
﻿﻿
﻿
MERGERS, 
ACQUISITIONS, AND 
OTHER RESTRUCTURING 
ACTIVITIES

Praise for Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring Activities, Sixth Edition
DePamphilis has masterfully covered in one book all relevant managerial, strategic, financial, accounting, legal and tax aspects 
of M&A in an easily understood roadmap for any M&A transaction, large or small. With totally up-to-date material, he provides 
the crucial information that is necessary in today’s rapidly changing M&A world.
—Lloyd Levitin, Professor of Clinical Finance and Business Economics, University of Southern California
After teaching M&A for ten years, I was relieved when last semester I finally switched to DePamphilis’ text. His single book 
replaced numerous other sources that I had to use before. His academic rigor is combined with his deep personal experience as 
a deal maker, and thus the textbook is highly valuable to both newcomers and those who have been involved in transactions for 
many years.
—Viktoria Dalko, Global Professor of Finance, Harvard University Extension School
Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring Activities, Sixth Edition, delivers an essential understanding of the corporate 
restructuring processes by combining insights from many case studies with academic rigor. The book points out how M&A can 
create value as well as the ways it can lead to value destruction. In addition to the state-of-the-art valuation techniques, it also 
explains the regulatory corporate governance framework for both the United States and Europe. It’s an excellent text, and I 
highly recommend it. 
—Luc Renneboog, Professor of Corporate Finance, Center, Tilburg University
Great textbook that in a simple and straightforward manner combines the latest insights from academia with contemporary 
industry practices. It fits perfect in a class of MBA students or executives. I will for sure use it next time I teach M&A.
—Karin Thorburn, DnB Nor Professor of Finance, Norwegian School of Economics and Business Administration
Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring Activities is quite simply an outstanding text. Don DePamphilis delivers a 
comprehensive guide to the M&A process from start to finish. . . . In sum, this book is a comprehensive, up-to-date, outstanding 
text.
—Scott C. Linn, R.W. Moore Chair in Finance and Economic  Development, the University of Oklahoma
 
Praise for Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring Activities, Fifth Edition
This is a truly comprehensive text and does a wonderful job at supplying the underlying motives and theory 
as well as the critical ‘in practice’ elements that many books lack. It spans all types of M&A and restructuring 
transactions and covers all the relevant knowledge from the academic research to the practical legal, accounting, 
and regulatory details. The book is up-to-date and teaches the state-of-the-art techniques used today. It contains 
numerous cases and spreadsheet support that enable the reader to put into practice everything that is covered. 
The combination of great writing and active case learning make this book the best I have seen in the M&A and 
restructuring arena.
—Matthew T. Billett, Associate Professor of Finance, Henry B. Tippie Research Fellow, University of Iowa
I am happy to recommend the Fifth Edition of Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring Activities. Having used 
prior editions of Don DePamphilis’ text, I can affirm that this edition builds on a firm foundation of coverage, real-
world examples, and readability. My students have consistently responded favorably to prior editions of the book. 
In this edition, I was delighted to discover that Don is expanding his coverage of family-owned businesses, already 
a strength in his earlier editions that were distinguished by their coverage of the valuation of privately held busi­
nesses. Additional attention is paid to restructuring, bankruptcy, and liquidation as well as risk management, which 
are clearly topics of interest to every business person in today’s economic climate.
—Kent Hickman, Professor of Finance, Gonzaga University
The fifth edition is one of the most comprehensive books on mergers and acquisitions. The text combines theo­
ries, valuation models, and real-life cases to give business students an overall insight into the M&A deal process. 
The up-to-date real-life examples and cases provide opportunities for readers to explore and to apply theories to 

a wide variety of scenarios such as cross-border transactions, highly levered deals, firms in financial distress, and 
family-owned businesses. The chapter on restructuring under bankruptcy and liquidation both inside and outside 
the protection of the bankruptcy court is timely and most useful in light of today’s economic crisis. Overall, this is an 
excellent book on mergers, acquisitions, and corporate restructuring activities.
—Tao-Hsien Dolly King, Rush S. Dickson Professor of Finance, Associate Professor, 
Department of Finance, The Belk College of Business, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring Activities is an interesting and comprehensive look at the most im­
portant aspects of M&A and corporate restructuring—from strategic and regulatory considerations and M&A deal 
process, through several chapters on M&A valuation and deal structuring, to other types of restructuring activities. 
It not only provides a road map for the M&A and other corporate restructuring transactions, but also highlights the 
key things to watch for. The book is clearly written with extensive but easy-to-follow case examples and empirical 
findings and cases to illustrate the points in the text. It is a book by an expert, and for M&A instructors and students 
as well as practitioners.
—Qiao Lui, Faculty of Business and Economics, The University of Hong Kong
I am delighted with Don DePamphilis’ Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring Activities, Fifth Edition. It is a 
clear, comprehensive, and thorough discussion of the issues involving all restructuring activities. The use of mini-
cases throughout each chapter both highlights and clarifies key elements of aspects of the decision-making pro­
cess. The end-of-chapter discussion questions are ideally complemented with the problem set questions to challenge 
readers’ understanding of the covered concepts. I am impressed with the current reflection of market conditions 
throughout the text and the extent of the recent changes to provide greater understanding for students. I expect to 
find that the students are also impressed with its the clarity and structure when I introduce this edition to my course. 
I recommend it to any professor covering mergers, acquisitions, bankruptcies, or other restructuring , , , to cover 
limited topics, or as a text for a complete course on restructuring.
—John F. Manley, Professor of Finance, Hagan School of Business, Iona College
Mergers and acquisitions continue to be amongst the preferred competitive options available to the companies seek­
ing to grow and prosper in the rapidly changing global business scenario. In the Fifth Edition of his path breaking 
book, the author and M&A expert Dr. DePamphilis illustrates how mergers, acquisitions, and other forms of restruc­
turing can help a company grow and prosper in the highly complex and competitive corporate takeover market­
place. Interspersed with most relevant and up-to-date M&A case studies . . ., this book deals with the multifarious 
aspects of corporate restructuring in an integrated manner . . .a lucid style. . . . Every effort has been made to deal 
with the intricacies of the subject by offering comprehensive coverage of the latest methods and techniques . . . of 
both public and private companies.
The book provides practical ways of dealing with M&As even in an economic downturn with a chapter on corporate 
restructuring under bankruptcy and liquidation. With the greatly enlarged and up-to-date material on varied aspects 
of the subject, the book provides a plethora of real-world examples which will go a long way in making the subject 
easy, stimulating, and interesting to both academicians and practitioners alike.
—Donepudi Prasad, ICFAI Business School, Hyderabad, India
Professor DePamphilis has made significant, important, and very timely updates in the Fifth Edition of his text. He 
incorporates contemporary events, such as the credit crunch and the latest accounting rules in the West, plus M&A 
issues in emerging markets including family businesses. He also readdresses corporate governance, a topic that will 
become increasingly important in Business Schools the world over in M&A. This text has become, and will increas­
ingly become, the definitive comprehensive and thorough reference on the subject.
—Jeffrey V. Ramsbottom, Visiting Professor, China Europe International Business School, Shanghai
I think the Fifth Edition of Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring Activities does a comprehensive job of cover­
ing the M&A field. As in the previous edition, the structure is divided into five parts. These are logical and easy to 
follow, with a nice blend of theory, empirical research findings, and practical issues. I especially like two chapters—
the chapter on bankruptcy and liquidation is extremely relevant in today’s economic conditions, and the chapter on 
private equity and hedge funds is interesting because M&A activities by these players are not well-documented in 

the literature. Overall, I believe that MBA students would find the book useful both as a textbook in class and as a 
reference book for later use.
—Raghavendra Rau, Purdue University and Barclays Global Investors
This book is truly outstanding among the textbooks on takeovers, valuation, and corporate restructuring for several 
reasons: the DePamphilis book not only gives a very up-to-date overview of the recent research findings on take­
overs around the world, but also offers nearly 100 recent business cases. The book treats all the valuation techniques 
in depth and also offers much institutional detail on M&A and LBO transactions. Not just takeover successes are 
analyzed, but also how financially distressed companies should be restructured. In short, the ideal textbook for any 
M&A graduate course.
—Luc Renneboog, Professor of Corporate Finance, Tilburg University, The Netherlands 
The Fifth Edition of Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring Activities by Professor Donald DePamphilis is an 
excellent book. Among its many strengths, I could easily identify three features that stand out. First, it is up to date, 
covering the recent knowledge published in most of the academic journals. Second, it offers comprehensive coverage 
of the subject matter, including chapters on the U.S. institutional, legal, and accounting environment; on technical 
aspects; valuation techniques; and strategic issues. Third, it is practical by including Excel Spread Sheet Models and 
a large number of real cases. These three aspects along with the . . . end-of-chapter discussion and review questions, 
problems, and exercises make this book one of the best choices for the subject.
—Nickolaos G. Travlos, The Kitty Kyriacopoulos Chair in Finance, and Dean, 
ALBA Graduate Business School, Greece
It is difficult to imagine that his fourth edition could be improved on, but Dr. DePamphilis has done just that. This 
edition is clearer, better organized, and contains a wealth of vitally important new material for these challenging 
times. I especially recommend the new chapter on liquidation for members of boards of directors who face extreme 
circumstances. This is a remarkably useful book for readers at any level—students, instructors, company executives, 
as well as board members. Bravo Don!
—Wesley B. Truitt, Adjunct Professor, School of Public Policy, Pepperdine University
The book is an excellent source for both academicians and practitioners. In addition to detailed cases, it provides 
tools contributing to value creation in M&A. A must book for an M&A course.
—Vahap Uysal, Assistant Professor of Finance, Price College of Business, University of Oklahoma
An impressive detailed overview of all aspects of mergers and acquisitions. Numerous recent case studies and ex­
amples convince the reader that all the material is very relevant in today’s business environment.
—Theo Vermaelen, Professor of Finance, Insead
The DePamphilis text is an excellent textbook that provides a full end-to-end view of the process with the appropri­
ate level of detail.  I have reviewed many M&A texts, and this text provides an excellent process view rather than 
just a series of topics.
—Stephen G Morrissette, University of Chicago 

MERGERS, 
ACQUISITIONS, AND 
OTHER RESTRUCTURING 
ACTIVITIES
An Integrated Approach to Process, 
Tools, Cases, and Solutions
NINTH EDITION
Donald M. DePamphilis, Ph.D.
Emeritus Professor of Finance
College of Business Administration 
Loyola Marymount University 
Los Angeles, CA, United States

Academic Press is an imprint of Elsevier
125 London Wall, London EC2Y 5AS, United Kingdom
525 B Street, Suite 1800, San Diego, CA 92101-4495, United States
50 Hampshire Street, 5th Floor, Cambridge, MA 02139, United States
The Boulevard, Langford Lane, Kidlington, Oxford OX5 1GB, United Kingdom
Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or 
mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, without 
permission in writing from the publisher. Details on how to seek permission, further information about the 
Publisher’s permissions policies and our arrangements with organizations such as the Copyright Clearance 
Center and the Copyright Licensing Agency, can be found at our website: www.elsevier.com/permissions.
This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright by the Publisher 
(other than as may be noted herein).
Notices
Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new research and experience broaden 
our understanding, changes in research methods, professional practices, or medical treatment may become 
necessary.
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in evaluating and 
using any information, methods, compounds, or experiments described herein. In using such information or 
methods they should be mindful of their own safety and the safety of others, including parties for whom they 
have a professional responsibility.
To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors, contributors, or editors, assume any 
liability for any injury and/or damage to persons or property as a matter of products liability, negligence 
or otherwise, or from any use or operation of any methods, products, instructions, or ideas contained in the 
material herein.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN: 978-0-12-801609-1
For information on all Academic Press publications visit our website at 
https://www.elsevier.com/books-and-journals
Publisher: Candice Janco
Acquisition Editor: J. Scott Bentley
Editorial Project Manager: Susan Ikeda
Production Project Manager: Nicky Carter
Designer: Mark Rogers
Typeset by Thomson Digital

I would like to express my gratitude for my wife, Cheryl, and my daughter, 
Cara, whose patience made the completion of this book possible; for my brother, 
Mel, who encouraged me to undertake this book; and for the blessings 
of my beautiful grandchildren Max and Hannah.
Dedication


Contents 
About the Author 
xv 
Preface to the Ninth Edition 
xvii 
Acknowledgments 
xxv 
I 
THE MERGERS AND 
ACQUISITIONS 
ENVIRONMENT 
1. An lnrroduction to Mergers,
Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring 
Activities 
Inside Mergers and Acquisitions: Banle of the 
Discount Retailers-Dollar Tree Acquires 
Falllily Doi lar 
6 
Chapter Overview 
8 
Why M&As Happen 
8 
Historical Developments in 
M&As 
16 
Un<lerscanding Corporate Restructuring 
Activities 
19 
Alternative T<1keover Scracegies 
22 
The Role of Holding Companies in Mergers 
and Acquisitions 
23 
The Role of Employee Srock Ownership Plans 
(ESOPs) in M&As 
23 
Business Alliances as Akcm<1tivcs to 
M&As 
24 
Parcicipancs in che Mergers and AcquisitionĀ 
Process 
25 
The Implications o( M&As for Sharehol<lers, 
Bondhol<lers, and Sociery 
31 
Some Things to Remember 
40 
Chapter Discussion Questions 
41 
ix 
2. The Regulatory Environment
Inside Mergers and Acquisitions: Comcast·s 
Accempred 2015 Takeover of Time Warner 
Unravels in the Face of Vigorous Opposirion 
48 
Chaprnr Overview 49 
Understanding Federal Securities Law 
49 
Undersran<ling Anricrusc Legislation 
59 
The lmplicacions for M&A of rhe Dodd-Frnnk Wall 
Street Reform and Consumer Protection Ace 
68 
Srare Regulations Affecting Mergers and 
Acquisitions 
68 
Restrictions on Direct Investment in the Unite<l 
States 
72 
The US Foreign Corrupt Practices Act 
72 
Fair Disclosure (Regulation FD) 
73 
Specific Industry Regulation 
74 
Environmental Laws 
76 
Labor and Benefit Laws 
76 
Cross-BorJer Transactions 
77 
Some Things ro Remember 
78 
Discussion Questions 
78 
l The Corporate Takeover Market 
Inside Mergers and Acquisitions: Strntegy Matters 
in Takeover Hanleā 84 
ChapLer Overview 
85 
Corporate Govemance 
85 
Understanding Alternative Takeover Taccics 
94 
Other Tactical Considerations 
99 
Developing a Bidding Strategy 
I 0 I 
Accivisr lnvest0rĂ: Gaining Influence Without 
Control 
103 
Understanding Alcernacive Takeover Defenses 
105 
The Impact of Takeover Defenses on Shareholder 
Value 
l 17 
Some Things ro Remen1her 
120 
Discussion Questions 
121 

x 
II 
THE MERGERS AND 
ACQUISITIONS PROCESS: 
PHASES 1-10 
4. Planning: Developing Business and
Acquisition Plans 
Inside Mergers and Acquisirions: Turmoil Among 
Media Companies 
130 
Chapter Overview 
132 
TI1e Role of Planning in Mergers and 
Acquisitions 
132 
The Merger aml Acquisirion Process 
134 
Phase I: Building the Business Plan 
135 
The Business Plan as a Communicarion 
Documenc 
1.5 l 
Phase 2: Building the Merger-Acquisition 
lmplemenrntion Plan 
152 
Some Thing· to Remember 
156 
Discussion Questions 
1 58 
5. Implementation: Search Through
Closing 
Inside M&A: Struggling Johnson Conrrols and 
Tyco Merge to Create a More Focused Global 
Business 
166 
Chapter Overview 
167 
Charncreri$tics of I ligh-Performing 
Acquirers 
168 
Phase 3: The Search Process 
169 
Phase 4: The Screening Process 
172 
Phase 5: First Contact 
173 
Phase 6: Negotiation 
177 
Phase 7: Developing the lntegrarion 
Plan 
185 
Phase 8: Closing 
J.87 
Phase 9: lmplemencing Postclosing 
Integration 
191 
Phase LO: Conducting a PQstclosing 
Evaluation 
192 
The Increasing Application of "IY.m1 Analytics" 
in M&As 
193 
Some Things to Remember 
195 
Discussion Questions 
195 
C0NTE1'TS 
6. Postclosing Integration
Inside Merger and Acquisitions: How a Chinese 
Oil Gianr Stumbled in its Largest Cross-Border 
Postmerger Integration Effort 
204 
Chapter Overview 
205 
The. Role of Integration in Successful 
Acquisitions 
206 
lnregr,uion I a Process, Not an Event 
209 
Integrating Business Alliances 
224 
Integrating Family-Owned Firms 
226 
Some Things to Remember 
226 
Chapter Discussion Questions 
227 
III 
MERGERS AND 
ACQUISITIONS VALUATION 
AND MODELING 
7. Mergers and Acquisitions Cash Flow
Valuation Basics 
Inside M&A: The Role of Valuarion Mechodologies 
in Fairness Opinions and Appraisal Rights 
236 
Ch<1pter Overview 
237 
Escimating Required Financial Recun'\S 
238 
Risk Assessmenr 
244 
Calculating Free C<1sh Flows 
249 
Applying Discounted Cash Flow Methods 
251 
Using the Enterprise Method ro Esrimare Equity 
Value 
259 
Valuing Nonoperaring Assets 
264 
Pulling it All Together 
266 
Some Things to Remember 
270 
Discussion Questions 
270 
Practice Problems and Answers 
271 
8. Relative, Asset-Oriented, and Real 
Option Valuation Basics 
Inside Mergers anti Acquisitions: Man<1ging Coke's 
Natural Drink Business Portfolio 
278 
Chapter Overview 
279 
Relative Valuation Methods 
279 
Asset-Oriented Methods 
288 

CONTENTS 
XI 
The WeighceJ Avemgc Valu,1tion MechoJ 
293 
A<ljuřting Valuation farim.1te., for Purchase 
Price Premiu1m 
293 
Real Opuons An,1ly,1s 
294 
Dctermmmg When co Use the Different Approaches 
to Valuauon 
303 
What Jo Valuation Profe:-.,1onal, Jo in Praccice1 
303 
Some Thmg' Ill Remcmhcr 
305 
Di:icuMwn Que,tiorh 305 
Pr,rcucc Prohlcm, anJ Amwcr-. 
305 
) Financial Mo<leling Basics 
lnŜi<le M&A: The Unrelenting Allure of Lhe 
"Tr.1mform;itivc" Acqu1Śirion-Microsofr Buys 
Linkcdln m its Biggest Deal in I lismry 
314 
Chapter Overview 
.31 5 
Whar Is Financi;1I Mo<leling1 
316 
Financial Modeling Dara RequirementD 
316 
Common Fimmcial Model Linkages 
319 
Key Step{ in the Valuation Process 
321 
Model Ralancmg Mechanism 
334 
Dara 5<.1urccb 
335 
Man.iging the Model 
340 
Addrc 'Ming Valuation hMrC' rn a Ne;u-Zero lnterQt 
Rare Em imnmeni 
HI 
Some Tlun!.!' to Remcmher 
341 
Dbcu010n QueMionb 
341 
Pmcuce Problemb and AmwerF 
342 
I ( 
Analysis an<l Valuation of Privately 
HelJ Firms 
I n,ide M&A: Owner·D Dcci'iion to Retire Forces Sale 
of Born I lealrh Care 
354 
Chapter Overview 
355 
Challengcs of Valuing Privately Held 
Companies 
357 
Process for Valuing Privately I lckl Businesses 
358 
Seep I: Adjusting Financial Statementś 
3 58 
S1ep 2: Applying Valu;uion Methodologies co 
Privately Held Companies 
364 
Step 3: Devclopmg Dbcount Rates 
366 
, rep 4: Applying Conrrol Premiums, Liquidity, and 
Minoriry l1ix:o11ni-
371 
Taking Privme Compantc'> Puhlic 
378 
Using Lever,1gcd Employee wck Ownership Plans to 
Buy Pri\'atc Companie., 
381 
Empirical 'tud1c-, of 'harchoklcr Returns 
382 
Some Things co Remember 
383 
Di'>Cussion Que,cion, 
384 
Pmcrice Problem'> and An-.wer' 
384 
IV 
DEAL STRUCTURING AND 
FINANCING STRATEGIES 
l l. StruclUring the Deal 
Inside M&A: The Elu-,1ve ls.,ue of Price 
394 
Chapter Overview 
396 
The De<tl-Structuring Procci.;, 
397 
Form of Acquicition Vehicle and Pmtclosing 
Org;mization 
400 
Leg<ll Form of the Selling Emily 
401 
Form of Payment 
40 I 
Managing Risk and Re<1ching Conscnsw. on Purchase 
Price 
405 
Constructing Collar Arrangements 
411 
Form of Acquisrcion 
413 
&ime Things to Remember 
42' 
Di-;cus.'>ion Quc.,rions 
42 3 
12.
tructuring the Deal
Inside M&A: The Planned Pfizer nnd Allergan 
Merger Thwarted hy Ch;mging ·fox 
Regulation., 
410 
Chaprer o,·erview 
4 n 
Alcemarive Tax Sm1crure., 
4 33 
Taxable Trnnŝacriom 
4B 
Tax-Free Transactions 
435 
Other Tax Considerations Affecting Corporate 
Restructuring 
441 
Fimincial Rt:ron ing of Ru.,incEs 01mhim11 ion{ 
44 7 
Impact of Purchase Accounting on Busine;,' 
Combinations 
450 
Rec<1piralization ("Recap") Accountin)l 
456 
'ornc Things w Rcmcrnhcr 
457 
Discus..,ion Questiom 
457 
Pmctice Problems and AnEwers 
458 
I ). Financing the Deal 
Inside M&A: lnformanca Goes Pri\«ltc ro Implement 
an AggrcNsi\'c 'pending Progmm 
464 
pro 
porO 
dek 

XII 
CONTEl\TS 
Ch<1ptcr Overview 
466 
I luw Arc M&A Tran®auion¯ Commonly 
FmanccJ? 
466 
What b the Role of Prh•Jte Equity, I ledge, and 
Vcnrure Capital Funds m Deal Financing! 
473 
LcverageJ Buyout  Fimmcmg Strategies 
479 
Wh,u F;u .. llrs Arc Critical to uccPful LBOs? 
485 
I low Do UńO, Crt'atc V<1luc! 
487 
Common LBO O..al ,mJ C'-apital Srrucrures 
492 
Some Thing" rn Rememher 
495 
Discussion Quełrions 
495 
14. Applying Financial Models
Inside Merger¯ and Acquisitions: M&A Financial 
Model Applicarioih 
504 
Chaprer Overview 
506 
Undcr,tunding and Applying M&A Financial 
Models 
507 
M&A MoJels: Srock Purchases 
513 
M&A MoJel;,: A>Scl Purcha,cs 
533 
Quantifying Synergy 
5)6 
Som<' Thing, to Remember 
537 
D1ņcu.,,ion Quest1om 
538 
Practice Problems anJ An,wers 
539 
Appendix A: Deht Rep<1ymenr Schedule, Com·errible 
ernriue,, lmcrc't Rate>, and /3 
547 
7 
ALTERNATIVE BUSINESS 
AND RESTRUCTURING 
STRATEGIES 
Business Alliances 
lrn.ide M&A: Comcast', NBCUniversal Invests 
in BuzzFced and Vox in a Search ror a Younger 
Audience 
552 
Chapter Overview 
55) 
Mmivmion' for Bu,ine.,., Allianct:' 
555 
What Make, Bu,mcss Alliance' SucceŃful? 
559 
Alternative Legal Form,ofBu,incs, 
Alli:mce' 
560 
Strategic and Opemnonal PlV 
567 
Resolving Bu,me'' Alli;mce O...al-Srructuring 
J..,ue' 
567 
Empirical FmJing' 
576 
Some Thing, to Rcmeml'Cr 
578 
Di-,cui;,.iun Que•liun' 
57 
I( AILernative Exit and Re tructuring 
trnrcgics 
Inside M&A: General Elccmc Returns to its 
lnJustrial Ruor' 
584 
Chapter Ovt'r. it'W 
585 
Why 00 Finn;, Exit Bu,ineĿ;,? 
586 
Dive;,Liture;, 
589 
Spin-Offs 
596 
Equity C:irvc-Out:. 
599 
Split-Offs anJ Split-Up, 
601 
Tmcking, T<1rgclCd, e111J Lcller Stoch 
604 
Rc,trucruing lmplcrncnt<•tion Issues 
606 
Key Restructure Leg-al Documents 
608 
Comparing Alternative Exit and Restructuring 
Strategies 
609 
Choo,,ing A111ung Divcsrilllrc, Carve-Out, 
;md Spin-Off Re:.rrucrnring Strategics 
610 
Derem1inanrs of Rerum" to, harehnlJers Resulring 
From Re·mucruring , rrategies 
611 
Some Thing, ro Rcmemhcr 
618 
Chapter Di'<'.u,:.ion Que't ion' 
61 $ 
Alccrnacivc Exit and Restructuring 
trategie 
ln°1de M&A: Hercule, Off.,horc Inc Emerge> 
From Court Prmectiun Through a PrepackageJ 
Bankruptcy 
624 
Chaprer Overview 
625 
Busincsŀ foilurc 
626 
Volunwry Settlement Out,idc of Bankruptcy 
Cuurt 
627 
Reorganiwrinn and Liquidation 
in Brmkrurrcy 
629 
Alremarive Oprions for F:iiling Firms 
638 
The lncrca±ing Role of I ledge Fund:. in the 
Bankruprcy Procc" 
640 
Failing Firnh and SyŁrcmic Risk 
641 
Predicring (',orpor:ire Oefaulr 
and Bankruptcy 
642 
Empirical Srudics of Financial Dbtre ;, 
645 
Some Thing,, to Rememl'Cr 
647 
Chapter D1-<.uŅion Que,uom, 
647 
Iv. 

CONTENTS 
xiii 
Cross-Border Mergers and Acquisitions 
Inside M&A: Chip Industry Omsolidation 
654 
Chapcer Overview 
655 
Globalizacion: The Elephanc in che Room? 
656 
Mocives for lncernacional Expansion 
658 
Common Lntemarional Markee Entry 
Strncegie:. 
660 
Structuring Crossbor<ler Deals 
661 
Financing Crossborder Deals 
665 
Planning and I mplcmenting Cross border Transactions 
in Emerging Countries 
666 
How arc Crossborder Transactions Valued? 
667 
Empirical Scudies of Cross-Border Transactions 
680 
Some Things to Remember 
684 
Chapter Discussion Quesrions 
685 
References 
691 
Glossary 
7 l 9 
lndex 
727 


xv
Dr. Donald DePamphilis has managed 
through closing more than 30 transactions, 
including acquisitions, divestitures, joint 
ventures, minority investments, licensing, 
and supply agreements in a variety of dif­
ferent industries. These industries include 
financial services, software, metals manufac­
turing, business consulting, healthcare, auto­
motive, communications, and real estate. He 
earned a BA in Economics from the Univer­
sity of Pittsburgh and an MA and a PhD in 
Economics from Harvard University.
He is currently Emeritus Professor of Fi­
nance at Loyola Marymount University in 
Los Angeles, where he has taught mergers 
and acquisitions, corporate restructuring, 
deal making, financial analysis, financial 
modeling, micro- and macroeconomics (to 
both business and nonbusiness majors) to 
undergraduate, MBA, and Executive MBA 
students. In addition, he has taught corpo­
rate governance and executive leadership to 
Executive MBA students.
Dr. DePamphilis has also served as an in­
structor in the Loyola Marymount University 
International Executive Education Program, 
teaching corporate restructuring tactics and 
strategies in a global context. He has served 
as chair of the Student Investment Fund at 
Loyola Marymount University’s College 
of Business and has been a member of the 
graduate business program curriculum com­
mittee. He has also directed curriculum de­
velopment and faculty recruitment efforts in 
specific teaching modules within the Univer­
sity’s Executive MBA program.
Dr. DePamphilis is the recipient of the 
Loyola Marymount University Executive 
MBA Leadership Achievement Award and 
has represented the University on the Los 
Angeles Council of Economic Advisors serv­
ing Mayor Eric Garcetti on matters relating 
to the economy.
Dr. DePamphilis has lectured on M&A 
and corporate restructuring, financial analy­
sis, and economics at the University of Cali­
fornia, at Irvine, Chapman University, and 
Concordia University. As a visiting professor, 
he taught mergers and acquisitions and cor­
porate restructuring strategies at the Antai 
School of Management, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University, in Shanghai, China. He has also 
served as a Teaching Fellow in economics at 
Harvard University.
The author has more than 25 years of ex­
perience in businesses ranging in size from 
small privately owned firms to Fortune 100 
companies in various industries and with 
varying degrees of responsibility. Previous­
ly, he served as vice president of Electronic 
Commerce for Experian Corporation, vice 
president of Business Development at TRW 
Information Systems and Services, senior 
vice president of Planning and Marketing 
at PUH Health Systems, director of Corpo­
rate Business Planning at TRW, and chief 
economist for National Steel Corporation 
(formerly a Fortune 100 company).
He also served as Director of Banking and 
Insurance Economics for Chase Economet­
ric Associates providing consulting services 
to dozens of clients in private industry and 
the government and as an economic analyst 
for United California Bank. While at United 
California Bank, he developed a complex, 
interactive econometric forecasting, and 
About the Author

xvi	
About the Author
simulation model of the US economy, which 
was used in both internal and external bank 
forecasts and in conducting simulations of 
alternative economic outcomes based on 
differing assumptions. Dr. DePamphilis has 
also spoke to numerous industry trade as­
sociations and customer groups and to Los 
Angeles community and business groups. 
He is a graduate of the TRW and National 
Steel Corporation Executive Management 
programs.
Dr. DePamphilis has authored numerous 
articles, chapters in books, and books on 
M&A. He has published in the areas of busi­
ness planning and development, marketing, 
and economics in peer-reviewed academic 
journals, as well as business and trade pub­
lications. His books include the highly pop­
ular, award-winning Mergers, Acquisitions, 
and Other Restructuring Activities, now in its 
ninth edition; Mergers and Acquisitions Basics: 
All You Need to Know; and Merger and Acqui­
sition Basics: Negotiation and Deal Structuring. 
Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring 
Activities has been translated into Chinese 
(now in its second edition) and Russian and 
has been used in more than 100 universities 
worldwide. The 7th edition was voted the 
2014 Textbook Excellence Award (Texty) in 
the business book category by the Text and 
Academic Authors Association. For more 
detail, see http://www.taaonline.net/2014-
taa-textbook-award-winners
Dr. DePamphilis has served as a consul­
tant in product and personal liability, patent 
infringement, and business valuation litiga­
tion, including but not limited to providing 
expert analysis and depositions in cases pri­
marily related to mergers and acquisitions. 
He has also served in an advisory capacity 
on matters of acquisition target selection, ne­
gotiation support, and business valuation.
The author has been a board member 
of the National Council of Orange County 
(California), Economics Club of Pittsburgh, 
Economic Council of Western Pennsylvania, 
and the Hospital Council of Western Penn­
sylvania. He has also been active in the Ro­
tary Club and Junior Achievement.
Please 
forward 
any 
comments 
you 
may have about this book to the author at 
dondepam@pacbell.net. Your suggestions 
about ways in which this text may be im­
proved are welcome.

xvii
TO THE READER
The pace of change in today’s world 
could hardly have been imagined a few gen­
erations ago. The accelerating change and 
broadening scope of technology has irre­
trievably altered our lifestyles and the way 
we conduct business. New products and 
services are required to address the needs 
of the world’s aging population. And an in­
creasingly interconnected world in terms of 
information, capital, and trade flows means 
that what happens in one region impacts 
other areas almost in “real time,” having 
both immediate and long-term implications. 
For example, largely unanticipated events 
such as “Brexit” (i.e., the UK’s vote to with­
draw from the European Union) in mid-2016 
immediately whipsawed global financial 
markets and raised questions about the long-
term viability of the European Union and fu­
ture global trading patterns. The largely un­
expected outcome of the US elections in late 
2016 created additional uncertainty about 
the country’s tax and trade policies and their 
potential impact on future economic growth. 
Mass migration from civil war, culture clash, 
and questions about who is benefiting from 
expanding international trade have stoked 
concerns about the sustainability of the ”glo­
balization“ of the last four decades. Uncer­
tainty has become the norm. How we deal 
with it is the challenge.
The dynamism of today’s global economy 
requires corporations to restructure their 
businesses to remain competitive. This re­
structuring entails activities ranging from 
mergers and acquisitions to divestitures and 
spin-offs to reorganization under the protec­
tion of national bankruptcy laws. Against 
this backdrop, this book attempts to bring 
clarity to what can be an exciting, complex, 
and sometimes-frustrating subject. Intend­
ed to help the reader think of the activities 
involved in mergers, acquisitions, busi­
ness alliances, and other types of corporate 
restructuring in an integrated way, M&A ac­
tivities are discussed in the context in which 
they occur.
This book is unique in that it is the most 
current, comprehensive, and cutting-edge 
text on M&A and corporate restructuring 
available. It is current in that it includes many 
of the most up-to-date and notable deals and 
precedent setting judicial decisions, as well as 
new regulations, trends, and tactics employed 
in M&As. Today’s challenges threaten to make 
obsolete some of the tools employed to value 
businesses, the way M&As are financed, and 
the way society thinks about M&As. The im­
plications of the continuing low (and in some 
instances negative) interest rate environment 
for commonly used valuation methodologies 
has yet to be fully understood. The proposed 
takeover of Time Warner by AT&T in late 
2016 raises concerns that such combinations 
could concentrate too much power in a single 
media company. Today’s politics, policies, 
and economics are reflected in the case stud­
ies in the ninth edition which involve deals ei­
ther announced or completed during the last 
several years. This edition is comprehensive in 
that nearly all aspects of M&As and corpo­
rate restructuring are explored from business 
planning to target selection and valuation to 
negotiation and integration. It is cutting edge 
Preface to the Ninth Edition

xviii	
PREFACE TO THE NINTH EDITION
in that conclusions and insights are anchored 
by the most recent academic research, with 
references to more than 160 empirical studies 
published in leading peer-reviewed journals 
just since 2015.
The highlights of the new edition are 
listed here:
•	 New Cases: More than ninety-percent 
of the nearly forty case studies are new 
and involve transactions announced 
or completed since 2015. These cases 
represent friendly, hostile, highly 
leveraged, and cross-border deals in ten 
different industries, involving public and 
private firms, as well as firms experiencing 
financial distress. All end of chapter case 
studies begin with a “Key Objectives” 
section indicating what the student should 
learn from the case study and include 
discussion questions and solutions 
available in the online instructors’ manual 
to measure student comprehension 
(https://textbooks.elsevier.com/web/
Manuals.aspx?isbn=9780128016091).
•	 Latest Research: This edition focuses on 
the most recent and relevant academic 
studies, some of which contain surprising 
insights changing the way we view 
this subject matter. Recent research has 
significant implications for academicians, 
students, M&A practitioners, and 
government policy makers shedding 
new light on current developments and 
trends in the ever-changing mergers and 
acquisitions market.
•	 New Content: Each chapter contains 
fresh information and insights on the 
changing market for M&As. This new 
content is highlighted in the following 
discussion.
	
M&A Environment: Chapter 1 which 
provides an overview of M&As now 
includes updated merger wave activity, 
the impact of target earnings management 
on acquirer postmerger financial returns, 
how takeover defenses affect premiums 
paid and deal completion rates, and 
the impact of investor sentiment on 
bidder abnormal returns. The chapter 
also discusses the limitations of the 
methodologies and data employed in 
the various academic studies cited. The 
discussion of M&A regulatory matters in 
Chapter 2 has been expanded to include 
the impact of the United States Federal 
Trade Commission’s net neutrality rules 
on M&As, the effectiveness of Securities 
(SEC) and Exchange Commission 
enforcement actions and their impact on 
firm value, and new SEC M&A related 
governance rules, as well as an update of 
prenotification filing and SEC reporting 
requirements. Chapter 3, which deals 
with takeover tactics and defenses, 
contains an expanded discussion of the 
role of the board of directors in promoting 
good corporate governance and the 
incentive for firms to reincorporate to 
other countries to take advantage of 
more management friendly laws. This 
chapter also addresses how concentrated 
ownership can affect board member 
selection, how the “white squire” defense 
can be used to entrench management, 
and the impact of an acquirer’s corporate 
culture on governance practices and a 
firm’s M&A strategy.
	
M&A Process: Chapter 4 introduces 
the 10 steps of the M&A process with 
a focus on the role of business and 
acquisition plans and now contains a 
more detailed discussion of the role 
of a firm’s corporate mission/vision 
in achieving successful outcomes, as 
well as how ”blue ocean“ strategies 
can be used to create markets without 
competitors. Implementation phases of 
the M&A process outlined in Chapter 5 
now describe the characteristics of 

	
PREFACE TO THE NINTH EDITION	
xix
“high performing acquirers” and how 
high entry barriers impact competition 
within markets, innovation, and 
provide an incentive for startups to be 
acquired by leading market competitors. 
Furthermore, this chapter addresses the 
growing popularity of “data analytics” 
in M&A and how the acquirers’ approval 
process affects target selection. Chapter 6 
deals with postmerger integration and 
includes new discussions of alternative 
integration strategies and the importance 
of selecting the integration strategy 
consistent with the acquirer’s objectives 
and the circumstances surrounding 
closing. The chapter discusses in more 
detail how to address employee concerns 
and the challenges of integrating family 
or privately owned firms. Finally, the 
chapter describes how digital tools can be 
used to accelerate cultural change within 
the combined firms.
	
M&A Valuation and Modelling: 
Chapter 7 focuses on discounted cash 
flow valuation and now discusses how 
firms often adjust discount rates when 
subject to financial and operational 
constraints. The chapter also addresses 
the knotty question of how abnormally 
low interest rates may distort firm 
valuation and how the CAPM can be 
adjusted to reflect the bias introduced by 
the “near zero” (or negative) interest rate 
environment of the last decade. Chapter 8 
introduces the basics of relative valuation 
methods and includes a discussion of 
what valuation professionals actually do 
in practice. The basics of M&A modeling 
introduced in Chapter 9 include new 
examples of how companies may use 
pro forma accounting to manipulate 
their performance and an update to the 
financial models accompanying this 
book. Chapter 10 which describes the 
challenges of buying and selling private 
firms now addresses the selection of 
the appropriate marginal tax rate when 
the acquirer is something other than a 
publicly traded firm, the wealth effects 
of alternative exit strategies for closely 
held firms, and the use of special purpose 
acquisition corporations as a mechanism 
for taking a private firm public.
	
Deal Structuring and Financing 
Strategies: Legal and payment 
considerations described in Chapter 11’s 
deal structuring discussion have been 
updated to include the role of convertible 
securities in resolving acquirer and 
target concerns when both are lacking 
in critical information about the other. 
Moreover, the chapter contains recent 
changes in Delaware law allowing for 
expedited backend mergers involving 
public companies and reducing the need 
for expensive and time consuming top 
up options and dual track structures. 
Recent court rulings clarifying when 
squeeze out mergers should be subject to 
the “business judgment rule” or the more 
rigorous “unified fairness standard” are 
also addressed. Chapter 12 deals with tax 
and accounting aspects of deals and now 
addresses the criteria for determining the 
acquirer in a deal, the implications of this 
designation, and how this determination 
is sometimes ambiguous. This chapter 
also discusses the relationship between 
“restructuring” charges and the 
likelihood of a subsequent takeover 
bid, new Treasury rules intended to 
discourage “tax inversions,” potential 
changes in corporate tax rates and their 
implications for inversions, and recent 
changes in how goodwill is calculated 
and how it is treated for private firms 
under GAAP. Finally, this chapter 
discusses the impact on a firm’s balance 
sheet of pending Financial Accounting 
Standards Board reporting requirements 

xx	
PREFACE TO THE NINTH EDITION
for operating leases and pending changes 
in revenue recognition methodology and 
its potential impact on M&As. Chapter 13 
addresses M&A financing issues and 
includes an updated discussion of 
how M&As are funded as well as the 
financing implications for M&As of 
near zero/negative interest rates. This 
chapter also contains a discussion of new 
bank regulatory guidelines pertaining 
to leveraged loans and their potential 
impact on LBOs and a more detailed 
discussion of how dilution occurs and its 
potential impact on current shareholders. 
Chapter 14’s discussion of the application 
of financial models to M&As includes 
a more detailed discussion of how 
solvency and liquidity considerations can 
constrain how a deal is structured and 
financed.
	
Alternative Business and Restructuring 
Strategies: Chapter 15 addresses 
alternatives to M&As and has been 
updated to include a discussion of how 
different tax rates influence the selection 
of the legal entity for various types of 
business alliances, how intangible assets 
contributed to JVs are valued and how 
they may impact the determination 
of equity contributions made by 
partners; and an updated discussion of 
the advantages and disadvantages of 
alternative alliance structures. Chapter 16 
deals with non-M&A related corporate 
restructuring and now describes the 
mechanics of how IPOs are executed, 
the typical IPO timeline, and how 
purchase premiums are determined. 
Furthermore, the chapter includes a 
more detailed discussion of how spin-
offs, split-offs, and Morris and Reverse 
Morris Trusts must be structured to 
qualify as tax-free deals, implementation 
issues, and the legal agreements that 
must be negotiated. Chapter 17 deals 
with bankruptcy and now analyzes how 
the strength of creditor rights affects a 
firm’s financing strategies and includes 
a complete rewrite of the section on 
bankruptcy prediction models. This 
chapter also addresses the degree to 
which so-called systemic risk has changed 
since the 2008 global financial market 
meltdown and the potential impact 
on M&As. In dealing with crossborder 
M&As, Chapter 18 includes a discussion 
of the implications of the recent backlash 
against globalization for cross border 
M&As, as well as an expanded analysis 
of the motives for such deals, common 
bidding strategies and tactics in 
international M&As, and how to adjust 
for political risk in valuing firms in both 
emerging and developed countries. This 
chapter also discusses the potential for 
high financial returns from undertaking 
M&As in “frontier economies.”
	
Updated Ancillary Materials: Both 
student and instructor PowerPoint 
slide presentations have been updated 
to reflect recent research, trends, and 
new chapter content. Located below 
each slide, Instructor PowerPoint 
presentations also contain suggested 
topics and key points to be made by the 
instructor for each slide. The student 
PowerPoint slides are structured to serve 
as student study guides.
	
The textbook contains more than 300 
end-of-chapter discussion and review 
questions, problems, and exercises that 
give readers the opportunity to test 
their knowledge of the material. Many 
of the exercises enable students to find 
their own solutions based on different 
sets of assumptions, using Excel-
based spreadsheet models available 
on the companion site to this textbook. 
Solutions to all questions, problems, 
and exercises are available on the 
expanded Online Instructor’s Manual, 
available to instructors using this book 

	
PREFACE TO THE NINTH EDITION	
xxi
(https://textbooks.elsevier.com/web/
Manuals.aspx?isbn=9780128016091). 
The online manual contains more 
than 1600 true/false, multiple-choice, 
and short essay questions as well as 
numerical problems. In addition to 
Excel-based customizable M&A valuation 
and structuring software, Power Point 
presentations, and due diligence 
materials, the companion site also 
contains a Student Study Guide.
	
This book is intended for students in 
courses on mergers and acquisitions, 
corporate restructuring, business strategy, 
management, and entrepreneurship. This 
book works well at both the undergraduate 
and graduate levels. The text also should 
interest financial analysts, chief financial 
officers, operating managers, investment 
bankers, and portfolio managers. Others 
who may have an interest include bank 
lending officers, venture capitalists, 
government regulators, human resource 
managers, entrepreneurs, and board 
members. Hence, from the classroom to 
the boardroom, this text offers something 
for anyone with an interest in mergers and 
acquisitions, business alliances, and other 
forms of corporate restructuring.
TO THE INSTRUCTOR
This text is an attempt to provide organi­
zation to a topic that is inherently complex 
due to the diversity of applicable subject mat­
ter and the breadth of disciplines that must 
be applied to complete most transactions. 
Consequently, the discussion of M&A is not 
easily divisible into highly focused chapters. 
Efforts to compartmentalize the topic often 
result in the reader’s not understanding how 
seemingly independent topics are integrated. 
Understanding M&A involves an under­
standing of a full range of topics, including 
management, finance, economics, business 
law, financial and tax accounting, organiza­
tional dynamics, and the role of leadership.
With this in mind, this book provides a 
new organizational paradigm for discussing 
the complex and dynamically changing world 
of M&A. The book is organized according to 
the context in which topics normally occur in 
the M&A process. As such, the book is divid­
ed into five parts: M&A environment, M&A 
process, M&A valuation and modeling, deal 
structuring and financing strategies, and alter­
native business and restructuring strategies. 
Topics that are highly integrated are discussed 
within these five groupings. See Exhibit 1 for 
the organizational layout of the book.
This book equips the instructor with the 
information needed to communicate effec­
tively with students having different levels of 
preparation. The generous use of examples and 
contemporary business cases makes the text 
suitable for distance learning and self-study 
programs, as well as for large, lecture-focused 
courses. The extensive use of end-of-chapter 
discussion questions, problems, and exercises 
[with answers available in the Online Instruc­
tors’ Manual (https://textbooks.elsevier.com/
web/Manuals.aspx?isbn=9780128016091)] 
offers instructors the opportunity to test the 
students’ progress in mastering the material. 
Prerequisites for this text include familiarity 
with basic accounting, finance, economics, and 
management concepts.
ONLINE INSTRUCTOR’S 
MANUAL
The manual contains PowerPoint presen­
tations (including instructor commentary for 
most slides) for each chapter ­[completely con­
sistent with those found on the companion 
site (https://www.elsevier.com/books-and-
journals/book-companion/9780128016091)], 
suggested learning objectives, recommended 
ways to teach the materials, and detailed syl­
labi for both undergraduate- and graduate-
level classes, and an exhaustive test bank. 

xxii	
PREFACE TO THE NINTH EDITION
The test bank contains more than 1600 test 
questions and answers (including true/
false, multiple choice, short essay questions, 
case studies, and computational problems) 
and solutions to end-of-chapter discussion 
questions and end-of-chapter business case 
studies in the book. The online manual also 
contains, in a file folder named “Preface to 
the Online Instructor’s Manual and Table of 
Contents,” suggestions on how to teach the 
course to both undergraduate and gradu­
ate classes (https://textbooks.elsevier.com/
web/Manuals.aspx?isbn=9780128016091).
Please e-mail the publisher at textbook@
elsevier.com (within North America), emea.
textbook@elsevier.com 
(Europe, 
Middle 
East, and Africa), apa.stbooks@elsevier.com 
(in Asia), and sandt.anz@elsevier.com (in 
Australia and New Zealand) for access to the 
online manual. Please include your contact 
information (name, department, college, ad­
dress, e-mail, and phone number) along with 
your course information, including course 
name and number, annual enrollment, ISBN, 
book title, and author. All requests are subject 
to approval by the company’s representatives. 
For instructors who have already adopted this 
book, please go to textbooks.elsevier.com (El­
sevier’s instructors’ website), register, search 
for this book, and click on the button in the 
upper right-hand corner entitled “Instructors’ 
Manual” 
(https://textbooks.elsevier.com/
web/Manuals.aspx?isbn=9780128016091).
STUDENT STUDY GUIDE
The guide contained on the companion 
site to this book includes chapter summa­
ries highlighting key learning objectives 
EXHIBIT 1  Course Layout: Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring Activities.

	
PREFACE TO THE NINTH EDITION	
xxiii
for each chapter as well as true/false, 
multiple-choice, and numerical questions 
and answers to enhance the student’s learn­
ing experience.
MANY PRACTICAL, TIMELY, 
AND DIVERSE EXAMPLES AND 
CURRENT BUSINESS CASES
Each chapter begins with a vignette in­
tended to illustrate a key point or points 
described in more detail as the chapter un­
folds. Hundreds of examples, business cases, 
tables, and figures illustrate the application 
of key concepts. Many exhibits and dia­
grams summarize otherwise-diffuse infor­
mation and the results of numerous empiri­
cal studies substantiating key points made 
in each chapter. Each chapter concludes 
with a series of 10 discussion questions and 
recent integrative end-of-chapter business 
cases intended to stimulate critical thinking 
and test the reader’s understanding of the 
material. Many chapters also include a series 
of practice problems and exercises to facili­
tate learning the chapter’s content.
COMPREHENSIVE YET FLEXIBLE 
ORGANIZATION
Although the text is sequential, each 
chapter was developed as a self-contained 
unit to enable adaptation of the text to vari­
ous teaching strategies and students with 
diverse backgrounds. The flexibility of the 
organization also makes the material suit­
able for courses of various lengths, from one 
quarter to two full semesters. The amount of 
time required depends on the students’ level 
of sophistication and the desired focus of the 
instructor. Undergraduates have consistent­
ly demonstrated the ability to master eight 
or nine chapters of the book during a typical 
semester, whereas graduate-level students 
are able to cover effectively 12 to 14 chapters 
during the same period.


xxv
I would like to express my sincere apprecia­
tion for the many helpful suggestions received 
from a number of anonymous reviewers 
and the many resources of Academic Press/
Elsevier. Specifically, I would like to thank 
Alan Cherry, Ross Bengel, Patricia Douglas, 
Jeff Gale, Jim Healy, Charles Higgins, Michael 
Lovelady, John Mellen, Jon Saxon, David 
Offenberg, Chris Manning, Maria Quijada, 
Warren Miller, and Chris Kohler for their con­
structive comments. I would also like to thank 
Scott Bentley, Executive Editor at Academic 
Press/Elsevier, for his ongoing support and 
guidance.
Acknowledgments

﻿P A R T I
THE MERGERS AND 
ACQUISITIONS 
ENVIRONMENT

2	
I.  THE MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS ENVIRONMENT
﻿ ﻿﻿
Merger and acquisition (M&A) activity globally and in the United States 
declined in 2016 from the prior year’s pace. According to research firm De­
alogic, more than 8000 deals totaling almost $1.9 trillion were announced 
in 2016 in the United States. Worldwide, announced M&A deals topped 
$3.7 trillion, well below 2015’s record $4.4 trillion, which exceeded the prior 
record of $4.6 trillion set in 2007.
At the time of this writing, the global recovery remains fragile and spreading 
geopolitical conflict continues to spark civil wars and mass migrations. China’s 
economy, the second largest in the world, sputters amid a growing mountain 
of debt. Growing populism in the United States seeks to insulate home mar­
kets through protectionism. Britain’s exit from the European Union and the 
rise of populism in parts of Western Europe raise concerns about the long-term 
viability of the European Union. The limits of expansionary monetary policies 
are evident. Countries engage in thinly disguised currency manipulation by 
driving interest rates into negative territory. By the end of 2016, more than 
$13 trillion worth of government bonds showed negative returns creating un­
precedented financial market conditions and a murky outlook.
In this highly uncertain environment, corporate decision making is in­
creasingly difficult. Strategic questions abound. Should excess cash flows 
be reinvested in the firm or distributed to shareholders? Does restructuring 
through a combination of divestitures and spin-offs make sense? Should 
firms continue to “buy” growth through M&As and run the risk of over­
paying, making achieving required shareholder returns more challenging? 
Should corporate executives stay with what they know or diversify? Should 
firms downsize their operations to better focus on markets in which their 
core competencies give them a competitive advantage? These are important 
questions with no easy answers.
While this book does not promise quick answers to these demanding 
questions, it does offer insight into all aspects of the corporate restructur­
ing process from takeovers and joint ventures to divestitures and spin-offs 
and equity carve-outs and reorganizing businesses inside and outside the 
protection of the bankruptcy court. Consequently, virtually all of the mate­
rial covered in this book can be viewed as part of the corporate restructuring 
process. This part discusses the context in which mergers, acquisitions, and 
corporate restructuring occur, including factors often beyond the control of 
the participants in the M&A process.
Chapter 1 provides an overview of M&As of basic vocabulary, the most 
common reasons why M&As happen, and how such transactions occur in 
a series of somewhat predictable waves. Alternatives to M&As and partici­
pants in the M&A process, from investment bankers to lenders to regula­
tory authorities, are discussed in detail. The chapter also addresses whether 
M&As benefit shareholders, bondholders, and society, with conclusions 
based on recent empirical studies.
The tangle of regulations that impact the M&A process are covered in 
Chapter 2, including recent changes in US federal and state securities and 

	
I.  THE MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS ENVIRONMENT	
3
﻿ ﻿﻿
antitrust laws as well as environmental, labor, and benefit laws that add to 
the increasing complexity of completing deals. The implications of cross-
border transactions, which offer an entirely new set of regulatory challenges, 
also are explored here and elsewhere in this book in the setting in which they 
commonly occur.
Viewed in the context of a market in which control transfers from sellers 
to buyers, Chapter 3 addresses common takeover tactics employed as part of 
an overall bidding strategy, the motivation behind such tactics, and the de­
fenses used by target firms to deter or delay such tactics. Bidding strategies 
are discussed for both friendly and unwanted or hostile business takeovers. 
In hostile deals, the corporate takeover is viewed as a means of disciplining 
underperforming management, improving corporate governance practices, 
and reallocating assets to those who can use them more effectively. While 
such takeovers occur infrequently, the mere threat of hostile takeovers often 
encourages incumbent managers to change their behavior. This chapter also 
addresses the growing role activists are taking in promoting good corporate 
governance and in disciplining incompetent or entrenched managers.
The reader is encouraged to review deals currently in the news and to 
identify the takeover tactics and defenses employed by the parties to the 
transactions. One’s understanding of the material can be enriched by at­
tempting to discern the intentions of both the acquiring and target firms’ 
boards and management, if the proposed business combination makes sense, 
and thinking about what you might have done differently to achieve similar 
goals. While completed deals tend to make the headlines, much can also be 
learned by examining those that fail.


C H A P T E R
5
Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring Activities. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-801609-1.00001-4
Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1
An Introduction to Mergers, 
Acquisitions, and Other 
Restructuring Activities
O U T L I N E
Inside Mergers and Acquisitions: 
Battle of the Discount Retailers—
Dollar Tree Acquires Family Dollar	
6
Chapter Overview	
8
Why M&As Happen	
8
Synergy	
8
Diversification	
12
Strategic Realignment	
14
Hubris and the “Winner’s Curse”	
14
Buying Undervalued Assets: 
The Q-Ratio	
14
Managerialism (Agency Problems)	
15
Tax Considerations	
15
Market Power	
15
Misvaluation	
16
Historical Developments in M&As	
16
Why M&A Waves Occur	
16
Similarities and Differences 
Among Merger Waves	
19
Why it Is Important to Anticipate 
Merger Waves	
19
Understanding Corporate 
Restructuring Activities	
19
Mergers and Consolidations	
20
Acquisitions, Divestitures, Spin-Offs, 
Split-Offs, Carve-Outs, and Buyouts	
21
Alternative Takeover Strategies	
22
The Role of Holding Companies 
in Mergers and Acquisitions	
23
The Role of Employee Stock 
Ownership Plans (ESOPs) in M&As	
23
Business Alliances as Alternatives 
to M&As	
24
Participants in the Mergers 
and Acquisitions Process	
25
Providers of Specialized Services	
25
Regulators	
27
Institutional Investors and Lenders	
28
Activist Investors	
29
M&A Arbitrageurs	
30

6	
1.  An Introduction to Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring Activities
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
If you give a man a fish, you feed him for a day. If you teach a man to fish, you feed him for a lifetime.
—Lao Tze
INSIDE MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS: BATTLE OF THE DISCOUNT 
RETAILERS—DOLLAR TREE ACQUIRES FAMILY DOLLAR
KEY POINTS
•	 Mergers between competitors offer the greatest potential shareholder value creation, but they 
also face the greatest scrutiny from regulators.
•	 Protracted bidding wars and negotiations can weaken operationally both the acquirer and 
target firms.
•	 Realizing anticipated synergy on a timely basis often is elusive.
•	 Postmerger integration is often the determining factor in the ultimate success or failure of a 
merger.
In an industry in which three major competitors all have the word dollar in their names, 
it is not surprising that it is sometimes difficult to keep the players straight. For purposes of 
clarity, the participants in this transaction are Dollar Tree (the acquirer), Family Dollar (the 
target), and Dollar General (the losing bidder). If you can keep that straight, what follows of­
fers insight into challenges common to many mergers and acquisitions (M&As).
Discount retailing in the United States is dominated by Walmart, Dollar General, Fam­
ily Dollar, Dollar Tree, and Five Below. While Walmart is the proverbial 800-lb gorilla in the 
industry, Dollar Tree and Family Dollar, if combined, offered the greatest potential for sig­
nificant value creation (synergy) and for receiving regulatory approval because few store 
locations overlap. Although their business strategies or models are different, the limited 
operational overlap provides greater geographic coverage and access to new customers. 
Common overhead offers significant opportunities for reducing operating costs and buying 
in larger volume provides increased negotiating leverage with vendors.
While both stores compete as discount retailers, the way in which they market their 
products is significantly different. At Dollar Tree, most items actually retail for $1. The firm 
The Implications of M&As for 
Shareholders, Bondholders, and Society	
31
Premerger Returns to Shareholders	
32
Postmerger Returns to Shareholders	
34
Acquirer Returns Vary by 
Characteristics of Acquirer, 
Target, and Deal	
35
Payoffs for Bondholders	
39
Payoffs for Society	
40
Some Things to Remember	
40
Chapter Discussion Questions	
41
Case Study: Charter Communications 
Acquires	
42
Case Study Objectives	
42
Discussion Questions	
45
Additional Case Study 
Recommendations	
45

I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
	
INSIDE MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS	
7
specializes in buying “going-out-of-business” merchandise enabling it to pass on savings to 
its customers and to provide an ever-changing product offering. Dollar Tree describes itself 
as offering a “thrill-of-the-hunt shopping experience.” In contrast, Family Dollar is a dollar 
store in name only, with product prices ranging as low as $1 to in excess of $20. The firm tries 
to maintain similar products in inventory over time so that its customers can expect to see 
the same products from week to week. While this model may have worked years ago, today 
it means that a discount retailer with a predictable product selection must compete directly 
with the likes of Walmart.
Family Dollar CEO Howard Levine had been under increasing competitive pressure from 
Walmart and Dollar General and had been underperforming the competition for years. More­
over, well-known billionaire activist investor Carl Icahn was publicly calling on the belea­
guered Family Dollar CEO to put the business up for sale. Activist investor Trian Fund Man­
agement LP invested in Family Dollar in 2009 and, with an executive on the board, supported 
the sale. In the face of both competitive pressure and the threat of a proxy battle for control 
of the board, Mr. Levine and the Family Dollar board were ready to negotiate a deal to sell 
the business. In July 2014, Dollar Tree announced that it had reached an agreement to acquire 
Family Dollar for $8.5 billion or $74.50 a share.
When the deal closed in mid-2015, Dollar General, previously the biggest of the three dol­
lar store competitors, faced a larger competitor that had more locations around the country. 
The combined Dollar Tree and Family Dollar companies will operate more than 13,000 stores 
nationwide, not including the 330 they had to sell to gain regulatory approval, and annual 
revenue of more than $20 billion. By comparison, Dollar General operates 12,000 stores in 
43 states. The new Dollar Tree will keep both brands and operate both dollar store business 
models.
The deal’s announcement prompted an aggressive response by the then much bigger Dol­
lar General that offered $9.1 billion or $80 per share offer for Family Dollar. Uncertainty over 
whether the higher takeover bid would receive regulatory approval eventually sank Dollar 
General’s chances. Family Dollar argued that any deal with its bigger competitor would re­
quire divesting as many as 4500 stores in order to get regulatory approval.
Successfully integrating the two chains has proven to be a major challenge, likely to take 
several years or more. Efforts to restore Family Dollar’s profitability negatively impacted 
consolidated earnings in 2015 and 2016. Remodeling stores, introducing new merchandise 
and promotional campaigns, and paying severance expenses to terminated employees have 
proven to be more expensive than anticipated. In addition, layoffs at both firms invariably 
reduce employee morale and productivity and in turn customer satisfaction and attrition. 
Breakdowns in logistics can also disrupt inventory management and restocking operations 
adding to both employee and customer discontent.
In 2016, Dollar Tree showed some success in increasing both sales and net income as it has 
added more food shelves and freezers to its stores. An important rationale for the business 
was the potential for significant synergies. But realizing anticipated synergies on a timely 
basis is proving daunting. Dollar Tree’s management in an effort to reassure investors has 
pointed out that the company’s operating performance, excluding the Family Dollar acquisi­
tion, is showing healthy sales and profit growth. But drawing this comparison makes some 
wonder why Dollar Tree bought Family Dollar at all.

8	
1.  An Introduction to Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring Activities
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
CHAPTER OVERVIEW
This chapter provides insights into why M&As happen and why they tend to cluster in 
waves, as well as into a variety of legal structures and strategies that are employed to restruc­
ture firms. The roles and responsibilities of the primary participants in the M&A process also 
are discussed in detail. Subsequent chapters analyze this subject matter in more detail. This 
chapter concludes with a series of discussion questions, an end of chapter case study with 
questions, and recommendations for relevant case studies from Harvard Business Publishing.
A firm that attempts to acquire or merge with another company is called an acquiring com­
pany, acquirer, or bidder. The target company is the firm being solicited by the acquiring com­
pany. Takeovers and buyouts are generic terms for a change in the controlling ownership in­
terest of a corporation. A review of this chapter (including practice questions and answers) is 
available in the file folder entitled “Student Study Guide” on the companion website for this 
book (https://www.elsevier.com/books-and-journals/book-companion/9780128016091).
WHY M&As HAPPEN
Table 1.1 lists some of the more prominent theories about why M&As happen. Of these, 
anticipated synergy between the acquirer and target firms is most often cited in empirical 
studies as the primary motivation for M&As.1 Each theory is discussed in greater detail in the 
remainder of this section.
Synergy
Synergy is the value realized from the incremental cash flows generated by combining two 
businesses. That is, if the market value of two firms is $100 million and $75 million, respec­
tively, and their combined market value is $200 million, then the implied value of synergy is 
$25 million. The two basic types of synergy are operating and financial.
Operating Synergy
Operating synergy consists of economies of scale, economies of scope, and the acquisition 
of complementary technical assets and skills, which can be important determinants of share­
holder wealth creation.2 Gains in efficiency can come from these factors and from improved 
managerial operating practices.
Economies of scale often refer to the reduction in average total costs for a firm producing 
a single product for a given scale of plant due to the decline in average fixed costs as produc­
tion volume increases. Scale is defined by such fixed costs as depreciation of equipment and 
amortization of capitalized software, normal maintenance spending, and obligations such 
as interest expense, lease payments, long-term union, customer, vendor contracts, and taxes. 
These costs are fixed since they cannot be altered in the short run. Variable costs are those 
that change with output levels. Consequently, for a given scale or amount of fixed expenses, 
2DeLong (2003).
1Ferreira et al. (2014).

I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
	
WHY M&As HAPPEN	
9
the dollar value of fixed expenses per unit of output and per dollar of revenue decreases as 
output and sales increase.
To illustrate the potential profit improvement from economies of scale, consider the merger 
of Firm B into Firm A. Firm A has a plant producing at only one-half of its capacity, enabling 
Firm A to shut down Firm B’s plant that is producing the same product and move the produc­
tion to its own, underutilized facility. Consequently, Firm A’s profit margin improves from 
6.25% before the merger to 14.58% after the merger. Why? Because the additional output 
transferred from Firm B is mostly profit as it adds nothing to Firm A’s fixed costs (Table 1.2).3
3The profit improvement is overstated because of the simplifying assumption that variable costs per unit are 
constant at $2.75. In reality, average variable costs rise as output increases, reflecting equipment downtime due 
to needed maintenance, increased overtime pay, additional shifts requiring hiring new and often less productive 
employees, and disruptions to production resulting from the logistical challenges of maintaining adequate supplies 
of raw materials. In addition, the example excludes the cost of financing the transaction and any shutdown costs 
incurred in closing Firm B’s plant.
TABLE 1.1  Common Theories of What Causes Mergers and Acquisitions
Theory
Motivation
Operating synergy
•	Economies of scale
•	Economies of scope
•	Complementary technical assets and skills
Improve operating efficiency through economies of scale or 
scope by acquiring a customer, supplier, or competitor or to 
enhance technical or innovative skills
Financial synergy
Lower cost of capital
Diversification
•	New products/current markets
•	New products/new markets
•	Current products/new markets
Position the firm in higher-growth products or markets
Strategic realignment
•	Technological change
•	Regulatory and political change
Acquire capabilities to adapt more rapidly to environmental 
changes than could be achieved if they were developed 
internally
Hubris (managerial pride)
Acquirers believe their valuation of the target is more accurate 
than the market’s, causing them to overpay by overestimating 
synergy
Buying undervalued assets (Q-ratio)
Acquire assets more cheaply when the equity of existing 
companies is less than the cost of buying or building the assets
Managerialism (agency problems)
Increase the size of a company to increase the power and pay of 
managers
Tax considerations
Obtain unused net operating losses and tax credits and asset 
write-ups, and substitute capital gains for ordinary income
Market power
Actions taken to boost selling prices above competitive levels 
by affecting either supply or demand
Misvaluation
Investor overvaluation of acquirer’s stock encourages M&As 
using acquirer stock
M&A, Merger and acquisition.

10	
1.  An Introduction to Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring Activities
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
Economies of scale may also affect variable costs such as a reduction in purchased ma­
terial prices due to an increase in bulk purchases and lower production line setup costs 
resulting from longer production runs. When one company buys another, the combined 
firms may be able to negotiate lower purchase prices from suppliers because of their in­
creased negotiating leverage. Suppliers often are willing to cut prices, because they also 
realize economies of scale as their plant utilization increases if they are able to produce and 
sell larger quantities. Setup costs refer to the expense associated with setting up a produc­
tion assembly line. These include personnel costs in changing from producing one product 
to another, any materials consumed in this process, and the time lost while the production 
line is down. For example, assume a supplier’s initial setup costs are $3000 per production 
run to produce an order of 2500 units of a product. Setup costs per unit produced are $1.20. 
If the order is doubled to 5000 units, setup costs per unit are cut in half to $0.60 per unit. 
Suppliers may be willing to pass some of these savings on to customers to get the larger 
order.
Economies of scope refers to the reduction in average total costs for a firm producing two 
or more products, because it is cheaper to produce these products in a single firm than in 
separate firms. Economies of scope may reflect both declining average fixed and variable 
costs. Common examples of overhead- and sales-related economies of scope include having 
a single department (e.g., accounting and human resources) support multiple product lines 
and a sales force selling multiple related products rather than a single product. Savings in 
distribution costs can be achieved by transporting a number of products to a single location 
rather than a single product. In 2012, following its emergence from bankruptcy, Hostess Bak­
ing achieved significant reductions in distribution costs when its unions allowed the firm to 
TABLE 1.2  Economies of Scale
Period 1: Firm A (premerger)
Period 2: Firm A (postmerger)
Assumptions:
•	Price = $4 per unit of output sold
•	Variable costs = $2.75 per unit of output
•	Fixed costs = $1,000,000
•	Firm A is producing 1,000,000 units of output per 
year
•	Firm A is producing at 50% of plant capacity
Assumptions:
•	Firm A acquires Firm B, which is producing 500,000 
units of the same product per year
•	Firm A closes Firm B’s plant and transfers 
production to Firm A’s plant
•	Price = $4 per unit of output sold
•	Variable costs = $2.75 per unit of output
•	Fixed costs = $1,000,000
=
×
−
−
=
×
−
×
−
=
Profit
price
quantity
variable costs
fixed costs
$4
1,000,000
$2.75
1,000,000
$1,000,000
$250,000
=
×
−
−
=
×
−
×
−
−
−
−
=
Profit
price
quantity
variable costs
fixed costs
$4
1,500,000
$2.75
1,500,000
$1,000,000
$6,000,000
$4,125,000
$1,000,000
$875,000
=
=
=
=
Profit margin(%)
$250,000
$4,000,000
6.25
Fixed costs per unit
$1,000,000
$1,000,000
$1.00
=
=
=
=
Profit margin(%)
$875,000
$6,000,000
14.58
Fixed cost per unit
$1,000,000
1,500,000
$.67
Notes: Contribution to profit of additional 500,000 units = $4 × 500,000 − $2.75 × 500,000 = $625,000.
Margin per unit sold at fixed cost per unit of $1.00 = $4.00 − $2.75 − $1.00 = $0.25.
Margin per unit sold at fixed cost per unit of $.67 = $4.00 − $2.75 − $0.67 = $0.58.

I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
	
WHY M&As HAPPEN	
11
transport both bread and other baked goods to customers in the same truck rather than in 
separate trucks as had been the case. Economies of scope also include the cost savings real­
ized by using a specific set of skills or an asset currently employed in producing a specific 
product to produce multiple products. Procter & Gamble, the consumer products giant, uses 
its highly regarded consumer marketing skills to sell a full range of personal care as well as 
pharmaceutical products. Honda employs its proprietary knowledge of internal combustion 
engines (an intangible asset) to enhance the manufacturing of engines used in cars, motor­
cycles, lawn mowers, and snow blowers.
Complementary technical assets and skills are those possessed by one firm that could be 
used by another to fill gaps in its technical capabilities. Gaining access to this know-how 
can be a significant motivation for one firm to acquire another. For example, merger activity 
is likely to occur between firms pursuing related research and development activities, with 
certain technologies owned by one firm appearing to be very attractive to the other.4 Both 
firms gain potentially from an increased rate of innovation after the merger, because they 
have access to each other’s technical skills and patent portfolios. For example, when Phar­
macia & Upjohn combined with Monsanto to form Pharmacia, the merger gave Pharmacia & 
Upjohn access to Monsanto’s Cox-2 inhibitors and Monsanto access to the other’s expertise in 
genomics. The merger allowed for expanded in-house clinical R&D, resulting in an increase 
in the average size of R&D projects and a reduction in the time required for getting products 
to market.
Financial Synergy
Financial synergy refers to the reduction in the acquirer’s cost of capital due to a merger 
or acquisition. This could occur if the merged firms have cash flows that are relatively uncor­
related, realize cost savings from lower securities’ issuance and transactions costs, or expe­
rience a better matching of investment opportunities with internally generated funds. The 
conventional view holds that corporations moving into different product lines whose cash 
flows are uncorrelated reduce only risk specific to the firm such as product obsolescence (i.e., 
business-specific or nonsystematic risk) and not risk associated with factors impacting all 
firms (i.e., systematic risk) such as a recession, inflation, or increasing interest rates.5
Recent research suggests that M&As that result in firms whose individual business unit 
cash flows are uncorrelated can indeed lead to a reduction in systematic risk. Such firms 
may be better able to withstand the loss of customers, suppliers, employees, or the impact of 
financial distress than single product firms. Sometimes referred to as coinsurance, the imper­
fect correlation of business unit cash flows allows resources to be transferred from cash-rich 
units to cash-poor units as needed. In contrast, the loss of key customers or employees in a 
single product firm could be devastating. Consequently, multi–product line firms with less 
correlated business unit cash flows can have less systematic risk than firms whose business 
unit cash flows are correlated.6
Target firms, unable to finance their investment opportunities, are said to be financially 
constrained, and they may view access to additional financing provided by an acquirer’s 
4Bena and Li (2014).
5Ross et al. (2008, p. 823).
6Hann et al. (2013).

12	
1.  An Introduction to Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring Activities
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
unused borrowing capacity or excess cash balance as a form of financial synergy. That is, 
financially constrained firms often increase their investment levels following acquisition by a 
firm not subject to financial constraints.7
Diversification
Buying firms beyond a company’s current lines of business is called diversification. Di­
versification may create financial synergy that reduces the cost of capital as noted earlier, or 
it may allow a firm to shift its core product lines or target markets to ones that have higher 
growth prospects. The new product lines or target markets may be related or unrelated to the 
firm’s current products or markets. The product–market matrix illustrated in Table 1.3 identi­
fies a firm’s primary diversification options.
A firm facing slower growth in its current markets may accelerate growth through related 
diversification by selling its current products in new markets that are somewhat unfamiliar 
and, therefore, more risky. Such was the case in 2012 when IBM acquired web-based human 
resource software maker Kenexa to move its existing software business into the fiercely com­
petitive but fast-growing market for delivering business applications via the web.
A firm also may attempt to achieve higher growth rates by acquiring new products 
with which it is relatively unfamiliar and then selling them in familiar and less risky cur­
rent markets. Retailer J.C. Penney’s $3.3 billion acquisition of the Eckerd Drugstore chain 
(a drug retailer) and Johnson & Johnson’s $16 billion acquisition of Pfizer’s consumer 
healthcare product line are examples of such related diversification. In each instance, the 
firm assumed additional risk by selling new product lines, but into markets with which it 
had significant prior experience: J.C. Penney in consumer retail markets and J&J in retail 
healthcare markets.
There is considerable evidence that acquisitions resulting in unrelated diversification fre­
quently result in lower financial returns when they are announced than nondiversifying ac­
quisitions.8 Firms that operate in a number of largely unrelated industries, such as General 
Electric, are called conglomerates. The share prices of conglomerates often trade at a dis­
count to shares of focused firms or to their value if broken up.9 This markdown is called a 
8Akbulut and Matsusaka (2010).
9Khorana et al. (2011) and Ammann et al. (2012).
7Erel et al. (2015).
TABLE 1.3  The Product–Market Matrix
Markets
Products
Current
New
Current
Lower growth/lower risk
Higher growth/higher risk 
(related diversification)
New
Higher growth/higher risk (related 
diversification)
Highest growth/highest risk 
(unrelated diversification)

I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
	
WHY M&As HAPPEN	
13
conglomerate or diversification discount, a measure that sometimes values conglomerates as 
much as 15% lower than more focused firms in the same industry.10 Investors often perceive 
conglomerates as riskier because management has difficulty understanding these firms and 
may tend to underinvest in attractive opportunities.11 Additionally, outside investors may 
have trouble in valuing the various parts of highly diversified businesses.12 Investors also 
may be reluctant to invest in firms whose management appears intent on diversifying to 
build “empires” rather than to improve firm performance13; moreover, such firms often ex­
hibit poor governance practices.14 The larger the difference between conglomerates whose 
share prices trade below those of more focused firms, the greater the likelihood these diversi­
fied firms will engage in restructuring that increases their focus.15
Other researchers find evidence that the most successful mergers in developed countries 
are those that focus on deals that promote the acquirer’s core business, largely reflecting their 
familiarity with such businesses and their ability to optimize investment decisions.16 Relat­
ed acquisitions may even be more likely to generate higher financial returns than unrelated 
deals,17 since related firms are more likely to realize cost savings due to overlapping func­
tions. There is also evidence that cross-border deals are more likely to be completed when the 
degree of relatedness between the acquiring and target firms is high.18
It is important to note that the existence of a conglomerate discount is not universally true. 
While conglomerates have not fared as well as more focused firms in North America and 
certain other developed countries, their performance in developing nations has been con­
siderably stronger. Diversified firms in countries having limited capital market access may 
sell at a premium since they may use cash generated by mature subsidiaries to fund those 
with higher growth potential.19 Furthermore, conglomerates in such developed countries as 
South Korea and Singapore have outperformed their more focused rivals in part due to their 
ability to transfer ideas and technologies among their various businesses.20 Diversified firms 
10Some researchers argue the magnitude of the discount is overstated (Campa and Simi, 1992), while others say it 
reflects sample bias (Graham et al., 2002; Villalonga, 2004). Recent research (Custodio, 2014) suggests that the mag­
nitude of the discount may reflect the way in which acquired assets are recorded for financial reporting purposes. 
Conglomerates often are more acquisitive than focused firms; as such, their book values are often higher as ac­
quired assets are written up to fair market value resulting in lower market-to-book ratios than more focused firms. 
Market-to-book ratios are commonly used to measure this discount; consequently, the magnitude of the discount 
may be overstated as conglomerate market-to-book ratios may be lower than those of less diversified firms for ac­
counting rather performance reasons. Other researchers argue the discount is overestimated due to methodological 
differences that systematically undervalue diversified firms (Rudolph and Schwetzler, 2014).
11Seru (2014).
12Best and Hodges (2004).
13Andreou et al. (2010).
14Hoechle et al. (2012).
15Hovakimian (2016).
16Harding and Rovit (2004) and Megginson et al. (2003).
17Singh and Montgomery (2008).
18Lim and Lee (2016a, 2016b).
19Fauver et al. (2003).
20Economist (2014).

14	
1.  An Introduction to Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring Activities
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
also tend to perform better in downturns than more focused firms, because they can use 
excess cash flows generated by some businesses to offset deteriorating cash flows in other 
businesses.21
Strategic Realignment
Firms use M&As to make rapid adjustments to changes in their external environment 
such as regulatory changes and technological innovation. Those industries that have been 
subject to significant deregulation in recent years—financial services, healthcare, utilities, 
media, telecommunications, and defense—have been at the center of M&A activity,22 because 
deregulation breaks down artificial barriers and stimulates competition. Firms in highly 
regulated industries often are unable to compete successfully following deregulation and 
become targets of stronger competitors. As such, deregulation often sparks a flurry of M&A 
activity resulting in a significant reduction in the number of competitors in the formerly 
regulated industry.23
Technological advances create new products and industries and force a radical restructur­
ing of existing ones. The smartphone spurred the growth of handheld telecommunications 
devices while undercutting the point-and-shoot camera industry and threatening the popu­
larity of wristwatches, alarm clocks, and MP3 players. Tablet computers reduced the demand 
for desktop and notebook computers, while e-readers reduced the popularity of hardback 
books. Services such as WhatsApp and Microsoft’s Skype erode a major source of mobile 
phone company revenue: voice and text messaging. A shift to cloud computing enables busi­
nesses to outsource their IT operations.
Hubris and the “Winner’s Curse”
CEOs with successful acquisition track records may pay more than the target is worth due 
to overconfidence.24 Having overpaid, such acquirers may feel remorse at having done so—
experiencing what has come to be called the “winner’s curse.”
Buying Undervalued Assets: The Q-Ratio
The Q-ratio is the ratio of the market value of the acquirer’s stock to the replacement 
cost of its assets. Firms can choose to invest in new plant and equipment or obtain the 
assets by buying a company with a market value less than what it would cost to replace 
the assets (i.e., a market-to-book or Q-ratio that is less than 1). This theory is useful in 
explaining M&A activity when stock prices drop well below the book value (or historical 
cost) of firms.
21Volkov and Smith (2015).
22Mulherin and Boone (2000).
23Ovtchinnikov (2013).
24Billett and Qian (2008) and Malmendier and Tate (2008).

I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
	
WHY M&As HAPPEN	
15
Managerialism (Agency Problems)
Agency problems arise when the interests of current managers and the firm’s sharehold­
ers differ. Managers may make acquisitions to add to their prestige, build their spheres of 
influence, or augment their compensation, or for self-preservation.25 Furthermore, agency 
problems may be more pronounced with younger CEOs. Since acquisitions often are accom­
panied by large, permanent increases in compensation, CEOs have strong financial incen­
tives to pursue acquisitions earlier in their careers.26 Such mismanagement can persist when a 
firm’s shares are widely held, since the cost of such negligence is spread across a large num­
ber of shareholders. Fairness opinions to evaluate the appropriateness of bidder offer prices 
and special committees consisting of independent directors to represent shareholders may 
be used to mitigate agency problems in target firms. Used to evaluate offers in about one-
fourth of takeovers,27 special committees are subcommittees of a target’s board composed of 
independent, disinterested directors who are not part of management or a group attempting 
a buyout of the firm.
Tax Considerations
Taxes influence corporate decision making.28 Acquirers of firms with accumulated losses 
and tax credits may use them to offset future profits generated by the combined firms. How­
ever, the taxable nature of the transaction often plays a more important role in determining 
whether a merger takes place than do any tax benefits accruing to the acquirer. The seller may 
view the tax-free status of the transaction as a prerequisite for the deal to take place. A prop­
erly structured transaction can allow the target shareholders to defer any capital gain until 
the acquirer’s stock received in exchange for their shares is sold. Taxes also are an important 
factor motivating firms in high-tax countries that derive a large portion of their income from 
foreign sources to move their corporate headquarters by acquiring a firm located in a country 
with more favorable tax rates. Since a firm’s income is taxed both in its home country and 
abroad, multinational companies are motivated to move to lower-tax environments as part of 
their global financial strategies. So-called corporate inversions are discussed in more detail in 
Chapters 12 and 18.
Market Power
The market power theory suggests that firms merge to improve their ability to set product 
prices at levels not sustainable in a more competitive market. However, many recent studies 
conclude that increased merger activity is much more likely to contribute to improved oper­
ating efficiency of the combined firms than to increased market power (later in the chapter). 
There is, however, evidence that increased industry concentration can force suppliers to lower 
their selling prices.29
28Doidge and Dyck (2015).
29Bhattacharyya and Nain (2011).
25Masulis et al. (2007).
26Yim (2013).
27Boone and Mulherin (2014).

16	
1.  An Introduction to Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring Activities
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
Misvaluation
Absent full information, investors may periodically incorrectly value a firm.30 If a firm’s 
shares are overvalued (undervalued), they are likely to decline (rise) in the long run to their 
true value as investors more accurately value such shares based on new information. Acquir­
ers may profit by buying undervalued targets for cash at a price below their actual value or 
by using overvalued equity (even if the target is overvalued), as long as the target is less over­
valued than the bidding firm’s stock.31 Overvalued shares enable the acquirer to purchase 
a target firm in a share for share exchange by issuing fewer shares, reducing the dilution of 
current acquirer shareholders in the combined companies.32 Target firm shareholders may be 
willing to accept overvalued acquirer shares if they believe the likely synergy resulting from 
the merger is substantial enough to offset the potential for the overvalued acquirer shares to 
decline.33
The effects of misvaluation tend to be short-lived, since the initial overvaluation of an 
acquirer’s share price often is reversed in 1–3 years as investors’ enthusiasm about potential 
synergies wanes.34 Both acquirer and target shareholders often lose in improperly valued 
deals. Acquirers tend to overpay for target firms and often anticipated synergy is insufficient 
for the acquirer to earn back the premium paid for the target. Target shareholders who hold 
their acquirer shares see them over time decline to their true economic value.
HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENTS IN M&As
M&As cluster in waves, with public firms being more active buyers than private firms due 
in part to their greater access to financing and their more liquid stock.35 Insights gained by 
analyzing these waves help buyers to understand when to make and how to structure and 
finance deals.
Why M&A Waves Occur
M&As in the United States have tended to cluster in six multiyear waves since the late 
1890s. There are two competing explanations for this phenomenon. One argues that merger 
waves occur when firms react to industry “shocks,”36 such as from deregulation, the emer­
gence of new technologies, distribution channels, substitute products, or a sustained rise in 
34Petmezas (2009) and Akbulut (2013).
35Maksimovic et al. (2013) and Gugler et al. (2012).
36Martynova and Renneboog (2008a) and Brealey and Myers (2003).
30Edmans et al. (2012).
31Ang and Cheng (2006) and Dong et al. (2006).
32Consider an acquirer who offers the target firm shareholders $10 for each share they own. If the acquirer’s cur­
rent share price is $10, the acquirer would have to issue one new share for each target share outstanding. If the 
acquirer’s share price is valued at $20, only 0.5 new share would have to be issued, and so forth. Consequently, 
the initial dilution of the current acquirer’s shareholders’ ownership position in the new firm is less the higher the 
acquirer’s share price compared to the price offered for each share of target stock outstanding.
33Di Giuli (2013).

I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
	
HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENTS IN M&As	
17
commodity prices. Such events often cause firms to acquire either all or parts of other firms.37 
The second argument is based on misvaluation and suggests that managers use overvalued 
stock to buy the assets of lower-valued firms. For M&As to cluster in waves, goes the argu­
ment, valuations of many firms must increase at the same time. Managers whose stocks are 
believed to be overvalued move concurrently to acquire firms whose stock prices are lesser 
valued.38 For this theory to be correct, the method of payment would normally be stock. In 
fact, the empirical evidence shows that less stock is used to finance takeovers during merger 
waves.
Since M&A waves typically correspond to an improving economy, managers confident 
about their stocks’ future appreciation are more inclined to use debt to finance takeovers,39 
because they believe their shares are currently undervalued. Thus, the shock argument seems 
to explain M&A waves better than the misevaluation theory.40 However, shocks alone, with­
out sufficient liquidity to finance deals, will not initiate a wave of merger activity. Moreover, 
readily available, low-cost capital may cause a surge in M&A activity even if industry shocks 
are absent.41
While research suggests that shocks drive merger waves within industries, increased M&A 
activity within an industry contributes to M&A activity in other industries due to customer–
supplier relationships.42 For example, increased consolidation among computer chip makers 
in the early 2000s drove increased takeovers of suppliers of chip manufacturing equipment 
to accommodate growing customer demands for more complex chips. More recently, British 
American Tobacco’s (BAT) takeover of Reynolds American Tobacco for $49.3 billion in early 
2017 creating the world’s biggest publicly traded firm in the industry pressured rivals to 
consolidate to achieve potential cost savings and to enhance marketing and distribution 
capabilities.
The First Wave (1897–1904): Horizontal Consolidation
M&A activity reflected a drive for efficiency, lax enforcement of the Sherman Anti-Trust 
Act, migration, and technological change. Mergers were largely between competitors and re­
sulted in increased concentration in primary metals, transportation, and mining. Fraudulent 
financing and the 1904 stock market crash ended the boom.
The Second Wave (1916–29): Increasing Concentration
Activity during this period was a result of the entry of the United States into World War I 
and the postwar economic boom. Mergers also tended to be horizontal and further increased 
industry concentration. The stock market crash of 1929 and the passage of the Clayton Act 
that further defined monopolistic practices brought this era to a close.
37According to Netter et al. (2011), the existence of merger waves in industries subject to shocks is less apparent in 
larger data samples than in smaller. M&A activity that includes small deals and private acquirers is much smoother 
and less wavelike than patterns observed with only public acquirers and large deals.
38Rhodes-Kropf and Viswanathan (2004) and Schleifer and Vishny (2003).
39Malmendier et al. (2011).
40Garcia-Feijoo et al. (2012).
41Harford (2005).
42Ahern and Harford (2014).

18	
1.  An Introduction to Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring Activities
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
The Third Wave (1965–69): The Conglomerate Era
Firms with high P/E ratios grew earnings per share (EPS) through acquisition rather than 
reinvestment by buying firms with lower P/E ratios but high earnings growth to increase 
the EPS of the combined companies. This boosted the share price of the combined firms—as 
long as the P/E ratio applied to the stock price of the combined companies did not fall below 
the P/E ratio of the acquiring company before the deal. To maintain this pyramiding effect, 
though, target companies had to have earnings growth rates that were sufficiently attractive 
to convince investors to apply the higher multiple of the acquiring company to the combined 
companies. In time, the number of high-growth, relatively low-P/E-ratio companies declined, 
as conglomerates bid up their P/E multiples. The higher prices paid for the targets, coupled 
with the increasing leverage of the conglomerates, caused the “pyramids” to collapse.
The Fourth Wave (1981–89): The Retrenchment Era
The 1980s was characterized by the breakup of many major conglomerates by so-called 
corporate raiders using hostile takeovers and leveraged buyouts (LBOs). LBOs involve the 
purchase of a company financed primarily by debt. A management buyout occurs when a 
firm’s management team buys the operations they manage, usually relying on an outside 
source of financing provided by an investor group commonly referred to as a financial spon­
sor. Conglomerates began to divest unrelated acquisitions made in the 1960s and early 1970s. 
For the first time, takeovers of US companies by foreign firms exceeded in number and dol­
lars the acquisitions by US firms of foreign companies. Foreign buyers were motivated by the 
size of the market, limited restrictions on takeovers, the sophistication of US technology, and 
the weakness of the dollar against foreign currencies. Toward the end of the 1980s, the level 
of merger activity tapered off in line with a slowing economy and widely publicized LBO 
bankruptcies.
The Fifth Wave (1992–99): The Age of the Strategic Megamerger
The longest economic expansion and stock market boom in US history was a result of a 
combination of the technology revolution, deregulation, reductions in trade barriers, and the 
global trend toward privatization. Both the dollar volume and the number of transactions 
continued to set records through the end of the 1990s before contracting sharply when the 
Internet bubble burst, a recession hit the United States in 2001, and global growth weakened.
The Sixth Wave (2003–08): The Rebirth of Leverage
US financial markets, especially from 2005 to 2007, were characterized by a proliferation 
of highly LBOs and complex securities collateralized by pools of debt and loan obligations. 
Much of the financing of these deals, as well as mortgage-backed security issues, has taken 
the form of syndicated debt (i.e., debt purchased by underwriters for resale to the investing 
public). Lenders have an incentive to increase the volume of lending to generate fee income 
by accepting riskier loans.43 Once loans are sold to others, loan originators are likely to re­
duce the monitoring of such loans. These practices, coupled with exceedingly low interest 
rates made possible by a world awash in liquidity and highly accommodative monetary poli­
cies, contributed to excessive lending and encouraged acquirers to overpay for target firms. 
43Brunnermeier (2009).

	
Understanding Corporate Restructuring Activities	
19
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
However, limited credit availability, as banks attempted to rebuild their capital following 
substantial asset write-downs, not only affected the ability of private equity and hedge funds 
to finance new or refinance existing transactions but also limited the ability of other busi­
nesses to fund operations. These conditions were exacerbated by European sovereign debt 
concerns and escalating oil prices that triggered a global economic downturn in 2008. Mirror­
ing the global malaise, M&A activity languished during this period.
Similarities and Differences Among Merger Waves
M&As commonly occur during periods of sustained high rates of economic growth, low or 
falling interest rates, and a rising stock market. Historically, each merger wave has differed in 
terms of a specific development (such as the emergence of a new technology), industry focus 
(such as rail, oil, or financial services), degree of regulation, and type of transaction (such as 
horizontal, vertical, conglomerate, strategic, or financial deals discussed in more detail later 
in this chapter). Merger waves also occur in cross-border M&As, with European waves fol­
lowing those in the United States with a short lag.44
Why it Is Important to Anticipate Merger Waves
The stock market rewards firms acting early and punishes those that merely imitate. Firms 
pursuing attractive deals early pay lower prices for targets than followers. Late in the cycle, 
purchase prices escalate as more bidders enter the takeover market, leading many buyers to 
overpay.45 Reflecting this “herd mentality,” deals completed late in M&A waves tend to show 
lower acquirer returns than those announced prior to an upsurge in deal activity.46 However, 
trying to predict the timing of the next merger wave is problematic due to the sluggish and 
uneven global economic recovery since 2009. Having reached its prior peak in 2015, M&A 
activity tapered off in 2016 raising the question as to whether this M&A activity is grounded 
on strong economic fundamentals or a financial market bubble created by historically low 
interest rates.
UNDERSTANDING CORPORATE RESTRUCTURING ACTIVITIES
Corporate restructuring often is broken into two categories. Operational restructuring 
entails changes in the composition of a firm’s asset structure by acquiring new businesses 
or by the outright or partial sale or spin-off of companies or product lines. It could also in­
clude downsizing by closing unprofitable or nonstrategic facilities. Financial restructuring 
describes changes in a firm’s capital structure, such as share repurchases or adding debt ei­
ther to lower the company’s overall cost of capital or as part of a takeover defense. The focus 
in this book is on business combinations and breakups rather than on operational downsizing 
44Brakman et al. (2005) and Gugler et al. (2012).
45McNamara et al. (2008) and Gell et al. (2008).
46Duchin and Schmidt (2013).

20	
1.  An Introduction to Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring Activities
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
and financial restructuring. Business combinations can be known as mergers, consolidations, 
acquisitions, or takeovers and can be friendly or hostile.
Mergers and Consolidations
Mergers can be described from a legal perspective and an economic perspective.
A Legal Perspective
A merger is a combination of two or more firms, often comparable in size, in which all 
but one ceases to exist legally. A statutory or direct merger is one in which the acquiring 
or surviving company assumes automatically the assets and liabilities of the target in ac­
cordance with the statutes of the state in which the combined companies will be incorpo­
rated. A subsidiary merger involves the targets becoming a subsidiary of the parent. To the 
public, the target firm may be operated under its brand name, but it will be owned and 
controlled by the acquirer. A statutory consolidation—which involves two or more com­
panies joining to form a new company—is technically not a merger. All legal entities that 
are consolidated are dissolved during the formation of the new company, which usually 
has a new name. Shareholders in the firms typically exchange their shares for shares in the 
new company.
An Economic Perspective
Business combinations may also be defined depending on whether the merging firms are 
in the same (horizontal) or different industries (conglomerate) and on their positions in the 
corporate value chain (vertical). Fig. 1.1 illustrates the different stages of the value chain. A 
simple value chain in the basic steel industry may distinguish between raw materials, such as 
coal or iron ore; steel making, such as “hot metal” and rolling operations; and metals distribu­
tion. Similarly, a value chain in the oil and gas industry would separate exploration activities 
from production, refining, and marketing. An Internet value chain might distinguish between 
infrastructure providers such as Cisco, content providers such as Dow Jones, and portals such 
as Google. In a vertical merger, companies that do not own operations in each major segment 
of the value chain “backward integrate” by acquiring a supplier or “forward integrate” by 
buying a distributor. When paper manufacturer Boise Cascade acquired Office Max, an office 
FIGURE 1.1  The corporate value chain. IT, Information technology.

	
Understanding Corporate Restructuring Activities	
21
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
products distributor, the $1.1-billion transaction represented forward integration.47 PepsiCo 
backward integrated through a $7.8-billion purchase of its two largest bottlers to realize $400 
million in annual cost savings.
Acquisitions, Divestitures, Spin-Offs, Split-Offs, Carve-Outs, and Buyouts
An acquisition occurs when a company takes a controlling interest in another firm, a legal 
subsidiary of another firm, or selected assets of another firm, such as a manufacturing facil­
ity. They may involve the purchase of another firm’s assets or stock, with the acquired firm 
continuing to exist as a legally owned subsidiary. In contrast, a divestiture is the sale of all or 
substantially all of a company or product line to another party for cash or securities. A spin-
off is a transaction in which a parent creates a new legal subsidiary and distributes shares in 
the subsidiary to its current shareholders as a stock dividend, with the spun-off subsidiary 
now independent of the parent. A split-off is similar to a spin-off, in that a firm’s subsidiary 
becomes an independent firm and the parent firm does not generate any new cash. However, 
unlike a spin-off, the split-off involves an offer to exchange parent stock for stock in the parent 
firm’s subsidiary. An equity carve-out is a transaction in which the parent issues a portion of 
its stock or that of a subsidiary to the public (see Chapter 15). Fig. 1.2 provides a summary of 
the various forms of corporate restructuring.
47According to Gugler et al. (2003), horizontal, conglomerate, and vertical mergers accounted for 42, 54, and 4%, 
respectively, of the 45,000 transactions analyzed between 1981 and 1998.
FIGURE 1.2  The corporate restructuring process.

22	
1.  An Introduction to Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring Activities
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
ALTERNATIVE TAKEOVER STRATEGIES
The term takeover is used when one firm assumes control of another. In a friendly take­
over, the target’s board and management recommend shareholder approval. To gain control, 
the acquiring company usually must offer a premium to the target’s current stock price. For 
example, French telecommunications giant Altice paid $34.90 per share of US cable company 
Cablevision in cash, 22% higher than Cablevision’s closing stock price on September 16, 2015 
(the day before the deal was announced). The excess of the offer price over the target’s pre­
merger share price is called a purchase premium or acquisition premium and varies widely 
by country,48 reflecting the perceived value of obtaining a controlling interest (i.e., the abil­
ity to direct the activities of the firm) in the target, the value of expected synergies (e.g., cost 
savings) resulting from combining the two firms, and any overpayment for the target firm. 
Overpayment is the amount an acquirer pays for a target firm in excess of the present value 
of future cash flows, including synergy.49 The size of the premium fluctuates widely from 
one year to the next. During the 30-year period ending in 2011, US purchase price premiums 
averaged 43%, reaching a high of 63% in 2003 and a low of 31% in 2007.50 The premium size 
also varies substantially across industries, reflecting their different expected growth rates.51
A formal proposal to buy shares in another firm made directly to its shareholders, usually 
for cash or securities or both, is called a tender offer. Tender offers most often result from 
friendly negotiations (i.e., negotiated tender offers) between the boards of the acquirer and 
the target firm. Cash tender offers may be used because they could represent a faster alter­
native to mergers.52 Those that are unwanted by the target’s board are referred to as hostile 
tender offers. Self-tender offers are used when a firm seeks to repurchase its stock.
A hostile takeover occurs when the offer is unsolicited, the approach was contested by the 
target’s management, and control changed hands. The acquirer may attempt to circumvent 
management by offering to buy shares directly from the target’s shareholders (i.e., a hostile 
tender offer) and by buying shares in a public stock exchange (i.e., an open market purchase). 
Friendly takeovers are often consummated at a lower purchase price than hostile deals, which 
48US merger premiums averaged about 38% between 1973 and 1998. Rossi and Volpin document an average pre­
mium of 44% during the 1990s for US mergers and find premiums in 49 countries ranging from 10% for Brazil and 
Switzerland to 120% for Israel and Indonesia. A more accurate representation of the purchase price premium paid 
to target firm shareholders would reflect the run-up in the target’s share price in advance of the deal announce­
ment date plus the price offered for the target shares in excess of the target’s share price immediately prior to the 
announcement date.
49Analysts often attempt to determine the premium paid for a controlling interest (i.e., control premium) and the 
amount of value created due to operating synergies. An example of a pure control premium is a conglomerate will­
ing to pay a price above the prevailing market price for a target to gain a controlling interest, even though operat­
ing synergies are limited. The acquirer believes it will recover the control premium by making better management 
decisions for the target firm. What is often called a “control premium” in the popular press is actually a purchase or 
acquisition premium that includes both a premium for synergy and a premium for control.
50Factset Mergerstat Review (2011).
51Madura et al. (2012).
52Speed is important to acquirers if there are other potential bidders for the target firm. Cash tender offers may be 
completed more rapidly than mergers since no target shareholder meeting is required and the length of time regu­
lators have to review tender offers is less than for mergers (Offenberg and Pirinsky, 2015).

I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
	
THE ROLE OF EMPLOYEE STOCK OWNERSHIP PLANS (ESOPs) IN M&As	
23
may trigger an auction for the target firm. Acquirers often prefer friendly takeovers because 
the postmerger integration process is usually more expeditious when both parties are cooper­
ating fully and customer and employee attrition is less. Most transactions tend to be friendly, 
with hostile takeovers usually comprising less than 5% of the value of total deals.
THE ROLE OF HOLDING COMPANIES IN 
MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS
A holding company is a legal entity having a controlling interest in one or more companies. 
The key advantage is the ability to gain effective control53 of other companies at a lower over­
all cost than if the firm was to acquire 100% of the target’s shares. Effective control sometimes 
can be achieved by owning as little as 30% of the voting stock of another company when the 
firm’s bylaws require approval of major decisions by a majority of votes cast rather than a 
majority of the voting shares outstanding. This is particularly true when the target company’s 
ownership is highly fragmented, with few shareholders owning large blocks of stock. Effec­
tive control generally is achieved by acquiring less than 100% but usually more than 50% of 
another firm’s equity leaving the holding company with minority shareholders who may not 
always agree with the strategic direction of the company. Implementing holding company 
strategies may become contentious. Also, holding company shareholders may be subject to 
an onerous tax burden, with corporate earnings potentially subject to triple taxation.54
THE ROLE OF EMPLOYEE STOCK OWNERSHIP 
PLANS (ESOPs) IN M&As
An ESOP is a trust fund that invests in the securities of the firm sponsoring the plan. 
Designed to attract and retain employees, ESOPs are defined contribution55 employee pen­
sion plans that invest at least 50% of the plan’s assets in the sponsor’s common shares. The 
plans may receive the employer’s stock or cash, which is used to buy the sponsor’s stock. 
The sponsor can make tax-deductible contributions of cash, stock, or other assets into the 
trust.56 The plan’s trustee is charged with investing the trust assets, and the trustee often can 
53One firm is said to have effective control when control has been achieved by buying voting stock, it is not likely to 
be temporary, there are no legal restrictions on control (such as from a bankruptcy court), and there are no power­
ful minority shareholders.
54Subsidiaries of holding companies pay taxes on their operating profits. The holding company then pays taxes 
on dividends it receives from its subsidiaries. Finally, holding company shareholders pay taxes on dividends they 
receive from the holding company. This is equivalent to triple taxation of the subsidiary’s earnings.
55Employee contributions are set as a percentage of salary, while the value of their pensions depends on the perfor­
mance of the sponsoring firm’s shares.
56Cash contributions made by the sponsoring firm for both interest and principal payments on bank loans to ESOPs 
are tax deductible by the firm. Dividends paid on stock contributed to ESOPs also are deductible if they are used to 
repay ESOP debt. The sponsoring firm could use tax credits equal to 0.5% of payroll if contributions in that amount 
were made to the ESOP. Finally, lenders must pay taxes on only one-half of the interest received on loans made to 
ESOPs owning more than 50% of the sponsoring firm’s stock.

24	
1.  An Introduction to Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring Activities
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
sell, mortgage, or lease the assets. Stock acquired by the ESOP is allocated to accounts for 
individual employees based on some formula and vested over time. ESOP participants must 
be allowed to vote their allocated shares at least on major issues such as selling the company.
ESOPs may be used to restructure firms. If a subsidiary cannot be sold at what the parent 
firm believes to be a reasonable price and liquidating the subsidiary would be disruptive to 
customers, the parent may divest the subsidiary to employees through a shell corporation. A 
shell corporation, as defined by the US Securities and Exchange Commission in 2005, is one 
with “no or nominal operations, and with no or nominal assets or assets consisting solely of 
cash and cash equivalents.”57 The shell sets up the ESOP, which borrows the money to buy 
the subsidiary; the parent guarantees the loan. The shell operates the subsidiary, whereas the 
ESOP holds the stock. As income is generated from the subsidiary, tax-deductible contribu­
tions are made by the shell to the ESOP to service the debt. As the loan is repaid, the shares 
are allocated to employees who eventually own the firm. ESOPs may be used by employees 
in LBOs to purchase the shares of owners of privately held firms. This is particularly com­
mon when the owners have most of their net worth tied up in their firms. ESOPs also provide 
an effective antitakeover defense, since employees who also are shareholders tend to vote 
against bidders for fear of losing their jobs.
BUSINESS ALLIANCES AS ALTERNATIVES TO M&As
In addition to M&As, businesses may combine through joint ventures (JVs), strategic alli­
ances, minority investments, franchises, and licenses. The term business alliance is used to re­
fer to all forms of business combinations other than M&As (see Chapter 15 for more details).
JVs are business relationships formed by two or more parties to achieve common objec­
tives. While the JV is often a legal entity such as a corporation or partnership, it may take any 
organizational form desired by the partners. Each JV partner continues to exist as a separate 
entity; JV corporations have their own management reporting to a board of directors. A stra­
tegic alliance generally does not create a separate legal entity and may be an agreement to 
sell each firm’s products to the other’s customers or to codevelop a technology, product, or 
process. Such agreements may be legally binding or informal.
Minority investments, those involving less than a controlling interest, require little com­
mitment of management time for those willing to be passive investors. Such investments are 
frequently made in firms that have attractive growth opportunities but lack the resources 
to pursue them.58 Investors often receive representation on the board or certain veto rights 
in exchange for their investment. A minority investor can effectively control a business by 
having veto rights changes in strategy, capital expenditures over a certain amount of money, 
key management promotions, salary increases applying to senior managers, the amount and 
timing of dividend payments, and when the business would be sold.
Licenses enable firms to extend their brands to new products and markets by permitting 
others to use their brand names or to gain access to a proprietary technology. A franchise is 
58Liao (2014).
57Shell corporations are created with the sole intent of merging with a privately held company, after selling their 
operations and assets to another firm, or as a result of the bankruptcy process.

	
Participants in the Mergers and Acquisitions Process	
25
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
a specialized form of a license agreement that grants a privilege to a dealer from a manufac­
turer or franchise service organization to sell the franchiser’s products or services in a given 
area. Under a franchise agreement, the franchiser may offer the franchisee consultation, pro­
motional assistance, financing, and other benefits in exchange for a share of the franchise’s 
revenue. Franchises represent a low-cost way for the franchiser to expand.59
The major attraction of these alternatives to outright acquisition is the opportunity for each 
partner to gain access to the other’s skills, products, and markets at a lower overall cost in 
terms of management time and money. Major disadvantages include limited control, the need 
to share profits, and the potential loss of trade secrets and skills to competitors.
PARTICIPANTS IN THE MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS PROCESS
In addition to the acquirer and target firms, the key participants in the M&A process in­
clude providers of specialized services, regulators, institutional investors and lenders, activist 
investors, and M&A arbitrageurs (arbs). Each participant plays a distinctly different role.
Providers of Specialized Services
The first category includes investment banks, lawyers, accountants, proxy solicitors, and 
public relations personnel. Not surprisingly, the number and variety of advisors hired by 
firms tends to increase dramatically with the increasing complexity of the deal.60
Investment Banks
Investment banks provide advice and deal opportunities; screen potential buyers and 
sellers; make initial contact with a seller or buyer; and negotiation support, valuation, 
and deal structuring guidance. The “universal or top-tier banks” (e.g., Goldman Sachs) 
also maintain broker–dealer operations, serving wholesale and retail clients in brokerage 
and advisory roles to assist with the complexity and often-huge financing requirements of 
megatransactions.
Investment bankers derive significant income from so-called fairness opinion letters—
signed third-party assertions that certify the appropriateness of the price of a proposed deal 
involving a tender offer, merger, asset sale, or LBO. They often are developed as legal protec­
tion for members of the boards of directors against possible shareholder challenges of their 
decisions.61 Researchers have found that fairness opinion letters reduce the risk of lawsuits 
59Franchising has been limited to industries such as fast food services and retailing, in which a successful business 
model can be easily replicated.
60DeMong et al. (2011).
61Typically limited to “change of control” transactions, fairness opinions include a range of values for a firm. The 
proposed purchase price is considered “fair” if it falls within the range. Problems with fairness opinions include 
the potential conflicts of interest with investment banks that generate large fees. Often, the investment bank that 
brings the deal to a potential acquirer is the same one that writes the fairness opinion (Henry, 2003). Acquirers us­
ing one firm to write the fairness opinion for a fixed fee and a different firm in an advisory capacity for a contingent 
fee to close the deal show higher abnormal positive returns than those that do not (Chen, 2010).

26	
1.  An Introduction to Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring Activities
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
associated with M&A transactions and the size of the premium paid for targets if they result 
in acquirers performing more rigorous due diligence and deal negotiation.62
In selecting an investment bank, acquirers and target firms focus far more on a bank’s 
track record in generating high financial returns for their clients than on its size or market 
share.63 Smaller advisors may generate higher returns for their clients than the megainvest­
ment banks because of proprietary industry knowledge and relationships. About one-fourth 
of merging firms tend to hire so-called boutique or specialty investment banks for their skill 
and expertise as their advisors, especially in deals requiring specialized industry knowl­
edge.64 However, size and market share do matter in certain situations. Contrary to earlier 
studies that report a negative or weak relationship between bidder financial advisor size and 
bidder returns,65 bidders using top-tier investment banks as advisors report on average a 1% 
improvement in returns in deals involving public targets.66 Top-tier investment banks are 
better able to assist in funding large transactions, which typically involve public companies, 
because of their current relationships with lenders and broker networks. Public company 
takeovers often are more complex than private firm takeovers due to their greater bargaining 
power, need for greater disclosure, and regulatory issues.
Long-standing investment banking relationships do matter. However, their importance 
varies with the experience of the acquirer and target firm. Targets, having long-standing re­
lationships with investment banks, are more likely to hire M&A advisors67 and to benefit by 
receiving higher purchase price premiums. Frequent acquirers are more likely to use the same 
investment advisor if they have had good prior outcomes. Otherwise they are very willing 
to switch to a new investment advisor. Investment banking relationships are significant for 
inexperienced acquirers that are more likely to hire financial advisors with whom they have 
had a long-standing underwriting relationship for equity finance deals.68
Investment banks often serve as advisors for firms undergoing extensive restructuring in­
volving asset sales. Such firms are more likely to utilize investment banks when they are in a 
different industry from the potential buyer and the asset to be sold is large. Buyers of divested 
assets are more likely to use investment banks when the target is large relative to the buyer 
(i.e., they have more at stake), is a foreign firm, is in the technology industry, or is in a differ­
ent industry from the buyer.69
Firms that are in the mature stage of their corporate life cycle (net cash generators with 
limited investment opportunities) are more inclined to use investment bankers than firms 
in their growth phase (net cash users with many investment opportunities). Mature firms 
hiring investment bankers often show higher returns than those that do not, suggesting that 
financial advisors add value perhaps by helping such firms identify and value appropriate 
investment opportunities. Firms in their growth phase are less likely to use financial advisors 
62Kisgen et al. (2009).
63Bao and Edmans (2011).
64Song et al. (2013).
65Hunter and Jagtiani (2003) and Ismail (2010).
66Bao and Edmans (2011).
67Forte et al. (2010).
68Francis et al. (2014a, 2014b).
69Cao et al. (2014).

	
Participants in the Mergers and Acquisitions Process	
27
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
due to the many investment opportunities that exist for such firms, but those not using advi­
sors tend to earn lower returns than those that do.70
In recent years, active acquirers are relying more on their internal staffs to perform what 
has traditionally been done by outside investment bankers. According to Dealogic, 27% of 
public company deals valued at more than $1 billion in 2016 did not use investment advisors. 
This compares to 13% in 2014. The trend is driven by a desire to control costs, keep deals con­
fidential, and move quickly when needed.
Lawyers
Lawyers help structure the deal, evaluate risk, negotiate the tax and financial terms, ar­
range financing, and coordinate the sequence of events to complete the transaction. Specific 
tasks include drafting the purchase agreement and other transaction-related documentation, 
providing opinion of counsel letters to the lender, and defining due diligence activities.
Accountants
Accountants provide advice on financial structure, perform financial due diligence, and 
help create the optimal tax structure for a deal. Income tax, capital gains, sales tax, and some­
times gift and estate taxes are all at play in negotiating a merger or acquisition. In addition 
to tax considerations, accountants prepare financial statements and perform audits. Many 
agreements require that the books and records of the acquired entity be prepared in accor­
dance with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP).
Proxy Solicitors
Proxy contests are attempts to change the management control or policies of a company by 
gaining the right to cast votes on behalf of other shareholders. In contests for the control of the 
board of directors of a target company, it can be difficult to compile mailing lists of stockhold­
ers’ addresses. The acquiring firm or dissatisfied shareholders hire a proxy solicitor to obtain 
this information. The target’s management may also hire proxy solicitors to design strategies 
for educating shareholders and communicating why they should support the board.
Public Relations Firms
Such firms often are hired to ensure that a consistent message is communicated during a 
takeover attempt or in defending against takeovers. In initiating a hostile takeover attempt, 
the message to target shareholders must be that the acquirer’s plans for the company will 
increase shareholder value more than the plans of current management. Often, the target’s 
management will hire a private investigator to develop detailed financial data on the com­
pany and do background checks on key personnel, later using that information in the public 
relations campaign in an effort to discredit publicly the management of the acquiring firm.
Regulators
Regulations that affect M&A activity exist at all levels of government and involve secu­
rity, antitrust, environmental, racketeering, and employee benefits laws. Others are industry 
70Chuang (2017).

28	
1.  An Introduction to Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring Activities
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
specific, such as public utilities, insurance, banking, broadcasting, telecommunications, de­
fense contracting, and transportation. State antitakeover statutes place limitations on how 
and when a hostile takeover may be implemented. Moreover, approval at both the state and 
federal levels may be required for deals in certain industries. Cross-border transactions may 
be even more complicated, because it may be necessary to obtain approval from regulatory 
authorities in all countries in which the acquirer and target companies do business.
Institutional Investors and Lenders
These financial intermediaries pool funds provided by others and invest or lend those 
funds to finance the purchase of a wide array of assets, from securities to real property to cor­
porate takeovers. Such organizations include insurance companies, pension funds, and mu­
tual funds; private equity, hedge funds, and venture capital funds; sovereign wealth funds; 
and angel investors. Commercial banks also are prominent intermediaries; however, under 
recent legislation their role is relegated primarily to lending rather than investing money 
deposited with the bank.
Insurance, Pension, and Mutual Funds
Risk averse and subject to substantial regulation, these institutions invest mostly in assets 
whose risk and return characteristics match their obligations to their customers. For example, 
an insurance company offers to mitigate risk for its customers in exchange for an insurance 
premium. The main source of profit for insurance companies is the sale of insurance products, 
but they also make money by investing premium income. Employers establish pension funds 
to generate income over the long term to provide pensions for employees when they retire. 
Typically, pension funds are managed by a financial advisor for the company and its employ­
ees, although some larger corporations operate their pension funds in-house. Mutual funds 
are pools of money professionally managed for the benefit of investors.
Commercial Banks
Traditionally, commercial banks have accepted checking, savings, and money market ac­
counts and would lend these funds to borrowers. This model has evolved into one in which 
banks sell many of the loans they originate to others for whom buying, selling, and collect­
ing loan repayments is their primary business. Commercial banks also derive an increasing 
share of their profits from fees charged for various types of services offered to depositors 
and fees charged for underwriting and other investment banking services. The Dodd–Frank 
bill, passed in 2010, is intended to limit the riskiness of bank lending and to severely restrict 
the types of investments that can be made. See Chapter 2 for a more detailed discussion of 
Dodd–Frank.
Hedge, Private Equity, and Venture Capital Funds
These funds assume higher levels of risk than other types of institutional investors 
and usually are limited partnerships in which the general partner has made a substantial 
personal investment. They are distinguished by their investment strategies, lockup peri­
ods (i.e., the length of time investors are required to commit funds), and the liquidity of 
their portfolios. Hedge fund investment strategies include trading a variety of financial 

	
Participants in the Mergers and Acquisitions Process	
29
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
instruments—debt, equity, options, futures, and foreign currencies—as well as higher-risk 
strategies, such as corporate restructurings (e.g., LBOs) and credit derivatives (e.g., credit 
default swaps). Because of their shorter lockup periods, hedge funds focus on investments 
that can be readily converted into cash. In contrast, private equity funds often make highly 
illiquid investments in private companies and hold such investments for 5 years or more; 
they attempt to control risk by being actively involved in managing the firm in which they 
have invested. Venture capitalists are a significant source of funds for financing both start-
ups and acquisitions.
Sovereign Wealth Funds
Sovereign wealth funds are government-backed or -sponsored investors whose primary 
function is to invest accumulated foreign currency reserves. Countries with huge quantities 
of US dollars would, through such funds, often reinvest the money in US Treasury securities. 
These funds are increasingly taking equity positions in foreign firms, often making high-
profile investments in public companies.
Angel Investors
Angel investors are wealthy individuals who band together in “investment clubs” or net­
works to identify deals, pool money, and share expertise. Some angel groups imitate profes­
sional investment funds, some affiliate with universities, while others engage in for-profit 
philanthropy.
Activist Investors
Such investors can be either an individual or a group that purchase large numbers of shares 
of a firm to vote their shares as a block or to obtain seats of the firm’s board of directors with 
the objective of effecting change. Institutions often play the role of activist investors to alter 
the policies of companies in which they invest and especially to discipline inept corporate 
management. Institutions having a long-term investment horizon have been shown to con­
tribute to a firm’s financial performance due to their more active monitoring of management 
decisions.71 Activism has also assumed a more important role in recent years by replacing 
the historic role of hostile takeovers in disciplining underperforming managers or changing 
corporate strategies.72
Mutual Funds and Pension Funds
Institutional ownership of public firms increased substantially in recent decades. While 
regulations restrict the ability of institutions to discipline corporate management, institu­
tional investors with huge portfolios can be very effective in demanding governance chang­
es.73 Corporate governance is the system of rules, processes, and practices that direct and 
71Andriosopoulos et al. (2015) and Kim et al. (2015).
72Denes et al. (2016).
73Mutual funds, to achieve diversification, are limited in the amount they can invest in any one firm’s outstanding 
stock. State regulations often restrict the share of a life insurance or property casualty company’s assets that can be 
invested in stock to as little as 2%.

30	
1.  An Introduction to Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring Activities
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
control a firm. These organizations may challenge management on such hot-button issues 
as antitakeover defenses, CEO severance benefits, and employee stock option accounting. 
Voting against management, though, can be problematic, since some mutual funds manage 
retirement plans and, increasingly, provide a host of outsourcing services—from payroll to 
health benefits—for their business clients. Mutual funds may own stock, on behalf of their 
clients, in these same firms.
Pressure from institutional activists may account for the general decline in the number 
of executives serving as both board chairman and CEO of companies.74 Sometimes, CEOs 
choose to negotiate with activists rather than face a showdown at an annual shareholders 
meeting. Activists also are finding that they may avoid the expense of a proxy fight simply 
by threatening to vote in certain ways on supporting a CEO or a management proposal. This 
may mean a “no” vote, although in some instances the only option is to vote in the affirma­
tive or abstain. Abstaining is a way to indicate dissatisfaction with a CEO or a firm’s policy 
without jeopardizing future underwriting or M&A business for the institution.
Hedge Funds and Private Equity Firms
Hedge funds and private equity firms have had more success as activist investors than oth­
er institutional investors. They are successful about two-thirds of the time in their efforts to 
change a firm’s strategic, operational, or financial strategies, often generating attractive finan­
cial returns for shareholders.75 They seldom seek control (with ownership stakes averaging 
about 9%) and are most often nonconfrontational. Their success as activists can be attributed 
to their managers, who direct large pools of relatively unregulated capital and who are highly 
motivated by financial gain. Because hedge funds are not subject to the same regulations gov­
erning mutual funds and pension funds, they can hold concentrated positions in a small num­
ber of firms. Moreover, they are not limited by the same conflicts of interests that afflict mutual 
funds and pension funds. Hedge funds tend to have the greatest impact on shareholder returns 
when they prod management to sell a company, but their impact dissipates quickly if the sale of 
the company is unsuccessful.76 Firms once targeted by activists are more likely to be acquired.
M&A Arbitrageurs
When a bid is made for a target firm, the target’s stock price often trades at a small discount 
to the actual bid—reflecting the risk that the deal may not be completed. Merger arbitrage re­
fers to an investment strategy that attempts to profit from this spread. Arbs buy the stock and 
make a profit on the difference between the bid price and the current stock price if the deal is 
completed. Others may “short” the stock once it increases betting that the proposed merger 
74(Goyal and Park, 2002). The number of executives serving in both positions of their companies declined from 
about 91% during the 1980s to 58% during the 1990s (Kini et al., 2004).
75Brav et al. (2008) argue that activist hedge funds occupy a middle ground between internal monitoring by large 
shareholders and external monitoring by corporate raiders. Clifford (2008) and Klein and Zur (2009) found that 
hedge fund activism generates an approximate 7% higher financial return to shareholders than normal around the 
announcement that the hedge fund is initiating some form of action.
76Greenwood and Schor (2007) found that under such circumstances, there is little change in the firm’s share price 
during the 18 months following the sale of the company, even if the firm follows the activist’s recommendations 
and buys back shares or adds new directors.

I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
	
THE IMPLICATIONS OF M&As FOR SHAREHOLDERS, BONDHOLDERS, AND SOCIETY	
31
will not be completed and the target’s share price will drop to its premerger announcement 
level. Assume a target firm’s shares are selling at $6 per share and an acquirer announces an 
offer to pay $10 per share. Because the outcome is uncertain, the target’s share price will rise 
to less than $10, assume $9.77 Other investors may bet the merger will not be completed and 
sell the stock short (i.e., sell borrowed shares—paying interest to the shareowner based on 
the value of the shares when borrowed—hoping to buy them back at a lower price) at $9 and 
buy it back at $6.
Hedge fund managers, playing the role of arbs, may accumulate a substantial percent­
age of the stock held outside of institutions so that they can be in a position to influence the 
outcome of the takeover attempt. If other offers for the target firm appear, arbs approach in­
stitutional investors with phone calls and through leaks to the media, attempting to sell their 
shares to the highest bidder. Acquirers making a hostile bid often encourage hedge funds to 
buy as much target stock as possible so that they can gain control of the target later by buying 
the stock from the hedge funds.
Arbs also provide market liquidity during transactions. In a cash-financed merger, arbs 
seeking to buy the target firm’s shares provide liquidity to the target’s shareholders that want 
to sell on the announcement day or shortly thereafter. Arbs may actually reduce liquidity for 
the acquirer’s stock in a share for share merger because they immediately “short” the acquirer 
shares. The downward pressure that arb short-selling puts on the acquirer’s share price at the 
time the deal is announced makes it difficult for others to sell without incurring a loss from the 
premerger announcement price. Merger arbitrage has the potential to be highly profitable.78
THE IMPLICATIONS OF M&As FOR SHAREHOLDERS, 
BONDHOLDERS, AND SOCIETY
The outdated notion that most M&As fail in some substantive manner is not supported 
by recent evidence. On average, the sum of target and acquirer shareholders’ gains around 
the deal’s announcement date is positive and statistically significant (i.e., not due to chance). 
While most of the gain accrues to target shareholders, acquirer shareholders often experience 
financial gains in excess of what would have been realized in the absence of a takeover.79 In 
the 3–5 years after a takeover, it is less clear if shareholders continue to benefit from the deal. 
As time passes, other factors impact performance, making it increasingly difficult to deter­
mine the extent to which a change in performance is due to an earlier acquisition.
Researchers use a variety of approaches to measure the impact of takeovers on share­
holder value.80 What follows is a discussion of the results of the two most common types 
78Such arbitrage generates financial returns ranging from 4.5% to more than 100% in excess of what would be con­
sidered normal in a highly competitive market (Mitchell and Pulvino, 2001).
79Ahern (2012).
80In an analysis of 88 empirical studies between 1970 and 2006, Zola and Meier (2008) identify 12 different ap­
proaches to measuring the impact of takeovers on shareholder value. Of these studies, 41% use the event study 
method to analyze premerger returns and 28% utilize long-term accounting measures to analyze postmerger 
returns.
77The target’s share price would rise by $4–$10 if investors were certain the deal gets done. Because it rises only to 
$9, investors are implicitly stating that there is a 75% (i.e., $3/$4) probability that the merger will be completed.

32	
1.  An Introduction to Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring Activities
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
of analyses of M&A financial returns: premerger event returns and postmerger accounting 
returns. So-called event studies examine abnormal stock returns to the shareholders of 
both acquirers and targets around the announcement of an offer (the “event”). Such stud­
ies presume that investors can accurately assess the likely success or failure of M&As 
realizing expected synergy around the deal’s announcement date.81 The results of such 
studies vary widely depending on the listing status,82 size of the acquirer and target firms, 
and the form of payment. Empirical studies of postmerger returns use accounting mea­
sures to gauge the impact on shareholder value in the years immediately following the 
announcement date.
Both event and postmerger returns in academic studies of M&As typically are estimated 
using regression analysis (i.e., a process used to quantify the relationship among variables). 
Fluctuations in the so-called dependent variable (in these studies some measure of finan­
cial returns or performance) are explained by selecting a set of factors (i.e., independent 
variables) whose variation is believed to explain changes in the dependent variable. These 
studies do not “prove” that certain independent variables explain returns but rather sug­
gest that they are statistically relevant (i.e., their correlation is not due to chance) for the 
sample and time period selected by the researcher. In many academic studies only about 
one-quarter (or less) of the total variation in financial returns or performance is explained 
by the independent variables used in the study. The remainder of the variation remains 
unexplained, thus making the results of such studies problematic because the exclusion of 
relevant variables can bias the results.83 However, if the same result is found using different 
data samples and varying time periods in numerous studies, the conclusions are likely to 
be more reliable.
Premerger Returns to Shareholders
Positive abnormal or excess shareholder returns may be explained by such factors as im­
proved efficiency, pricing power, and tax benefits. They are abnormal in that they exceed 
what an investor would normally expect to earn for accepting a certain level of risk. If an 
investor expects to earn a 10% return on a stock but actually earns 25% due to a takeover, the 
abnormal or excess return to the shareholder would be 15%.84
81(Bargeron et al., 2014; Circon et al., 2014). Positive abnormal acquirer financial returns around the announcement 
date of a deal may indeed be good predictors of the wealth creation potential of takeovers when acquirer manag­
ers and investors agree on the attractiveness of the deal. However, a lack of a consensus can result in great acquirer 
share price volatility making it difficult for investors to value the deal accurately.
82Listing status refers to whether the acquirer and the target are listed on public stock exchanges or are privately 
held firms. Whether a deal involves listed or unlisted firms often makes a substantial difference in the financial 
returns to shareholders, since the vast majority of firms engaging in takeovers involve a private acquirer, a private 
target, or both.
83An independent variable that is statistically significant in a regression equation that explains a low percentage of 
the variation in the dependent variable can be a proxy for a variable that should have been included in the equa­
tion. Thus, the included variable is not the true determinant of, for example, acquirer returns but rather is simply 
correlated with the excluded variable, the true determinant of acquirer returns.
84Abnormal returns are calculated by subtracting the actual return from a benchmark indicating investors’ required 
returns, often the capital asset pricing model or the S&P 500 stock index.

I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
	
THE IMPLICATIONS OF M&As FOR SHAREHOLDERS, BONDHOLDERS, AND SOCIETY	
33
Returns High for Target Shareholders
Average abnormal returns to target shareholders during the 2000s averaged 25.1% as com­
pared to 18.5% during the 1990s.85 This upward trend may reflect a tendency by bidders 
to offer a substantial premium in friendly takeovers to preempt other possible bidders and 
the potential for revising the initial offer because of competing bids. Other contributing fac­
tors include the increasing sophistication of takeover defenses and federal and state laws 
requiring bidders to notify target shareholders of their intentions before completing the deal. 
Returns from hostile tender offers generally exceed those from friendly mergers, which are 
characterized by less contentious negotiated settlements and the absence of competing bids.
Sometimes returns to target shareholders on the announcement date can be negative. Why? 
Because investors are sensitive to the size of the actual offer price relative to the expected of­
fer price.86 When the announced offer price is significantly below expectations, investors ex­
press their disappointment by selling their shares. Selling pressure can be particularly intense 
when the run-up in share prices prior to the bid is fueled largely by speculators hoping to 
profit from a sizable jump in the stock. When it becomes clear that their expectations will not 
be realized, speculators try to lock in any profits they have by selling their shares.
Returns to Acquirer Shareholders (With Some Exceptions) Often Favorable
Recent research involving large samples involving tens of thousands of firms over lengthy 
time periods involving US, foreign, and cross-border deals (including public and private 
firms) shows that returns to acquirer shareholders are generally positive around the deal 
announcement date except for those involving large public firms and those public firms us­
ing stock to pay for the deal.87 While it varies in these large-sample studies, deals involving 
private acquirers, private targets, or both comprise at least four-fifths or more of the sample. 
Unlike earlier results, these studies document that acquirer shareholders earn positive abnor­
mal returns of about 1%–1.5%. While earlier studies show such returns to be zero or slightly 
negative, they focus almost exclusively on large publicly traded acquirers. They also fail to 
explain why the number and size of M&As continues to grow globally, implying that manag­
ers do not learn from past failures.
Earlier studies may understate average acquirer returns because they are based on rela­
tively small samples of mostly public firms, employ problematic methodologies, fail to cap­
ture the preannouncement rise in acquirer share prices,88 and fail to adjust for distortions of 
a few large transactions. Nor do they properly account for premerger pay-for-performance 
programs even though bidders with high pay-for-performance plans tend to pay lower pre­
miums and realize higher announcement date financial returns than firms that do not have 
such plans.89 Furthermore, commonly used sampling methods bias sample selection toward 
larger publicly traded firms making such samples unrepresentative of the general popula­
tions of firms involved in M&As.90
88Cornett et al. (2011) and Cai et al. (2011).
89Krolikowski (2016).
90Moeller et al. (2005) and Jansen and Stuart (2014).
85See Table 11 in Netter et al. (2011).
86Ang and Ismail (2015).
87Yilmaz and Tanyeri (2016), Erel et al. (2012), Netter et al. (2011), and Ellis et al. (2011).

34	
1.  An Introduction to Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring Activities
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
A more significant shortcoming of measuring the success or failure of deals using financial 
returns around the announcement date is that they do not view M&As in the context of a 
larger integrated business strategy.91 Such event studies assume that investors at the time of 
the deal’s announcement can accurately assess potential synergy, even though often investors 
lack access to the necessary information to make an informed decision. Google was widely 
criticized as having overpaid in 2006 when it acquired YouTube for $1.65 billion. Google’s 
business strategy was to increase usage of its search engine and websites to attract advertis­
ing revenue. Today, YouTube is widely recognized as the most active site featuring videos 
on the internet and has attracted substantial additional web activity for its parent. Viewed 
independently from the Google business strategy, YouTube may not exhibit attractive fi­
nancial returns, but as part of a larger strategy, it appears to have been wildly successful. 
Moreover, event studies do not take into account the potential beneficial impact of defensive 
acquisitions.92 Facebook’s eye-popping $21.8 billion acquisition in 2014 of WhatsApp with 
its $20 million in annual revenue was in part justified because it kept this rapidly growing 
mobile messaging business out of the hands of Google.
Disney was severely criticized as overpaying when it acquired Pixar for $7.3 billion in 
2006, Marvel Entertainment in 2009 for $4 billion, and Lucasfilm for $4 billion in 2012. Dis­
ney’s business strategy has been to nurture strong brands and grow creative content. The 
acquisition of the wildly successful film animation studio Pixar reinvigorated Disney’s ani­
mation and production studio business and prevented Pixar from being acquired by a rival. 
Marvel Entertainment provided the firm with such iconic brands as Iron Man, Spider-Man, 
the X-Men, Captain America, the Fantastic Four, and Thor. Lucasfilm added the Star Wars 
franchise to Disney’s growing film library. When combined with Disney’s creative skills and 
global distribution, these brands have helped push Disney earnings to record levels.
Postmerger Returns to Shareholders
The objective of examining postmerger accounting or other performance measures such 
as cash flow and operating profit, usually during the 3- to 5-year period following closing, 
is to assess how performance changed. The evidence, however, is conflicting about the long-
term impact of M&A activity. In a review of 26 studies of postmerger performance during 
the 3–5 years after the merger, Martynova and Renneboog (2008a) found that 14 showed 
a decline in operating returns, 7 provided positive (but statistically insignificant) changes 
in profitability, and 5 showed a positive and statistically significant increase in profitabil­
ity.93 The inability to determine the long-term impact of M&As appears to be affected by 
methodological issues and the failure to distinguish among alternative situations in which 
M&As occur. The longer the postmerger period analyzed, the greater the likelihood that 
91Barkema and Schijven (2008).
92Bidders may rationally overpay when the cost of overpaying is less than the cost incurred in losing the target to a 
competitor (Akdogu, 2011).
93The disagreement about postmerger returns may be the result of sample and time selections, methodology 
employed in the studies, or factors unrelated to the merger, such as a slowing economy (Fama, 1998). Dutta et al. 
(2009) do not find evidence of any systematic long-term deterioration in acquirer financial performance and attri­
bute findings of such deterioration to the choice of benchmarks, differing methodologies, and statistical techniques.

I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
	
THE IMPLICATIONS OF M&As FOR SHAREHOLDERS, BONDHOLDERS, AND SOCIETY	
35
other factors, wholly unrelated to the merger, will affect financial returns. Moreover, these 
longer-term studies are not able to compare how well the acquirer would have done without 
the acquisition.
Acquirer Returns Vary by Characteristics of Acquirer, Target, and Deal
Abnormal returns to acquirer shareholders are largely situational, varying according to the 
size of the acquirer, the type and size of the target, the form of payment, firm-specific charac­
teristics, and investor sentiment (Table 1.4).
TABLE 1.4  Acquirer Returns Differ by Characteristics of the Acquirer, Target, and Deal as Well as Investor 
Sentiment
Characteristic
Empirical support
Type of target: acquirer returns
•	On US buyouts are often positive when the targets are privately 
owned (or are subsidiaries of public companies) and slightly 
negative when the targets are large publicly traded firms 
(i.e., so-called “listing effect”), regardless of the country
•	On cross-border deals generally positive except for those 
involving large public acquirers that are often zero to negative
Jansen and Stuart (2014)
Netter et al. (2011)
Capron and Shen (2007)
Faccio et al. (2006)
Draper and Paudyal (2006)
Moeller et al. (2005)
Barbopoulos et al. (2013)
Erel et al. (2012)
Ellis et al. (2011)
Yilmaz and Tanyeri (2016)
Form of payment: acquirer returns
•	On equity-financed acquisitions of large public firms often 
negative and less than cash-financed deals in the United States
•	On equity-financed acquisitions of public or private firms 
frequently more than all-cash-financed deals in EU countries
•	On equity-financed deals involving private firms (or subsidiaries 
of public firms) often exceed significantly cash deals
•	On cross-border deals financed with equity often negative
Fu et al. (2013)
Schleifer and Vishny (2003), Megginson 
et al. (2003)
Martynova and Renneboog (2008a, 2008b)
Netter et al. (2011)
Officer et al. (2009)
Chang (1998)
Ellis et al. (2011)
Vijh and Yang (2013)
Offenberg (2009)
Acquirer/target size
•	Smaller acquirers often realize higher returns than larger acquirers
•	Relatively small deals often generate higher acquirer returns than 
larger ones
•	Acquirer returns may be lower when the size of the acquisition 
is large relative to the buyer (i.e., more than 30% of the buyer’s 
market value)
Gorton et al. (2009)a
Moeller et al. (2005)
Moeller et al. (2004)
Hackbarth and Morellec (2008)
Frick and Torres (2002)
Rehm et al. (2012)
Firm characteristics: acquirer returns higher due to
•	Deal-making experience
•	Postmerger integration skills
•	Specific industry or proprietary knowledge
Golubov et al. (2015)
Investor sentiment: acquirer returns higher due to
•	Overly optimistic investors
•	Substantial media attention
Danbolt et al. (2015)

36	
1.  An Introduction to Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring Activities
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
Smaller Acquirers Tend to Realize Higher M&A Returns
Managers at large firms tend to overpay more than those at smaller firms, since large-firm 
executives may have been involved in more deals and be overconfident. This is sometimes 
referred to as the “size effect.” Incentive systems at larger firms also may skew compensation 
to reflect more the overall size of the firm than its ongoing performance. Finally, managers of 
large firms may pursue larger, more risky investments (such as unrelated acquisitions) in an 
attempt to support the firm’s overvalued share price. In contrast, CEOs of small firms tend to 
own a larger percentage of the firm’s outstanding shares than those of larger firms. On aver­
age CEOs of small firms own 7.4% of their firm’s stock, while those of larger firms own on 
average 4.5%. Consequently, small-company CEOs may be more risk averse in negotiating 
M&As. Regardless of the reason, research shows that large public acquirers tend to destroy 
shareholder wealth, while small acquirers create wealth.94
While the “size effect” has been widely documented in developed countries, large size 
can have significant benefits for M&As in countries characterized by weak corporate 
governance, (i.e., countries in which the laws and courts fail to protect shareholders’ 
rights). Realizing positive abnormal financial returns averaging 1.3% around the deal 
announcement date, large acquirers in such countries often are better able to insulate 
themselves from corrupt governments due to their sheer size, prestige, influence, and 
political connections. Reflecting their excellent political connections in weak governance 
environments, large acquirers often take less time to complete deals than in countries 
with more rigorous governance practices enabling a more rapid realization of anticipated 
synergies.95
Acquirer Returns Often Positive for Privately Owned or Subsidiary Targets
US acquirers of private firms or subsidiaries of publicly traded firms often realize posi­
tive abnormal returns of 1.5%–2.6% around the announcement date.96 Acquirers pay less for 
private firms or subsidiaries of public companies due to the limited availability of informa­
tion and the limited number of bidders for such firms. That is, the market for private firms 
is relatively illiquid. Since these targets may be acquired at a discount from their true value, 
acquirers are able to realize a larger share of the combined value of the acquirer and target 
firms.
Relatively Small Deals May Generate Higher Returns
Acquirer announcement date financial returns tend to be three times larger for acquisi­
tions involving small targets than for those involving large targets.97 High-tech firms realize 
attractive returns by acquiring small, but related, target firms to fill gaps in their product 
96(Fuller et al., 2002; Moeller et al., 2004). Similar results were found in an exhaustive study of UK acquirers (Draper 
and Paudyal, 2006) making bids for private firms or subsidiaries of public firms, where the positive abnormal 
returns were attributed to the relative illiquidity of such businesses.
97Vijh and Yang (2013) define small and large targets as firms in the bottom quartile of firms trading on the New 
York Stock Exchange.
94Regardless of how they were financed (i.e., stock or cash) or whether they were public or private targets, acquisi­
tions made by smaller firms had announcement returns 1.55% higher than a comparable acquisition made by a 
larger firm (Moeller et al., 2004).
95Humphery-Jenner and Powell (2014).

I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
	
THE IMPLICATIONS OF M&As FOR SHAREHOLDERS, BONDHOLDERS, AND SOCIETY	
37
offerings.98 Larger deals tend to be riskier for acquirers99 and experience consistently lower 
postmerger performance, possibly reflecting the challenges of integrating large target firms 
and realizing projected synergies. There are exceptions: firms making large acquisitions show 
less negative or more positive returns in slower-growing than in faster-growing sectors.100 In 
slow-growth industries, integration may be less disruptive than in faster-growing industries, 
which may experience a slower pace of new product introductions and upgrade efforts. Fur­
thermore, small firms are less likely than larger firms to receive overpriced stock offers since 
they often are less attractive to larger firms, which are more prone to use overvalued stock.101 
Why? Because small deals often do not provide the incremental revenue and profit to jump­
start growth for the larger firms. Therefore, purchases of smaller firms at reasonable prices 
provide a greater likelihood of realizing attractive financial returns.
Payment Impacts Acquirer Returns
Announcement date returns to acquirer shareholders often are negative when the acquirer 
and the target are publicly traded and the form of payment consists mostly of stock. For pub­
licly traded firms, acquirers tend to issue stock when they believe it is overvalued, because 
they can issue fewer new shares resulting in less earnings dilution. Investors treat such deci­
sions as signals that the stock is overvalued and sell their shares when the new equity issue 
is announced, causing the firm’s share price to decline. However, the majority of the decline 
in acquirer shares on the announcement date may be related more to merger arbitrage activ­
ity than to investors believing the shares are overvalued. About 60% of the sharp decline in 
acquirer shares on the announcement date may reflect short selling as arbs buy the target’s 
shares and short the acquirer’s.102
Other factors contributing to negative acquirer returns in stock for stock deals may reflect 
a tendency of acquirers using overvalued stock to overpay for target firms and the extent of 
the overpayment prevents such firms from recovering the premium paid through synergy.103 
Acquirers that use cash to purchase the target firm are less likely to overpay and exhibit better 
long-term performance than do those using stock.104 However, equity-financed transactions 
in the European Union often display higher acquirer returns than those using cash, due to the 
existence of large block shareholders, whose active monitoring tends to improve the acquired 
firm’s performance. Such shareholders are less common in the United States.105
Why would target shareholders accept overvalued acquirer shares? Target firms may ac­
cept such payment terms because in share exchanges the requirement to pay capital gains 
taxes may be deferred until the target shareholders sell their shares,106 the takeover may be 
98For the 10-year period ending in 2000, high-tech companies, averaging 39% annual total return to shareholders, 
acquired targets whose average size was about 1% of the market value of the acquiring firms (Frick and Torres, 2002).
99Hackbarth and Morellec (2008) and Alexandridis et al. (2013).
100Rehm et al. (2012).
101Vijh and Yang (2013).
102Liu and Wu (2014).
103Fu et al. (2013).
104Akbulut (2013), Schleifer and Vishny (2003), and Megginson et al. (2003).
105Martynova and Renneboog (2008a).
106See Chapter 12 for a more detailed discussion of the tax advantages of share exchanges.

38	
1.  An Introduction to Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring Activities
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
too big for the acquirer to finance with cash, overvaluation may not be obvious, or the use of 
acquirer shares may reduce the leverage of the combined firms. The latter factor recognizes 
that the postmerger risk associated with acquirer shares reflects the combined leverage of 
both the target and acquiring firms. Overvalued acquirer shares may be justified if their is­
suance will result in a reduction in the leverage (i.e., a lower debt to total capital ratio) of the 
combined firms.107 The resulting risk reduction may reduce or eliminate the overvaluation of 
the acquirer shares.
Announcement-period gains to acquirer shareholders tend to dissipate within 3–5 years, 
even when the acquisition was successful, when stock is used to acquire a large public firm.108 
These findings imply that shareholders, selling around the announcement dates, may realize 
the largest gains from either tender offers or mergers.
A tendency for target firms to manage premerger earnings also may explain their under­
performance in the years immediately following a takeover, even when acquirers use cash 
rather than equity. Targets may deliberately overaccrue revenue and underaccrue expenses 
during the year prior to takeovers in order to boost reported earnings used by the acquirer 
to value the target firm.109 In cash transactions, the full cost of such earnings management is 
borne by acquirer shareholders who may see their shares decline in value as GAAP is accu­
rately applied in future years, while target shareholders having received cash at closing are 
unhurt.110
Firm-Specific Characteristics May Outweigh Deal-Specific Factors
Acquirer characteristics may explain to a greater extent than deal-specific factors (e.g., 
form and timing of payment) the variation in financial returns to acquiring firms.111 While 
a growing literature using increasingly larger and more diverse samples over the past 
three decades has identified a number of determinants of acquirer performance, the over­
all variation in acquirer returns remains largely unexplained. Most studies explain a small 
percentage of such variation as measured by the adjusted R2 of the regression models 
used in these studies. An example of a firm-specific factor is the firm’s organizational 
deal making skill and knowledge possibly residing in an in-house corporate development 
team charged with screening deals, performing due diligence, and undertaking most of 
the analysis underlying acquisition decisions. Other factors could include a firm’s time-
tested postmerger integration process, specific industry or proprietary knowledge, or ac­
cumulated experience. Successful acquirers tend to internalize the M&A process such that 
continuing success is not dependent on the leadership at the top and the deal structure 
employed.
107Vermaelen and Xu (2014).
108Alexandridis et al. (2013) and Black et al. (2007).
109Revenue accruals represent revenue that has been earned but not yet received such as sales to customers made 
on credit. Such revenue may be inflated if not reduced by an amount that the firm can reasonably expect not to 
collect. Expense accrual refers to costs incurred by the firm but not yet paid such as commissions, wages, and 
benefits. Firms can report actual expenses paid in the current period rather than to account fully for future expense 
obligations.
110Campa and Hajbaba (2016).
111Golubov et al. (2015).

I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
	
THE IMPLICATIONS OF M&As FOR SHAREHOLDERS, BONDHOLDERS, AND SOCIETY	
39
Investor Sentiment
Abnormal returns to acquirer shareholders tend to be higher when investors are opti­
mistic around the announcement date of the deal resulting in an overestimation of poten­
tial synergies and an underestimation of risk.112 The impact of investor sentiment varies 
by sophistication of bidder shareholders, whether the bidder is public or private, and 
the size of the target firm compared to the bidder. This optimism tends to be greatest for 
firms with few large, sophisticated institutional investors (or blockholders) and mostly 
smaller, less knowledgeable shareholders. Investor sentiment also is impacted signifi­
cantly when deals receive extensive media attention around the announcement date. This 
is often true for large publicly traded firms and when smaller firms acquire much larger 
firms.
Payoffs for Bondholders
M&As have little impact on abnormal returns to acquirer or to target bondholders, except 
in special situations. The limited impact on bondholder wealth is due to the relationship be­
tween leverage and operating performance.113 How M&As affect bondholder wealth reflects, 
in part, the extent to which an increase in leverage that raises the potential for default is off­
set by the discipline imposed on management to improve operating performance.114 Other 
things being equal, increasing leverage will lower current bondholder wealth, while im­
proving operating performance will improve bondholder wealth. Target firm bondholders, 
whose debt is below investment grade, experience positive abnormal returns if the acquirer 
has a higher credit rating.115 Much of the improvement in the target firm comes well be­
fore the announcement of a takeover and is more likely attributable to insider information 
than market anticipation.116 Furthermore, when loan covenant agreements for firms that are 
subject to takeovers include poison puts that allow bondholders to sell their bonds back to 
the company at a predetermined price, bondholders experience positive abnormal returns 
when a change of control takes place.117 Target firms whose boards support a buyout offer 
may tender for such bonds because they increase the acquirer’s takeover cost and threaten 
deal completion. Such actions can result in significant excess returns to those tendering their 
bonds.118
113Renneboog and Szilagyi (2007).
114The empirical evidence is ambiguous. A study by Billett et al. (2004) shows slightly negative abnormal returns to 
acquirer bondholders regardless of the acquirer’s bond rating. However, they also find that target firm holders of 
below-investment-grade bonds earn average excess returns of 4.3% or higher around the merger announcement 
date, when the target firm’s credit rating is less than the acquirers’ and when the merger is expected to decrease the 
target’s risk or leverage. A study of European deals finds positive returns to acquirer bondholders of 0.56% around 
the announcement date of the deal (Renneboog et al., 2007).
115Kedia and Zhou (2011, 2014).
116Kedia and Zhou (2014).
117Billett et al. (2010).
118Billett and Yang (2016).
112Danbolt et al. (2015).

40	
1.  An Introduction to Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring Activities
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
Another special case occurs when financial institutions hold both equity and debt posi­
tions in a firm. Sometimes called “dual holders,” such institutions have an incentive to ac­
cept smaller equity premiums when the value of the debt position is likely to increase by an 
amount greater than the equity premium. Why? A takeover resulting in a lower debt to equity 
ratio often causes the value of the target’s debt to appreciate significantly if the firm was pre­
viously viewed as highly leveraged prior to the takeover bid. Consequently, “dual holders” 
stand to benefit more if the deal closes than if it does not because the acquirer balks at the size 
of the equity premium demanded by the target firm.119
Acquirers with large cash balances are found to experience lower announcement 
date returns to bondholders, an effect that has been widely documented for acquirer 
shareholders. While large cash balances could be viewed as positive for bondholders 
since they serve as a cushion against default, evidence shows that they tend to encour­
age value-destroying takeovers because management tends to overpay in the presence of 
such balances.120
Payoffs for Society
Most empirical studies show that M&As result in improved operating efficiencies and 
lower product prices than would have been the case without the deal. Gains in aggregate 
shareholder value (i.e., financial returns to both acquirer and target firm shareholders) are 
attributed more to the improved operating efficiency of the combined firms than to increased 
market or pricing power.121 That is, many M&As create value when more efficient firms ac­
quire less efficient ones.122 After a takeover, acquirers have a strong incentive to improve the 
target’s operating efficiency to recover any premium paid. Acquirers improve the target’s 
efficiency by automating labor-intensive activities, with layoffs concentrated among nonpro­
duction workers. Thus, what ultimately drives increases in the combined firm’s share price is 
improved productivity measured by output per unit of input resulting from the acquisition 
of the less efficient target firm.123
SOME THINGS TO REMEMBER
M&As represent only one way of executing business plans. Alternatives include “go it 
alone” strategies and the various forms of business alliances. Which method is chosen de­
pends on management’s desire for control, willingness to accept risk, and the range of op­
portunities present at a particular moment in time. M&As generally reward significantly 
target shareholders and, to a lesser extent, acquirer shareholders, with some exceptions.
119Bodnaruk et al. (2016).
120Poldolski et al. (2016).
121Shahrur (2005), Ghosh (2004), and Akhigbe et al. (2000).
122Maksimovic and Phillips (2001) and Maksimovic et al. (2013).
123Li (2013).

	
Chapter Discussion Questions	
41
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
CHAPTER DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1.1	 Discuss why mergers and acquisitions occur.
1.2	 What is the role of the investment banker in the M&A process?
1.3	 In your judgment, what are the motivations for two M&As currently in the news?
1.4	 What are the arguments for and against corporate diversification through acquisition? 
Which do you support, and why?
1.5	 What are the primary differences between operating synergy and financial synergy?
1.6	 At a time when natural gas and oil prices were at record levels, oil and natural gas pro­
ducer Andarko Petroleum announced the acquisition of two competitors, Kerr-McGee 
Corp. and Western Gas Resources, for $16.4 billion and $4.7 billion in cash, respec­
tively. The acquired assets complemented Andarko’s operations, providing the scale 
and focus necessary to cut overlapping expenses and concentrate resources in adjacent 
properties. What do you believe were the primary forces driving Andarko’s acquisi­
tion? How will greater scale and focus help Andarko cut costs? What are the assump­
tions implicit in your answer to the first question?
1.7	 Mattel, a major US toy manufacturer, virtually gave away The Learning Company 
(TLC), a maker of software for toys, to rid itself of a disastrous acquisition. Mattel, 
which had paid $3.5 billion for TLC, sold the unit to an affiliate of Gores Technology 
Group for rights to a share of future profits. Was this a related or unrelated diversifi­
cation for Mattel? Explain your answer. How might your answer to the first question 
have influenced the outcome?
1.8	 AOL acquired Time Warner in a deal valued at $160 billion. Time Warner was at the 
time the world’s largest media company, whose major business segments included 
cable networks, magazine publishing, book publishing, direct marketing, recorded 
music and music publishing, and film and TV production and broadcasting. AOL 
viewed itself as the world leader in providing interactive services, web brands, Internet 
technologies, and electronic commerce services. Would you classify this business com­
bination as a vertical, horizontal, or conglomerate transaction? Explain your answer.
1.9	 Pfizer, a leading pharmaceutical company, acquired drug maker Pharmacia for 
$60 billion, betting that size is what mattered in the new millennium. Pfizer was find­
ing it difficult to sustain the double-digit earnings growth demanded by investors 
due to the skyrocketing costs of developing and commercializing new drugs. Expiring 
patents on a number of so-called blockbuster drugs intensified pressure to bring new 
drugs to market. In your judgment, what were the primary motivations for Pfizer’s 
desire to acquire Pharmacia? Categorize these in terms of the primary motivations for 
M&As discussed in this chapter.
1.10	 Dow Chemical, a leading chemical manufacturer, acquired Rohm and Haas Company, 
a maker of paints, coatings, and electronic materials, for $15.3 billion. While Dow has 
competed profitably in the plastics business for years, this business has proven to have 
thin margins and to be highly cyclical. As a result of the acquisition, Dow would be 
able to offer less-cyclical and higher-margin products. Would you consider this related 
or unrelated diversification? Explain your answer. Would you consider this a cost-
effective way for the Dow shareholders to achieve better diversification of their invest­
ment portfolios?

42	
1.  An Introduction to Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring Activities
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
Answers to these Chapter Discussion Questions are available in the Online Instructor’s Manual for 
instructors using this book (https://textbooks.elsevier.com/web/Manuals.aspx?isbn=9780128016091).
END OF CHAPTER CASE STUDY: CHARTER COMMUNICA­
TIONS ACQU IRES TIME WARNER CABLE AMID INDUSTRY 
TURMOIL
Case Study Objectives: To Illustrate
•	 The role of changing technologies in forcing rapid industry consolidation
•	 How the pace of consolidation often is the greatest in industries with high fixed expenses
•	 Why successful consolidation requires both vision and aggressive cost cutting
•	 Why business strategies must change to reflect changing competitive conditions
No successful business strategy can remain static. Significant and sustained changes in a firm’s 
external environment will ensure that efforts to “stay the course” will result eventually in busi­
ness failure. The US cable industry is a prime example of how changing technologies are making 
obsolete the industry’s traditional business model of monthly subscriptions to access “bundles” of 
channels. This model worked for decades, but now cable customers can “cut the cord” and move 
to online video.
Online video content usage has exploded in popularity at the expense of TV viewing. At the end 
of 2015, ratings company Nielsen reported TV viewing fell by 8% from year-earlier levels while 
online streaming-to-TV surged by more than 50% during the same period. Traditional TV content 
is now available on an ever-widening array of video services such as Netflix, Hulu, and YouTube. 
Once having established accounts with these channels, a user is able to stream to their television 
content on Netflix, Amazon Instant Video, Hulu Plus, HBO Go, Pandora, etc., through products 
such as Roku. The Roku feed puts choice and control in the consumer’s hands. How? By providing 
access to a wide variety of online content enabling users to pay only for what they want to watch 
rather than being forced to pay for bundles of channels and content from traditional cable compa­
nies that they often do not want. Reflecting what consumers see as excessive pricing, limited choice, 
and deteriorating customer service, the move away from traditional cable TV subscriptions is ac­
celerating. In response, the cable industry is rushing to shift from the traditional business model to 
one in which they become internet and video service providers.
While going online doesn’t mean free, since streaming service still costs money, the cost to the 
consumer often is lower than monthly cable subscriptions and online streaming enables users to 
pay only for what they actually want. At the time of this writing, Hulu runs $8 per month, Netflix 
is $9 per month, and Amazon is $99 per year. The new HBO Now costs $15 per month, and Sling 
TV—which has an assortment of “cable” channels, including AMC and ESPN—starts at $20 per 
month. In addition, some shows are not part of unlimited streaming plans, requiring you to pay for 
individual episodes or seasons.
Making money as a content distributor (e.g., cable companies) or as a content provider (e.g., 
TV networks) was always a numbers game. The traditional cable business model has stood largely 
intact for more than 30 years. Cable companies represented an alternative gateway to a wide va­
riety of TV network content. Cable companies made money by covering their fixed network costs 

	
Chapter Discussion Questions	
43
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
by locking as many customers as possible into long-term subscriptions to “bundles of channels.” 
They charged more for the most popular bundles. Content providers covered the fixed expenses 
associated with developing programming by selling content to the cable and TV networks with 
the largest viewing audiences. Content providers could maximize their profit by reselling the same 
content to as many viewers as possible.
The now legendary 74-year-old John Malone was a formative figure in the cable industry. His 
vision for the cable industry when it was in its infancy was to create a subscription business gen­
erating predictable and growing revenue stream by making every household in America a cable 
customer. The industry would have high barriers to entry because of its huge capital requirements. 
While subject to regulation as a utility, the cable business could justify raising prices by bundling 
services sold to its largely captive audience that in the early years had few alternatives to cable.
Malone realized his vision by taking control of Tele-Communications Inc. (TCI) in his early 30s 
and through a series of acquisitions grew it into the nation’s largest cable company. In 1998, he sold 
TCI for $48 billion to AT&T, which later sold its cable business to Comcast. But the cable-TV market 
that Mr. Malone and others raced to build at a breakneck pace is now mature and beginning to show 
signs of decline. The strategic imperative for traditional cable firms is to expeditiously move from 
their traditional model to one in which they are profitable providers of online video and broadband 
services. And their strategy for achieving this transformation is through acquisition.
While the cable industry has always been subject to a high degree of acquisition activity, it has his­
torically been used mostly as a mechanism for achieving and sustaining a high level of revenue and 
profit growth. More recently, cable firms have been engaging in acquisitions as much for survival as 
for growth. Acquisitions for the cable companies represent a much more rapid way of obtaining in­
creased geographic coverage, customer contracts, as well as network and content assets than growth 
by reinvesting in their existing business. The major risk of acquisitions is overpaying for acquired 
assets and not being able to generate the minimum required return to attract and retain investors.
In 2013, Charter Communications Inc. (Charter) made several offers for Time Warner Cable 
(TWC) but was repeatedly rejected. In 2014, it made an unsuccessful hostile bid but was thwarted 
by TWC accepting a richer Comcast bid. Charter’s aggressive tactics seem to reflect the instincts 
of cable mogul John Malone. He has substantial influence on Charter’s strategy through Liberty 
Broadband Corporation’s (Liberty) substantial equity stake in Charter. Malone is the controlling 
shareholder in Liberty.
When Comcast’s deal was thwarted by regulators, the highly leveraged Charter took a less ag­
gressive approach getting Mr. Malone more involved in the initial phases of the deal. He called 
TWC’s CEO Rob Marcus initially indicating that Charter wanted a friendly deal. Charter deliber­
ately avoided making what would be perceived by TWC as an excessively low offer so as not to 
alienate TWC’s CEO and board. Charter’s offer of $195 per TWC share was also structured to give 
TWC shareholders more choice: $110 in cash and $95 in stock or $115 in cash and the remainder in 
stock. The deal involved a breakup fee. If regulators block the deal, Charter could owe Time Warner 
Cable about $2 billion, or Time Warner Cable would be responsible for the breakup fee if it had ac­
cepted an offer from a rival suitor.
Timing and persistence paid off. Charter announced on May 26, 2015, that it had reached an 
agreement to acquire TWC for $55 billion cash and stock deal excluding assumed TWC debt, a 14% 
premium to TWC’s closing price on May 22. The merger also includes a smaller cable company, 

44	
1.  An Introduction to Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring Activities
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
Bright House Networks, which Charter had previously agreed to buy. Liberty, the John Malone 
company holding a stake in Charter, bought $5 billion in new stock to help finance the takeover.
Including debt and equity, the transaction value (also called enterprise value) of TWC was $78.7 
billion. The deal enables Charter to quadruple its number of cable subscribers, with much of the 
increase coming in such key cities as New York, Los Angeles, and Dallas. The combined businesses 
will have more than 24 million cable customers, second only to Comcast’s 27 million. In addition, the 
combined firms will have greater leverage in negotiating contracts with television networks want­
ing to distribute their content to the new firm’s cable customers. TWC shares rose 7.3% on the deal’s 
announcement date, or about one-half of the offer price premium. Charter’s shares gained 2.5%.
In the wake of the failure of market leader Comcast to get approval to acquire TWC, why did 
Charter believe it could get approval? There is little market overlap between Time Warner, Charter, 
and Bright House and the combined businesses will still not be as big as Comcast’s broadband/cable 
business. By some estimates, a tie-up between Comcast and TWC would have given the combined 
firms almost two-thirds of the broadband market. Moreover, Charter is not as vertically integrated 
as Comcast that produces considerable amounts of its own content. The Federal Communication 
Commission’s clearer definition of so-called net neutrality rules, which essentially ban discrimina­
tion against businesses wishing to access the internet through gateway services such as cable, makes 
it more difficult for a cable firm to hamper access to potential competitors. Finally, the emergence 
of online video alternatives to cable promotes increased competition for the traditional cable firms.
In May 2016, Charter received regulatory approval to acquire Time Warner subject to certain condi­
tions being satisfied. These include requiring Charter to expand broadband service in areas that are cur­
rently underserved and to provide affordable internet service to at least 525,000 low-income households.
To be successful in the coming years, cable operators will need to lean heavily on their broad­
band businesses to generate profit growth while limiting shrinkage in their TV business. That 
means investing in broadband infrastructure, streaming video services, and other technologies. 
Consequently, the demands on cash flow will accelerate.
The impact of the consolidation among cable providers on content providers is ominous. The 
Charter/TWC deal shrinks the number of major internet and cable TV distributors in the United 
States to just four: Comcast, Charter, Verizon, and AT&T/DirecTV. With fewer outlets to sell their 
shows, TV and cable network content providers have less leverage to demand high fees and the 
inclusion of their niche channels in packages of services offered to cable customers. This is likely to 
hurt revenue at content providers such as Discovery, AMC Networks, Scripps Networks Interactive, 
and even Viacom. Their only recourse may be for the networks to merge or be acquired by cable and 
internet distributors themselves.
While content distributors may currently have the upper hand in their dealings with content 
providers, their advantage may be short lived as Amazon, Facebook, and Apple could enter the 
business of providing streaming video on demand. This would enable the major TV networks to 
seek partners from firms such as Facebook or Apple when they launch their own internet-based vid­
eo service. The cable companies turned online video and broadband suppliers must remain vigilant 
and aware of changing circumstances in the industry. A clear vision of where they want to compete 
and on what basis they want to compete will help sustain their advantage over content suppliers. 
However, as technological and regulatory change occurs, they must be willing to vary their busi­
ness models to accommodate changes in their external environment.

	
Chapter Discussion Questions	
45
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
Discussion Questions
1.	 Using the motives for M&As described in this chapter, which do you think apply to Charter’s 
acquisition of Time Warner Cable? Discuss the logic underlying each motive you identify. Be 
specific.
2.	 What are the key implicit assumptions underlying Charter’s bid to take over Time Warner 
Cable? Do you believe these assumptions were realistic? Why/why not?
3.	 Speculate as to why Charter offered Time Warner Cable a choice of various combinations of 
stock and cash. How might the composition of the offer price affect its attractiveness to TWC 
shareholders? Be specific.
4.	 Charter’s share price declined by 2.5% while Time Warner’s share price jumped by 7.3%, about 
one-half of the offer price premium. Speculate as to why the stock prices of the two firms acted 
as they did immediately following the announcement of an agreement between the two firms 
to merge.
5.	 What factors contributed to cable industry consolidation? Be specific. Explain how each factor 
identified impacted industry competitors.
Answers to these questions are found in the Online Instructor’s Manual available to instructors using this 
book (https://textbooks.elsevier.com/web/Manuals.aspx?isbn=9780128016091).
A D D I T I O N A L  C A S E  S T U D Y  R E C O M M E N D AT I O N S 
( S E A R C H  H A RVA R D  B U S I N E S S  S C H O O L 
P U B L I S H I N G  S I T E  B Y  N A M E  O F  C A S E : 
h b s p . h a r v a r d . e d u )
Hindalco’s Acquisition of Novelis: The Mak­
ing of a Giant, Aastha Sachdeva, Madhur 
Deep, R. Srinivasan, Revision Date: January 
1, 2010, Product Number: IMB303-PDF-
ENG, Source: Indian Institute of Manage­
ment, Bangalore, hbsp.harvard.edu.
	
Subjects Covered: Acquirer and Target 
Motives, Cross-Border Deals, Value Creation 
and Value Destruction, Aligning Strategic 
Intents, Cross-Cultural Relations.
	
Big (Double) Deal: Anadarko’s Acqui­
sition of Kerr-McGee and Western Gas 
Resources, Clayton Christensen, Curtis B. 
Rising, Publication Date: October 10, 2009, 
Product Number: 610020-PDF-ENG. Source: 
Harvard Business School, hbsp.harvard.edu.
	
Subjects Covered: Takeovers, Mergers 
and Acquisitions, Valuation, Business Strat­
egy, Value Creation, Due Diligence, Integra­
tion Planning, Cultural Issues, Negotiation.
	
InBev and Anheuser-Busch, Andrew C. 
Inkpen, Publication Date: November 16, 
2010, Product Number: TB0251-PDF-ENG. 
Source: Thunderbird School of Management, 
hbsp.harvard.edu.
	
Subjects Covered: Takeovers, Synergy, 
Premiums, Integration.


C H A P T E R
47
Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring Activities. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-801609-1.00002-6
Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
2
The Regulatory Environment
O U T L I N E
Inside Mergers and Acquisitions: Comcast’s 
Attempted 2015 Takeover of Time Warner 
Unravels in the Face of Vigorous Opposition	48
Chapter Overview	
49
Understanding Federal Securities Laws	
49
Securities Act of 1933	
51
Securities Exchange Act of 1934	
52
The Williams Act: Regulation of Tender 
Offers	
55
The Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002	
58
Understanding Antitrust Legislation	
59
The Sherman Act	
59
The Clayton Act	
59
The Federal Trade Commission 
Act of 1914	
60
The Hart–Scott–Rodino (HSR) 
Antitrust Improvements Act of 1976	
60
Procedural Rules	
62
The Consent Decree	
63
Antitrust Merger Guidelines for 
Horizontal Mergers	
63
Trends in Enforcement Efforts	
67
Impact of Antitrust Actions on Firm Value	
67
The Implications for M&A of the 
Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and 
Consumer Protection Act	
68
State Regulations Affecting Mergers 
and Acquisitions	
68
State Antitakeover Laws	
68
State Antitrust and Securities Laws	
72
Restrictions on Direct Investment 
in the United States	
72
The US Foreign Corrupt Practices Act	
72
Fair Disclosure (Regulation FD)	
73
Specific Industry Regulation	
74
Banking	
74
Communications	
74
Railroads	
75
Defense	
75
Other Regulated Industries	
75
Environmental Laws	
76
Labor and Benefit Laws	
76
Cross-Border Transactions	
77
Some Things to Remember	
78
Discussion Questions	
78
Case Study: Regulators Approve 
Merger of AT&T and Directv but 
not Comcast and Time Warner Cable 
(TWC)	
79
Case Study Objectives	
79
Discussion Questions	
82
Additional Case Study Recommendations	 82

48	
2.  The Regulatory Environment
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
I am not a product of my circumstances. I am a product of my decisions.  —Stephen Covey
INSIDE MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS: COMCAST’S ATTEMPTED 
2015 TAKEOVER OF TIME WARNER UNRAVELS IN THE FACE 
OF VIGOROUS OPPOSITION
KEY POINTS
•	 Public opposition can sway regulatory decisions.
•	 Criteria applied to regulatory rulings can vary from one deal to another.
•	 Timing often is everything in gaining regulatory approval.
It would appear that some things in life are not meant to be. Comcast’s aborted takeover 
of Time Warner Cable (TWC) appears to be one of these things. On April 25, 2015, Com­
cast CEO Brian Roberts and his board decided to withdraw their offer to takeover TWC for 
$45.2 billion amidst stiff opposition from regulatory agencies and public outcry.
Announced 14 months earlier, The Comcast–TWC deal had promised to reshape the media 
landscape—forcing TV channel owners and other pay TV operators to contemplate their own 
mergers. The proposed takeover of TWC reflected Comcast’s belief that it had to get bigger 
to gain negotiating leverage over cable networks in the distribution of their content. From the 
outset, the proposed merger ignited a firestorm of controversy from the public, dissatisfied 
with perceived price gouging and poor customer service. Media content providers, includ­
ing Netflix and Dish Network, lobbied regulators relentlessly arguing that the combination 
would enable Comcast to discriminate against content providers. When told by regulators in 
no uncertain terms they would fight the deal, Comcast decided to call off the merger. End­
ing the deal was made more palatable due to the absence of a breakup fee, money that the 
acquirer would have to pay the target firm if the deal were not consummated.
What ultimately caused the deal to unravel? In the end, the coup de grace was the threat of 
delay. It was clear to the companies that the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) was 
prepared to call for an administrative judge to hear the case and months or years could have 
passed before any ruling would be determined. Proposed mergers do not get better with age 
as customers, suppliers, employees, and shareholders abandon the firms amid the uncertain 
outcome.
The Department of Justice (DoJ) and FCC while pursuing separate investigations collab­
orated frequently. Both of them reached a similar conclusion that the merger would make 
Comcast a “gatekeeper” in a position to determine which content relying on a broadband 
connection users could access via the internet. Postmerger, Comcast would control more than 
one-half of the broadband market and would be in a position, so the regulators argued, to 
determine who would get access to its customers. In doing so, Comcast could impact the 
emergence of new video service and limit the growth of firms that could become future 
competitors.
Some observers compared the regulatory reaction to the Comcast and TWC tie-up to 
AT&T’s $39 billion bid to buy T-Mobile in 2011, the last big telecom merger killed by the DoJ. 
While AT&T and T-Mobile were competitors in large geographic areas, Comcast and TWC 
did not compete directly. Therefore, assessing the impact was more complex. In the case of 

	
Understanding Federal Securities Laws	
49
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
AT&T and T-Mobile, the substantial increase in market concentration as measured by market 
share would have enabled the combined firms to raise prices more readily in the absence of 
a large competitor or engage in nonprice competition such as bundling more services offered 
at higher prices. In buying T-Mobile, AT&T simply eliminated a competitor, whereas Comcast 
argued that since it didn’t compete with TWC in any geographic markets, the combination 
of the two firms would result in greater innovation and lower prices and could help improve 
TWC’s notoriously bad customer service.
Regulators chose to focus on the impact of the combination of the broadband market. The 
FCC increased its definition of broadband speeds from 4 to 25 mbps. The issue became choice 
and availability. Comcast admitted that they would be the only choice following the merger 
for 25 mbps or higher for about 63% of households in that range.
Also, Comcast’s timing was poor as the announcement came at a time when there was 
growing support for the FCC’s neutrality rules. Net neutrality is the principle that Inter­
net service providers (ISPs) should enable access to all content and applications regardless 
of the source, and without favoring or blocking particular products or websites. After the 
FCC approved its rules in February 2015, regulators used the new regulations to hammer 
the proposed Comcast/TWC combination. Reflecting the furore over Comcast’s emerging 
dominance of the broadband market, over 800,000 individual comments were submitted to 
the FCC, mostly arguing that the combination should not be allowed. Historically, regulators 
rarely if ever have approved a merger in the face of such opposition.
CHAPTER OVERVIEW
Most deals requiring regulatory review due ultimately receive approval, although often 
with concessions made by the parties involved. Why do regulators find some deals accept­
able and not others? This chapter addresses this question and others by focusing on the key 
elements of the regulatory process and its implications for mergers and acquisitions (M&As). 
The labyrinth of environmental, labor, benefit, and foreign laws that affect M&As is also dis­
cussed. The chapter concludes with a series of discussion questions, an end of chapter case 
study, and recommendations for other case studies illustrating the material discussed in this 
chapter. Table 2.1 provides a summary of applicable legislation. A review of this chapter is 
available (including practice questions and answers) in the file folder entitled Student Study 
Guide contained on the companion site to this book (https://www.elsevier.com/books-and-
journals/book-companion/9780128016091).
UNDERSTANDING FEDERAL SECURITIES LAWS
Whenever the acquirer or target has publicly traded securities, the firms are subject to the 
substantial reporting requirements of the current federal securities laws.1 Passed in the 1930s, 
these laws reflected the loss of confidence in the securities markets following the 1929 stock 
market crash.
1Note that a private company can be subject to the same reporting requirements if it merges with a public shell 
company in a reverse merger.

50	
2.  The Regulatory Environment
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
TABLE 2.1  Laws Affecting M&A
Law
Intent
FEDERAL SECURITIES LAWS
Securities Act (1933)
Prevents the public offering of securities without a registration 
statement; defines minimum data requirements and 
noncompliance penalties
Securities Exchange Act (1934)
Established the SEC to regulate securities trading. Empowers 
the SEC to revoke the registration of a security if the issuer is 
in violation of any provision of the 1934 act
  Section 13
Defines content and frequency of SEC filings as well as events 
triggering them
  Section 14
Defines disclosure requirements for proxy solicitation
  Section 16(a)
Defines what insider trading is and who is an insider
  Section 16(b)
Defines investor rights with respect to insider trading
Williams Act (1968)
Regulates tender offers
  Section 13D
Defines disclosure requirements
Sarbanes–Oxley Act (2002)
Initiates reform of regulations governing financial disclosure, 
governance, auditing, analyst reports, and insider 
trading
Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act or 
JOBS Act (2012)
Intended to reduce reporting requirements for so-called 
“emerging companies”
FEDERAL ANTITRUST LAWS
Sherman Act (1890)
Made “restraint of trade” illegal; establishes criminal penalties 
for behaviors that limit competition unreasonably
  Section 1
Makes mergers creating monopolies illegal
  Section 2
Applies to firms already dominant in their served markets to 
prevent them from “unfairly” restraining trade
Clayton Act (1914)
Outlawed such practices as price discrimination, exclusive 
contracts, and tie-in contracts, and created civil penalties for 
illegally restraining trade
Celler–Kefauver Act of 1950
Amended the Clayton Act to cover asset as well as stock 
purchases
Federal Trade Commission Act (1914)
Established a federal antitrust enforcement agency; made it 
illegal to engage in deceptive business practices
Hart–Scott–Rodino Antitrust Improvement 
Act (1976)
Requires a waiting period before a transaction can 
be completed and sets regulatory data submission 
requirements
  Title I
Defines what must be filed
  Title II
Defines who must file and when
  Title III
Enables state attorneys general to file triple damage suits on 
behalf of injured parties

	
Understanding Federal Securities Laws	
51
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
Securities Act of 1933
This legislation requires that securities offered to the public be registered with the govern­
ment to protect investors by making issuers disclose all material facts regarding the issue. 
Registration requires, but does not guarantee, that the facts represented in the registration 
statement and prospectuses are accurate. The law makes providing inaccurate or mislead­
ing statements in the sale of securities to the public punishable with a fine, imprisonment, or 
both. The registration process requires a description of the company’s properties and busi­
ness, a description of the securities, information about management, and financial statements 
certified by public accountants.
Law
Intent
OTHER LEGISLATION AFFECTING M&AS
Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and 
Consumer Protection Act (2010)
Reforms executive compensation; introduces new hedge/
private equity fund registration requirements; increases 
Federal Reserve and SEC regulatory authority; gives the 
government authority to liquidate systemically risky firms; 
enables government regulation of consumer financial 
products; and makes it illegal for federal employees and 
regulators to engage in insider trading
State antitakeover laws
Define conditions under which a change in corporate 
ownership can take place; may differ by state
State antitrust laws
Similar to federal antitrust laws; states may sue to block 
mergers, even those not challenged by federal regulators
Exon–Florio amendment to the Defense 
Protection Act of 1950
Establishes authority to review the impact of foreign direct 
investment (including M&As) on national security
US Foreign Corrupt Practices Act
Prohibits payments to foreign government officials in 
exchange for obtaining new business or retaining existing 
contracts
Regulation Fair Disclosure (FD)
All material disclosures of nonpublic information made 
by public corporations must be disclosed to the general 
public
Industry-specific regulations
Banking, communications, railroads, defense, insurance, and 
public utilities
Environmental laws (federal and state)
Define disclosure requirements
Labor and benefit laws (federal and state)
Define disclosure requirements
Applicable foreign laws
Cross-border transactions subject to jurisdictions of countries 
in which the bidder and target firms have operations
M&A, Merger and acquisition; SEC, Securities and Exchange Commission.
TABLE 2.1  Laws Affecting M&A (cont.)

52	
2.  The Regulatory Environment
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
Securities Exchange Act of 1934
The Securities Exchange Act extends disclosure requirements stipulated in the Securities 
Act of 1933 to include securities already trading (so-called seasoned or secondary issues) 
on the national exchanges. The Act also established the Securities and Exchange Commis­
sion (SEC), whose purpose is to protect investors from fraud by requiring full and accurate 
financial disclosure by firms offering stocks, bonds, and other securities to the public. In 1964, 
coverage was expanded to include securities traded on the Over-the-Counter (OTC) Market. 
The act also covers proxy solicitations (i.e., mailings to shareholders requesting their vote on 
a particular issue) by a company or shareholders. The 2010 Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform 
and Consumer Protections Act (Dodd–Frank Act) strengthened the SEC enforcement powers 
by allowing the commission to impose financial penalties against any person, rather than 
against just entities.
Reporting Requirements
Companies required to file annual and other periodic reports with the SEC are those for 
which any of the following are true: the firm has assets of more than $10 million and whose 
securities are held by more than 499 shareholders, it is listed on any of the major US or in­
ternational stock exchanges, or its shares are quoted on the OTC Bulletin Board. Even if both 
parties to a transaction are privately owned, an M&A transaction is subject to federal securi­
ties laws if a portion of the purchase price is going to be financed by an initial public offering 
of securities.
Section 13: Periodic Reports
Form 10K documents the firm’s financial activities during the preceding year. The four 
key financial statements that must be included are the income statement, the balance 
sheet, the statement of retained earnings, and the statement of cash flows. Form 10K also 
includes a relatively detailed description of the business, the markets served, major events 
and their impact on the business, key competitors, and competitive market conditions. 
Form 10Q is a highly succinct quarterly update of such information. If an acquisition or 
divestiture is deemed significant,2 Form 8K must be submitted to the SEC within 15 days 
of the event. Form 8K describes the assets acquired or disposed, the type and amount of 
consideration (i.e., payment) given or received, and the identity of the person (or persons) 
for whom the assets were acquired. In an acquisition, Form 8K also must identify who 
is providing the funds used to finance the purchase and the financial statements of the 
acquired business.
Section 14: Proxy Solicitations
Where proxy contests deal with corporate control, the act requires materials containing 
the names and interests of all participants to be filed with the SEC in advance of voting. If 
the deal involves either acquirer or target shareholder approval, any materials distributed to 
shareholders must conform to the SEC rules for proxy materials.
2Acquisitions and divestitures are usually deemed significant if the equity interest in the acquired assets or the 
amount paid or received exceeds 10% of the total book value of the assets of the registrant and its subsidiaries.

	
Understanding Federal Securities Laws	
53
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
Insider Trading Regulations
Insider trading involves individuals who buy or sell securities based on knowledge that 
is not available to the general public. Despite the successful prosecution of 95 insider trading 
cases between 2009 and 2014 including the record $1.2 billion fine paid by hedge fund SAC 
Capital in 2014, there is widespread evidence that insider trading is rampant.3 Historically, 
insider trading has been covered under the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934. Section 16(a) 
of the act defines “insiders” as corporate officers, directors, and any person owning 10% or 
more of any class of securities of a company. The Sarbanes–Oxley Act (SOA) of 2002 amended 
Section 16(a) of the 1934 act by requiring that insiders disclose changes in ownership within 
2 business days of the transaction, with the SEC posting the filing on the Internet within 1 
business day after the filing is received.
The SEC is responsible for investigating insider trading. Regulation 10b-5, issued by the 
SEC, prohibits the commission of fraud in relation to securities transactions. Regulation 14e-3 
prohibits trading securities in connection with a tender offer (i.e., an offer to buy securities) 
based on information that is not available to the general public. Individuals found guilty of en­
gaging in insider trading may be subject to substantial penalties and forfeiture of any profits.4 
In 2010, the Dodd–Frank Act granted the Commodity Futures Trading Commission authority 
to investigate insider trading in commodities used in interstate commerce and made it illegal 
for federal employees to engage in insider trading. The Act also allows the SEC to compensate 
those providing original information on insider trading activities (so-called whistleblowers) 
up to 30% of the damages assessed in the successful prosecution of insider trading cases.
The effectiveness of insider trading legislation is limited, due to the difficulty in defining 
such activity. While the rate at which insiders buy target firm shares slows prior to takeover 
announcement dates, they reduce the pace at which they sell shares by even more, such that 
their actual holdings increase.5 Such activity is most common in deals where there is less 
uncertainty about their completion, that is, friendly deals and those with a single bidder. The 
magnitude of the increase in the dollar value of insider share holdings is about 50% higher 
than levels normally found in the 6 months prior to announcement dates.6
In an effort to limit their exposure to litigation, many corporations voluntarily restrict when 
insiders can trade in the firm’s securities. Many corporate policies specify certain time peri­
ods during which insiders are allowed to trade their stock. During so-called blackout periods, 
insiders are forbidden to trade their shares without corporate approval. Firms often permit 
those designated as insiders to trade during short time periods after the quarterly earnings 
announcement dates, with many requiring their insiders to obtain prior approval even when 
they trade during the allowed periods. However, despite these restrictions, employees inter­
ested in engaging in such practices continue to find ways to circumvent such restrictions.7
7Lee et al. (2015).
3Barrett et al. (2011).
4According to the Insider Trading Sanctions Act of 1984, those convicted of engaging in insider trading are required 
to give back their illegal profits and to pay a penalty three times the amount of such profits. A 1988 US Supreme 
Court ruling gives investors the right to claim damages from a firm that falsely denied it was involved in negotia­
tions that subsequently resulted in a merger.
5If insiders normally buy 100 shares and sell 50 shares each month, the normal increase in their holdings would be 
50. However, if their purchases drop to 90 and sales to 30 each month, their holdings rise by 60 shares.
6Agrawal and Nasser (2012).

54	
2.  The Regulatory Environment
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
While most insider trading deals with using nonpublic information to profit from equities, 
there is also evidence that insiders use nonpublic information to profit from trading in bonds. 
Bonds issued by firms that are a takeover target often are subject to abnormally large trading 
volumes just prior to the announcement of the deal, with their prices increasing (decreasing) 
before they are acquired by firms with better (worse) credit ratings.8
Longer sentences may eventually deter insider trading. According to Reuters, those en­
gaged in insider trading are receiving stiffer sentences. Those convicted received an average 
sentence of 17.3 months for the 5 years ending in 2012 compared to an average of 13.1 months 
during the prior 5-year period. The average length of sentences could continue to increase 
due to stiffer sentencing guidelines. In 2012, federal sentencing guidelines for those convicted 
of insider trading provided for minimum sentences ranging from 15 to 21 months depending 
on the severity of the crime.
Government efforts to rein in insider trading received a blow on December 10, 2014, when 
the US Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in Manhattan dismissed two of the gov­
ernment’s signature insider trading convictions. The judge ruled that the government had 
not proven that the accused securities traders having received indirectly confidential infor­
mation leaked by insiders (tippers) were aware that the insiders would benefit from the 
leaked information. In the past, government prosecutors had argued that mere friendship 
was enough to prove that the tipper benefitted from passing on an illegal tip to a friend. The 
judge’s ruling establishes a higher standard by requiring that the government also prove 
that the tipper expected to benefit from sharing confidential information. Not only could this 
ruling overturn earlier government convictions, but it could also force the SEC to provide 
clarity as to what constitutes a violation of insider trading laws, something that it has been 
unable to do in the past. The ruling will stand as the US Supreme Court refused to review the 
case on October 5, 2015.
On December 7, 2016, the Supreme Court partly offset the 2014 Court of Appeals’ ruling by 
deciding that prosecutors in insider trading cases do not always have to show that money or 
something of value changed hands. The Supreme Court concluded offering information to a 
relative is the same as trading on the information by the tipper followed by a gift of the proceeds 
generated. Simply proving a tipster and trader were related was enough to initiate a lawsuit 
alleging insider trading. This ruling is narrow in that it does not address gray areas involving 
trading among friends and professional acquaintances.
Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act (JOBS Act)
Passed on April 12, 2012, the JOBS Act is intended to reduce reporting requirements for 
so-called “emerging companies,” those with less than $1 billion in annual revenue in their 
most recent fiscal year and fewer than 2000 shareholders. To qualify for the lighter disclosure 
requirements, the firm must have issued new securities after December 8, 2011. For qualify­
ing firms, the SEC requires only 2 years of audited financial statements in its IPO registra­
tion documents, a less detailed disclosure of executive compensation, and no requirement for 
SOA Section 404(b), which deals with internal controls and financial reporting.
The allowance for lighter disclosure requirements is justified in part on the notion that 
investors using the internet will pick the best investments reflecting the “wisdom of crowds.” 
8Kedia and Zhou (2014).

	
Understanding Federal Securities Laws	
55
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
There is reason to be skeptical that small investors will be protected despite having access to 
limited information because they often are poorly diversified, subject to a “herd” mentality, 
and often lack sufficient sophistication.
There is evidence that the JOBS Act contributed to increasing US IPO activity, especially 
among small firms. The majority of the increase cannot be explained by improving stock 
market or industry conditions. It seems that the new legislation has facilitated access to public 
markets for emerging firms seeking additional financing, “cash-out” opportunities for found­
ing investors, or to become acquisition targets.9
SEC Enforcement Effectiveness
Despite all the media fanfare, sound, and fury that often accompany SEC investigations, 
some have questioned how effective the Commission actually is in executing its mandate to 
protect the public from securities fraud. The SEC’s Division of Enforcement conducts inves­
tigations into possible violations of federal securities laws, and prosecutes the Commission’s 
civil suits in federal courts as well as its administrative proceedings. In civil suits, the Com­
mission seeks injunctions or orders prohibiting certain behavior and anyone violating an in­
junction is subject to fines or imprisonment for contempt.
Data reported annually by the Commission suggests that over time it has been highly 
effective as both the number of enforcement actions (i.e., those taken to ensure compliance 
with prevailing laws) undertaken and the amount of fines assessed have tended to increase 
significantly over time. However, empirical evidence suggests that SEC data may be seri­
ously flawed due to double and even triple counting some of its cases and overstating the 
actual dollar amount of fines collected. Adjusting for these distortions, enforcement activity 
between 2002 and 2014 appears to have been relatively steady.10
The Williams Act: Regulation of Tender Offers
Passed in 1968, the Williams Act consists of a series of amendments to the Securities Act 
of 1934 intended to protect target shareholders from fast takeovers in which they do not 
have enough time to assess adequately the value of an acquirer’s offer. This protection was 
achieved by requiring more disclosure by the bidding company, establishing a minimum 
period during which a tender offer must remain open, and authorizing targets to sue bidding 
firms. The disclosure requirements of the Williams Act apply to anyone, including the target, 
asking shareholders to accept or reject a takeover bid. The major sections of the Williams Act 
as they affect M&As are in Sections 13(D) and 14(D). The Williams Act requirements apply 
to all types of tender offers, including those negotiated with the target firm (i.e., negotiated 
or friendly tender offers), those undertaken by a firm to repurchase its own stock (i.e., self-
tender offers), and those that are unwanted by the target firm (i.e., hostile tender offers).11
9Dambra et al. (2015).
10Velikonja (2016).
11The Williams Act is vague as to what is a tender offer so as not to construe any purchase by one firm of another’s 
shares in the open market as a tender offer. The courts have ruled that a tender offer is characterized by either of 
the following conditions: (1) a bidder announcing publicly the intent to purchase a substantial block of another 
firm’s stock to gain control or (2) the actual purchase of a substantial portion of another firm’s shares in the open 
market or through a privately negotiated block purchase of the firm’s shares.

56	
2.  The Regulatory Environment
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
Sections 13(D) and 13(G): Ownership Disclosure Requirements
Section 13(D) of the Williams Act is intended to regulate “substantial share” or large acqui­
sitions and provides an early warning for a target company’s shareholders and management 
of a pending bid. Any person or firm acquiring 5% or more of the stock of a public firm must 
file a Schedule 13(D) with the SEC within 10 days of reaching that percentage threshold. 
Section 13(D) also requires that derivatives, such as options, warrants, or rights convertible 
into shares within 60 days, must be included in determining whether the threshold has been 
reached. Schedule 13(D) requires the inclusion of the identities of the acquirer, their occupa­
tion and associations, sources of financing, and the purpose of the acquisition. If the purpose 
of buying the stock is to take control of the target firm, the acquirer must reveal its business 
plan for the target firm. The plans could include the breakup of the firm, suspending divi­
dends, a recapitalization of the firm, the intention to merge it with another firm, or simply the 
accumulation for investment purposes only.
Under Section 13(G), any stock accumulated by related parties, such as affiliates, brokers, 
or investment bankers working on behalf of the person or firm, is counted toward the 5% 
threshold. This prevents an acquirer from avoiding filing by accumulating more than 5% of 
the target’s stock through a series of related parties. Institutional investors, such as registered 
brokers and dealers, banks, and insurance companies, can file a Schedule 13(G)—a shortened 
version of Schedule 13(D)—if the securities were acquired in the normal course of business.
The permitted reporting delay under Section 13(D) of up to 10 days allows for potential 
abuse of the disclosure requirement. In late 2010, activist hedge fund investor William Ackman 
and real estate company Vornado Realty Trust surprised Wall Street when they disclosed that 
they had acquired nearly 27% of megaretailer J.C. Penney’s outstanding shares. Once the inves­
tors exceeded the 5% reporting threshold, they rapidly accumulated tens of millions of shares 
during the ensuing 10-day period, driving J.C. Penney’s share price up 45%. In mid-2014, Wil­
liam Ackman again made headlines by having amassed a 9.7% stake in drug company Aller­
gan becoming its largest shareholder before having to publicly disclose this information. The 
investment was undertaken as part of an effort to acquire Allergan by competitor Valeant Phar­
maceuticals and raised questions about whether Ackman had violated insider trading laws by 
benefitting from his knowledge of the takeover attempt before it was made public.
The 10-day delay gives activists the ability to acquire substantial ownership positions in 
firms before they can take any actions to strengthen their negotiating positions or ward off an 
unwanted takeover. When the activists’ positions become publicly known, the target firm’s 
share prices soar, ensuring the activists a sizeable profit. Activists point out that this is needed 
to provide them with an incentive to incur the costs of making such investments and the 
risk that they will not be supported by the target firm’s shareholders. In an effort to improve 
transparency to the investing public, Britain, Hong Kong, and Germany require investors to 
disclose their positions in 4 days or less.
Section 14(D): Rules Governing the Tender Offer Process
Although Section 14(D) of the Williams Act relates to public tender offers only, it applies to 
acquisitions of any size. The 5% notification threshold also applies.
Obligations of the acquirer. An acquirer must disclose its intentions, business plans, 
and any agreements between the acquirer and the target firm in a Schedule 14(D)-1. 

	
Understanding Federal Securities Laws	
57
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
The schedule is called a tender offer statement. The commencement date of the tender offer 
is defined as the date on which the tender offer is published, advertised, or submitted to 
the target. Schedule 14(D)-1 must contain the identity of the target company and the type 
of securities involved; the identity of the person, partnership, syndicate, or corporation 
that is filing; and any past contracts between the bidder and the target company. The 
schedule also must include the source of the funds used to finance the tender offer, its 
purpose, and any other information material to the transaction.
Obligations of the target firm. The management of the target company cannot advise its 
shareholders how to respond to a tender offer until it has filed a Schedule 14(D)-9 with 
the SEC within 10 days after the tender offer’s commencement date. This schedule is 
called a tender offer solicitation/recommendation statement.
Shareholder rights: 14(D)-4 to 14(D)-7. The tender offer must be left open for a minimum 
of 20 trading days. The acquiring firm must accept all shares that are tendered during 
this period. The firm making the tender offer may get an extension of the 20-day period 
if it believes that there is a better chance of getting the shares it needs. The firm must 
purchase the shares tendered at the offer price, at least on a pro rata or proportional basis, 
unless the firm does not receive the total number of shares it requested under the tender 
offer. The tender offer also may be contingent on attaining the approval of the DoJ and 
the Federal Trade Commission (FTC). Shareholders have the right to withdraw shares 
tendered previously as long as the tender offer remains open. The law also requires that 
when a new bid for the target is made from another party, the target firm’s shareholders 
must have an additional 10 days to consider the bid.
The “best price” rule: 14(D)-10. To avoid discrimination, the “best price” rule requires 
that all shareholders holding the same class of security be paid the same price in a tender 
offer. Consequently, if a bidder increases what it is offering to pay for the remaining 
target firm shares, it must pay the higher price to those who have already tendered their 
shares.
Court rulings in the mid-1990s indicated that executive compensation such as golden 
parachutes, retention bonuses, and accelerated vesting rights triggered whenever a change 
in control occurred should be counted as part of the compensation they received for their 
shares. These rulings significantly reduced the use of tender offers, due to concerns that all 
shareholders would have to receive payment for their shares comparable to what executives 
had received following a change in control. The “best price” rule was clarified on October 18, 
2006, to exclude executive compensation following a change in control from the price paid 
for their shares. The rule changes make it clear that the “best price” rule applies only to the 
consideration (i.e., cash, securities, or both) offered and paid for securities tendered by share­
holders.12 This clarification contributed to the recovery in the use of tender offers in recent 
years. Having fallen to 3.2% of total deals in 2006, tender offers accounted for about one-fifth 
of deals in recent years.
12Acquirers often initiate two-tiered tender offers, in which target shareholders receive a higher price if they tender 
their shares in the first tier than those submitting shares in the second tier. The “best price” rule simply means that 
all shareholders tendering their shares in the first tier must be paid the price offered for those shares in the first tier, 
and those tendering shares in the second tier are paid the price offered for second-tier shares unless precluded by 
state law.

58	
2.  The Regulatory Environment
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
The Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002
The SOA was signed in the wake of the egregious scandals at such corporate giants as 
Enron, MCI WorldCom, ImClone, Qwest, Adelphia, and Tyco and has implications ranging 
from financial disclosure to auditing practices to corporate governance. Section 302 of the act 
requires quarterly certification of financial statements and disclosure controls and procedures 
for CEOs and CFOs. Section 404 requires most public companies to certify annually that their 
internal control system is operating successfully and to report material weaknesses in internal 
controls to analysts when making earnings forecasts.13 The legislation, in concert with new 
listing requirements at public stock exchanges, requires a greater number of directors on the 
board who do not work for the company (i.e., so-called independent directors). The act also 
requires board audit committees to have at least one financial expert, while the full commit­
tee must review financial statements every quarter after the CEO and chief financial officer 
certify them. The SOA also provides for greater transparency or visibility into a firm’s finan­
cial statements and greater accountability. However, the flagrant practices of some financial 
service firms (e.g., AIG, Bear Stearns, and Lehman Brothers) in recent years cast doubt on 
how effective the SOA has been in achieving its transparency and accountability objectives.
The costs associated with implementing SOA have been substantial. As noted in a number 
of studies (see Chapter 13), there is growing evidence that the monitoring costs imposed by 
Sarbanes–Oxley have been a factor in many small firms going private since the introduc­
tion of the legislation. The overall costs of corporate boards soared post-SOA due to sharply 
higher director compensation.14 However, shareholders of large firms that are required to 
overhaul their existing governance systems under Sarbanes–Oxley may in some cases benefit 
as new shareholder protections are put in place.15 Moreover, the run-up in target share prices 
before they are publicly announced has decreased significantly since the SOA’s introduction, 
perhaps reflecting improved accountability and regulatory oversight of bidder managers and 
boards involved in deals.16
New York Stock Exchange listing requirements far exceed SOA’s auditor-independence re­
quirements. Companies must have board audit committees consisting of at least three inde­
pendent directors and a written charter describing its responsibilities in detail. Moreover, the 
majority of all board members must be independent, and nonmanagement directors must meet 
periodically without management. Board compensation and nominating committees must 
consist of independent directors. Shareholders must be able to vote on all stock option plans.
14Linck et al. (2009).
15Chaochharia and Grinstein (2007) conclude that large firms that are the least compliant with the rules around the 
announcement dates of certain rule implementations are more likely to display significantly positive abnormal 
financial returns. In contrast, small firms that are less compliant earn negative abnormal returns.
16Brigida and Madura (2012).
13An unintended consequence of the law’s requirement that firms make public material weaknesses in internal con­
trols is the reduced coverage of such firms by financial analysts in the year following such announcements (Clinton 
et al., 2014). Less coverage could result in reduced awareness among investors of potential problems with the firm’s 
earnings quality. This could be mitigated somewhat as investor interest in such firms also is likely to decline in 
line with waning analyst coverage. Chen et al. (2014a, 2014b) find that firms receiving less analyst coverage can 
contribute to a firm’s CEO receiving “excessive” compensation, managers making value-destroying acquisitions, 
and managers engaging more aggressively in managing reported earnings.

	
Understanding Antitrust Legislation	
59
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
The SOA also created a quasi-public oversight agency, the Public Company Accounting 
Oversight Board (PCAOB). The PCAOB is charged with registering auditors, defining spe­
cific processes and procedures for compliance audits, quality control, and enforcing compli­
ance with specific SOA mandates.
UNDERSTANDING ANTITRUST LEGISLATION
Federal antitrust laws exist to prevent individual corporations from assuming so much 
market power that they can limit their output and raise prices without concern for any sig­
nificant competitor reaction. The DoJ and the FTC have the primary responsibility for enforc­
ing federal antitrust laws. The FTC was established in the Federal Trade Commission Act 
of 1914 to enforce existing antitrust laws, such as the Sherman, Clayton, and Federal Trade 
Commission acts. The challenge for regulators is to apply prevailing laws in such a way as to 
discourage monopolistic practices without reducing gains in operational efficiency that may 
accompany business combinations.
National laws usually do not affect firms outside their domestic political boundaries. There 
are two exceptions: antitrust laws and laws applying to the bribery of foreign government of­
ficials.17 Outside the United States, antitrust regulation laws are described as competitiveness 
or merger control laws, which are intended to minimize or eliminate anticompetitive behav­
ior. The EU antitrust regulators were able to thwart the attempted takeover of Honeywell by 
General Electric—two US corporations with operations in the European Union. Remarkably, 
this occurred following the approval of the proposed takeover by US antitrust authorities. 
In 2014, European antitrust authorities blocked United Parcel Services’ bid to acquire Dutch 
shipping company TNT because of concerns about reduced competition in the continent-
wide delivery of small packages. The other exception, the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, is 
discussed later in this chapter.
The Sherman Act
Passed in 1890, the Sherman Act makes illegal all contracts, combinations, and conspira­
cies that restrain trade “unreasonably.” Examples include agreements to fix prices, rig bids, 
allocate customers among competitors, or monopolize any part of interstate commerce. Sec­
tion I of the Sherman Act prohibits new business combinations resulting in monopolies or in 
a significant concentration of pricing power in a single firm. Section II applies to firms that 
already are dominant in their targeted markets. The act applies to all transactions and busi­
nesses involved in interstate commerce or, if the activities are local, all transactions and busi­
ness “affecting” interstate commerce. Most states have comparable statutes.
The Clayton Act
Passed in 1914, the Clayton Act was created to outlaw certain practices not prohibited by 
the Sherman Act and to help government stop a monopoly before it developed. Section 5 of 
17Truitt (2006).

60	
2.  The Regulatory Environment
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
the act made price discrimination between customers illegal, unless it could be justified by 
cost savings associated with bulk purchases. Tying of contracts—in which a firm refuses to 
sell certain important products to a customer unless the customer agrees to buy other prod­
ucts from the firm—also was prohibited. Section 7 prohibits one company from buying the 
stock of another company if their combination results in reduced competition. Interlocking 
directorates also were made illegal when the directors were on the boards of competing firms.
Unlike the Sherman Act, which contains criminal penalties, the Clayton Act is a civil stat­
ute. The Clayton Act allows private parties that were injured by the antitrust violation to sue 
in federal court for three times their actual damages. State attorneys general also may bring 
civil suits. If the plaintiff wins, the costs must be borne by the party that violated the prevail­
ing antitrust law, in addition to the criminal penalties imposed under the Sherman Act. Ac­
quirers soon learned how to circumvent the original statutes of the Clayton Act of 1914, which 
applied to the purchase of stock. They simply would acquire the assets, rather than the stock, 
of a target firm. Under the Celler–Kefauver Act of 1950, the Clayton Act was amended to give 
the FTC the power to prohibit asset as well as stock purchases.
The Federal Trade Commission Act of 1914
This act created the FTC, consisting of five full-time commissioners appointed by the presi­
dent for a 7-year term and supported by a staff of economists, lawyers, and accountants to 
assist in the enforcement of antitrust laws.
The Hart–Scott–Rodino (HSR) Antitrust Improvements Act of 1976
Acquisitions involving companies of a specific size cannot be completed until certain in­
formation is supplied to the federal government and a specified waiting period has elapsed. 
The premerger notification allows the FTC and the DoJ sufficient time to challenge acquisi­
tions believed to be anticompetitive before they are completed. Once the merger has taken 
place, it is often difficult to break it up. Since both the FTC and the DoJ share jurisdiction over 
merger review transactions requiring review are assigned on a case-by-case basis depending 
on which agency has more expertise with the industry involved. Table 2.2 provides a sum­
mary of 2016 prenotification filing requirements.
Title I: What Must Be Filed?
Title I of the act gives the DoJ the power to request internal corporate records if it suspects 
potential antitrust violations. Information requirements include background data on the “ul­
timate parent entity”18 of the acquiring and target parents, a description of the deal, and all 
background studies relating to the transaction.
Title II: Who Must File and When?
Title II addresses the conditions under which filings must take place. In 2016, to comply 
with the size-of-transaction test, transactions in which the buyer purchases voting securities 
or assets valued in excess of $78.2 million must be reported under the HSR Act. However, 
18The ultimate parent entity is the firm at the top of the chain of ownership if the actual buyer is a subsidiary.

	
Understanding Antitrust Legislation	
61
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
according to the size-of-person (a reference to the acquirer and target firms) test, transactions 
valued at less than this figure may still require filing if the acquirer or the target firm has an­
nual net sales or total assets of at least $156.3 million and the other party has annual net sales 
or total assets of at least $15.6 million. These thresholds are adjusted upward by the annual 
rate of increase in gross domestic product. A filing is required if the transaction value exceeds 
$312.6 million without regard to whether the size-of-person test is met.
Bidding firms must execute an HSR filing at the same time as they make an offer to a target 
firm. The target firm also is required to file within 15 days following the bidder’s filing. Filings 
TABLE 2.2  Regulatory Prenotification Filing Requirements for 2016
Williams Act
Hart–Scott–Rodino Act
Required 
filing
1.	Schedule 13(D) within 10 days of acquiring 
5% stock ownership in another firm
2.	Ownership includes stock held by affiliates 
or agents of the bidder
3.	Schedule 14(D)-1 for tender offers
4.	Disclosure required even if 5% accumulation 
not followed by a tender offer
HSR filing is necessary whena:
1.	Size-of-transaction test: The buyer purchases 
assets or securities >$78.2 million
2.	Size-of-person testa: Buyer or seller has annual 
sales or assets ≥$156.3 million and any other 
party has sales or assets ≥$15.6 million
3.	If the acquisition value >$312.6 million, a filing 
is required regardless of whether (2) is met
Thresholds in (1)–(3) are adjusted annually by 
the increase in gross domestic product
File with 
whom
Schedule 13(D)
1.	Premerger Notification Office of the Federal 
Trade Commission
2.	Director of Operations of the DoJ Antitrust 
Division
1.	6 copies to SEC
2.	1 copy via registered mail to target’s 
executive office
3.	1 copy via registered mail to each public 
exchange on which target stock is traded
Schedule 14(D)-1
1.	10 copies to SEC
2.	1 copy hand-delivered to target’s executive 
offices
3.	1 copy hand-delivered to other bidders
4.	1 copy mailed to each public exchange 
on which the target stock is traded (each 
exchange also must be phoned)
Time 
period
1.	Tender offers must stay open a minimum of 
20 business days
2.	Begins on date of publication, advertisement, 
or submission of materials to target
3.	Unless the tender offer has been closed, 
shareholders may withdraw tendered shares 
up to 60 days after the initial offer
1.	Review/waiting period: 30 days (15 days for 
cash tender offers)
2.	Target must file within 15 days of bidder’s 
filing
3.	Period begins for all cash offers when bidder 
files; for cash/stock bids, period begins when 
both bidder and target have filed
4.	Regulators can request a 20-day extension
aThe “size-of-person” test measures the size of the “ultimate parent entity” of the buyer and seller. The ultimate parent entity is the entity that 
controls the buyer and seller and is not itself controlled by anyone else.
DoJ, Department of Justice; SEC, Securities and Exchange Commission.

62	
2.  The Regulatory Environment
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
consist of information on the operations of the two companies and their financial statements. 
The waiting period begins when both the acquirer and the target have filed. Either the FTC 
or the DoJ may request a 20-day extension of the waiting period for transactions involving 
securities and 10 days for cash tender offers. If the acquiring firm believes there is little likeli­
hood of anticompetitive effects, it can request early termination. In practice, only about 20% 
of transactions require HSR filings; of these only about 4% are challenged by the regulators.19
If the regulatory authorities suspect anticompetitive effects, they will file a lawsuit to ob­
tain a court injunction to prevent completion of the proposed transaction. Although it is rare 
for either the bidder or the target to contest the lawsuit, because of the expense involved, and 
even rarer for the government to lose, it does happen.20 If fully litigated, a government law­
suit can result in substantial legal expenses as well as a significant cost in management time. 
Even if the FTC’s lawsuit is overturned, the benefits of the merger often have disappeared 
by the time the lawsuit has been decided. Potential customers and suppliers are less likely to 
sign lengthy contracts with the target firm during the period of trial. New investment in the 
target is likely to be limited, and employees and communities where the target’s operations 
are located would be subject to uncertainty. As such, both regulators and acquirers try to 
avoid litigation.
How Does HSR Affect State Antitrust Regulators?
Title III expands the powers of state attorneys general to initiate triple damage suits on 
behalf of individuals in their states injured by violations of the antitrust laws.
Procedural Rules
When the DoJ files an antitrust suit, it is adjudicated in the federal court system. When 
the FTC initiates the action, it is heard before an administrative law judge at the FTC, whose 
ruling is subject to review by FTC commissioners. Criminal actions are reserved for the DoJ, 
which may seek fines or imprisonment for violators. Individuals and companies also may file 
antitrust lawsuits. The FTC reviews complaints that have been recommended by its staff and 
approved by the commission. The commission then votes whether to accept or reject the hear­
ing examiner’s findings. The decision of the commission then can be appealed in the federal 
circuit courts. As an alternative to litigation, a company may seek to negotiate a voluntary 
settlement of its differences with the FTC. Such settlements usually are negotiated during the 
review process and are called consent decrees. The FTC then files a complaint in the federal 
court along with the proposed consent decree. The federal court judge routinely approves the 
consent decree.
19In 2007, there were 2201 HSR filings with the FTC (about 20% of total transactions), compared to 1768 in 2006 
(Barnett, 2008). Of these, about 4% typically are challenged and about 2% require second requests for information. 
About 97% of the 37,701 M&A deals filed with the FTC between 1991 and 2004 were approved without further 
scrutiny (Business Week, 2008).
20Regulators filed a suit on February 27, 2004, to block Oracle’s $26 per-share hostile bid for PeopleSoft on antitrust 
grounds. On September 9, 2004, a US District Court judge denied a request by US antitrust authorities that he issue 
an injunction against the deal, arguing that the government failed to prove that large businesses can turn to only 
three suppliers (i.e., Oracle, PeopleSoft, and SAP) for business applications software.

	
Understanding Antitrust Legislation	
63
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
The Consent Decree
A typical consent decree may consist of both structural and behavioral remedies. Structur­
al remedies generally require the party or parties seeking regulatory approval to in some way 
change the structure of their businesses. This usually involves the sale of assets or businesses 
in areas where they compete directly. Structural remedies differ from behavioral remedies, 
which are designed to regulate the future conduct of the relevant party or parties (e.g., by 
regulating the prices which a party may charge). Behavioral remedies may require significant 
monitoring by regulators to ensure compliance.
In late 2015, General Electric won US and EU antitrust approval to buy French-based Al­
stom’s electric power generation equipment unit by agreeing to a structural remedy involving 
the sale of Alstom’s subsidiary that provides aftermarket parts and services. Regulators rea­
soned that this divestiture would give customers a viable alternative to GE in buying spare 
parts and maintenance services. As a condition of approving the January 2011 acquisition of 
NBCUniversal (NBCU) by Comcast, Comcast agreed to several behavioral remedies that would 
impact its future conduct of the combined businesses. Comcast committed to arbitrate dis­
putes with other cable systems concerning their access to NBCU’s cable channels. In addition, 
Comcast assured regulators that it would adhere to so-called “net neutrality” conditions by 
licensing its content to competing Internet sites at competitive rates.
If a potential acquisition is likely to be challenged by the regulatory authorities, an acquirer 
may seek to negotiate a consent decree in advance of the deal. In the absence of a consent 
decree, a buyer often requires that an agreement of purchase and sale includes a provision 
allowing the acquirer to back out of the transaction if it is challenged by the FTC or the DoJ 
on antitrust grounds. Consent decrees do seem to limit potential increases in business pricing 
power following a merger by creating viable competitors.21
Antitrust Merger Guidelines for Horizontal Mergers
Understanding an industry begins with understanding its market structure. Market struc­
ture may be defined in terms of the number of firms in an industry; their concentration, 
cost, demand, and technological conditions; and ease of entry and exit. Intended to clarify 
the provisions of the Sherman and Clayton acts, the DoJ issued in 1968 largely quantitative 
guidelines, presented in terms of specific market share percentages and concentration ratios, 
indicating the types of M&As it would oppose. Concentration ratios were defined in terms of 
the market shares of the industry’s top four or eight firms. Because of their rigidity, the guide­
lines have been revised to reflect the role of both quantitative and qualitative data. Qualitative 
data include factors such as the enhanced efficiency that might result from a combination 
of firms, the financial viability of potential merger candidates, and the ability of US firms to 
compete globally.
In 1992, both the FTC and the DoJ announced a new set of guidelines indicating that they 
would challenge mergers creating or enhancing market power, even if there are measurable 
efficiency benefits. Market power is defined as a situation in which the combined firms will be 
21In a report evaluating the results of 35 divestiture orders entered between 1990 and 1994, the FTC concluded that 
the use of consent decrees to limit market power resulting from a business combination has proven to be successful 
by creating viable competitors (Federal Trade Commission, 1999b).

64	
2.  The Regulatory Environment
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
able profitably to maintain prices above competitive levels for a significant period. The 1992 
guidelines were revised in 1997 to reflect the regulatory authorities’ willingness to recognize 
that improvements in efficiency over the long term could more than offset the effects of in­
creases in market power. On August 19, 2010, the guidelines were updated to give regulators 
more leeway to challenge mergers than previously. However, they also raised the thresholds 
for determining if a merger would cause anticompetitive concentration.
The 2010 guidelines express a clear commitment to more aggressive horizontal merger 
enforcement, rely much less on formulas than the earlier guidelines, and reflect heightened 
concern about unilateral effects (i.e., firms achieving such market power that they can uni­
laterally raise prices above competitive levels). The new guidelines also closely resemble the 
EU’s antitrust guidelines.22 In general, horizontal mergers are most likely to be challenged 
by regulators. Vertical mergers—those involving customer–supplier relationships—are con­
sidered much less likely to result in anticompetitive effects, unless they deprive other firms 
access to an important resource.
Concern about potential antitrust violations can force selling firms in horizontal mergers to 
accept a lower purchase price than could have been received from other bidders. In late 2014, 
US discount retailer Family Dollar rejected a $9 billion offer from competitor Dollar General 
that was intended to break up an earlier agreement between Family Dollar and a smaller ri­
val Dollar Tree that had offered $8.5 billion. Family Dollar’s board unanimously rejected the 
higher bid over concern about receiving approval from the antitrust regulators.
As part of the review process, regulators consider customers and the prospect for price 
discrimination, market definition, market share and concentration, unilateral effects, coor­
dinated effects, ease of entry, realized efficiencies, potential for business failure, and partial 
acquisitions. These factors are considered next.
Targeted Customers and the Potential for Price Discrimination
Price discrimination occurs when sellers can improve profits by raising prices to some 
targeted customers but not to others. For such discrimination to exist there must be evidence 
that certain customers are charged higher prices even though the cost of doing business with 
them is no higher than selling to other customers, who are charged lower prices. Further­
more, customers charged higher prices must have few alternative sources of supply.
Market Definition
Markets are defined by regulators solely in terms of the customers’ ability and willing­
ness to substitute one product for another in response to a price increase. The market may be 
geographically defined, with scope limited by such factors as transportation costs, tariff and 
nontariff barriers, exchange rate volatility, and so on.
Market Share and Concentration
The number of firms in the market and their respective market shares determine market 
concentration. Such ratios measure how much of the total output of an industry is produced 
by the “n” largest firms in the industry. To account for the distribution of firm size in an 
industry, the FTC measures concentration using the Herfindahl–Hirschman Index (HHI), 
22Horton (2011).

	
Understanding Antitrust Legislation	
65
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
which is calculated by summing the squares of the market shares for each firm competing in 
the market. For example, a market consisting of 5 firms with market shares of 30, 25, 20, 15, 
and 10%, respectively, would have an HHI of 2250 (302 + 252 + 202 + 152 + 102). Note that an 
industry consisting of 5 competitors with market shares of 70, 10, 5, 5, and 5%, respectively, 
will have a much higher HHI score of 5075, because the process of squaring the market shares 
gives the greatest weight to the firm with the largest market shares.
The HHI ranges from 10,000 for an almost pure monopoly to approximately 0 in the case 
of a highly competitive market. The index gives more weight to the market shares of larger 
firms to reflect their relatively greater pricing power. The FTC developed a scoring system, 
described in Fig. 2.1, as one factor in determining if the FTC will challenge a proposed deal.
Almost one-third of industries in the United States in 2015 are considered highly concen­
trated under current federal antitrust standards. This compares to approximately one-fourth 
in 1996.23 In many cases, this increased concentration is driven by technological innovation 
and the need for consolidation in the face of intensifying global competition. Mergers offer 
economies of scale and scope that increase efficiency and innovation and in some instances 
preserve jobs at firms too weak to remain competitive on their own. However, the dark side of 
increased concentration is the potential for the surviving competitors to increase prices. Glar­
ing examples of this concentration include the US wireless industry that is currently domi­
nated by four national carriers. However, AT&T and Verizon hold substantially larger market 
share than their financially weaker rivals T-Mobile and Sprint. In the food industry, Kroger 
and Walmart dominate their competition. In 1996, there were more than 40 publicly traded 
grocery firms; today, there are 18. Other industries showing a dramatic reduction in the num­
ber of competitors include appliance, air travel, and beverage.
Unilateral Effects
A merger between two firms selling differentiated products may reduce competition by 
enabling the merged firms to profit by unilaterally raising the price of one or both products 
23Francis and Knutson (2015).
FIGURE 2.1  FTC actions at various market share concentration levels. FTC Merger Guidelines, www.ftc.gov. 
FTC, Federal Trade Commission, HHI, Herfindahl–Hirschman Index.

66	
2.  The Regulatory Environment
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
above the premerger level. Furthermore, a merger between two competing sellers prevents 
buyers from negotiating lower prices by playing one seller against the other. Finally, in mar­
kets involving undifferentiated products, a firm, having merged with a large competitor, may 
restrict output in order to raise prices.
Coordinated Effects
After a merger with a competitor, a firm may coordinate its output and pricing decisions with 
the remaining firms in the industry. Such actions could include a simple understanding of what 
a firm would do or not do under certain circumstances. If the firm with dominant market share 
was to reduce output, others may follow suit, with the implied intent of raising product prices.
Ease of Entry
Ease of entry is defined as entry that would be timely, likely to occur, and sufficient to 
counter the competitive effects of a combination of firms that temporarily increases market 
concentration. Barriers to entry—such as proprietary technology or knowledge, patents, gov­
ernment regulations, exclusive ownership of natural resources, or huge investment require­
ments—can limit the number of new competitors that enter a market. Excessive entry barriers 
may hinder innovation because of a reduced need to do so due to the limited threat of com­
petition.24 However, defining what is excessive is highly subjective.
Efficiencies
Increases in efficiency that result from a merger or acquisition can enhance the combined 
firms’ ability to compete and result in lower prices, improved quality, better service, or in­
novation. However, efficiencies are difficult to measure and verify, because they will be real­
ized only after the merger has taken place. An example of verifiable efficiency improvements 
would be a reduction in the average fixed cost per unit of output due to economies of scale.
Alternative to Imminent Failure
Regulators also consider the likelihood that a firm would fail if not allowed to merge with 
another firm. The regulators must weigh the potential cost of the failing firm, such as a loss of 
jobs, against any potential increase in market power resulting from a merger.
Partial Acquisitions
Regulators may also review acquisitions of minority positions involving competing firms 
if it is determined that the partial acquisition results in the effective control of the target firm. 
A partial acquisition can lessen competition by giving the acquirer the ability to influence 
the competitive conduct of the target firm, in that the acquirer may have the right to appoint 
members of the board of directors. Furthermore, the minority investment also may blunt 
competition if the acquirer gains access to nonpublicly available competitive information.
Antitrust Guidelines for Vertical Mergers
Vertical mergers may become a concern if an acquisition by a supplier of a customer prevents 
the supplier’s competitors from having access to the customer. Alternatively, the acquisition 
24Park and Sonenshine (2012).

	
Understanding Antitrust Legislation	
67
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
by a customer of a supplier could become a concern if it prevents the customer’s competitors 
from having access to the supplier. Vertical mergers are more likely to result in regulatory re­
view when firms that are dominant in their respective markets integrate vertically.25
Antitrust Guidelines for Collaborative Efforts
Collaborative efforts are horizontal agreements among competitors, including joint ven­
tures, strategic alliances, and other competitor agreements. Regulators are less likely to find 
a collaborative effort to be anticompetitive if (1) the participants have continued to compete 
through separate, independent operations or through participation in other collaborative ef­
forts; (2) the financial interest in the effort by each participant is relatively small; (3) each par­
ticipant’s ability to control the effort is limited; (4) effective safeguards prevent information 
sharing; and (5) the duration of the collaborative effort is short.
Trends in Enforcement Efforts
Enforcement efforts ebb and flow with changes in presidential administrations and politi­
cal and economic philosophies. During much of the decade ending in 2010, business combi­
nations among direct competitors tended to be less restrictive as they were viewed as a means 
of achieving greater operating efficiency. In recent years, enforcement efforts have become 
more aggressive, especially in such concentrated industries as telecommunications, airlines, 
and media.
Just the threat of regulatory intervention appears to have been a major factor in deterring 
the proposed tie-ups between Sprint and T-Mobile and 21st Century Fox and Time Warner 
in 2014. In neither instance, did the Justice Department or the FCC announce a formal posi­
tion on either deal. The Sprint–T-Mobile deal would have reduced the number of wireless 
competitors from four to three and the Fox–Time Warner combination would have joined 
the two largest movie studios and two of the five largest television producers. In 2015 and 
2016, other potential tie-ups that were abandoned due to regulatory investigations included 
the Comcast/TWC, Applied Materials/Tokyo Electron, GE/Electrolux, and Bumble Bee/
Chicken of the Sea deals.
The impact of failing to receive regulatory approval can be very costly for acquirers. In 
mid-2016, oil services providers Halliburton and Baker Hughes called off their planned 
$35 billion merger. The decision was made after a lengthy regulatory review in which the 
US Justice Department decided to block the deal. Halliburton had to pay Baker Hughes a 
$3.5 billion termination fee, one of the largest on record, to exit the merger agreement. The 
amount was included in the merger agreement to reassure Baker Hughes that Halliburton 
expected the deal to close.
Impact of Antitrust Actions on Firm Value
Empirical studies of the announcement of decisions by regulators to investigate potential 
violations of antitrust laws on the value of firms confirm that initially the share prices of the 
firms involved in the investigation can drop only to recover if the concessions required to 
25Kedia et al. (2011).

68	
2.  The Regulatory Environment
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
gain approval are perceived by investors as minimal.26 Other studies show that the impact 
of legislative changes or regulatory policy reform on a firm’s share price can be as large as 
or larger than announced enforcement actions around a deal’s announcement date for firms 
in different sectors of the economy. Why? Financial services firms tend to be more regulated 
than nonfinancial firms with regulators often having more discretion in regulatory enforce­
ment. Research seems to indicate that investors view new merger control legislation estab­
lishing clearer guidelines as positive, because such laws reduce the discretion (and implicitly 
the perceived arbitrariness) given to regulators.27
THE IMPLICATIONS FOR M&A OF THE DODD–FRANK WALL 
STREET REFORM AND CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT
Comprehensive in scope, the Dodd–Frank Act (the Act) substantially changed federal reg­
ulation of financial services firms as well as some nonfinancial public companies. The Act’s 
objectives included restoring public confidence in the financial system and preventing future 
financial crises that threaten the viability of financial markets. Its provisions range from giv­
ing shareholders a say on executive compensation to greater transparency in the derivatives 
markets to new powers granted to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) to liqui­
date financial firms whose failure would threaten the US financial system (i.e., systemic risk).
While the implications of the legislation are far reaching, the focus in this book is on those 
aspects of the Act impacting corporate governance directly, the environment in which M&As 
and other restructuring activities take place, and participants in the restructuring process. The 
Act’s provisions having the greatest impact on the subject matter addressed in this book are 
summarized in Table 2.3 according to the categories governance and executive compensation, 
systemic regulation and emergency powers, capital markets, and financial institutions. These 
provisions are discussed in more detail in the chapters in which they are most applicable. All 
statements made pertaining to the Dodd–Frank Act are accurate as of April 2017. However, 
changes are likely with the election of Donald Trump as the US president. The scope of the 
changes is unclear at this time.
STATE REGULATIONS AFFECTING MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS
State regulations affecting takeovers often differ from one state to another, making compli­
ance with all applicable regulations a challenge.
State Antitakeover Laws
With 64% of all Fortune 500 companies as of 2016 incorporated in Delaware, the state’s cor­
porate law has a substantial influence on publicly traded firms. The next most popular state 
is Nevada with 14%. Delaware corporate law generally defers to the judgment of business 
26Gunter and van Dijk (2016).
27Carletti et al. (2015).

	
State Regulations Affecting Mergers and Acquisitions	
69
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
TABLE 2.3  Selected Dodd–Frank Act Provisions
Provision
Requirements
GOVERNANCE AND EXECUTIVE COMPENSATIONa
Say on pay
In a nonbinding vote on the board, shareholders may vote on 
executive compensation packages every 2 or 3 years
Say on golden parachutes
Proxy statements seeking shareholder approval of acquisitions, 
mergers, or sale of substantially all of the company’s assets must 
disclose any agreements with executive officers of the target or 
acquiring firm with regard to present, deferred, or contingent 
compensation
Institutional investor disclosure
Institutional managers (e.g., mutual funds, pension funds) 
must disclose annually their position on pay and on golden 
parachutes voting records
Clawbacks
Public companies are required to develop and disclose 
mechanisms for recovering incentive-based compensation paid 
during the 3 years prior to earnings restatements
Broker discretionary voting
Public stock exchanges are required to prohibit brokers from 
voting shares without direction from owners in the election 
of directors, executive compensation, or any other significant 
matter as determined by the SEC
Compensation committee independence
SEC to define rules requiring stock exchanges to prohibit 
listing any issuer that does not comply with independence 
requirements governing compensation of committee members 
and consultants
SYSTEMIC REGULATION AND EMERGENCY POWERS
Financial Stability Oversight Council
To mitigate systemic risk, the Council, which consists of 
10 voting members and is chaired by the Secretary of the 
Treasury, monitors US financial markets to identify domestic 
or foreign banks and some nonbank firms whose default or 
bankruptcy would risk the financial stability of the United 
States
New Federal Reserve (Fed) bank and 
nonbank holding company supervision 
requirements
Bank and nonbank holding companies with consolidated assets 
exceeding $50 billion must:
•	Submit plans for their rapid and orderly dissolution in the 
event of failure
•	Provide periodic reports about the nature of their credit expo­
sure
•	Limit their credit exposure to any unaffiliated company to 25% 
of its capital
•	Conduct semiannual “stress tests” to determine capital ad­
equacy
•	Provide advance notice of intent to purchase voting shares in 
financial services firms
Limitations on leverage
For bank holding companies whose assets exceed $50 billion, the 
Fed may require the firm to maintain a debt-to-equity ratio of no 
more than 15-to-1
(Continued)

70	
2.  The Regulatory Environment
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
Provision
Requirements
Limits on size
The size of any single bank cannot exceed 10% of deposits 
nationwide. The limitation does not apply for mergers involving 
troubled banks
Capital requirements
Bank capital requirements are to be left to the regulatory 
agencies and should reflect the perceived risk of bank or 
nonbank institutions
Savings and loan regulations
Fed gains supervisory authority over all savings and loan 
holding companies and their subsidiaries
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation 
(FDIC)
The FDIC may guarantee obligations of solvent insured 
depository institutions if the Fed and the Systemic Risk Council 
determine that financial markets are illiquid (i.e., investors 
cannot sell assets without incurring an unusual and significant 
loss)
Orderly Liquidation Authority
The FDIC may seize and liquidate a financial services firm 
whose failure threatens the financial stability of the United 
States, to ensure the speedy disposition of the firm’s assets and 
to ensure that losses are borne by shareholders and bondholders 
while losses of public funds are limitedb
CAPITAL MARKETS
Office of Credit Ratings
Proposes rules for internal controls, independence, transparency, 
and penalties for poor performance, making it easier for 
investors to sue for “unrealistic” ratings. Office to conduct 
annual audits of rating agencies
Securitization
Issuers of asset-backed securities must retain an interest of at least 
5% of the collateral underlying any security sold to third parties
Hedge and private equity fund registration
Advisers to private equity and hedge funds with $100 million or 
more in assets under management must register with the SEC 
as investment advisers; those with less than $100 million will 
be subject to state registration. Registered advisors to provide 
reports and be subject to periodic examinations
Clearing and trading of over-the-counter 
(OTC) derivatives
Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) and SEC to 
mandate central clearing of certain OTC derivatives on a central 
exchange and the real-time public reporting of volume and 
pricing data as well as the parties to the transaction
FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
Volcker Rule
Prohibits insured depository institutions and their holding 
companies from buying and selling securities with their own 
money (so-called proprietary trading) or sponsoring or investing 
in hedge funds or private equity funds. Underwriting and 
market-making activities are exempt. Proprietary trading may 
occur outside the United States as long as the bank does not 
own or control the entity. Sponsoring private funds is defined as 
serving as a general partner or in some way gaining control of 
such funds
TABLE 2.3  Selected Dodd–Frank Act Provisions (cont.)

	
State Regulations Affecting Mergers and Acquisitions	
71
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
managers and board directors in accordance with the so-called “business judgment rule.” The 
“business judgment rule” acknowledges that the daily operation of a business is inherently 
risky and controversial, and, as such, states that the board of directors should be allowed to 
make decisions without fear of being prosecuted. The rule further assumes that it is unfair 
to expect that those managing a company make the right decisions all the time. If the courts 
believe a board acted rationally in making a decision, there should be no legal repercussions 
against managers and directors. The major exception is in change of control situations. In 
such situations, managers are subject to an enhanced business judgment test. This requires a 
target board to show that there are reasonable grounds to believe that a danger to corporate 
viability exists and that the adoption of certain defensive measures is reasonable. While Dela­
ware law is the norm for many companies, firms incorporated in other states often are subject 
to corporate law that may differ significantly from Delaware law. What follows is a discussion 
of commonalities across the states.
States regulate corporate charters. Corporate charters define the powers of the firm and the 
rights and responsibilities of its shareholders, boards of directors, and managers. However, 
states are not allowed to pass any laws that impose restrictions on interstate commerce or 
conflict in any way with federal laws. State laws affecting M&As tend to apply only to firms 
incorporated in the state or that conduct a substantial amount of their business within the 
state. These laws often contain fair price provisions, requiring that all target shareholders of a 
successful tender offer receive the same price as those tendering their shares. In an attempt to 
prevent highly leveraged transactions, some state laws include business combination provisions, 
which may specifically rule out the sale of the target’s assets for a specific period.28
Other common characteristics of state antitakeover laws include cash-out and share-control 
provisions. Cash-out provisions require a bidder whose purchases of stock exceed a stipulated 
amount to buy the remainder of the target stock on the same terms granted those shareholders 
28By precluding such actions, these provisions limit LBOs from using asset sales to reduce indebtedness.
SEC, Securities and Exchange Commission.
Provision
Requirements
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
Creates an agency to write rules governing all financial 
institutions offering consumer financial products, including 
banks, mortgage lenders, and credit card companies as well as 
“payday” lenders. The authority applies to banks and credit 
unions with assets over $10 billion and all mortgage-related 
businesses. While institutions with less than $10 billion will 
have to comply, they will be supervised by their current 
regulators
Federal Insurance Office
Monitors all aspects of the insurance industry (other than 
health insurance and long-term care), coordinates international 
insurance matters, consults with states regarding insurance 
issues of national importance, and recommends insurers that 
should be treated as systemically important
aSee Chapter 3 for more details.
bSee Chapter 17 for more details.
TABLE 2.3  Selected Dodd–Frank Act Provisions (cont.)

72	
2.  The Regulatory Environment
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
whose stock was purchased at an earlier date. By forcing the acquiring firm to purchase 100% 
of the stock, potential bidders lacking substantial financial resources effectively are elimi­
nated from bidding on the target. Share-control provisions require that a bidder obtains prior 
approval from stockholders holding large blocks of target stock once the bidder’s purchases 
of stock exceed some threshold level. The latter provision can be troublesome to an acquiring 
company when the holders of the large blocks of stock tend to support target management.
State Antitrust and Securities Laws
As part of the HSR Act of 1976, the states were granted increased antitrust power. The state 
laws are often similar to federal laws. Under federal law, states have the right to sue to block 
mergers, even if the DoJ or FTC does not challenge them. State “blue sky” laws are designed 
to protect individuals from investing in fraudulent security offerings. State restrictions can be 
more onerous than federal ones.
RESTRICTIONS ON DIRECT INVESTMENT IN THE UNITED STATES
The Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States (CFIUS) operates under the 
authority granted by Congress in the Exon–Florio amendment (Section 721 of the Defense 
Production Act of 1950). CFIUS includes representatives from many government agencies to 
ensure that all national security issues are identified and considered in the review of foreign 
acquisitions of US businesses. The president can block the acquisition of a US corporation 
based on recommendations made by CFIUS if there is credible evidence that the foreign en­
tity exercising control might take action that threatens national security.29
THE US FOREIGN CORRUPT PRACTICES ACT
The Foreign Corrupt Practices Act of 1977 prohibits individuals, firms, and foreign subsid­
iaries of US firms from paying anything of value to foreign government officials in exchange 
for obtaining new business or retaining existing contracts. Even though many nations have 
laws prohibiting bribery of public officials, enforcement tends to be lax. Of the 38 countries 
that signed the 1997 Anti-Bribery Convention of the Organization for Economic Cooperation 
and Development, more than one-half of the signatories have little or no enforcement mecha­
nisms for preventing the bribery of foreign officials, according to a 2010 study by Transparen­
cy International. The US law permits “facilitation payments” to foreign government officials 
if relatively small amounts of money are required to expedite goods through foreign custom 
inspections or to gain approval for exports. Such payments are considered legal according to 
US law and the laws of countries in which such payments are considered routine.30
29In 2008, CFIUS was amended to cover investments involving critical infrastructure. The intention is to cover 
cross-border transactions involving energy, technology, shipping, and transportation. Some argue that it may also 
apply to large US financial institutions, in that they represent an important component of the US monetary system.
30Truitt (2006).

	
Fair Disclosure (Regulation FD)	
73
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
FAIR DISCLOSURE (REGULATION FD)
The US SEC adopted this regulation on August 15, 2000, to address concerns about the 
selective release of information by publicly traded firms. Regulation FD requires that a 
publicly traded firm that discloses material nonpublic information to certain parties, such 
as stock analysts and individual shareholders, must release that information to the general 
public.
Critics of the regulation expressed concern that less information about a firm’s share 
price would be provided by managers concerned about litigation. In fact, there are indica­
tions that there has been an increase in voluntary disclosure. However, the greater availabil­
ity of information may have done little to dampen earnings’ “surprises” and to lower stock 
price volatility. Studies provide conflicting results, with one study reporting an increase 
in share price volatility and another showing no change following the implementation of 
Regulation FD.31
Consistent with the trend toward increased voluntary disclosure of information, the frac­
tion of US acquirers disclosing synergy estimates when announcing a deal has increased 
from 7% in 1995 to 27% of total transactions in 2008, with much of the increase coming 
since the introduction of Regulation FD. Some researchers argue that public disclosure of 
synergy can help the acquirer communicate the potential value of the deal to investors lack­
ing the same level of information available to the firm’s board and management, enabling 
investors to make more informed decisions.32 In particular, synergy disclosure can result 
in significantly higher acquirer announcement date financial returns by allaying investor 
fears that the offer price is excessive.33 Others contend that disclosing such information is 
self-serving, since it helps the acquirer’s board and management gain shareholder support 
for the transaction.34
Recent evidence suggests that acquirers may use press releases to manipulate deals in 
other ways. That is, acquirers in stock deals increase the number of stories after the start 
of merger negotiations but before the public announcement that an agreement had been 
reached. This media blitz may be an effort to generate a temporary increase in their share 
price to reduce the number of acquirer shares that must be issued for each target share 
outstanding. This minimizes potential dilution of acquirer shareholders.35 For example, 
assume the target is to receive $100 per share in terms of acquirer stock, valued at $50 per 
share at the time of the agreement. Therefore, the acquirer would have to issue two shares 
of its stock for each acquirer share. However, if the acquirer’s stock price increases to $105 
per share, only 0.9524 acquirer share ($100/$105) would have to be issued for each target 
share.
31All studies show an increase in voluntary disclosure by firms (Bailey et al., 2003; Dutordoir et al., 2014; Heflin 
et al., 2001). However, Bailey et al. (2003) report an increase in the variation of analysts’ forecasts but no change in 
the volatility of share prices following the introduction of Regulation FD. In contrast, Heflin et al. (2001) find no 
change in the variation of analysts’ forecast but a decrease in share price volatility.
32Dutordoir et al. (2014).
33Dutordoir et al. (2014).
34Ismail (2011).
35Ahern and Sosyura (2014).

74	
2.  The Regulatory Environment
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
SPECIFIC INDUSTRY REGULATION
In addition to the DoJ and the FTC, a variety of other agencies monitor activities (including 
M&As) in certain industries, such as commercial banking, railroads, defense, and cable TV.
Banking
Currently, three agencies review banking mergers. The Office of the Comptroller of the 
Currency has responsibility for transactions in which the acquirer is a national bank. The 
FDIC oversees mergers where the acquiring bank or the bank resulting from combining 
the acquirer and the target will be a federally insured state-chartered bank that operates out­
side the Federal Reserve System. The third agency is the Board of Governors of the Federal 
Reserve System (the Fed). It has the authority to regulate mergers in which the acquirer or 
the resulting bank will be a state bank that is also a member of the Federal Reserve System.
The Dodd–Frank legislation eliminated the Office of Thrift Supervision and transferred 
the responsibility for regulating savings and loan associations, credit unions, and savings 
banks (collectively referred to as thrift institutions) to other regulators. Specifically, the Fed 
will supervise savings and loan holding companies and their subsidiaries, the FDIC will gain 
supervisory authority of all state savings banks, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Cur­
rency will supervise all federal savings banks.
M&A transactions involving financial institutions resulting in substantial additional lever­
age or in increased industry concentration will also come under the scrutiny of the Financial 
Stability Oversight Council created by the Dodd–Frank Act to monitor systemic risk. The 
council is empowered, among other things, to limit bank holding companies with $50 billion 
or more in assets or a nonbank financial company that is regulated by the Federal Reserve 
from merging with, acquiring, or consolidating with another firm. The council may require 
the holding company to divest certain assets if the company is deemed to constitute a threat 
to the financial stability of US financial markets. Under the new legislation, the size of any 
single bank or nonbank cannot exceed 10% of deposits nationwide. However, this constraint 
may be relaxed for mergers involving failing banks.
Communications
The FCC is charged with regulating interstate and international communication by radio, 
television, wire, satellite, and cable. It is responsible for the enforcement of such legislation as 
the Telecommunications Act of 1996, intended to reduce regulation while promoting lower 
prices and higher quality services.
Under the authority of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, the FCC established 
new rules in early 2015 that have significant implications for M&As involving firms doing 
business on the internet. The so-called “net neutrality rules” were enacted to ensure that 
internet networks are equally available to all types of legal content providers. ISPs, most­
ly large cable or telephone companies, are prohibited from discriminating against content 
providers by blocking or slowing down data transmission speeds and seeking payments 
in exchange for faster access on their internet networks. The latter practice is called “paid 
prioritization.”

	
Specific Industry Regulation	
75
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
The net neutrality rules reclassify ISPs, including wireless data providers such as DirecTV 
(now owned by AT&T), as public utilities subject to regulations ensuring consumers get fair 
access to their services. Since paid prioritization deals are banned, critics argue that, without 
the ability to charge users for premium services, ISPs will have less incentive to innovate. 
Premium services could include items such as appliances connected to the Internet to alert 
owners of problems and smartphone-controlled residential doors and windows.
Efforts to consolidate media companies such as Comcast and TWC were stopped in mid-
2015 due to the resulting increased broadband market share the combined firms would enjoy. 
AT&T and DirecTV were given the approval to merge in late 2015 but only after they made 
certain concessions to ensure the combined businesses would be in compliance with the net 
neutrality rules.
Whether net neutrality rules as formulated at the time of this writing will change under the 
new Trump administration in 2017 remains unknown. Republicans will have a majority of the 
FCC commissioners as well as control of both houses of Congress. However, laws requiring 
administrative agencies such as the FCC to justify their decisions by proving that circum­
stances have changed will make reversing course on net neutrality quickly difficult. Nonethe­
less, the assumption underlying any acquisition whose value depends on the enforcement of 
current rules must be carefully considered in view of possible changes.
Railroads
The Surface Transportation Board (STB), the successor to the Interstate Commerce Com­
mission (ICC), governs mergers of railroads. Under the ICC Termination Act of 1995, the STB 
determines if a merger should be approved by assessing the impact on public transportation, 
the areas currently served by the carriers involved in the proposed transaction, and the bur­
den of the total fixed charges resulting from completing the transaction.
Defense
During the 1990s, the US defense industry underwent consolidation, consistent with the 
Department of Defense’s (DoD’s) philosophy that it is preferable to have three or four highly 
viable defense contractors than a dozen weaker firms. Although defense industry mergers 
are technically subject to current antitrust regulations, the DoJ and FTC have assumed a sec­
ondary role to the DoD. As noted previously, efforts by a foreign entity to acquire national 
security–related assets must be reviewed by the Council on Foreign Investment in the United 
States.
Other Regulated Industries
Historically, the insurance industry was regulated largely at the state level. Under the 
Dodd–Frank Act, the Federal Insurance Office was created within the US Treasury to moni­
tor all nonhealthcare-related aspects of the insurance industry. As a “systemic” regulator, 
its approval will be required for all acquisitions of insurance companies whose size and 
interlocking business relationships could have repercussions on the US financial system. The 
acquisition of more than 10% of a US airline’s shares outstanding is subject to approval of the 

76	
2.  The Regulatory Environment
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
Federal Aviation Administration. Public utilities are highly regulated at the state level. Like 
insurance companies, their acquisition requires state government approval.
ENVIRONMENTAL LAWS
Failure to comply adequately with environmental laws can result in enormous potential 
liabilities to all parties involved in a transaction. These laws require full disclosure of the 
existence of hazardous materials and the extent to which they are being released into the en­
vironment. Such laws include the Clean Water Act (1974), the Toxic Substances Control Act of 
1978, the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (1976), and the Comprehensive Environ­
mental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (Superfund) of 1980. Additional reporting 
requirements were imposed in 1986 with the passage of the Emergency Planning and Com­
munity Right to Know Act (EPCRA). In addition to EPCRA, several states also passed “right-
to-know” laws such as California’s Proposition 65.
LABOR AND BENEFIT LAWS
A diligent buyer also must ensure that the target is in compliance with the labyrinth of la­
bor and benefit laws. These laws govern such areas as employment discrimination, immigra­
tion law, sexual harassment, age discrimination, drug testing, and wage and hour laws. Labor 
and benefit laws include the Family Medical Leave Act, the Americans with Disabilities Act, 
and the Worker Adjustment and Retraining Notification Act (WARN). WARN governs notifi­
cation before plant closings and requirements to retrain workers.
Employee benefit plans frequently represent one of the biggest areas of liability to a buyer. 
The greatest liabilities often are found in defined pension benefit plans, postretirement medi­
cal plans, life insurance benefits, and deferred compensation plans. Such liabilities arise when 
the reserve shown on the seller’s balance sheet does not accurately indicate the true extent of 
the future liability. The potential liability from improperly structured benefit plans grows with 
each new round of legislation, starting with the passage of the Employee Retirement Income 
and Security Act of 1974. Laws affecting employee retirement and pensions were strength­
ened by additional legislation, including the Multi-Employer Pension Plan Amendments Act 
of 1980, the Retirement Equity Act of 1984, the Single Employer Pension Plan Amendments 
Act of 1986, the Tax Reform Act of 1986, and the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation acts of 1987, 
1989, 1990, and 1993. Buyers and sellers also must be aware of the Unemployment Compen­
sation Act of 1992, the Retirement Protection Act of 1994, and Statements 87, 88, and 106 of the 
Financial Accounting Standards Board.36
The Pension Protection Act of 2006 places a potentially increasing burden on acquirers of 
targets with underfunded pension plans. The legislation requires employers with defined 
benefit plans to make sufficient contributions to meet a 100% funding target and erase fund­
ing shortfalls over 7 years. Furthermore, the legislation requires employers with so-called 
“at-risk” plans to accelerate contributions. At-risk plans are those whose pension fund assets 
cover less than 70% of future pension obligations.
36Sherman (2006).

	
Cross-Border Transactions	
77
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
CROSS-BORDER TRANSACTIONS
Transactions involving firms in different countries are complicated by having to deal with 
multiple regulatory jurisdictions in specific countries or regions such as the European Union. 
More antitrust agencies mean more international scrutiny, potentially conflicting philoso­
phies, and substantially longer delays in completing all types of business combinations. Anti­
trust law also can restrict the formation of other types of business combinations, such as joint 
ventures, when the resulting entity is viewed as limiting competition.
These factors can impose significant costs to acquirer and target shareholders. For ex­
ample, there is evidence that EU intervention in M&A deals during the two decades end­
ing in 2010 reduced the combined US acquirer and target firms’ shareholder value by about 
$8 billion on or about the announcement date that a proposed deal would be subject to 
European regulatory review. The loss of shareholder value could reflect the cost of legal 
compliance and information disclosure, restructuring the current business operation due 
to the antitrust remedies requested by European regulators, greater uncertainty that the 
deal would not close, and potential delay or loss of synergistic benefits resulting from the 
merger.37
International agreements have been reached in an attempt to rationalize the global regula­
tory process. For example, changes in European antitrust laws in 2013 are among the most 
recent and far-reaching revisions affecting cross-border deals. The review process, outlined in 
Article 101 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU), which prohibits 
anticompetitive practices in 27 countries, has been greatly simplified. Certain types of agree­
ments, such as technology transfers, between firms whose combined market share is less than 
20% between competitors and less than 30% between noncompetitors are exempt from TFEU 
review. The objectives of these revisions are to stimulate research and development invest­
ment, the diffusion of intellectual property, and competition.
Such agreements are only as effective as each country’s willingness to stand by their 
commitments. Despite warnings from the EU’s Internal Market regulators about the risk of 
protectionism and the potential incompatibility with EU treaties, the French government 
intervened in late 2014 in a bidding war to acquire French engineering firm Alstrom be­
tween US-based multinational General Electric and a combined bid by Germany’s Siemens 
and Japan’s Mitsubishi. Having built France’s power grid and high-speed TGV trains, 
Alstrom was viewed as an important strategic asset by the French government. GE eventu­
ally won the day by agreeing to the French government owning a 20% stake in the business 
and having veto power over business strategy. Furthermore, GE committed to increasing 
employment at the Alstrom operations in France. This type of government intervention 
can be abused. For example, in 2005, the French government declared dairy maker Da­
none a strategically important company to shield it from a possible takeover by US-based 
PepsiCo.
When regulations differ among countries, not only the cost of takeovers but also the 
pattern of M&As is affected as businesses engage in “regulatory arbitrage.” Firms may be 
encouraged to acquire targets in countries with less stringent antitrust, environmental, and 
labor laws than those prevailing in their own countries. There is empirical evidence that the 
37Deshpende et al. (2016).

78	
2.  The Regulatory Environment
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
investors of firms in countries with stronger regulations are rewarded when such firms ac­
quire targets in countries with comparatively benign regulations.
SOME THINGS TO REMEMBER
Current laws require that securities offered to the public must be registered with the gov­
ernment and that target firm shareholders receive enough information and time to assess 
adequately the value of an acquirer’s offer. Federal antitrust laws exist to prevent individu­
al corporations from assuming too much market power. Numerous state regulations affect 
M&As such as state antitakeover and antitrust laws. A number of industries are also subject 
to regulatory approval at the federal and state levels. Finally, gaining regulatory approval 
in cross-border transactions can be nightmarish because of the potential for the inconsistent 
application of antitrust laws as well as differing reporting requirements, fee structures, and 
legal jurisdictions.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
2.1	 What factors do US antitrust regulators consider before challenging a transaction?
2.2	 What are the obligations of the acquirer and target firms according to the Williams 
Act?
2.3	 Discuss the pros and cons of federal antitrust laws.
2.4	 When is a person or firm required to submit a Schedule 13(D) to the SEC? What is the 
purpose of such a filing?
2.5	 Give examples of the types of actions that may be required by the parties to a pro­
posed merger subject to an FTC consent decree.
2.6	 Ameritech and SBC Communications received permission from the FCC to combine to 
form the nation’s largest local telephone company. The FCC gave its approval, subject 
to conditions requiring that the companies open their markets to rivals and enter new 
markets to compete with established local phone companies, in an effort to reduce 
the cost of local phone calls and give smaller communities access to appropriate phone 
service. SBC had considerable difficulty in complying with its agreement with the 
FCC. Over an 18-month period, SBC paid the US government $38.5 million for failing 
to provide rivals with adequate access to its network. The government noted that SBC 
failed to make available its network in a timely manner, meet installation deadlines, 
and notify competitors when their orders were filled. Comment on the fairness and 
effectiveness of using the imposition of heavy fines to promote government-imposed 
outcomes rather than free market-determined outcomes.
2.7	 In an effort to gain approval of their proposed merger from the FTC, top executives 
from Exxon Corporation and Mobil Corporation argued that they needed to merge be­
cause of the increasingly competitive world oil market. Falling oil prices during much 
of the late 1990s put a squeeze on oil industry profits. Moreover, giant state-owned 
oil companies pose a competitive threat because of their access to huge amounts of 
capital. To offset these factors, Exxon and Mobil argued that they had to combine to 

	
Discussion Questions	
79
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
achieve substantial cost savings. Why were the Exxon and Mobil executives emphasiz­
ing efficiencies as a justification for this merger?
2.8	 How important is properly defining the market segment in which the acquirer and 
target companies compete in determining the potential increase in market power if the 
two firms are permitted to combine? Explain your answer.
2.9	 Comment on whether antitrust policy can be used as an effective means of encourag­
ing innovation. Explain your answer.
2.10	 The Sarbanes–Oxley Act has been very controversial. Discuss the arguments for and 
against the act. Which side do you find more convincing, and why?
Answers to these Chapter Discussion Questions are available in the Online Instructor’s Guide for 
instructors using this book (https://textbooks.elsevier.com/web/Manuals.aspx?isbn=9780128016091).
END OF CHAPTER CASE STUDY: REGULATORS APPROVE 
MERGER OF AT&T AND DIRECTV BUT NOT COMCAST 
AND TIME WARNER CABLE (TWC)
Case Study Objectives: To Illustrate
•	 Common ways in which regulators and acquirers compromise
•	 How the FCC’s net neutrality regulations reshape media industry behavior
•	 How deals among competitors can be treated differently by regulators even when they are 
comparable in size
For years, AT&T had been flirting with the idea of acquiring satellite pay TV company DirecTV. 
But such a deal would have resulted in increased market concentration that may have precluded 
getting regulatory approval, and this concern caused AT&T to hold back. Regulators are charged 
with protecting the public interest by stimulating healthy competition and innovation. Two large 
firms attempting to merge in the same industry is generally a “red flag” for regulators concerned 
about the potential for limiting competition and for higher prices charged to consumers.
When Comcast announced that it had an agreement to merge with TWC in February 2014, AT&T 
saw an opening to get regulatory approval for a deal involving DirecTV. The Comcast/TWC merger 
would have made Comcast the dominant cable company and broadband provider in the industry. 
AT&T reasoned it could argue that Comcast needed a strong competitor. AT&T in combination with 
DirecTV would be much stronger financially than DirecTV on its own and constituted a formidable 
counterweight to a Comcast/TWC tie-up.
AT&T’s interest in DirecTV’s satellite service is not simply about finding more pay TV custom­
ers in a market that is fast maturing; it’s about bundling and getting more money from the same 
customers. By adding DirecTV’s 20 million pay TV subscribers into its diversified product portfolio 
consisting of wireless, phone, fiber-optic broadband, and cable TV, AT&T hoped to create more at­
tractive bundled packages for which they could charge premium prices to boost revenue and profit.
The firm’s previous growth engine had been wireless mobile services, but now that market is ma­
turing and AT&T needs to find new ways to boost revenue that has been growing slightly more than 
1% annually in recent years. While the firm has lost landline subscribers, that decline in revenue was 

80	
2.  The Regulatory Environment
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
offset by new tablet subscribers. Currently, AT&T customers who have U-Verse “triple-play” service, 
which includes landline phone, broadband internet, and cable TV, spend about $170 each month, not 
including wireless service. With its satellite TV revenue alone, DirecTV generates about $102 per user.
AT&T is the nation’s largest telecommunications company by revenue and second largest wire­
less company by subscribers. The DirecTV deal gives AT&T, with 2014 revenue of $133 billion, a 
greater national presence to expand video delivery and another $33 billion in yearly revenue. But 
it also pairs the carrier with a business that is past its prime as Americans increasingly disconnect 
from pay TV and watch TV on a variety of mobile devices. DirecTV has suffered from years of slug­
gish subscriber growth in its core satellite business and lacks any broadband infrastructure needed 
for streaming television. As the biggest provider of pay TV the deal would also give AT&T more 
bargaining power with content firms.
AT&T envisions future bundled services including mobile, TV programming, and other services 
like home security. But the firm is limited to only 22 states where it offers its U-Verse fiber-optic 
service. AT&T wants to build a better bundle of services, combining mobile, TV programming, and 
other services and eventually wireless TV. It has 11 million U-verse customers, but only 5.7 million 
of them get TV. With DirecTV—the second-largest pay TV provider in the United States, behind 
only Comcast—AT&T instantly becomes a national player in providing pay TV.
But the competitive landscape changed dramatically in 2015. In less than 6 months, regulators 
disallowed the proposed merger of Comcast and TWC while approving the mergers of Charter Com­
munications (Charter) and TWC as well as AT&T and DirecTV. All three proposed mergers were val­
ued between $45 and $55 billion. What made one proposed merger unacceptable and the others okay?
Comcast has been the “800-lb gorilla” in the cable industry in recent years. When the firm sought 
to take control of foundering TWC, alarm bells sounded among content providers and the public 
and in turn regulatory agencies. Regulators were also concerned about the absence of a strong third 
competitor behind Comcast and AT&T. Prior to acquiring TWC, Charter was a weak player in the 
industry. This gave them an edge in getting support from the regulators who say the combination 
of Charter and the financially ailing TWC provides potentially the strong third competitor they 
thought was necessary to protect consumer interests.
The more intriguing discussion is why Comcast/TWC failed to get approval while AT&T and 
DirecTV did. The competitive issues surrounding the two deals were different in significant ways. 
Comcast struck a deal to buy another provider of pay TV and internet service in TWC, but the 
transaction would not eliminate a competitor in their served markets. In contrast, AT&T’s U-Verse 
service competed with DirecTV in certain geographic markets. Therefore, AT&T’s acquisition of 
DirecTV would remove a competitor in the U-Verse markets since the satellite TV service would 
be owned and marketed by AT&T. Usually this would require the new company to divest assets to 
create another competitor in areas in which they overlapped in order to get regulatory approval.
What seems to have killed the Comcast/TWC merger was that the combined firms would domi­
nate the broadband services market potentially enabling the new firm to engage in a variety of 
anticompetitive practices. By some estimates, the new firm would have about 60% market share 
in broadband services in the United States. Comcast also owned substantial content acquired in its 
deal for NBCU in 2013. As such, they theoretically had much greater incentive to promote their own 
content over that owned by others. Neither AT&T nor DirecTV has significant proprietary content 
and have less incentive to discriminate.

	
Discussion Questions	
81
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
While regulators were more favorably disposed to approve the AT&T/DirecTV merger, they 
were going to require significant concessions from AT&T before doing so. AT&T was going to be 
in for difficult bargaining over issues concerning the FCC’s net neutrality rules that AT&T believed 
were inimical to product innovation in the telecommunications industry. AT&T and other ISPs had 
vigorously opposed the FCC’s net neutrality rules intended to give legal content providers equal 
access to the internet. Under the rules, ISPs could not discriminate against content by blocking or 
slowing transmission speeds and seeking payments in exchange for faster lanes on their internet 
networks.
In the end, the perceived benefits of the deal persuaded AT&T to make a number of concessions 
to get approval to take control of DirecTV that it valued at more than $48 billion. While the merger 
approval did not require such structural remedies as divesting certain assets in geographic areas 
in which the two firms competed, it did require far-reaching behavioral remedies. Behavioral rem­
edies require the combining firms to adopt a set of future practices designed to lessen potentially 
anticompetitive policies.
As a condition for FCC approval, AT&T agreed to extend its broadband service to an additional 
12.5 million people, many of whom were in low-income areas not currently served by the firm. This 
would require AT&T to make substantial new investments to expand geographically its high-speed 
broadband network, effectively increasing the nation’s fiber-optic network by 40% and adding bil­
lions of dollars in new assets to the firm’s balance sheet. The FCC insisted on this investment since 
an internal study found that 55 million Americans—17% of the population—still lack access to in­
ternet service with sufficient speed to watch video or accomplish other data-intensive tasks. Increas­
ing the availability of high-speed Internet connections has been a priority for the FCC.
AT&T also agreed not to discriminate against unaffiliated content providers. The major area of 
concern was in the fast-growing market for online video content. AT&T cannot exclude its own or 
affiliated video services and content from monthly data caps it imposes on its broadband internet 
customers. Technically, this amounts to a net neutrality violation since it treats some types of data 
differently than others. Therefore, AT&T could not cap data transmission for other broadband pro­
viders while not capping users of its own broadband services. AT&T said it would not slow data 
transmission from certain websites or prevent access by other websites to the internet. In addition, 
it would not take payments to give some content providers faster transmission of their content than 
others.
The conditions for approval fell short of what some critics had wanted. Netflix had urged the 
FCC to forbid explicitly AT&T from charging access fees to content providers that connect to its 
network. This is what Charter had agreed to in its merger with TWC in late 2015. Consumer groups 
have opposed AT&T’s purchase of DirecTV from the outset expressing concern that the merger 
would not lead to lower rates for consumers or encourage competition. Consumer organizations 
and a trade group representing small cable operators repeatedly called for strengthening consumer 
protections. These groups also demanded that AT&T be required to offer stand-alone internet ser­
vice, rather than it being part of a bundle. The American Cable Association, which represents small 
operators, had asked the FCC to consider safeguards against fast-rising fees charged by cable sports 
channels. AT&T inherits four regional sports networks now owned by DirecTV. While praised for 
requiring an expansion of low-cost internet service to low-income residents, consumer groups com­
plained that the service being offered did not meet the FCC’s own standards for high-speed service.

82	
2.  The Regulatory Environment
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
A D D I T I O N A L  C A S E  S T U D Y  R E C O M M E N D AT I O N S 
( S E A R C H  H A RVA R D  B U S I N E S S  S C H O O L 
P U B L I S H I N G  S I T E  B Y  N A M E  O F  C A S E :  
h b s p . h a r v a r d . e d u )
MCI Communications Corp., Bruce C. 
Greenwald, Wilda L. White, June 1, 1998, 
Source: HBS Premier Case Collection, Product 
Number: 284057-PDF-ENG, hbsp.harvard.edu.
	
Subjects covered: Antitrust law, managing 
uncertainty, financing.
Bank of America-Merrill Lynch, Guhan 
Subramanian, Nithyasri Sharma, Revision 
Date: 2012, Product Number: 910026-PDF-
ENG, Source: Harvard Business School, hbsp.
harvard.edu.
	
Subjects covered: Government interven-
tion, negotiation.
Northrop versus TRW, Carliss Y. Baldwin, 
James Quinn, Revision Date: January 10, 
2008, Product Number: 903115-PDF-ENG, 
Source: Harvard Business School, HBSP.
Harvard.edu.
	
Subjects covered: Takeover tactics, 
takeover defenses, takeover laws.
Discussion Questions
1.	 The net neutrality principle states that all legal content providers should have equal access to 
the internet and that no provider can gain faster access to the internet by paying a premium 
price. ISPs that are now regulated by the FCC as public utilities argue that net neutrality 
reduces the incentive for firms to innovate because they cannot charge for premium services 
that might require faster network speeds than other services. In your opinion is innovation 
helped or hurt by net neutrality rules? How are all content providers forced potentially to pay 
more to ISPs for online access as a result of net neutrality rules? Explain your answers.
2.	 Should regulators in your opinion have extracted more concessions from AT&T before granting 
approval to merge with DirecTV? Explain your answer.
3.	 As a regulator, would you have approved the takeover of DirecTV by AT&T? Explain your 
answer.
4.	 Free markets discriminate among consumers based on price: those that can afford a product or 
service can get it and those that can’t don’t. Net neutrality offers everyone equal access to the 
internet. Of these two options, which do you believe is most fair? Explain your answer.
5.	 Whose interests do you believe antitrust regulators represent? What trade-offs do antitrust 
regulators face in making decisions that impact the groups whose interests they represent? Be 
specific.
Solutions to these case study questions are found in the Online Instructor’s Manual available to instructors 
using this book (https://textbooks.elsevier.com/web/Manuals.aspx?isbn=9780128016091).

C H A P T E R
83
Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring Activities. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-801609-1.00003-8
Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
3
The Corporate Takeover Market
Common Takeover Tactics, Antitakeover 
Defenses, Corporate Governance
O U T L I N E
Inside Mergers and Acquisitions: 
Strategy Matters in Takeover Battles	
84
Chapter Overview	
85
Corporate Governance	
85
Factors Internal to the Firm	
87
Factors External to the Firm	
92
Understanding Alternative Takeover 
Tactics	
94
Friendly Takeovers Are Most Common	
94
Hostile Takeovers Are More a Threat 
Than a Reality	
95
The Bear Hug: Limiting the Target’s 
Options	
95
Proxy Contests in Support of a Takeover	
95
The Hostile Tender Offer	
97
Other Tactical Considerations	
99
The Importance of Premium, Board 
Composition, and Investor Sentiment	 100
Contract Considerations	
100
Developing a Bidding Strategy	
101
Activist Investors: Gaining Influence 
Without Control	
103
Understanding Alternative Takeover 
Defenses	
105
Preoffer Defenses	
105
Strengthening the Board’s Defenses	
109
Limiting Shareholder Actions	
110
Other Shark Repellents	
111
Postoffer Defenses	
114
The Impact of Takeover Defenses 
on Shareholder Value	
117
Takeover Defenses and Target 
Firm Shareholder Financial 
Returns	
117
Takeover Defenses and Public 
Offerings	
120
Some Things to Remember	
120
Discussion Questions	
121
Case Study: Mylan Thwarted 
in Hostile Takeover of Perrigo	
122
Case Study Objectives	
122
Discussion Questions	
125
Additional Case Study 
Recommendation	
125

84	
3.  The Corporate Takeover Market
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
Treat a person as he is, and he will remain as he is. Treat him as he could be, and he will become what 
he should be.—Jimmy Johnson
INSIDE MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS: STRATEGY MATTERS 
IN TAKEOVER BATTLES
KEY POINTS
•	 Successful takeovers include a strategy for bringing the target’s board to the negotiating table 
and the discipline to walk away when the target’s demands are viewed as excessive.
•	 Friendly takeovers often are preferred to hostile attempts but sometimes result in overpaying 
for the target.
•	 Paying too much severely limits the acquirer’s ability to earn its cost of capital.
Good takeover strategies don’t always ensure success, especially when things turn hostile. 
But a bad strategy dramatically increases the risk of calamity. This was aptly demonstrated in 
the years following ConAgra Food’s (ConAgra) acquisition of Ralcorp Holdings (Ralcorp) in 
early 2013. By mid-2015, ConAgra, under considerable pressure to divest or spin-off Ralcorp 
from activist investors, announced it would be seeking ways to do so.
The Ralcorp takeover made ConAgra one of the largest packaged food companies in North 
America. The transaction also positioned ConAgra as the largest private label packaged food 
business in North America.1 What ConAgra had hoped is that diversifying from its own con­
sumer brands to faster-growing private label brands would provide a well-balanced busi­
ness portfolio allowing the firm to better weather cyclical downturns in the economy. What 
actually happened is that investors saw ConAgra as a hybrid company consisting of second- 
and third-tier branded products such as Hunt’s ketchup and Orville Redenbacher’s popcorn 
and private label foods sold under supermarket names. Other food companies selling either 
branded products or private-label items were easier to value.
ConAgra, initially rebuffed in its all-cash $84 bid in March 2011 to get a friendly deal, de­
cided to threaten to walk away if Ralcorp did not negotiate immediately. Normally, so-called 
hostile deals (i.e., those not supported by the target’s board and management) are difficult, 
particularly when a target has strong takeover defenses. Ralcorp had both a staggered board 
making it difficult to change the composition of the board and a poison pill that would if trig­
gered substantially raise the cost of the deal. Such deals are made even more difficult when 
the acquirer lacks a coherent takeover strategy. Such strategies often involve an offer made 
directly to the target’s shareholders (i.e., a hostile tender offer), a proxy contest to change the 
composition of the board (even though it could take several years because of the staggered 
board) to rescind the poison pill, and litigation to compel the board to remove the pill. These 
tactics in combination are intended to pressure the board to the negotiating table.
Despite its threat, ConAgra did not walk away and a year later announced a friendly deal 
on November 27, 2012, with Ralcorp at $94 per share, about 12% more than its initial bid. The 
1Private label sales are products manufactured or packaged for sale under the name of the retailer rather than that 
of the manufacturer.

	
Corporate Governance	
85
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
purchase price appeared at the time to be excessive especially since Ralcorp had spun off Post 
Cereals in early 2012 that at the time had a market value of $17.50 per share. Since ConAgra 
was receiving fewer assets, the purchase price paid should have been lower reflecting the 
Post spin-off, possibly by as much as $17.50 per share.
ConAgra’s misfortune showed when it failed to convince investors that its “hybrid” strat­
egy could create shareholder value as its underperformance resulted in write-downs of the 
value of its Ralcorp acquisition by more than $2 billion. The implication was clear: it had dra­
matically overpaid for Ralcorp. The legacy of overpaying has been that ConAgra shares since 
the closing in January 2013 have dropped by more than 3% while other food products com­
panies showed average gains of more than 10%. At the end of 2016, ConAgra shares traded at 
a 30% discount to the median multiple for similar-sized North American food manufacturers.
CHAPTER OVERVIEW
Corporate takeovers are a common way to transfer control of a firm from ineffective to ef­
fective management. The corporate takeover market in which control is transferred serves two 
important functions in a free market economy: the allocation of resources to sectors in which 
they can be used most efficiently and as a mechanism for disciplining failing corporate man­
agers. By replacing such managers through hostile takeover attempts or proxy fights or the 
mere threat of such tactics, the corporate takeover market can help to promote good corporate 
governance, which in turn can improve a firm’s financial performance. In recent years, so-
called activist investors have assumed the role of the hostile takeover in pressuring a firm’s 
management to pursue value-enhancing strategies.
Corporate governance refers to the rules and processes by which a business is controlled, 
regulated, or operated. Traditionally, the goal has been to protect shareholder rights. More 
recently, this has expanded to encompass additional corporate stakeholders, including cus­
tomers, employees, the government, lenders, communities, regulators, and suppliers. For our 
purposes, corporate governance is about leadership and accountability, and it involves all 
those factors internal and external to the firm that interact to protect the rights of corporate 
stakeholders. That is, the long-held goal of the firm as maximizing shareholder value neces­
sarily encompasses the protection of the rights of all key stakeholder groups.
Fig.  3.1 illustrates the range of factors affecting corporate governance, including the 
corporate takeover market. A chapter review (including practice questions) is available in 
the file folder entitled Student Study Guide contained on the companion site to this book 
(https://www.elsevier.com/books-and-journals/book-companion/9780128016091).
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
Where capital markets are liquid, investors discipline bad managers by selling their shares 
(i.e., the market model). Where capital markets are illiquid, bad managers are disciplined by 
those owning large blocks of stock in the firm (i.e., the control model). Table 3.1 summarizes 
the characteristics of these two common models. The following sections describe those fac­
tors internal and external to the firm, including mergers and acquisitions (M&As), impacting 
corporate governance.

86	
3.  The Corporate Takeover Market
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
TABLE 3.1  Alternative Models of Corporate Governance
Market model applicable when
Control model applicable when
Capital markets are highly liquid
Capital markets are illiquid
Equity ownership is widely dispersed
Equity ownership is heavily concentrated
Board members are largely independent
Board members are largely “insiders”
Ownership and control are separate
Ownership and control overlap
Financial disclosure is high
Financial disclosure is limited
Shareholders focus more on short-term gains
Shareholders focus more on long-term gains
FIGURE 3.1  Factors affecting corporate governance. CEO, Chief Executive Officer; FASB, Financial Accounting 
Standards Board.

	
Corporate Governance	
87
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
Factors Internal to the Firm
Corporate governance is affected by the effectiveness of the firm’s board, internal controls 
and incentive systems, takeover defenses, and corporate culture. These factors are discussed 
next.
The Board of Directors/Management
Corporate board structures differ among countries and have evolved into two basic types: 
unitary (single) and two-tier (dual) structures. A unitary board is composed of both company 
managers and independent directors, which make decisions as a group. An independent di­
rector (sometimes called an outside director) is someone brought to the board from outside 
the firm. Such directors have not worked for the firm in the past, are not a current manager, 
do not stand to benefit financially beyond what is paid to other board directors, and are not 
a captive of the firm’s current culture or way of doing business. A two-tier board consists of a 
management board composed only of company executives, including the chief executive of­
ficer, whose responsibilities are to run the firm’s operations and a separate supervisory board 
composed only of independent directors. Overseeing the management board, the supervi­
sory board is responsible for strategic decisions and often contains other stakeholders such as 
employees and environmental groups.
The United States and the United Kingdom are examples of countries having mandated 
unitary board structures, while Germany and Austria use the two-tiered board structure. 
In other countries such as France, firms are permitted to switch between the two types 
of structures. Which structure a firm chooses seems to reflect the extent to which share­
holders see potential significant conflicts with management as to how the firm should be 
managed.
What follows is more descriptive of a unitary board structure. For such boards, the pri­
mary responsibilities are to advise the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) and to monitor firm 
performance. The board hires, fires, and sets CEO pay and is expected to oversee manage­
ment, corporate strategy, and the firm’s financial reports to shareholders. Some board mem­
bers may be employees or founding family members; others may be affiliated with the firm 
through a banking relationship, a law firm retained by the firm, or someone who represents a 
customer or supplier. Such members may be subject to conflicts of interest causing them to act 
in ways not in the shareholders’ best interests. For example, boards with directors working 
for banks that have made loans to the firm may be prone to favor diversifying acquisitions 
that are financed with stock rather than cash.2 Such directors may believe that acquisitions 
that diversify the firm may smooth out fluctuations in consolidated cash flow and that using 
stock rather than cash to pay for them preserves the firm’s ability to meet interest and prin­
cipal payments on its existing debt. However, the use of the stock may dilute the acquiring 
shareholders’ ownership interest in the combined firms.
Such potential conflicts of interest have led some observers to argue that boards should be 
composed primarily of independent directors and different individuals should hold the CEO 
and board chairman positions. The presumption is that independent directors improve firm 
performance due to their objectivity and outside experience. Boards with significant numbers 
of independent directors also are likely to be more attractive to foreign investors concerned 
2Hilscher and Sisli-Ciamarra (2013).

88	
3.  The Corporate Takeover Market
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
about the challenges of monitoring firm performance from outside the country. The presence 
of the independent directors may reduce monitoring costs as they are viewed as better able 
to limit the self-serving actions of insiders.3 Moreover, the longer outside directors serve on a 
board, the greater their contribution to improving firm performance, because they are better 
able to understand the firm’s operations and to provide better-quality advice.4
Studies do indeed show that firm performance can be improved by more independent 
boards and by separating the CEO and Chairman of the Board positions.5 Perhaps underscor­
ing the potential conflict of interest when CEOs are also Board Chairman, CEOs who serve 
as Chairman on average earn 20% more than those reporting to a Board Chairman who is an 
independent director.6 Another factor impacting the quality of board decisions is the gender 
makeup of the board. Perhaps reflecting less hubris among female than among male direc­
tors, boards with more women directors tend to make less frequent acquisitions and to pay 
smaller premiums for target firms.7
Despite the potential improvement in governance resulting from separating the Chairman 
and CEO positions, shareholders have proven largely comfortable with the combined role of 
these two positions. According to the proxy advisory firm Institutional Shareholder Services, 
only 6% of the 372 proposals to separate the roles at S&P 500 companies during the decade 
ending in 2015 were approved by shareholders.
While it continues to be common for one person to hold dual roles as CEO and Chairman, 
the number of independent directors on boards has been increasing over the years. In the 
early 1990s, about 40% of boards were composed of senior corporate managers or individu­
als affiliated with the corporation. In recent years, more than 90% of boards have only one or 
two nonindependent directors.8 Despite this trend, more independent boards are not a pana­
cea. There is little evidence that underperforming managers are more likely to be removed 
today than in the past.9 Moreover, having more independent directors does not seem to lead 
to lower CEO pay.10 Furthermore, less independent boards are associated with higher an­
nouncement date financial returns when nonindependent board members possess significant 
information about the target firm.11 In such instances, the advisory role of the board is more 
important than its performance monitoring function.
With more than one-fifth of the board directors in Fortune 500 companies in 2013 on 
more than one board, the demands on directors’ time can be substantial. The most talented 
independent directors, often on multiple boards, are most likely to spend the bulk of their 
5Armstrong et al. (2015) find that firm value is positively influenced by outsider-dominated boards. Dahya et al. 
(2016) document that in the United Kingdom where outside directors are more common acquirers whose boards 
are dominated by outside directors show higher returns when targets are public than when they are private. Why? 
Because outside director effectiveness may be better when access to information is greater as often is the case with 
private targets.
6Francis and Lublin (2016).
7Levi et al. (2014).
8Gordon (2007).
9Davidoff et al. (2014).
10Guthrie et al. (2012).
11Schmidt (2015).
3Miletkov et al. (2014).
4Kim et al. (2014)

	
Corporate Governance	
89
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
time on those boards of firms held in the highest esteem by their peers and investors. This 
suggests that they may be less effective on other boards on which they serve. Why? They 
have an incentive to devote most of their time and energy on boards that add to their 
reputations.12
The oft-used adage that information is power is certainly true in the board room. Well-
connected CEOs often have access to information not readily available to others giving them 
greater control over board agendas and the ability to achieve consensus among board mem­
bers. Access to better information also makes it more difficult to remove underperforming 
CEOs who claim they have a more accurate view of future competitive trends and that con­
tinued reliance on their business strategy will result in eventual success.13
Political connections matter. Acquirers whose board members or senior managers include 
former politicians and regulators are more likely to receive regulatory approval, realize high­
er announcement date returns, and exhibit superior postmerger operating performance than 
those that do not.14 Investors realize that such acquirers may receive more favorable treatment 
by regulators and be able to acquire more synergistic targets such as direct competitors. For­
mer politicians and regulators can be helpful in navigating the regulatory process, gaining 
access to decision makers for purposes of lobbying, and receiving government contracts.
Today, boards average about 10 members, about one-half of their average size during the 
1970s. There is evidence that smaller boards tend to be more effective, since each member can 
wield more influence, thereby effectively reducing the power of the CEO. Smaller boards also 
are more likely to replace a CEO due to poor performance. However, more complicated firms 
may benefit from larger boards capable of providing a broader range of advice to the CEO.15
Despite progress in recent years, boards often do not discipline underperforming CEOs 
as quickly as perhaps they should due to a variety of factors. Boards may be slow to dismiss 
such managers due to cronyism, concern about how it reflects on board members, or a con­
cern about investor reaction. For publicly traded firms, dismissing high-profile CEOs attracts 
substantial investor attention. CEO termination reflects negatively on the board that hired 
the CEO, raising investor concerns about board competence. Such concerns could impact the 
firm’s future cost of financing16 and may help explain why CEOs often seem to be compen­
sated for M&A deals that create as well as destroy value.17
How board members themselves are selected may be problematic. The selection of board 
members may be more a function of their accumulated experience and public profile as CEOs 
than past job performance. For example, CEOs with substantial acquisition experience are 
more likely to be selected for a higher number of directorships with little regard to whether 
their past acquisitions created or destroyed shareholder value.18 When this is the case, the 
existence of independent board members with significant senior-level investment banking 
experience may be increasingly important. While acquiring firms having such directors have 
12Masulis and Mobbs (2014).
13El-Khatib et al. (2015).
14Ferris et al. (2016).
15Coles et al. (2008).
16Dow (2013).
17Fich et al. (2014).
18Harford and Schonlau (2013).

90	
3.  The Corporate Takeover Market
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
a higher probability of making acquisitions, they also tend to exhibit higher announcement 
date financial returns, pay lower takeover premiums and advisory fees, and show superior 
long-term performance than firms that do not.19
Board members are compensated using different types of incentive payments, including 
stock, stock options, and fees paid to attend meetings. Directors on boards of larger, more 
complex firms tend to be paid more. Firms with greater growth opportunities pay a larger 
percentage of director compensation in the form of equity, presumably to better align director 
interests with those of the firm’s shareholders.20
In the final analysis, it is possible to place too much emphasis on the importance of form 
over substance in achieving effective governance. Form focuses on the size and distribution 
of the board between independent and nonindependent directors and whether the Chairman 
and CEO positions are held by different individuals. Substantive improvement in governance 
often comes more from the integrity of board members and senior managers and the willing­
ness of board members to remain engaged in the ongoing activities of the business.
Internal Controls, Incentive Systems, and Management Contracts
These factors often are critical to aligning shareholder and manager interests. Internal con­
trols help prevent fraud as well as encourage compliance with prevailing laws and regula­
tions. Financial and legal auditing functions, as well as hiring and firing policies, within the 
firm are examples of internal controls. Compensation, consisting of base pay, bonuses, and 
stock options, underpins incentive systems used to manage the firm in the manner the board 
deems appropriate. Management contracts formally stipulate responsibilities, term of em­
ployment, basic compensation arrangements, change in control provisions, and severance 
packages.
The dark side of financial incentive systems is that they may create abuses as well as posi­
tive incentives. For example, equity-based incentive systems can encourage managers and 
directors to engage in unethical activity. For instance, systems in which managers and direc­
tors are rewarded for improvements in a firm’s share price have been associated with efforts 
to more aggressively avoid the payment of taxes. And efforts to do so can cause managers to 
undertake risky strategies in excess of what shareholders want.21
To rectify management abuses, the Dodd–Frank Act of 2010 gives shareholders of public 
firms the right to vote on executive compensation. Under the new rules, such votes must oc­
cur at least once every 3 years. The Dodd–Frank Act also requires publicly traded firms to 
develop mechanisms for recovering compensation based on executive misconduct.
Managerial and shareholder interests can be aligned in other ways. Option strike prices 
(i.e., prices at which options can be converted into company shares) can be linked to the 
firm’s share price performance relative to the stock market, ensuring that increases in the 
stock market do not benefit managers whose companies are underperforming. Another way 
is for managers to own a significant portion of the firm’s outstanding stock or for the man­
ager’s ownership of the firm’s stock to comprise a substantial share of his or her personal 
wealth.
21Armstrong et al. (2015).
19Huang et al. (2014).
20Nguyen (2014).

	
Corporate Governance	
91
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
Aggressive incentive programs tend to improve acquirer abnormal financial returns 
around acquisition announcement dates for public targets and have had an even greater posi­
tive impact after the introduction of Sarbanes–Oxley in 2002 that makes senior management 
more accountable for their actions. With a greater focus on good governance, senior managers 
may be more inclined to make decisions based more on common sense than hubris. Senior 
managers at firms with high pay-for-performance incentive plans tend to pay 23.3% lower 
average merger premiums to public target firm shareholders than firms with more modest 
incentive plans.22
An alternative to concentrating ownership in management is for one or more shareholders 
who are not managers to accumulate a large block of voting shares. So-called “blockholders” 
may be more aggressive in monitoring management and more receptive to takeovers, thereby 
increasing the risk to managers that they will be ousted for poor performance.
While management contracts can guarantee pay for failure,23 there is evidence they can 
contribute to shareholder wealth creation by better aligning CEO interests with shareholders. 
Why? Because they enable firms to attract and retain the best talent and encourage the pursuit 
of high-return (albeit high-risk), value-enhancing investments, since such contracts generally 
align their compensation with the long-term performance of the firm and specify severance 
packages. Management contracts have become increasingly popular over the years, especial­
ly for firms that are underperforming their peers or are takeover targets,24 with the percentage 
of S&P 500 CEOs with employment contracts increasing from 29% in 1990 to 50% in 2005. Ac­
quirers whose CEOs have employment contracts outperform their counterparts without one 
in terms of financial returns by 1.3 percentage points on average when deals are announced 
and show greater long-term profitability. Acquirer CEOs with contracts may bargain more 
aggressively with target firms resulting in lower purchase price premiums paid because their 
total compensation depends on the long-term performance of the firm. They may also be will­
ing to bid for risky firms.25 Risky firms may attract fewer bidders thereby also contributing to 
lower purchase premiums.
Antitakeover Defenses
A firm’s board and management may employ defenses to negotiate a higher purchase 
price with a bidder or to solidify their current position within the firm. The range of defensive 
actions is detailed later in this chapter.
Corporate Culture and Values
Good governance also depends on an employee culture instilled with appropriate values 
and behaviors. Setting the right tone comes from the board of directors’ and senior manage­
ment’s willingness to behave in a manner consistent with what they demand from other em­
ployees. A firm’s culture is often viewed by management as a valuable corporate asset, and, 
as such, their desire to preserve the culture can impact investment policy. For example, firms 
whose cultures breed substantial trust between employees and management tend to increase 
22Krolikowski (2016).
23Bebchuk and Fried (2003, 2004).
24Rau and Xu (2013).
25Zhao (2013).

92	
3.  The Corporate Takeover Market
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
cooperation and the exchange of specialized knowledge. Such firms tend to make acquisi­
tions that are on average one-third the size of those made by other firms enabling their culture 
to be dominant in defining the behavior of the employees of the combined firms.26
Bond Covenants
Legally binding on both the bond issuer and the bond holder, covenants forbid the issuer 
from undertaking certain activities, such as dividend payments, or require the issuer to meet 
specific requirements, such as periodic information reporting. Strong covenants can motivate 
managers to pursue relatively low-risk investments, such as capital expenditures, and avoid 
higher-risk investments, such as research and development spending.27
Factors External to the Firm
Federal and state legislation, the court system, regulators, institutional activists, and the 
corporate takeover market all play an important role in maintaining good corporate gover­
nance practices.
Legislation and the Legal System
The 1933 and 1934 Securities Acts underlie US securities legislation and created the Se­
curities and Exchange Commission (SEC), charged with writing and enforcing securities’ 
regulations. The US Congress has since transferred some enforcement tasks to public stock 
exchanges operating under SEC oversight.28 Under the Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002, the SEC 
oversees the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board, whose task is to develop and 
enforce auditing standards. State legislation also has a significant impact on governance prac­
tices by requiring corporate charters to define the responsibilities of boards and managers 
with respect to shareholders. The net effect of stronger investor protections, such as laws and 
regulations that increase investor access to consistent and accurate financial information, is 
to limit the ability of managers and controlling shareholders to misuse corporate resources.29
While such legislation can enhance shareholder value at firms whose governance practices 
are problematic, there is little evidence that such firms perform long term at the level of com­
panies whose governance practices are viewed as superior by investors. Why? New legisla­
tion and regulations tend to be targeted to specific areas within the firm. Areas untouched 
by such legislation or regulation tend not to change unless the firm undergoes a pervasive 
change in its culture.
Regulators
The SEC, Federal Trade Commission, and Department of Justice can discipline firms 
through formal investigations and lawsuits. In 2003, the SEC approved new listing stan­
dards that would put many lucrative, stock-based pay plans to a shareholder vote. The 2010 
26Bargeron et al. (2015).
27King and Wen (2011).
28The SEC itself has delegated certain responsibilities for setting accounting standards to the not-for-profit Financial 
Accounting Standards Board (FASB).
29Burkhart et al. (1997).

	
Corporate Governance	
93
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
Dodd–Frank Act requires listed firms to have fully independent compensation committees. 
The Act also promotes more detailed salary transparency for key managers. However, there is 
evidence that the drive for transparency is helping to fuel spiraling salaries due to the way in 
which boards set CEO compensation. Boards look at CEO salaries at comparable firms, often 
pegging such salaries at levels above those offered by peer firms in an attempt to attract or 
retain the best talent.30
Institutional Activists
Pension funds, hedge funds, private equity investors, and mutual funds have become 
increasingly influential in affecting the policies of companies in which they invest. Activist 
investors target about one in seven publicly traded firms worldwide and tend to be most 
prevalent in countries whose laws provide good investor protection.31 According to research 
firm Activist Insight, the growth in institutional activism in 2016 occurred in Western Europe, 
with about one-third of the 97 companies worldwide (vs. 67 in 2015) targeted by activists 
centered in the United Kingdom.
Shareholders of public firms may submit proposals to be voted on at annual meetings, but 
such proposals are not binding. The firm’s board can accept or reject the proposal even if ap­
proved by a majority of shareholders. Only 30% of proposals receiving majority support are 
implemented within 1 year of the vote.32 Nonbinding proposals approved by shareholders per­
taining to takeover defenses, executive compensation, etc., are more likely to be implemented if 
there is an activist investor likely to threaten a proxy fight.33 When nonbinding votes are too close 
to call, there is evidence that firm value can increase by as much as 1.8% on the day of the vote if 
it passes and as much as 2.8% if it is later adopted by the firm’s board. The impact on shareholder 
value is even greater for firms with a substantial number of takeover defenses in place.34
Activist hedge funds during the 2008–14 period demonstrated announcement date finan­
cial returns of 7% on equity positions taken in target firms, consistent with those returns 
observed in earlier periods. The most successful hedge funds were those willing to take mi­
nority positions in large targets mired in complicated situations. Such firms had a demon­
strated track record of either changing the composition of the target’s board or getting the 
incumbent board to change strategic direction by using proxy contests, lawsuits, pressuring 
target boards using the media, overcoming strong defenses, and replacing board members.35 
These firms also had substantial financial clout in terms of assets under management making 
it clear to target firm boards that they had the financial clout to initiate a buyout if needed.
The Corporate Takeover Market
Changes in corporate control can occur because of a hostile or friendly takeover or 
because of a proxy contest initiated by activist shareholders. When a firm’s internal manage­
ment controls are weak, the takeover market acts as a “court of last resort” to discipline bad 
30Elson and Ferrere (2013).
31Kim et al. (2015).
32Ertimur et al. (2010).
33Levit and Malenko (2012).
34Cunat et al. (2012).
35Krishnan et al. (2016).

94	
3.  The Corporate Takeover Market
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
management behavior.36 Strong internal governance mechanisms, by contrast, lessen the role 
of the takeover threat as a disciplinary factor. However, the disciplining effect of a takeover 
threat on a firm’s management can be reinforced when it is paired with a large shareholding 
by an institutional investor.37 Larger firms are more likely to be the target of disciplinary take­
overs than smaller firms, and their CEOs are more likely to be replaced following a series of 
poor acquisitions.38 Public firms, whose management and boards tend to engage in frequent 
acquisitions, often overpaying, are likely to become takeover targets as their firm’s perfor­
mance suffers from their undisciplined takeover and bidding practices.39
Several theories attempt to explain why managers resist a takeover attempt. The manage­
ment entrenchment theory suggests that managers use takeover defenses to ensure their lon­
gevity with the firm. While relatively rare in the United States, hostile takeovers (i.e., those 
not supported by the target firm’s management and boards) or the threat of such takeovers 
have historically been useful for maintaining good corporate governance by removing bad 
managers and installing better ones. Indeed, there is evidence of frequent management turn­
over even if a takeover attempt is defeated, since takeover targets are often poor financial 
performers. An alternative viewpoint is the shareholder interest’s theory, which suggests that 
management resistance to takeovers is a good bargaining strategy to increase the purchase 
price to the benefit of the target’s shareholders.40
Proxy contests are attempts by a group of activist shareholders to gain representation on a 
firm’s board or to change management proposals by gaining the support of other sharehold­
ers. While those that address issues other than board representation do not bind the board, 
boards are becoming more responsive—perhaps reflecting fallout from the Enron-type scan­
dals in 2001 and 2002.41 Even unsuccessful proxy contests often lead to a change in manage­
ment, a restructuring of the firm, or investor expectations that the firm ultimately will be 
acquired.
UNDERSTANDING ALTERNATIVE TAKEOVER TACTICS
Implementing a friendly takeover is described briefly in the following section and in 
considerable detail in Chapter 5. Hostile-takeover tactics are described extensively in the fol­
lowing sections.
Friendly Takeovers Are Most Common
In friendly takeovers, a negotiated settlement is possible without the acquirer’s resorting 
to aggressive tactics. The potential acquirer initiates an informal dialogue with the target’s 
36Kini et al. (2004).
37Cremers and Nair (2005).
38Offenberg (2009).
39Rahman et al. (2016).
40Schwert (2000).
41According to Ertimur et al. (2010), boards implemented 41% of nonbinding shareholder proposals for majority 
voting in 2004, versus only 22% in 1997. A board was more likely to adopt a shareholder proposal if a competitor 
had adopted a similar plan.

	
Understanding Alternative Takeover Tactics	
95
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
top management, and the acquirer and target reach an agreement on the key issues early in 
the process, such as the long-term business strategy, how they will operate in the short term, 
and who will be in key executive positions. Often, a standstill agreement is negotiated in which 
the acquirer agrees not to make any further investments in the target’s stock for a specific 
period. This compels the acquirer to pursue the acquisition on friendly terms, at least for the 
period covered by the agreement, and permits negotiations without the threat of more ag­
gressive tactics, such as those discussed in the following sections.
Hostile Takeovers Are More a Threat Than a Reality
If initial efforts to take control of a target firm are rejected, an acquirer may choose to 
adopt more aggressive tactics, including the bear hug, the proxy contest, and the tender of­
fer. However, relatively few deals reach this stage. Why? Arguably, firms are more efficient 
today than in the 1980s when highly diversified firms offered the likes of such corporate 
raiders as Carl Icahn and T. Boone Pickens opportunities to reap huge profits by breaking up 
such firms and selling them in pieces. Furthermore, the proliferation of corporate takeover 
defenses has made hostile takeovers more problematic and expensive. However, the threat 
of an unsolicited offer turning hostile increases the likelihood that target firm’s management 
will ultimately negotiate a settlement. Spurred by a few large transactions, their share of total 
deal value in 2014 did rise to about 8% from less than 3% the prior year. Nonetheless, hostile 
takeovers continue to be relatively rare making headlines often because they are so infrequent 
and therefore newsworthy.
The Bear Hug: Limiting the Target’s Options
A bear hug is an offer to buy the target’s shares at a substantial premium to its current share 
price and often entails mailing a letter containing the proposal to the target’s CEO and board 
without warning and demanding a rapid decision. It usually involves a public announcement 
to put pressure on the board. Directors voting against the proposal may be subject to share­
holder lawsuits alleging they are not working in the best interests of their shareholders. Once 
the bid is made public, the company is likely to attract additional bidders. Institutional inves­
tors42 and arbitrageurs (arbs) add to the pressure by lobbying the board to accept the offer. By 
accumulating target shares, they make purchases of blocks of stock by the bidder easier, for 
they often are quite willing to sell their shares.
Proxy Contests in Support of a Takeover
Activist shareholders often initiate a proxy fight to remove management due to poor per­
formance, to promote the spin-off of a business unit or the outright sale of the firm, or to force 
a cash distribution to shareholders.43 Proxy fights enable such shareholders to replace board 
42Institutional investors include insurance companies, retirement or pension funds, hedge funds, banks, and 
mutual funds and account, on average, for more than two-thirds of the shareholdings of publicly traded firms 
(Bogle, 2007).
43Faleye (2004).

96	
3.  The Corporate Takeover Market
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
members with those more willing to support their positions. Proxy contests are a means of 
gaining control without owning 50.1% of the voting stock, or they can be used to eliminate 
takeover defenses, as a precursor of a tender offer, or to oust recalcitrant target-firm board 
members. In late 2010, Air Products & Chemicals, after being rejected several times by Air­
gas Inc., succeeded in placing three of its own nominees on the Airgas board and, in doing 
so, voted to remove the chairman of Airgas, who had led the resistance to the Air Products’ 
offer. Notably, despite their success in electing their own nominees to the board and remov­
ing the CEO, Air Products still was unable to convince the Airgas board to accept their offer 
and eventually withdrew their bid. In a rare show of shareholder solidarity, activist fund 
Starboard Capital in late 2014 replaced all 12 of Darden Restaurant’s board members with its 
nominees following the Darden board’s failure to spin off certain assets.
Implementing a Proxy Contest
When the bidder is also a shareholder, the proxy process may begin with the bidder’s at­
tempting to call a special shareholders meeting. Alternatively, the bidder may put a proposal 
to replace the board at a regularly scheduled shareholders meeting. Before the meeting, the 
bidder opens an aggressive public relations campaign, with direct solicitations sent to share­
holders and full-page advertisements in the press to convince shareholders to support the 
bidder’s proposals. The target often responds with its own campaign. Once shareholders 
receive the proxies, they may choose to sign and send them directly to a designated collection 
point such as a brokerage house or a bank.
SEC regulations cover proxy solicitations under Section 14(A) of the Securities Exchange 
Act of 1934. All materials distributed to shareholders must be submitted to the SEC for review 
at least 10 days before they are distributed. The party attempting to solicit proxies from the 
target’s shareholders must file a proxy statement and Schedule 14(A) with the SEC and mail it 
to the target’s shareholders. Proxy statements may be obtained from the companies involved 
and on the SEC’s website and they are excellent sources of information about a proposed 
transaction.
The Impact of Proxy Contests on Shareholder Value
Despite a low success rate, proxy fights often result in positive abnormal returns to target 
shareholders regardless of the outcome.44 The reasons include the eventual change in man­
agement at firms embroiled in proxy fights, the tendency for new management to restructure 
the firm, investor expectations of a future change in control, and special cash payouts made 
by firms with excess cash holdings. However, when management wins by a wide margin, 
shareholder value often declines, since little changes in how the firm is managed.45
An SEC rule change in late 2015 may result in shareholder proxy votes involving M&As 
having a greater potential impact on shareholder value. Why? Referred to as unbundling 
under Exchange Act Rule 14a-4(a)(3), the new rule requires a separate shareholder vote for 
each change in governance resulting from the deal. Previously the SEC had taken the posi­
tion that only one vote was required on the merger: the target’s shareholders could simply 
44In studies of proxy battles during the 1980s through the mid-1990s, abnormal returns ranged from 6 to 19%, even 
if the activist shareholders were unsuccessful in the proxy contest (Faleye, 2004; Mulherin and Poulsen, 1998).
45Listokin (2009).

	
Understanding Alternative Takeover Tactics	
97
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
vote to support or reject the merger. Now, the requirement to have a separate vote on gover­
nance matters means that shareholders can support a merger without approving governance 
changes such as takeover defenses (discussed in detail later in this chapter) that may reduce 
shareholder value.
The Hostile Tender Offer
A hostile tender offer circumvents the target’s board and management to reach the target’s 
shareholders directly with an offer to purchase their shares. While boards often discourage 
unwanted bids initially, they are more likely to relent to a hostile tender offer.46 Such offers are 
undertaken for several reasons: (1) as a last resort if the bidder cannot get the target’s board 
and management to relent, (2) to preempt another firm from making a bid for the target, and 
(3) to close a transaction quickly if the bidder believes that time is critical. A common hostile-
takeover strategy involves the bidder’s acquiring a controlling interest in the target and later 
completing the combination through a merger. This strategy is described in detail later in this 
chapter.
Pretender Offer Tactics: Toehold Bidding Strategies
Toehold investments involve a potential bidder taking a less than controlling interest in a 
target firm. Bidders may purchase stock before a formal bid to accumulate shares at a price 
lower than the eventual offer price. Such purchases are secretive to avoid increasing the av­
erage price paid. For public firms, investments exceeding 5% of the target’s shares must be 
made public. Another advantage to the bidder is the potential leverage achieved with the vot­
ing rights associated with the stock it has purchased. The bidder also can sell this stock if the 
takeover attempt is unsuccessful. Once a toehold position has been established, the bidder 
may attempt to call a special stockholders meeting to replace the board of directors or remove 
takeover defenses.47
While rare in friendly takeovers, these actions are commonplace in hostile transactions, 
comprising about one-half of all such takeovers. In friendly deals, bidders are concerned 
about alienating a target firm’s board with such actions; however, in hostile situations, the 
target firm would have rejected the initial bid under any circumstances. The frequency of 
toehold bidding has declined since the early 1990s in line with the widespread adoption 
of takeover defenses such as poison pills and a decline in the frequency of hostile deals.48 
Acquirers with a toehold investment in the target firm prior to a takeover represent about 
5.4% of public firms and 1.4% of private firms. The average toehold investment size is about 
31% of the target’s shares (higher in hostile deals and lower in friendly ones) and about 20% 
for investments made by private equity firms.
46In a study of 1018 tender offers in the United States between 1962 and 2001, Bhagat et al. (2005) found that target 
boards resisted tender offers about one-fifth of the time. In a study of 49 countries, Rossi and Volpin found that 
only about 1% of 45,686 M&A deals between 1990 and 2002 were opposed by target firm boards.
47The conditions under which such a meeting can be called are determined by the firm’s articles of incorporation, 
governed by the laws of the state in which the firm is incorporated. A copy of a firm’s articles of incorporation can 
usually be obtained from the Office of the Secretary of State of the state in which the firm is incorporated.
48Betton et al. (2009).

98	
3.  The Corporate Takeover Market
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
Toehold strategies may also be undertaken when a potential bidder lacks access to enough 
accurate information about a target to determine potential and in turn a realistic offer price for 
the target. The value of a toehold investment is greatest when one potential bidder has access 
to significantly less information than competing bidders more familiar with the target firm. 
For example, about 14% of firms employing a toehold strategy are from another country than 
the target and about 43% operate in an industry different from that of the target. However, 
the incentive for one bidder to make a toehold investment in advance of the bidding process 
is less if other potential bidders are having similar difficulty in obtaining accurate informa­
tion. Furthermore, the value of the toehold investment as a means of gaining information is 
less when the number of potential bidders is large, as some bidders with poor information 
may make excessive offers for the target based on hubris rather than an accurate assessment 
of potential synergy.49
Toehold strategies tend to reduce the likelihood that other firms will bid for the target. 
If a bidding contest does occur, a bidder making a toehold investment is more likely to be 
successful in closing the deal, given the voting rights obtained with its toehold target stock 
purchase.50
Implementing a Tender Offer
Tender offers can be for cash, stock, debt, or some combination. Unlike mergers, tender of­
fers frequently use cash as the form of payment. Securities transactions involve a longer peri­
od to complete because of the need to register with the SEC, to comply with state registration 
requirements, and, if the issue is large, to obtain shareholder approval. If the offer involves a 
share-for-share exchange, it is referred to as an exchange offer. Whether cash or securities, the 
offer made to target shareholders may be extended for a specific period and may be unre­
stricted (any-or-all offer) or restricted to a certain percentage or number of the target’s shares.
Tender offers restricted to purchasing less than 100% of the target’s outstanding shares may 
be oversubscribed. Because the Williams Act of 1968 requires equal treatment of all sharehold­
ers tendering shares, the bidder may either purchase all of the target stock that is tendered 
or purchase only a portion of the tendered stock. For example, if the bidder has extended a 
tender offer for 70% of the target’s outstanding shares and 90% of the target’s stock actually is 
offered, then the bidder may choose to prorate the purchase of stock by buying only 63% (i.e., 
0.7 × 0.9) of the tendered stock by each shareholder. If the bidder chooses to revise the tender 
offer, the waiting period is automatically extended. If another bid is made, the waiting period 
must also be extended another 10 days. Once initiated, tender offers for publicly traded firms 
are usually successful, although the success rate is lower if they are contested.51
Federal securities laws impose reporting, disclosure, and antifraud requirements on ac­
quirers initiating tender offers. Once the tender offer has been made, the acquirer cannot 
purchase any target shares other than the number specified in the offer. Section 14(D) of the 
Williams Act requires that any individual or entity making a tender offer resulting in owning 
49Povel and Sertsios (2014).
50Bessler et al. (2015).
51According to FactSet Mergerstat, the success rate of total attempted tender offers between 1980 and 2000 was 
more than 80%, with the success rate for uncontested offers more than 90% and for contested offers (i.e., by the 
target’s board) slightly more than 50%.

	
Other Tactical Considerations	
99
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
more than 5% of any class of equity must file a Schedule 14(D)-1 and all solicitation materials 
with the SEC.
Multitiered Offers
A bid can be either a one- or two-tiered offer. In a one-tier offer, the acquirer announces the 
same offer to all target shareholders, which provides the potential to purchase control of the 
target quickly and discourage other possible bidders from attempting to disrupt the deal. In a 
two-tiered offer, the acquirer offers to buy a number of shares at one price and more at a lower 
price at a later date. The form of payment in the second tier may be less attractive, consisting 
of securities rather than cash. The intent of the two-tiered approach is to give target share­
holders an incentive to tender their shares early in the process to receive a more attractive 
price. Since those shareholders tendering their shares in the first tier enable the acquirer to 
obtain a controlling interest, their shares are worth more than those who may choose to sell 
in the second tier.
Once the bidding firm accumulates enough shares to gain control of the target (usually 
50.1%), the bidder may initiate a so-called back-end merger by calling a special shareholders 
meeting seeking approval for a merger, in which minority shareholders are required to ac­
cede to the majority vote. Alternatively, the bidder may operate the target firm as a partially 
owned subsidiary, later merging it into a newly created wholly owned subsidiary. Many state 
statutes require equal treatment for all tendering shareholders as part of two-tier offers and 
give target shareholders appraisal rights52 that allow those not tendering shares in the first or 
second tier to ask the state court to determine a “fair value” for the shares.53 State statutes 
may also contain fair-price provisions, in which all target shareholders, including those in the 
second tier, receive the same price and redemption rights, enabling target shareholders in the 
second tier to redeem their shares at a price similar to that paid in the first tier.
There are disadvantages to owning less than 100% of the target’s voting stock. These in­
clude the potential for dissatisfied minority shareholders owning significant blocks of stock 
to disrupt efforts to implement important management decisions and the cost incurred in 
providing financial statements to both majority and minority shareholders.
OTHER TACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS
Successful takeovers depend on the size of the offer price premium, the board’s composi­
tion, and the makeup, sentiment, and investment horizon of the target’s current shareholders. 
Other factors include the provisions of the target’s bylaws and the potential for the target to 
implement additional takeover defenses.
52In 2015, Delaware’s Court of Chancery (the nation’s busiest for M&A lawsuits) had 43 appraisal lawsuits filed 
valued at $2.3 trillion, up from 16 worth $129 billion the prior year. The majority of the plaintiffs settle for a small 
increase in the value of their target shares, a few with large increases, and some are awarded the merger price. 
While appraisal rights can be abused by opportunistic target shareholders in an effort to gain more than fair value 
for their shares, such instances appear to be relatively rare (Kalodimos and Lundberg, 2017).
53The minority shares may be subject to a “minority discount,” since they are worth less to the bidder than those 
acquired in the process of gaining control.

100	
3.  The Corporate Takeover Market
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
The Importance of Premium, Board Composition, and Investor Sentiment
The target’s board will find it more difficult to reject offers exhibiting substantial premiums 
to the target’s current share price. The composition of the target’s board also influences what 
the board does because one dominated by independent directors may be more likely to negoti­
ate the best price for shareholders by soliciting competing bids than to protect itself and current 
management. The final outcome of a hostile takeover also is dependent on the composition 
of the target’s ownership, how shareholders feel about management’s performance, and how 
long they intend to hold the stock. Firms held predominately by short-term investors (i.e., less 
than 4 months) are more likely to receive a bid and exhibit a lower average premium of as 
much as 3% when acquired. Researchers speculate that firms held by short-term investors have 
a weaker bargaining position with the bidder due to the limited loyalty of such shareholders.54
To assess these factors, an acquirer compiles (to the extent possible) lists of stock ownership 
by category: management, officers, employees, and institutions such as pension and mutual 
funds. This information can be used to estimate the target’s float—total outstanding shares less 
shares held by insiders. The larger the share of stock held by insiders such as corporate officers, 
family members, and employees, the smaller the number of shares that are likely to be easily 
purchased by the bidder, since these types of shareholders are less likely to sell their shares.
Finally, an astute bidder will always analyze the target firm’s bylaws for provisions po­
tentially adding to the cost of a takeover.55 Such provisions could include a staggered board, 
the inability to remove directors without cause, or supermajority voting requirements for ap­
proval of mergers. These and other measures are detailed later in this chapter.
Contract Considerations
To heighten the chance of a successful takeover, the bidder will include provisions in a 
letter of intent (LOI) to discourage the target firm from backing out of any preliminary agree­
ments. The LOI is a preliminary agreement between two companies intending to merge stipu­
lating areas of agreement between the parties as well as their rights and limitations. It may 
contain a number of features protecting the buyer; among the most common is the no-shop 
agreement, prohibiting the target from seeking other bids or making public information not 
currently readily available.
Contracts often grant the target and acquirer the right to withdraw from the agreement. This 
usually requires the payment of breakup or termination fees, sums paid to the acquirer or target to 
compensate for their expenses. Expenses could include legal and advisory expenses, manage­
ment time, and the costs associated with opportunities that may have been lost to the bidder 
while involved in trying to close this deal.56 Termination fees are used more frequently on the 
target side than on that of the acquirer because targets have greater incentives to break contracts 
and seek other bidders. Such fees give the target firm some leverage with the bidder. Averaging 
54Gaspara and Massa (2005).
55Unlike charters, which are recorded in the Office of the Secretary of State in the state in which the firm is incor­
porated, corporate bylaws generally are held by the firm along with other corporate records and may be available 
through the firm’s website or by requesting a copy directly from the firm.
56Hotchkiss et al. (2005) found a target termination or breakup fee included in the initial agreement in 55% of all 
deals, while in 21% of the deals both target and acquirer termination fees were included.

	
Developing a Bidding Strategy	
101
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
about 3% of the purchase price and found in about two-thirds of all M&A deals, such fees tend 
to result in an approximately 4% higher premium paid to target firms. The higher premium rep­
resents the amount paid by the bidder for “insurance” that it will be compensated for expenses 
incurred if the transaction is not completed and for motivating the target to complete the deal.57 
Low- or moderate-sized fees do not discourage postannouncement competing bids.58
Breakup fees paid by the bidder to the target firm are called reverse breakup fees, and they 
have become more common in recent years as buyers, finding it difficult to finance transactions, 
have opted to back out of signed agreements. The stock lockup, an option granted to the bidder 
to buy the target firm’s stock at the first bidder’s initial offer, is another form of protection for 
the bidder. It is triggered whenever the target firm accepts a competing bid. Because the target 
may choose to sell to a higher bidder, the stock lockup arrangement usually ensures that the 
initial bidder will make a profit on its purchase of the target’s stock. The initial bidder also may 
require that the seller agrees to a crown jewel lockup, in which the initial bidder has an option to 
buy important strategic assets of the seller, if the seller chooses to sell to another party.
DEVELOPING A BIDDING STRATEGY
The tactics used in a bidding strategy represent a series of decision points, with objectives 
and options well understood before a takeover is initiated. A poorly thought-out strategy can 
result in unsuccessful bidding for the target firm, which can be costly to CEOs, who may lose 
their jobs.59 CEOs who demonstrate restraint by being unwilling to increase an offer price 
or withdraw an offer when the bidding becomes too expensive are less likely to be replaced 
than those who are less disciplined bidders.60 Common bidding-strategy objectives include 
winning control of the target, minimizing the control premium, minimizing transaction costs, 
and facilitating postacquisition integration.
If minimizing the purchase price and transaction costs while maximizing cooperation be­
tween the two parties is critical, the bidder may choose the “friendly” approach. This minimizes 
the loss of key personnel, customers, and suppliers while control is changing hands. Friendly 
takeovers avoid an auction environment, which may raise the target’s purchase price. More­
over, amicable deals facilitate premerger integration planning and increase the likelihood that 
the combined firms will be integrated quickly. If the target is unwilling to reach a negotiated 
settlement, the acquirer is faced with the choice of abandoning the effort or resorting to more 
aggressive tactics. Such tactics are likely to be less effective because of the extra time they give 
the target’s management to put additional takeover defenses in place. In reality, the risk of loss 
of surprise may not be very great because of the prenotification requirements of current US law.
Reading Fig.  3.2 from left to right, we see that the bidder initiates contact informally 
through an intermediary (sometimes called a casual pass) or through a more formal inquiry. 
If rejected, the bidder’s options are either to walk away or to become more aggressive. In 
57Officer (2003).
58Jeon and Ligonb (2011).
59In a sample of 714 acquisitions between 1990 and 1998, Lehn and Zhao (2006) found that 47% of acquiring firm 
CEOs were replaced within 5 years. Moreover, top executives are more likely to be replaced at firms that have 
made poor acquisitions some time during the previous 5 years.
60Jacobsen (2014).

102	
3.  The Corporate Takeover Market
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
the latter case, the bidder may undertake a simple bear hug, hoping that pressure from large 
institutional shareholders and arbs will nudge the target toward a negotiated settlement. If 
that fails, the bidder may accumulate enough shares in the open market from institutional 
investors to call a special shareholders meeting or initiate a proxy battle to install new board 
members receptive to a takeover or to dismember the target’s defenses. While generally less 
expensive than tender offers (which include a premium to the target’s current share price), 
proxy campaigns are expensive, with an average cost of $6 million, not including possible 
litigation costs.61 If the target’s defenses are weak, the bidder may forego a proxy contest and 
initiate a tender offer for the target’s stock. If the target’s defenses appear formidable, the bid­
der may implement a proxy contest and a tender offer concurrently; however, the exorbitant 
cost makes this option uncommon.
Litigation often is used to pressure the target’s board to relent to the bidder’s proposal or re­
move defenses and is most effective if the firm’s defenses appear to be especially onerous. The 
bidder may initiate litigation that accuses the target’s board of not giving the bidder’s offer suf­
ficient review, or the bidder may argue that the target’s defenses are not in the best interests of 
the target’s shareholders. Table 3.2 summarizes common bidder objectives and the advantages 
and disadvantages of the various tactics that may be employed to achieve these objectives.
61Gantchev (2013).
FIGURE 3.2  Alternative takeover tactics to negotiated settlement tender offer.

	
Activist Investors: Gaining Influence Without Control	
103
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
ACTIVIST INVESTORS: GAINING INFLUENCE WITHOUT CONTROL
The objective of hostile takeovers is for the acquirer to achieve control. However, the cost 
and complexity of implementing such deals has resulted in hostile tender offers declining in 
popularity. Those seeking to change corporate behavior are increasingly doing so by exer­
cising their rights as corporate shareholders. An increasingly important threat to corporate 
boards and management is the activist investor. Companies often view such investors the 
way they did hostile takeovers in the 1980s, with trepidation.
Unlike hostile takeovers, the activist investor has no interest in gaining control of the firm. 
Rather, their objective is to purchase enough of its outstanding equity to gain the attention 
of other investors by making their claims well known, often in what turns out to be a public 
TABLE 3.2  Advantages and Disadvantages of Alternative Takeover Tactics
Common bidder strategy objectives
•	Gain control of target firm
•	Minimize the size of the control premium
•	Minimize transactions costs
•	Facilitate postacquisition integration
Tactics
Advantages
Disadvantages
Casual Pass (i.e., informal 
inquiry)
•	May learn target is receptive to 
deal
•	Gives advance warning
Bear Hug Offer (i.e., letter 
to target board forcefully 
proposing takeover)
•	Raises pressure on target to 
negotiate a deal
•	Gives advance warning
Open Market Purchases (i.e., 
acquirer buys target shares on 
public market)
•	May lower cost of transaction
•	Creates profit if target agrees 
to buy back bidder’s toehold 
position
•	May discourage other bidders
•	Can result in a less than controlling 
interest
•	Limits on amount one can purchase 
without disclosure
•	Some shareholders could hold out 
for higher price
•	Could suffer losses if takeover 
attempt fails
•	Could alienate target management and 
make a friendly takeover more difficult
Proxy Contest (i.e., effort to 
obtain target shareholder 
support to change target board)
•	Less expensive than tender offer
•	May obviate need for tender 
offer
•	Relatively low probability of success 
if target stock widely held
•	Adds to transactions costs
Hostile Tender Offer 
(i.e., direct offer to target 
shareholders to buy shares not 
supported by target’s board or 
management)
•	Pressures target shareholders to 
sell stock
•	Bidder not bound to purchase 
tendered shares unless desired 
number of shares tendered
•	Tends to be most expensive tactic
•	Disrupts postmerger integration 
due to potential loss of key target 
managers, customers, and suppliers
Litigation (i.e., lawsuits 
accusing target board of 
improper conduct)
•	Puts pressure on target board
•	Expense

104	
3.  The Corporate Takeover Market
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
spectacle. Once this has been achieved, the investor will promote a particular agenda de­
signed to change a firm’s behavior, which if successful they hope will increase the firm’s 
market value.
Companies continually monitor their share price for signs of an activist, are prone to hire 
advisers when an activist investor appears, and are more willing to make important conces­
sions early to head off an all-out public battle for control. They have become more proac­
tive by determining where they might be vulnerable and how they might minimize their 
exposure. For example, firms may choose to spin off or divest underperforming businesses 
or to increase dividend payments to reduce excess cash on the balance sheet or to borrow to 
undertake share buybacks. Company management is now more inclined to talk to activists in 
an effort to keep the discussions out of the media so as not to impact the firm’s reputation or 
share price. The intent is to keep the discussions civil and constructive.
Activist investors who succeed in achieving their objectives commonly do so by gaining 
a seat(s) on the board of the target company.62 Board representation gives such investors ac­
cess to proprietary information and an opportunity to express disparate opinions at board 
meetings. Allowing such representation is a compromise position enabling the target to avoid 
highly public and potentially rancorous proxy fights with the activist investor. The agreement 
in late 2014 between legendary activist investor Karl Icahn and rental car company Hertz 
Global holdings illustrates how boards are increasingly reaching negotiated settlements 
with activist investors. After publicly expressing his lack of confidence in the firm’s board 
and management, Mr. Icahn was able to place three of his representatives on the board who 
would take over from three existing directors who were scheduled to retire. Hertz also agreed 
to raise the threshold that would trigger its shareholder rights plan intended to raise the cost 
of an unwanted takeover to 20 from 10%. This enables activist investors to increase their stake 
in the firm without fear of triggering the poison pill. Poison pills are described in more detail 
later in this chapter.
Unlike their predecessors, active investors in recent years are less interested in short-term 
gains and more interested in agitating for a specific long-term change: a change in business 
strategy, an increase in dividends, or a change in the composition of the firm’s board. While 
some efforts are successful, others go horribly wrong. In 2013, TPG-Axon was able to push 
out Sand Ridge Energy CEO, Tom Ward. In contrast, William Ackman lost hundreds of mil­
lions of his investors’ dollars in attempting to remove Target Corporation’s CEO. He ended 
up selling his stake at a loss of almost $500 million.
Critics argue that activist investors seek to limit shareholder rights by noting their poten­
tial adverse impact on firm value when they force a board and management to focus on short-
term decisions, often at the expense of long-term performance. For example, forcing a board 
to pay dividends to reduce cash on the balance sheet or to borrow to repurchase shares may 
limit the firm’s ability to pursue future high-growth opportunities.
The empirical evidence does not seem to support these claims. In a study of more than 
2000 activist investments in firms between 1994 and 1997, researchers found that, on average, 
firms’ operating performance measured by return on assets improved relative to that of their 
industry peers during the 5 years following the activist’s investment.63
63Bebchuk et al. (2013).
62Benoit and Monga (2015).

	
Understanding Alternative Takeover Defenses	
105
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
UNDERSTANDING ALTERNATIVE TAKEOVER DEFENSES
Takeover defenses are designed to slow down an unwanted offer or to force a suitor to 
raise the bid to get the target’s board to rescind the defense. They can be grouped into two 
categories: those put in place before receiving an offer (preoffer) and those implemented after 
receipt of an offer (postoffer). Table 3.3 shows the most commonly used preoffer and postoffer 
defenses.
Preoffer Defenses
Preoffer defenses are used to delay a change in control, giving the target firm time to erect 
additional defenses after the unsolicited offer has been received. Such defenses generally fall 
TABLE 3.3  Alternative Preoffer and Postoffer Takeover Defenses
Preoffer defenses
Postoffer defenses
Poison Pillsa:
Greenmail (bidder’s investment purchased at a 
premium to what bidder paid as inducement to 
refrain from any further activity)
Flip-over rights plans
Flip-in rights plans
Blank check preferred stock plans
Shark Repellents (Implemented by Changing 
Bylaws or Charter):
Standstill Agreements (often used in conjunction 
with an agreement to buy bidder’s investment)
Strengthening the board’s defenses
Staggered or classified board elections
“For cause” provisions
Limiting shareholder actions with respect to:
Calling special meetings
Consent solicitations
Advance notice provisions
Supermajority rules
Other shark repellents
Antigreenmail provisions
Fair-price provisions
Dual class recapitalization
Reincorporation
Golden Parachutes (Change of Control payments)
White knights
Employee stock ownership plans
Leveraged recapitalization
Share repurchase or buyback plans
Corporate restructuring
Litigation
aWhile many different types of poison pills are used, only the most common forms are discussed in this text. Note also that the distinction 
between preoffer and postoffer defenses is becoming murky as increasingly poison pill plans are put in place immediately following the 
announcement of a bid. Pills can be adopted without a shareholder vote because they are issued as a dividend and the board has the exclusive 
authority to issue dividends.

106	
3.  The Corporate Takeover Market
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
into three categories: poison pills,64 shark repellents, and golden parachutes. Table 3.4 sum­
marizes the advantages and disadvantages of preoffer defenses.
Poison Pills
A poison pill involves a board issuing rights to current shareholders, with the exception of 
an unwanted investor, to buy the firm’s shares at an exercise price well below their current 
market value. Because they are issued as a dividend and the board usually has the exclusive 
authority to declare dividends, a pill can be adopted without a shareholder vote and imple­
mented either before or after a hostile bid. If a specified percentage (usually 10%–20%) of 
the target’s common stock is acquired by a hostile investor, each right entitles the holder to 
purchase common stock or some fraction of participating preferred stock65 of the target firm 
(a flip-in pill). If a merger, consolidation, sale of at least some percentage (usually 50%) of the 
target’s assets, or announced tender offer occurs, the rights holder may purchase acquirer 
common shares (a flip-over pill). Both the flip-in and flip-over pills entitle their holders on 
paying the exercise price to buy shares having a market value on the date the pill is triggered 
equal to some multiple (often two times) of the right’s exercise price.66 Rights are redeemable 
at any time by the board, usually at $.01 per right, expire after some period (sometimes up to 
10 years), and trade on public exchanges.
The flip-in pill discourages hostile investors from buying a minority stake in the firm be­
cause it dilutes their ownership interest in the firm as more target shares are issued. For ex­
ample, if the hostile investor buys a 20% interest in the firm and the number of target shares 
doubles, the investor’s ownership stake is reduced to 10%. Furthermore, the value of the 
investor’s investment also decreases as other shareholders buy more shares at a deeply dis­
counted price. Efforts by the hostile investor to sell shares at what he or she paid are thwarted 
by the willingness of other shareholders, having acquired shares at a much lower price, to 
sell below the price paid by the hostile investor. Finally, the total cost of completing the take­
over increases as the number of shares that must be acquired in a cash offer or the number of 
acquirer shares issued in a share exchange increases, diluting current acquirer shareholders. 
Similarly, the flip-over poison pill dilutes the acquirer’s current shareholders and depresses 
the value of their investment as more acquirer shares are issued at below their current market 
value.
Netflix adopted a poison pill, having both flip-in and flip-over rights, on November 2, 
2012, in response to a 9.98% investment stake in the firm by investor Carl Icahn. Each share­
holder, except Icahn, received a right for each common share held as of November 12, 2012, 
to buy one one-thousandth of a new preferred share at an exercise price of $350 per right if an 
investor acquires more than 10% of the firm without board approval. If triggered, each flip-in 
right entitled its holder to purchase by paying the right’s exercise price a number of shares of 
Netflix common stock having a market value of twice the exercise price (i.e., $700). At the time 
65The fraction of a preferred share is intended to give the shareholder about the same dividend, voting, and liquida­
tion rights as would one common share and should approximate the value of one common share.
66The exercise price is determined by estimating the long-term trading value of the company’s common shares 
during the life of the plan. The greater the exercise price relative to the market value of the firm’s share price, the 
greater the number of new shares a rights holder can buy once he or she pays the exercise price.
64Poison pills could be viewed as postoffer defenses, since they can be implemented after an offer has been made.

	
Understanding Alternative Takeover Defenses	
107
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
TABLE 3.4  Advantages and Disadvantages of Preoffer Takeover Defenses
Type of defense
Advantages for target firm
Disadvantages for target firm
POISON PILLS: RAISING THE COST OF ACQUISITIONS
Flip-Over Pills (rights to buy 
stock in the acquirer, activated 
with 100% change in ownership)
Dilutes ownership position of 
current acquirer shareholders
Rights redeemable by buying 
them back from shareholders at 
nominal price
Ineffective in preventing acquisition 
of less than 100% of target (bidders 
could buy controlling interest only 
and buy remainder after rights expire)
Subject to hostile tender contingent 
on target board’s redemption of pill
Makes issuer less attractive to white 
knights
Flip-In Pills (rights to buy target 
stock, activated when acquirer 
purchases less than 100% change 
in ownership)
Dilutes target stock regardless of 
amount purchased by potential 
acquirer
Not given to investor who 
activated the rights
Rights redeemable at any point 
prior to triggering event
Not permissible in some states due 
to discriminatory nature
No poison pill provides any 
protection against proxy contests
SHARK REPELLENTS: STRENGTHENING THE BOARD’S DEFENSES
Staggered or Boards
Delays assumption of control by a 
majority shareholder
May be circumvented by increasing 
size of board, unless prevented by 
charter or bylaws
Limitations on When Directors 
Can Be Removed
“For cause” provisions narrow 
range of reasons for removal
Can be circumvented unless 
supported by a supermajority 
requirement for repeal
SHARK REPELLENTS: LIMITING SHAREHOLDER ACTIONS
Limitations on Calling Special 
Meetings
Limits ability to use special 
meetings to add board seats, 
remove or elect new members
States may require a special 
meeting if a certain percentage of 
shareholders requests a meeting
Limiting Consent Solicitations
Limits ability of dissatisfied 
shareholders to expedite a proxy 
contest process
May be subject to court challenge
Advance Notice Provisions
Gives board time to select its own 
slate of candidates and to decide 
an appropriate response
May be subject to court challenge
Supermajority Provisions
May be applied selectively to 
events such as hostile takeovers
Can be circumvented unless a 
supermajority of shareholders is 
required to change provision
OTHER SHARK REPELLENTS
Antigreenmail Provision
Eliminates profit opportunity for 
raiders
Eliminates greenmail as a takeover 
defense
Fair-Price Provisions
Increases the cost of a two-tiered 
tender offer
Raises the cost to a White knight, 
unless waived by typically 95% of 
shareholders
(Continued)

108	
3.  The Corporate Takeover Market
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
of the issue, Netflix common stock traded at $76 per share. Each right would be convertible 
into 9.2 common shares [i.e., (2 × $350)/$76] if the pill was triggered. If the firm was merged 
into another firm or it was to sell more than 50% of its assets, each flip-over right would en­
title the holder to buy a number of common shares of the acquirer at the then-market value at 
twice the exercise price following payment of the $350 exercise price.
Poison pill proponents argue that it prevents a raider from acquiring a substantial por­
tion of the firm’s stock without board permission. Since the board generally has the power 
to rescind the pill, bidders are compelled to negotiate with the target’s board, which could 
result in a higher offer price. Pill defenses may be most effective when used with staggered 
board defenses, because a raider would be unable to remove the pill without winning two 
successive elections. This increases the likelihood of the target’s remaining independent.67 
Detractors argue that pill defenses simply entrench management and encourage disaffected 
shareholders to litigate.
Recent legal precedents further strengthen a target’s takeover defenses. The unsolicited of­
fer by Air Products for Airgas on February 2, 2010, has been one of the longest running hostile 
bids in US history. After having revised up its offer twice, Air Products sought to bring this 
process to a close when it asked the Delaware Chancery Court to invalidate Airgas’s poison 
pill. On February 15, 2011, the court ruled that the board has the right to prevent shareholders 
from voting on the takeover offer as long as it is acting in good faith. In the wake of the court’s 
ruling, Air Products withdrew its bid.
The outcome of the court’s ruling has implications for future hostile takeovers. The ruling 
upholds Delaware’s long tradition of respecting managerial discretion as long as the board is 
found to be acting in good faith and abiding by its fiduciary responsibilities to the firm’s share­
holders. The ruling allows target firm boards to use a poison pill as long as the board deems 
justified, and it is far reaching because Delaware law governs most US publicly traded firms.
67Bebchuk et al. (2002).
Type of defense
Advantages for target firm
Disadvantages for target firm
Dual Class Recapitalization/
Supervoting Stock
Concentrates control by giving 
“friendly” shareholders more 
voting power than others
Difficult to implement because 
requires shareholder approval and 
only useful when voting power 
can be given to promanagement 
shareholders
Reincorporation
Takes advantage of most favorable 
state antitakeover statutes
Requires shareholder approval; 
time consuming to implement 
unless subsidiary established before 
takeover solicitation
Golden Parachutes
Emboldens target management to 
negotiate for a higher premium 
and raises the cost of a takeover to 
the hostile bidder
Negative public perception; makes 
termination of top management 
expensive; cost not tax deductible; 
subject to nonbinding shareholder 
vote
TABLE 3.4  Advantages and Disadvantages of Preoffer Takeover Defenses (cont.)

	
Understanding Alternative Takeover Defenses	
109
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
In mid-2014, the Delaware state court blocked efforts by hedge fund mogul Daniel Loeb 
to overturn a crucial corporate defense at legendary auction house, Sothebys. Loeb had ar­
gued that the Sotheby’s poison pill plan unfairly discriminated against his firm and inhibited 
his ability to wage his proxy campaign. The pill specifically limited him to no more than 
10% of Sotheby’s shares while letting passive (long-term) investors hold as much as 20% of 
Sotheby’s shares without triggering the pill. The ruling justifies the use of such defenses to 
limit the ownership stake in the company of a specific investor. Sotheby had argued, and the 
court concurred, that it had adopted the two-tiered poison pill to protect shareholders from 
coercive takeover tactics. In legitimizing the two-tiered pill, the courts may have limited the 
future effectiveness of activist investors in some situations.
Shark Repellents
Shark repellents are takeover defenses achieved by amending either a corporate charter or the 
corporation bylaws.68 They predate poison pills as a defense, and their success in slowing down 
takeovers and making them more expensive has been mixed. Today, shark repellents have 
largely become supplements to poison pill defenses. Their primary role is to make it more 
difficult to gain control of the board through a proxy fight at an annual or special meeting. 
In practice, shark repellents necessitate a shareholder vote because they require amendments 
to the firm’s charter. Although there are many variations of shark repellents, the most typical 
are staggered board elections, restrictions on shareholder actions, antigreenmail provisions, 
differential voting rights (DVR) shares, and debt-based defenses.
Strengthening the Board’s Defenses
Corporate directors are elected at annual shareholder meetings by a vote of the holders of 
a majority of shares who are present and entitled to vote. The mechanism for electing direc­
tors differs among corporations, with voting shares being cast either through a straight vote 
or cumulatively. With straight voting, shareholders may cast all their votes for each member 
of the board of directors, thereby virtually ensuring that the majority shareholder(s) will 
elect all of the directors. For example, assume that a corporation has 4 directors up for elec­
tion and has 2 shareholders, 1 owning 80 shares (i.e., the majority shareholder) and 1 own­
ing 20 shares (i.e., the minority shareholder). With each share having one vote, the majority 
shareholder will always elect the director for whom he or she casts his or her votes. In cumu­
lative voting systems, the number of votes each shareholder has equals the number of shares 
owned times the number of directors to be elected. The shareholder may cast all of these 
votes for a single candidate or for any two or more candidates. With cumulative voting, all 
directors are elected at the same time. Using the same example, the majority shareholder 
will have 320 votes (80 × 4), and the minority shareholder will have 80 votes (20 × 4). If the 
minority shareholder casts all of his or her votes for himself or herself, he or she is assured 
68The charter gives the corporation its legal existence and consists of the articles of incorporation, a document filed 
with a state government by the founders of a corporation, and a certificate of incorporation, a document received 
from the state once the articles have been approved. The corporation’s powers thus derive from the laws of the 
state and from the provisions of the charter. Rules governing the internal management of the corporation are de­
scribed in the corporation’s bylaws, which are determined by the corporation’s founders.

110	
3.  The Corporate Takeover Market
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
of a seat, since the majority shareholder cannot outvote the minority shareholder for all four 
board seats.69
In states where cumulative voting is mandatory, companies sometimes distribute the elec­
tion of directors over a number of years to make it harder for a dissatisfied minority share­
holder to gain control of the board. This makes it more difficult for the minority shareholder 
to elect a director when there is cumulative voting because there are fewer directors to be 
elected at one time. This so-called staggered or classified board election involves dividing the 
firm’s directors into a number of different classes. Only one class is up for reelection each 
year. A 12-member board may have directors divided into 4 classes, with each director elected 
for a 4-year period. In the first year, the three directors in what might be called “Class 1” are 
up for election; in the second year, “Class 2” directors are up for election; and so on. This 
means that a shareholder, even one who holds the majority of the stock, would have to wait 
for three election cycles to gain control of the board. Moreover, the size of the board is limited 
by the firm’s bylaws to preclude the dissatisfied shareholder from adding board seats to take 
control of the board.
For cause provisions specify the conditions (e.g., fraud, noncompliance with prevailing regu­
lations) for removing a member of the board of directors. This narrows the range of permis­
sible reasons and limits the flexibility of dissident shareholders in contesting board seats.
Limiting Shareholder Actions
The board can also reinforce its control by restricting shareholders’ ability to gain control of 
the firm by bypassing the board. Limits can be set on their ability to call special meetings, en­
gage in consent solicitations, and use supermajority rules (explained later). Firms frequently 
rely on the conditions under which directors can be removed (i.e., the “for cause” provision 
discussed earlier) and a limitation on the number of board seats as defined in the firm’s by­
laws or charter.
Limiting the circumstances under which shareholders can call special meetings effectively 
limits their opportunity to introduce a new slate of directors or to push for a rescission of 
certain defenses such as a poison pill. A firm’s bylaws often require that a new slate of direc­
tors can be nominated only at its annual meeting and restrict the ability of shareholders to 
call special meetings. This forces shareholders wishing to replace directors who are up for 
reelection only one opportunity to do so at the annual meeting. In 2016, newspaper publisher 
Gannett’s failure to meet a deadline for nominating directors at rival Tribune’s annual meet­
ing meant it could not pressure the current board into accepting the firm’s hostile offer for 
Tribune. Why? It would be unable to mount a proxy battle to replace the Tribune’s board until 
the firm’s 2017 annual meeting. Gannett was reduced to conducting an advertising campaign 
asking Tribune shareholders to withhold their votes for directors up for reelection.
In some states, shareholders may take action—without a special shareholders meeting—
to add to the number of seats on the board, remove specific board members, or elect new 
69While there are many possible combinations, if the majority shareholder was to cast 81 votes for each of 3 seats, he 
or she would have only 77 votes remaining (i.e., 320 ( 243) for the last seat. As the number of directors increases, it 
becomes easier for the minority shareholder to win a seat (or seats), since the majority shareholder’s votes must be 
spread over more directors to block the minority shareholder.

	
Understanding Alternative Takeover Defenses	
111
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
members. These states allow dissatisfied shareholders to obtain support for their proposals 
simply by obtaining the written consent of shareholders under what is known as consent 
solicitation, a process that still must abide by the disclosure requirements applicable to proxy 
contests. Shareholders may vote simply by responding to a mailing thereby circumventing 
the delays inherent in setting up a meeting to conduct a shareholder vote.70 Corporate bylaws 
may include advance notice provisions requiring shareholder proposals and board nominations 
to be announced well in advance, sometimes as long as 2 months, of an actual vote, to buy 
time for management. Supermajority rules require a higher level of approval than is standard 
to amend the charter for transactions such as a merger or acquisition. Such rules are triggered 
when an “interested party” acquires a specific percentage of the ownership shares (e.g., 5%–
10%). Supermajority rules may require that as much as 80% of the shareholders must approve 
a proposed merger or a simple majority of all shareholders except the potential acquirer.
Other Shark Repellents
Other shark repellent defenses include antigreenmail provisions, fair-price provisions, 
DVR shares, reincorporation, and golden parachutes. These are discussed next.
Antigreenmail Provisions
During the 1980s, bidders profited by taking an equity position in a firm, threatening take­
over, and subsequently selling their shares back to the firm at a premium over what they 
paid for them. The practice was dubbed “greenmail.” Many firms have since adopted charter 
amendments, called antigreenmail provisions, restricting the firm’s ability to repurchase shares 
at a premium.
Fair-Price Provisions
Requirements that any acquirer pay minority shareholders at least a fair market price for 
their stock are called fair-price provisions. The fair market price may be expressed as some his­
torical multiple of the company’s earnings or as a specific price equal to the maximum price 
paid when the buyer acquired shares in the company.71
Dual Class Recapitalization
A firm may create more than one class of stock to separate the performance of individual 
operating subsidiaries, compensate subsidiary operating management, maintain control, or 
prevent hostile takeovers. The process of creating another class of stock is called a dual class 
recapitalization and involves separating shareholder voting rights from cash flow rights. Vot­
ing rights indicate the degree of influence or control shareholders have over how a firm is 
managed, while cash flow rights are rights to receive dividends. Shares with different voting 
rights, DVR shares, may have multiple voting rights (so-called supervoting shares), fractional 
70Whereas the winning vote in a proxy fight is determined as a percentage of the number of votes actually cast, the 
winning vote in a consent solicitation is determined as a percentage of the number of shares outstanding. A dissat­
isfied shareholder may find it easier to win a proxy contest because many shareholders simply do not vote.
71In two-tiered tender offers, the fair-price provision forces the bidder to pay target shareholders who tender their 
stock in the second tier the same terms offered to those tendering their stock in the first tier.

112	
3.  The Corporate Takeover Market
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
voting rights, or no voting rights. DVR shares may have 10–100 times the voting rights of 
another class of stock or a fraction of a voting right per share (e.g., a shareholder might be 
required to hold 100 DVR shares to cast 1 vote). Shares without voting rights but having cash 
flow rights may pay a dividend higher than those with voting rights. Once approved by 
shareholders, the new class of stock is issued as a pro rata stock dividend or an exchange offer 
in which the new class of stock is offered for one currently outstanding.
Dual class structures tend to concentrate voting power as supervoting shares are issued 
as a pro rata dividend; later, shareholders are given the option of exchanging their supervot­
ing shares for shares offering higher dividends, with managers retaining their supervoting 
shares. In dual class structures, the largest shareholder owns, on average, about 23% of the 
firm’s equity and about 58% of the voting rights.72 How this increased concentration of voting 
rights impacts the value of the firm is unclear. Some studies find that firm value is reduced as 
controlling shareholders erect excessive takeover defenses, create agency conflicts, and avoid 
higher-risk, value-enhancing investments.73 Other studies document an increase in firm value 
when the firm moves from a single to a dual class capital structure as controlling sharehold­
ers have more time to focus on longer-term strategies, are subject to less short-term pressure, 
and are more inclined to pursue higher-risk growth opportunities.74 The various arguments 
supporting these different conclusions are discussed in more detail in the subsequent text.
Supervoting shares enable controlling shareholders to diversify their net worth by selling 
a portion of their equity in the firm without losing control. As such, insiders may be more in­
clined to pursue higher-risk, higher-return investments to improve corporate performance.75 
Dual class IPOs may be particularly appropriate for firms in which the founding family or 
founding entrepreneur(s) are widely viewed as critical to the firm’s long-term performance.76 
Examples include Mark Zuckerberg of Facebook and Larry Page and Sergey Brin of Google. 
Facebook in 2013 and Google in 2014 each issued a new class of nonvoting shares to be used 
for equity-based employee compensation and for financing new acquisitions out of concern 
about diluting the founders’ future voting power. In mid-2016, Facebook issued as a dividend 
2 shares of new supervoting (Class “C”) shares to current holders of Class “A” nonvoting 
shares and Class “B” supervoting shares (10 votes each). This enabled Zuckerberg to sell non­
voting shares to finance philanthropic projects without surrendering control over the firm.
Dual class structures can create agency costs when the controlling shareholders receive ben­
efits not available to noncontrolling shareholders. Such benefits could include the sale of the 
firm’s assets to others with whom the controlling shareholders have a business relationship 
at a discount from their fair market value. Other benefits accruing to controlling shareholders 
include the sale of the firm’s products at a discount to businesses owned by the controlling 
shareholders or requiring the firm to pay higher than market prices to suppliers with whom 
the controlling shareholders have business ties. Ideally, responsible boards would intervene 
to prevent insiders from disadvantaging other shareholders in such situations. However, 
there is evidence that when control tends to be disproportionately concentrated, insiders tend 
72Baulkaran (2014).
73Gompers et al. (2010).
74Jordan et al. (2016).
75Baugess et al. (2012) and Ferreira et al. (2010a, 2010b).
76Chemmanur et al. (2014).

	
Understanding Alternative Takeover Defenses	
113
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
to put in place weaker boards allowing the insiders to entrench themselves despite their re­
ceiving benefits at the expense of other shareholders.77
When agency problems arise at dual class structure firms, the remedy is to “unify” or 
convert the structure to “one share, one vote.” The elimination of the dual class structure di­
lutes the voting power of controlling shareholders (whose high vote shares lose their multiple 
voting rights) making the firm vulnerable to shareholders seeking a change in the control of 
the firm through proxy contests. In these instances, the firm’s market value often increases 
following the elimination of the dual class structure.78
The major US public stock exchanges allow firms to list on the exchanges with dual class 
shares and set no restrictions on voting rights of new public stock issues. However, firms may 
not take steps to reduce the voting rights of existing shareholders in any way.79
Reincorporation
A potential target may change the state or country within which it is incorporated to one 
where the laws are more favorable for implementing takeover defenses by creating a subsid­
iary in the new state and later merging with the parent. Several factors need to be considered 
in selecting a location for incorporation, such as how the courts have ruled in lawsuits al­
leging breach of corporate director fiduciary responsibility in takeovers as well as the laws 
pertaining to certain takeover tactics and defenses. Reincorporation requires shareholder ap­
proval.
Golden Parachutes (Change-of-Control Payouts)
Employee severance packages, triggered whenever a change in control takes place, are 
called golden parachutes. These arrangements typically cover only a few dozen employees, 
who are terminated following the change in control. They are designed to raise the bidder’s 
cost of the acquisition rather than to gain time for the target board. Such severance packages 
also may serve the interests of shareholders by making senior management more willing to 
accept an acquisition.80 There is evidence that golden parachutes benefit target sharehold­
ers by increasing the likelihood deals will be completed, but often at a lower purchase price 
premium.81
Golden parachutes are often associated with a reduction in firm value around their adop­
tion date, although the incentives they create for CEOs can produce ambiguous results: they 
may increase the likelihood of a takeover but destroy firm value by encouraging CEOs to 
accept deals not in the best interests of the firm’s shareholders. For example, the target’s CEO 
may accept overvalued acquirer shares to close the deal and trigger payout of the golden 
parachute even though they realize that such shares are likely to decline in value.82
Actual payouts to management, such as accelerated equity awards, pensions, and other 
deferred compensation following a change in control, may significantly exceed the value of 
78Lauterbach and Pajuste (2015).
79Howell (2014).
80Fich et al. (2016).
81Fich et al. (2013).
82Bebchuk et al. (2014).
77Baran and Forst (2015).

114	
3.  The Corporate Takeover Market
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
the so-called golden parachutes. Tax considerations and recent legislation affect corporate 
decisions to implement such compensation packages.83
Postoffer Defenses
Once an unwanted suitor has approached a firm, a variety of additional defenses can be 
introduced. These include greenmail to dissuade the bidder from continuing the pursuit; de­
fenses designed to make the target less attractive, such as restructuring and recapitalization 
strategies; and efforts to place an increasing share of the company’s ownership in friendly 
hands by establishing employee stock ownership plans (ESOPs) or seeking white knights. 
Table 3.5 summarizes the advantages and disadvantages of these postoffer defenses.
83The 1986 Tax Act imposed penalties on these types of plans if they create payments that exceed three times the 
employee’s average pay over the previous 5 years and treats them as income and thus not tax-deductible by the 
paying corporation. More recently, the Dodd–Frank bill of 2010 gives shareholders the opportunity to express their 
disapproval of golden parachutes through a nonbinding vote.
TABLE 3.5  Advantages and Disadvantages of Postoffer Takeover Defenses
Type of defense
Advantages for target firm
Disadvantages for target firm
Greenmail
Encourages raider to go away (usually 
accompanied by a standstill agreement)
Reduces risk to raider of losing money on a 
takeover attempt; unfairly discriminates against 
nonparticipating shareholders; generates 
litigation; triggers unfavorable tax issues and 
bad publicity
Standstill 
agreement
Prevents raider from returning for a 
specific time period
Increases amount of greenmail paid to get raider to 
sign standstill; provides only temporary reprieve
White knights
May be a preferable to the hostile bidder
Involves loss of target’s independence
ESOPs
Alternative to white knight and highly 
effective if used in conjunction with certain 
states’ antitakeover laws
Employee support not guaranteed; ESOP cannot 
overpay for stock because transaction could be 
disallowed by federal law
Recapitalizations
Makes target less attractive to bidder and 
may increase target shareholder value 
if incumbent management motivated to 
improve performance
Increased leverage reduces target’s borrowing 
capacity
Share buyback 
plans
Reduces number of target shares available 
for purchase by bidder, arbs, and others 
who may sell to bidder
Cannot self-tender without SEC filing once 
hostile tender under way; reduction in the shares 
outstanding may facilitate bidder’s gaining control
Corporate 
restructuring
Going private may be an attractive 
alternative to bidder’s offer for target 
shareholders and for incumbent 
management
Going private, sale of attractive assets, making 
defensive acquisitions, or liquidation may 
reduce target’s shareholder value versus 
bidder’s offer
Litigation
May buy time for target to build defenses 
and increases takeover cost to the bidder
May have negative impact on target shareholder 
returns
arb, Arbitrageur; ESOP, employee stock ownership plan; SEC, Securities and Exchange Commission.

	
Understanding Alternative Takeover Defenses	
115
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
Greenmail
Greenmail (introduced earlier) is the practice of paying a potential acquirer to leave you 
alone. It consists of a payment to buy back shares at a premium price in exchange for the 
acquirer’s agreement not to initiate a hostile takeover. In exchange for the payment, the po­
tential acquirer is required to sign a standstill agreement, which specifies the amount of stock, if 
any, the investor can own and the circumstances under which the raider can sell such stock.84
White Knights and White Squires
A target may seek a white knight: another firm that is considered a more appropriate suitor. 
The white knight must be willing to acquire the target on terms more favorable than those of 
other bidders. Fearing a bidding war, the white knight often demands some protection in the 
form of a lockup. This may involve giving the white knight options to buy stock in the target 
that has not yet been issued at a fixed price or to acquire specific target assets at a fair price. 
Such lockups usually make the target less attractive to other bidders. If a bidding war does 
ensue, the knight may exercise the stock options and sell the shares at a profit to the acquiring 
company.
So-called white squires are investors willing to support a firm’s board and management in 
the event of an unwanted takeover attempt. Unlike a white knight, which agrees to acquire 
the entire firm, the white squire is willing to purchase a large block of stock often at a favor­
able price and attractive dividend yield, and for a seat on the board. Such strategies may not 
be in the best interests of shareholders as they may serve only to entrench management.85 In 
an effort to discourage an unwanted bid from newspaper rival Gannett Corporation, Tribune 
Publishing sold a 12.92% stake in 2016 to billionaire entrepreneur Patrick Soon-Shiong, which 
is permitted under Delaware corporate law, where Tribune is incorporated.
Employee Stock Ownership Plans
ESOPs are trusts that hold a firm’s stock as an investment for its employees’ retirement 
program. They can be quickly set up, with the firm either issuing shares directly to the ESOP 
or having an ESOP purchase shares on the open market. The stock held by an ESOP is likely to 
be voted in support of management in the event of a hostile takeover attempt (see Chapter 1 
for more detail).
Leveraged Recapitalization
A firm may recapitalize by assuming substantial amounts of new debt either to buy back 
stock or to finance a dividend payment to shareholders. While debt often is viewed as a 
means of forcing managers to focus on a more efficient use of the firm’s operating cash flow, 
it also tends to allow managers to entrench themselves by financing outsized payments to 
shareholders.86 The additional debt reduces the firm’s borrowing capacity and leaves it in a 
86Chang et al. (2015).
84Courts view greenmail as discriminatory because not all shareholders are offered the opportunity to sell their 
stock back to the target firm at an above-market price. Nevertheless, courts in some states (e.g., Delaware) have 
found it appropriate if done for valid business reasons. Valid business reasons could include the need for the firm 
to stay focused on implementing its business strategy. Courts in other states (e.g., California) have favored share­
holder lawsuits, contending that greenmail breaches fiduciary responsibility.
85Chen et al. (2016).

116	
3.  The Corporate Takeover Market
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
highly leveraged position, making it less attractive to a bidder that may have wanted to use 
that capacity to help finance a takeover. Moreover, the payment of a dividend or a stock buy­
back may persuade shareholders to support the target’s management in a proxy contest or 
hostile tender offer.87 Recapitalization may require shareholder approval, depending on the 
company’s charter and the laws of the state in which it is incorporated.88
Share Repurchase or Buyback Plans
A firm may repurchase shares when it believes it has few attractive investment alterna­
tives,89 to reward shareholders, signal undervaluation, fund ESOPs, adjust capital structure, 
and defend against takeovers.90 When used as a takeover defense, share buybacks reduce the 
number of shares that could be purchased by the potential buyer or by arbs who will sell to 
the highest bidder. What remains are shares held by those who are less likely to sell, namely 
individual investors.91 So for a hostile tender offer to succeed in purchasing the remaining 
shares, the premium offered would have to be higher, thereby discouraging some prospec­
tive bidders. While there is considerable evidence that buyback strategies are an effective 
takeover deterrent,92 the buyback may reduce the number of shares outstanding. This makes 
it easier for the bidder to gain control because fewer shares have to be purchased to achieve 
a controlling interest. In addition, share repurchase announcements may actually increase 
the probability that a firm will be taken over, especially if the firm appears vulnerable to a 
takeover due to weak defenses or poor governance. Why? Because such firms’ share prices 
often underperform before buybacks and share buyback announcements call attention to 
their potential undervaluation.93 This is particularly true of smaller firms engaging in share 
repurchases.94
Corporate Restructuring
Restructuring may involve taking the company private, selling attractive assets, under­
taking a major acquisition, or even liquidating the company. “Going private” typically in­
volves the management team’s purchase of the bulk of a firm’s publicly traded shares. This 
87The primary differences between a leveraged recapitalization and a leveraged buyout are that the firm remains a 
public company and that management does not take a significant equity stake in the firm in a leveraged recapital­
ization.
88Shareholders will benefit from the receipt of a dividend or from capital gains resulting from a stock repurchase. 
The increased interest expense shelters some of the firm’s taxable income and may encourage management to im­
prove the firm’s performance. Thus, current shareholders may benefit more from this takeover defense than from a 
hostile takeover of the firm.
89Boudry et al. (2013).
90According to Billett and Xue (2007), firms frequently increase their share repurchase activities when confronted 
with an imminent takeover threat.
91Share buybacks make firm ownership less concentrated as large shareholders such as institutional investors, per­
haps showing a greater preference for liquidity, appear to be more likely to participate in buybacks than individual 
shareholders (Golbe and Nyman, 2013).
92Potential acquirers are less likely to pursue firms with substantial excess cash, which could be used to adopt 
highly aggressive share repurchase programs (Faleye, 2004; Pinkowitz, 2002).
93Huang (2015).
94Lin et al. (2014).

	
The Impact of Takeover Defenses on Shareholder Value	
117
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
may create a win–win situation for shareholders, who receive a premium for their stock, and 
management, who retain control. Alternatively, the target may make itself less attractive by 
divesting assets the bidder wants, with the proceeds financing share buybacks or payment of 
a special stockholder dividend. A target company also may undertake a so-called defensive ac­
quisition to draw down any excess cash balances and to exhaust its current borrowing capac­
ity. A firm may choose to liquidate the company, pay off outstanding obligations to creditors, 
and distribute the remaining proceeds to shareholders as a liquidating dividend. This makes 
sense only if the liquidating dividend exceeds what the shareholders would have received 
from the bidder.
Litigation
Lawsuits are extremely common during M&As. More than 90% of large deals experience 
at least one lawsuit and typically take the form of class actions. In 2013, deals valued at more 
than $100 million experienced an average of seven shareholder lawsuits, an all-time high, up 
from about two per deal in 2012.95 Shareholder-filed lawsuits challenged 93% of corporate 
mergers in 2014, up from 44% in 2007.96 Lawsuits may involve alleged antitrust concerns, 
violations of federal securities laws, undervaluation of the target, inadequate disclosure by 
the bidder as required by the Williams Act, and fraudulent behavior. Targets often seek a 
court injunction to stop a takeover until the court has decided the merits of the allegations. 
By preventing a bidder from buying more stock, the target firm is buying more time to erect 
additional defenses.
While litigation is seldom successful in preventing a takeover, it may uncover additional 
information about the bidder through the ensuing discovery, or fact-finding, process that 
leads to more substantive lawsuits. The majority of lawsuits are settled before going to court, 
resulting in additional information disclosed and fees awarded to plaintiff attorneys. Bid­
ders may sue targets to obtain shareholder mailing lists or to have arguably unreasonable 
takeover defensives removed. While the probability of completing deals embroiled in litiga­
tion falls by about 8%, the takeover premium for those deals that are completed increases by 
about 30%.97
THE IMPACT OF TAKEOVER DEFENSES ON SHAREHOLDER VALUE
Empirical evidence suggests that on average takeover defenses have a slightly negative 
impact on firm value, while those instituted prior to an IPO or during the early stages of the 
firm’s development can increase shareholder value.
Takeover Defenses and Target Firm Shareholder Financial Returns
Early empirical studies provide inconsistent results. Some empirical studies suggest that take­
over defenses in general have virtually no statistically significant impact on shareholder returns.98 
98Field and Karpoff (2002).
95Davidoff and Cain (2014).
96Hoffman (2015).
97Krishnan et al. (2012).

118	
3.  The Corporate Takeover Market
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
Other studies point to poison pills having a positive impact.99 Studies that find a positive return 
seem to support the idea that existing management acts in the best interests of shareholders (the 
shareholders’ interests hypothesis), while those studies that find a negative return seem to sup­
port the notion that current management acts in its own interests (the management entrenchment 
hypothesis). Overall, the earlier research suggests that takeover defenses have a slightly negative 
impact on target shareholder returns.100
Recent research provides more consistent evidence that takeover defenses destroy share­
holder value.101 For instance, the creation of a detailed “management entrenchment index” 
revealed that during the 1990s, firms scoring lower on the index (i.e., exhibiting lower levels of 
entrenchment) had larger positive abnormal returns than firms with higher scores.102 Howev­
er, the close correlation between a firm’s entrenchment and abnormal returns disappeared in 
the 2000s, since investors had already bid up the prices of those firms that had removed take­
over defenses in the 1990s and penalized those that had not.103 Another large study concludes 
that managers at firms protected by takeover defenses are less subject to takeover and are 
more likely to engage in “empire-building” acquisitions that destroy firm value.104 Firm value 
also may be reduced because managers shielded from the threat of a hostile buyout may be 
under less pressure to innovate.105 Still another study found that firms moving from staggered 
board elections to annual elections of directors experience a cumulative abnormal return of 
1.8%, reflecting investor expectations that the firm is more likely to be subject to a takeover. 
More recently, a study found a close positive correlation between the number of takeover 
defenses in place and director compensation. This suggests that directors who propose such 
defenses directly benefit to the extent they are insulated from activists and hostile takeovers.106
The negative impact of takeover defenses on firm value appears to be most pronounced af­
ter judicial approval of such defenses in the 1985 landmark Delaware Supreme Court decision 
of Moran v. Household. The court case validated the use of poison pills giving boards of direc­
tors the sole right to adopt such measures. The court ruling further granted boards broader 
powers to adopt other types of takeover defenses as long as they were reasonable and wide 
legal discretion to reject unsolicited takeover bids. Following the ruling, firms experienced an 
99Comment and William Schwert (1995) found that poison pills have a positive impact on shareholder returns if 
investors believe a takeover is imminent or that the firm’s management would use such a defense to improve the 
purchase price during negotiation. Several studies suggest that investors will react positively to the announcement 
of the adoption of takeover defenses if the firm’s management interests are viewed as aligned with those of share­
holders and will react negatively if management is viewed as seeking to entrench itself (Malekzadeh et al., 1998).
100Comment and William Schwert (1995) conducted a comprehensive review of previous studies and found that 
most takeover defenses resulted in a slightly negative decline in shareholder returns of about 0.5%.
101Cohen and Wang (2013).
102Bebchuk and Fried (2003) created a management entrenchment index in an effort to assess which of 24 provisions 
tracked by the Investor Responsibility Research Center (IRRC) had the greatest impact on shareholder value. The 
index, which is negatively correlated with firm value between 1990 and 2003, includes staggered boards, limits to 
shareholder bylaw amendments, supermajority requirements for mergers, supermajority requirements for charter 
amendments, poison pills, and golden parachutes.
103Bebchuk et al. (2010).
104Masulis et al. (2007).
105Atanassov (2013).
106Souther (2016).

	
The Impact of Takeover Defenses on Shareholder Value	
119
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
average 5% reduction in their market value immediately following the announcement that 
they had adopted a poison pill. Even in the absence of a poison pill, firms adopting other 
measures restricting shareholder rights exhibited a decline in firm value of averaging 1.7%.107
The Moran v. Household essentially reinforced another Delaware Court ruling involving 
Unocal v. Mesa Petroleum also in 1985 legitimizing a two-tiered tender offer in which share­
holders tendering their shares in the first round could potentially receive more than those 
choosing not to tender their shares. The net effect of these two court cases was to weaken the 
disciplinary impact on boards and management of hostile takeover threats by giving boards 
the wide legal authority to reject unsolicited takeover bids. While these court cases apply 
directly to firms incorporated in Delaware (about one-half of US firms), Delaware court deci­
sions shape laws in other states. In fact, many states have adopted Delaware’s poison pill stat­
utes and not a single state has invalidated the use of poison pills. In 1995, additional Delaware 
court rulings validated additional types of poison pills. These cases include Unitrin, Inc. v. 
American General Corp. and Moore Corp. v. Wallace Computer Services Inc.
It is widely believed that these cases and the proliferation of poison pills contributed to 
management entrenchment. However, there is evidence that poison pills since these cases 
were litigated have contributed to increased takeover premiums but have had little impact 
on the number of deals that were not completed.108 Takeover defenses in general may not 
reduce deal completion rates, but they can reduce the likelihood of a bid. That is, formidable 
defenses discourage opportunistic bidders seeking buyouts at “bargain” prices. Therefore, 
the bids that are received by target firms with defenses in place are likely to be higher than 
they would have been had the firm been defenseless.109 The degree of target resistance to 
a takeover attempt enables the target firm shareholders to realize higher takeover premiums 
than might have otherwise been the case.110 Target defenses can prove particularly effective 
at raising negotiated takeover premiums when the target’s management is being advised by 
a top-tier investment bank.111
Takeover defenses may also allow a firm’s senior management to communicate potentially 
negative information to investors on a more timely basis due to their feeling somewhat pro­
tected from takeover threats. The gradual release of negative information can allow the firm’s 
share price to adjust in a more orderly manner rather than to crash when the accumulated 
information is released to surprised shareholders.112
Studies also show that staggered boards can be effective in helping a firm lower its cost of 
debt113 and enable management to focus on longer-term value-enhancing investments such 
as R&D.114 For complex firms, staggered boards may allow for more aggressive monitor­
ing of firm performance by board members offsetting the negative impact of management 
107Cremers et al. (2004).
108Heron and Lie (2015).
109Goktan and Kieschnick (2012).
110Dimopoulos and Sacchetto (2014) estimate that in about three-fourths of deals involving only one bidder, the 
acquisition price paid is determined largely by the degree of target resistance.
111Ertugrul (2015).
112Bhargava et al. (2017).
113Chen (2012) argues that by reducing concern over takeovers, managers are less inclined to engage in high-risk 
strategies and engage in more detailed financial disclosure. Both activities aid bondholders.
114Duru et al. (2013).

120	
3.  The Corporate Takeover Market
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
entrenchment on firm value. Directors may be more willing to provide more independent 
and perhaps controversial advice without fear of being replaced by investors with a more 
short-term focus.115
Despite many firms having eliminated staggered boards in recent years, the number of 
firms with such defenses remains high. According to FactSet Research Systems, the number 
of S&P 500 firms with staggered boards declined by more than 50% from 2000 to 2014. How­
ever, of the more than 3000 publicly traded firms tracked by FactSet, more than one-half still 
have staggered boards as of late 2014.
How investors react to the announcement of a leveraged recapitalization depends on how 
they assess the motives of the firm’s board and management. The shares of firms managed 
by poor performing managers often display decidedly negative financial returns when an­
nouncements are made that the firm is about to undertake substantial additional leverage in 
the wake of a takeover attempt. Financial returns can be even more negative if the potential 
acquirer later withdraws the offer. Investors reason that they are now stuck with both bad 
management and a highly leveraged firm. Shareholders of target firms with high-performing 
managers are likely to realize less negative and often positive financial returns if the offer is 
withdrawn as investors anticipate that existing management will enhance value by more than 
the premium offered by the potential acquirer.116
Takeover Defenses and Public Offerings
There is evidence that takeover defenses create firm value at the very point the firm is 
formed (i.e., an IPO) if they help the firm attract, retain, and motivate effective managers 
and employees and to sustain business relationships. Furthermore, such defenses give the 
new firm time to implement its business plan fully and to invest in upgrading the skills of 
employees.117 The firm’s IPO value is likely to be higher when it has strong takeover defenses 
and large customers, dependent suppliers, and strategic partners.118 Why? Because takeover 
defenses tend to strengthen the firm’s business relationships with its customers, suppliers, 
and other strategic partners since they increase the likelihood that commitments negotiated 
with the firm will be sustained. This “bonding” effect encourages such stakeholders to invest 
in their relationships with the firm: customers may increase their purchases, suppliers im­
prove their manufacturing capabilities, and strategic partners devote more resources to the 
relationship.
SOME THINGS TO REMEMBER
Corporate takeovers facilitate the allocation of resources and promote good governance 
by disciplining underperforming managers. Other factors external to the firm—such as 
federal and state legislation, the court system, regulators, and institutional activism—also 
116Jandik and Lallemand (2015).
117Stout (2002) and Coates (2001).
118Johnson et al. (2015).
115Ahn and Shrestha (2013).

	
Discussion Questions	
121
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
serve important roles in maintaining good governance practices. Governance also is af­
fected by the professionalism of the firm’s board of directors as well as by the effective­
ness of the firm’s internal controls and incentive systems, takeover defenses, and corporate 
culture.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
3.1	 What are the management entrenchment and the shareholders’ interests’ hypotheses? 
Which seems more realistic in your judgment? Explain your answer.
3.2	 What are the advantages and disadvantages of the friendly versus hostile approaches 
to a corporate takeover? Be specific.
3.3	 What are the primary advantages and disadvantages of commonly used takeover 
defenses?
3.4	 How may golden parachutes for senior management help a target firm’s shareholders? 
Are such severance packages justified in your judgment? Explain your answer.
3.5	 How might recapitalization as a takeover defense help or hurt a target firm’s share­
holders?
3.6	 Anheuser-Busch (AB) rejected InBev’s all-cash offer price of $65 per share, saying 
it undervalued the company, despite the offer representing a 35% premium to AB’s 
preannouncement share price. InBev refused to raise its offer while repeating its strong 
preference for a friendly takeover. Speculate as to why InBev refused to raise its initial 
offer price. Why do you believe that InBev continued to prefer a friendly takeover? 
What do you think InBev should have done to raise pressure on the AB board to ac­
cept the offer?
3.7	 What do you believe are the primary factors a target firm’s board should consider 
when evaluating a bid from a potential acquirer?
3.8	 If you were the CEO of a target firm, what strategy would you recommend to convince 
institutional shareholders to support your position in a proxy battle with the bidding 
firm?
3.9	 Anheuser-Busch reduced its antitakeover defenses in 2006, when it removed its stag­
gered board structure. Two years earlier, it did not renew its poison pill provision. 
Speculate as to why the board acquiesced in these instances. Explain how these events 
may have affected the firm’s vulnerability to a takeover.
3.10	 In response to Microsoft’s efforts to acquire the firm, the Yahoo! board adopted a 
“change-in-control” compensation plan. The plan stated that if a Yahoo! employee’s 
job is terminated by Yahoo! without cause (i.e., the employee is performing his or her 
duties appropriately) or if an employee leaves voluntarily due to a change in posi­
tion or responsibilities within 2 years after Microsoft acquires a controlling interest in 
Yahoo!, the employee will receive 1 year’s salary. Yahoo! notes that the adoption of the 
severance plan is an effort to ensure that employees are treated fairly if Microsoft wins 
control. Microsoft views the tactic as an effort to discourage a takeover. With whom do 
you agree, and why?
Answers to these Chapter Discussion Questions are available in the Online Instructor’s Manual for 
instructors using this book (https://textbooks.elsevier.com/web/Manuals.aspx?isbn=9780128016091).

122	
3.  The Corporate Takeover Market
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
END OF CHAPTER CASE STUDY: MYLAN THWARTED 
IN HOSTILE TAKEOVER OF PERRIGO
Case Study Objectives: To Illustrate How
•	 Institutional investors can impact corporate decisions
•	 Current strategies can limit future options
•	 Poor governance undermines shareholder value
•	 Hubris can derail good decision making
Things looked good for Mylan NV, a leading generic pharmaceutical drug maker, midday 
on November 13, 2015, as the early results of the firm’s campaign to acquire Perrigo appeared 
promising. The votes of more and more index fund shares supported Mylan’s proposed takeover 
of Perrigo Co., a maker of store-branded generic drugs. This date marked the last day Perrigo 
shareholders could tender their shares, a process that had begun with Mylan’s initiation of a ten­
der offer for a simple majority of Perrigo’s outstanding common shares on September 15, 2015. 
Acceptance of Mylan’s bid, initially valued at $26 billion and consisting of $75 in cash and 2.3 
new Mylan shares for each Perrigo outstanding, appeared to be in reach. In contrast, the Perrigo 
board of directors and management was nervous, as they had received support from the major­
ity of their investors in Israel but were alarmed at the number of index fund votes in support of 
the takeover.
But the heady feeling among Mylan’s board of directors and senior management was soon to 
turn grim. By evening, Mylan’s position appeared to weaken when a tally of votes by the national 
stock clearinghouse, Deposit Trust Corporation, showed that Mylan was short by about 18 million 
shares of the number needed to gain a controlling interest in Perrigo. Had they won control of the 
firm, Mylan reasoned they could implement a backend merger at a later date to “squeeze out” the 
shareholders who had been unwilling to tender their shares.
Nearly all the major mutual funds supported Perrigo, with only Vanguard Group supporting 
Mylan. Other major mutual fund groups did not even vote, including Blackrock, State Street Global 
Advisers, and Fidelity Investments. Despite an aggressive marketing campaign to garner investor 
support, Mylan failed to convince enough investors that they would be better off owning shares in 
a combined Mylan/Perrigo company. In the end, Mylan was able to garner only 40% of Perrigo’s 
outstanding common shares.
Even though Mylan had promised to make certain changes to its questionable governance prac­
tices immediately following its acquisition of Perrigo, the declining value of its shares made the 
Mylan shares less attractive. Teva Pharmaceuticals’ bid to acquire Mylan earlier in 2015 had inflated 
the value of Mylan’s shares to reflect most of the anticipated premium. Mylan was using the inflated 
value of its shares to make a bid for Perrigo. When Teva later withdrew its offer, Mylan shares plum­
meted, reducing the premium to Perrigo’s share price from 34% when the offer was first made to 
less than 3%. Ultimately, concerns about the diminishing premium and Mylan’s poor governance 
practices could not be overcome. Analysts on Wall Street also expressed a sigh of relief as they be­
lieved that the Mylan offer price overvalued Perrigo.
In April 2015, generic drug leader Teva Pharmaceuticals had tried to acquire Mylan. Within 
months, Mylan attempted to buy Perrigo, but the latter successfully fended off Mylan 8 months 

	
Discussion Questions	
123
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
later. Mylan, one of the world’s largest generic drug firms, was always facing an uphill fight to 
acquire Perrigo, the leading manufacturer of drugstore-brand products. Why? Because it is difficult 
to acquire a firm whose board and management do not want to sell. Historically, hostile takeovers 
eventually end either with the target firm relenting following the acquirer’s willingness to raise the 
offer price or with the target able to find another suitor to buy it instead. However, Mylan, perhaps 
out of senior management’s hubris, thought it would be relatively easy to acquire Perrigo. To under­
stand why we need to look at past corporate actions taken by Perrigo and how such action limited 
the firm’s options in defending against Mylan’s unsolicited offer.
In 2013, Perrigo implemented a corporate inversion in which it reincorporated in Ireland in 
an effort to move from the United States to a more favorable tax environment. However, Ire­
land’s corporate antitakeover laws tend to be much weaker than elsewhere. Mylan reasoned that 
it could bypass Perrigo’s board and management and make their offer for the firm directly to its 
shareholders and that there was little Perrigo’s board and management could do due to lax antita­
keover laws. While on paper this looked like a good idea, in practice it turned out to be far more 
challenging.
While Perrigo could not utilize more traditional antitakeover defenses that were largely pro­
hibited by Irish takeover law, it was able to exploit Mylan’s problematic governance practices. 
Mylan disclosed on October 30, 2015, less than 2 weeks before the tender period was to close, that 
it was under investigation by the US SEC that was probing potential conflicts of interest with the 
firm’s board members. Not only did Mylan wait a full 7 weeks into tender period to make any 
disclosure about this SEC subpoena, but also it buried the disclosure in a footnote on Page 53 of a 
Friday-afternoon SEC filing that never explained the specific subject of the SEC’s inquiry. Further­
more, Mylan’s own shareholders were suing the firm for not properly disclosing its highly restric­
tive antitakeover defenses when it sought a vote for its prior inversion transaction, the process 
by which Mylan had reincorporated in the Netherlands (for more information on inversions see 
Chapter 12). In another display of disregard for its shareholders, Mylan used an obscure part of 
Dutch law allowing a target firm to put control of the firm into a foundation. While such control 
would be temporary, it effectively allowed management to circumvent a shareholder vote on the 
Teva acquisition attempt.
Perrigo’s board after repeatedly rejecting Mylan’s offer encouraged its shareholders to reject 
the Mylan tender offer by noting that it “substantially undervalues our Company and did not ad­
equately compensate shareholders for our exceptional standalone growth prospects.” The Perrigo 
board also pointed out that shareholders had realized a 970% total return since 2007, which dwarfed 
the total return to Mylan shareholders during the same time period. They argued that continuing 
the firm’s current business strategy would be more lucrative than selling to Mylan.
Perhaps Perrigo’s most effective argument against the Mylan offer was its assertion that the 
poor governance practices of Mylan would undermine the long-term value of shares that would 
be received by those tendering their Perrigo shares. Adding support to Perrigo’s claims was the 
fact that Mylan had consistently received the worst possible governance score from ISS, a leading 
independent proxy advisory firm. In response to Perrigo’s allegations, Mylan threatened to delist 
Perrigo shares if it gained majority control making any such shares outstanding highly illiquid. 
Perrigo countered that these were just scare tactics and represented another illustration of Mylan’s 
disregard for shareholder rights.

124	
3.  The Corporate Takeover Market
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
Despite these challenges, in early November Mylan stated in a press release that it was “highly 
confident” it would succeed in the takeover. Mylan initially stated that it expected to open a tender 
offer for as much as 80% of Perrigo’s outstanding shares but later reduced that figure to 51% of 
outstanding common shares, enough to gain a controlling interest. The reduction in this thresh­
old figure from 80% to slightly more than 50% reflected a more realistic assessment of Mylan’s 
prospects.
The deal did not appear to make sense from the outset. Why? It did not involve the more com­
monly used “friendly approach” in which the acquirer seeks to get support from the target’s board 
and management. Moreover, Mylan would not have realized a spike in earnings per share as a re­
sult of the deal as the number of new shares issued would offset the addition of Perrigo’s earnings. 
Furthermore, Mylan’s acquisition of Perrigo would not have expanded Mylan’s share of the overall 
generic prescription market, as Perrigo dominated only a subsegment of the market for cheaper 
drugstore brand versions of drugs such as Advil and Neosporin. Why then did Mylan want Per­
rigo? Acquiring Perrigo would make Mylan a more diversified health care firm helping to offset 
increasing competition in the generic drug market.
Decisions made years earlier had left Perrigo vulnerable to takeover. Perrigo surrendered highly 
effective defenses when it moved its legal domicile to Ireland. Prior to its corporate inversion, Per­
rigo had been incorporated in Michigan. Michigan is generally considered to have strong antitake­
over laws, including a business combination law limiting parties that have acquired 10% or more of 
the shares of a firm from acquiring the remaining shares for 5 years. Because it would take so many 
years to gain a controlling interest, most acquirers would be encouraged to look for targets not 
headquartered in Michigan. Also, under Michigan law, the board of directors is allowed to consider 
the interest of other stakeholder groups such as employees when deciding to accept a takeover bid. 
If a combination would threaten substantial layoffs at the target firm, the takeover could be disal­
lowed under state statutes.
As a US-based firm, Perrigo had several defensive measures in place including a staggered 
board allowing only one-third of its directors to be up for election in any year. The firm’s bylaws 
also allowed it to adopt a poison pill defense either before or after a bid had been made. The pill 
meant that the firm could ward off any unwanted suitor unless the board would rescind the pill. 
The staggered board meant that any effort to change the composition of the board would take at 
least 2 years to replace the majority of board members with those willing to rescind the poison 
pill.
Now incorporated in Ireland, Perrigo has been stripped of these defensive measures as they 
are prohibited by the Irish laws applying to takeovers. Consequently, Perrigo was forced to rely 
primarily on other means to dissuade its shareholders from tendering their shares. The absence of 
significant takeover defenses had been a motivating factor in Mylan’s initiating a hostile tender of­
fer for the firm.
Once Mylan withdrew its offer, Perrigo’s shares fell 6% to $146.90 in a single day, while Mylan’s 
shares jumped 13% to $48.78 per share. The wild swings in the share prices of these two firms re­
flected the unwinding of speculative bets. That is, investors who had purchased Perrigo shares in 
anticipation of their rising to or near the offer price sold their holdings and investors who antici­
pated a drop in Mylan’s share price covered their short positions.

	
Discussion Questions	
125
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
Mylan had been at the center of a three-way fight while pressing its bid for Perrigo and fend­
ing off its own takeover bid from Teva. Ironically, neither deal materialized as Teva withdrew 
its bid and Perrigo shareholders voted against the Mylan tender offer. Millions of dollars in 
fees paid to investment bankers, accountants, lawyers, and consultants were paid despite noth­
ing having been accomplished. Mylan’s management and board had been distracted from the 
ongoing strategic and operating management of the business. During this time, other attractive 
investment opportunities may have been missed resulting in significant cost to the firm’s share­
holders in terms of potential foregone profits. In the end, perhaps driven by hubris, Mylan’s 
management and board continued to demonstrate that they were poor stewards of shareholder 
wealth.
Discussion Questions
1.	What was Perrigo’s main defense against Mylan? Why was so much reliance given to 
this tactic? Speculate as to why shareholders accepted Perrigo’s board and management’s 
arguments.
2.	How did corporate inversions undertaken by each firm impact the outcome of the hostile 
takeover attempt? Be specific.
3.	Identify the takeover tactics and defenses employed by Mylan and Perrigo, respectively. 
Explain why each may have been used.
4.	What does the reaction of investors to the breakup of the deal tell you about what they were 
thinking?
5.	Under what circumstances does the combination of a poison pill and a staggered board make 
sense for the target firm’s shareholders? Be specific.
6.	Using the information in this case study, discuss the arguments for and against encouraging 
hostile corporate takeovers. Why might a hostile takeover of Mylan be justified?
7.	Explain why a friendly approach often is preferred to a hostile takeover. Be specific.
8.	Explain what caused the share prices of both firms to fluctuate wildly when the results of the 
tender offer solicitation were made public. Be specific.
9.	Explain how a backend merger works and what it means to “squeeze out” the remaining 
Perrigo investors.
10.	Both Mylan and Perrigo fought aggressively to ward off unwanted suitors. As such, both 
could be accused of trying to entrench senior management and their boards of directors. 
Do you believe that the actions of both firms were consistent with the best interests of their 
shareholders? Explain your answer.
Answers to these questions are found in the Online Instructor’s Manual available to instructors using this 
book (https://textbooks.elsevier.com/web/Manuals.aspx?isbn=9780128016091).

126	
3.  The Corporate Takeover Market
I.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Environment
A D D I T I O N A L  C A S E  S T U D Y  R E C O M M E N D AT I O N 
( S E A R C H  H A RVA R D  B U S I N E S S  S C H O O L 
P U B L I S H I N G  S I T E  B Y  N A M E  O F  C A S E : 
h b s p . h a r v a r d . e d u )
Circon, Brian J. Hall, Ghuan Subramanian, 
Christopher Rose, Revised Publication 
Date: August 5, 2004, Product Number: 
307031-PDF-ENG, hbsp.harvard.edu.
	
Subjects covered: Hostile Takeovers, 
Poison Pills, Staggered Board, Corporate 
Governance, Executive Incentives, Board 
Fiduciary Responsibilities.
Fashion Faux Pas: Gucci & LVMH,  
Michael Moddett, Kannan Ramaswamy, 
Publication Date: May 17, 2002, Prod-
uct Number: TB0161-PDF-ENG, hbsp.
harvard.edu.
	
Subjects covered: Global Takeover, How 
Takeover Laws Differ Across Countries, 
Creeping Acquisitions, Takeover Defenses, 
Takeover Tactics, Purchase Premium.
Ben & Jerry’s Homemade, Michael J. 
Schill, Publication Date: September 13, 
2002, Source: Darden School of Business, 
Product Number: UV0273-PDF-ENG, 
hbsp.harvard.edu.
	
Subjects covered: Takeover Tactics, 
Takeover Defenses, Corporate  
Governance.
Strategy and Governance at Yahoo! Inc., 
Krishna G. Palepu, Suraj Srinivasan, David 
Lane, Ian McKown Cornell, Publication 
Date: October 13, 2011, Product Number: 
112040-PDF-ENG, Source: Harvard Business 
School, hbsp.harvard.edu.
	
Subjects covered: Governance, Offer 
Evaluation, Management Decision Making, 
Evaluating Strategic Options, Business 
Strategy.
Northrop versus TRW, Carliss Y. Baldwin, 
James Quinn, Revision Date: January 10, 
2008, Product Number: 903115-PDF-ENG, 
Source: Harvard Business School, hbsp.
harvard.edu.
	
Subjects covered: Takeover tactics, 
takeover defenses, takeover laws.
Cinergy and Duke Energy 2005: Think Big, 
Boris Groysberg, Nitin Nohria, Colleen 
Kaftan, Geoff Marietta, Publication Date: 
December 20, 2007, Product Number: 
408096-PDF-ENG, Source: Harvard Business 
School, hbsp.harvard.edu.
	
Subjects covered: Hostile Takeovers, 
Takeover Tactics.
MCI Takeover Battle: Verizon Versus Qwest, 
Malcolm P. Baker, James Quinn, Revision 
Date: October 5, 2012, Product Number: 
206045-PDF-ENG, Source: Harvard Business 
School, hbsp.harvard.edu.
	
Subjects covered: Bidding Strategies, 
Corporate Governance, Strategy.

P A R T II
THE MERGERS AND 
ACQUISITIONS PROCESS
Phases 1–10

128	
II.  THE MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS PROCESS
﻿ ﻿﻿
Amid investigations into its business practices, Valeant Pharmaceuticals’ 
share price fell by almost 90% from a peak of $251.92 on July 26, 2015, to $28.98 
on March 21, 2016, the day the firm’s CEO was fired. The firm duped investors 
with a flawed business strategy of eye-popping price increases on proprietary 
drugs (critical to large patient populations) for which there were few substi­
tutes to stoke the more than 400% rise in its share price since early 2012. The 
strategy was implemented by gaining control of such drugs through acquisi­
tion and was doomed from the start. Why? The number of firms Valeant could 
acquire was limited and it was only a matter of time before the firm would 
experience a backlash to its outsized drug price increases.
Part II discusses how business strategies are developed and how manage­
ment may choose to implement such strategies. Mergers and acquisitions 
(M&As) are not business strategies but rather a means of implementing busi­
ness strategies. Business strategies define a firm’s vision and long-term objec­
tives and how it expects to achieve these ends. M&As simply represent one 
means of implementing the business strategy. The firm may choose from a 
range of alternative implementation strategies, including “going it alone,” 
partnering, or acquiring another firm. Valeant could have executed its strategy 
by developing drugs through R&D (going it alone), partnering, or M&A (its 
actual choice).
Chapters 4–6 discuss the 10 phases typical of an M&A process. While not 
all M&As unfold in exactly the same way, the process outlined in this section 
serves as a road map for executing deals. This process is sufficiently flexible 
to be applicable to alternatives to M&As, such as business alliances. The pro­
cess for implementing an M&A could be employed by a firm seeking to di­
vest a business, since the selling process involves the identification of potential 
buyers, approaching such buyers, and negotiating a completed deal. Highly 
effective sellers often readily understand how prospective buyers think and 
attempt to tailor the marketing of the business to satisfy the highest-priority 
needs of potential buyers. Thus, a successful seller often is one who has been 
a successful buyer.
Chapter 4 focuses on how to develop a business strategy and, if an acquisi­
tion is the best way of realizing that strategy, how to develop an acquisition 
plan. Chapter 5 deals with identifying, making initial contact with the potential 
target, and developing the necessary legal documents prior to beginning due 
diligence and formal negotiations. While initial valuations provide a starting 
point, the actual purchase price is determined during the negotiation period. 
Chapter 6 discusses the role of preintegration planning and the common ob­
stacles arising during the postclosing integration effort and how to overcome 
such challenges.

C H A P T E R
129
Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring Activities. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-801609-1.00004-X
Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
4
Planning: Developing Business 
and Acquisition Plans
Phases 1 and 2 of the Acquisition Process
If you don’t know where you are going, any road will get you there. —Lewis Carroll, Alice’s Adven­
tures in Wonderland
O U T L I N E
Inside Mergers and Acquisitions: 
Turmoil Among Media Companies	
130
Chapter Overview	
132
The Role of Planning in Mergers and 
Acquisitions	
132
Key Business Planning Concepts	
133
The Merger and Acquisition Process	
134
Phase 1: Building the Business Plan	
135
External Analysis	
136
Determinants of the Intensity of Industry 
Competition	
139
Determinants of Actual Profits and Cash 
Flow	
141
Internal Analysis	
142
Defining the Mission/Vision Statement	
143
Setting Strategic or Long-Term Business 
Objectives	
144
Selecting the Appropriate Corporate, 
Business, and Implementation 
Strategies	
145
Implementation Strategies	
148
Functional Strategies	
149
Strategic Controls	
150
The Business Plan as a Communication 
Document	
151
Phase 2: Building the Merger–
Acquisition Implementation Plan	
152
Plan Objectives	
153
Resource/Capability Evaluation	
154
Management Guidance	
155
Timetable	
156
Some Things to Remember	
156
Discussion Questions	
158
Case Study: Yahoo’s Fall From Grace	
159
Case Study Objectives	
159
Discussion Questions	
163
Additional Case Study 
Recommendations	
164

130	
4.  Planning: Developing Business and Acquisition Plans
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
INSIDE MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS: TURMOIL AMONG MEDIA 
COMPANIES
KEY POINTS
•	 Industry leaders often have a unique vision of the future of their business and are highly adept 
at implementing their business strategies.
•	 Leadership positions can be sustained only if the leading firms continuously “reinvent” 
themselves to stay ahead of changing competitive conditions.
•	 Companies imitating others may be successful if they are able to execute their strategies better 
than the competition.
Traditional companies are those that tend to conform to the conventional way of doing 
business. Nontraditional firms are those that eschew conventional wisdom. What follows is 
a discussion of two different groups of firms in what could be loosely defined as the “media” 
industry and how they react differently to a rapidly changing competitive landscape. Tradi­
tional media firms tend to view the future through a rearview mirror feeling most comfort­
able with what they know. In contrast, nontraditional firms less constrained by the past are 
more inclined to look far into the future to identify the “next big thing.”
Media companies are arguably those that disseminate proprietary and nonproprietary 
content through multiple distribution channels generating revenue from subscriber fees and 
charging businesses to advertise to their subscriber/customer base. Traditionally media firms 
have included cable TV, wireless carriers, newspapers, radio, and movie production compa­
nies, as well as blogs and websites. Social networking company, Facebook, and online search 
behemoth, Google, position themselves as partners to the traditional media firms giving them 
access to their huge global audiences.
Far from being just partners, Facebook and Google have become the largest global media 
companies when measured by advertising revenues and increasingly represent competitors 
to traditional media firms. Their focus has been to build a large and diverse user base that 
makes them increasingly attractive to business advertisers. Their meteoric growth has cata­
pulted them to the top of firms ranked by market value. With well over a billion users, each 
firm has seen their advertising revenue explode, because they offer by far the largest audience 
for businesses wishing to get their message out to large but targeted audiences. The ongoing 
shift by consumers to accessing content through mobile devices ranging from smartphones 
to tablets to laptops is allowing Facebook and Google to capture an ever-increasing share of 
global mobile advertising revenues.
Traditional media companies have been slow to respond to the ongoing shift of customers 
to accessing content by using a variety of mobile devices. Telecom companies like Comcast, 
AT&T, and Verizon were primarily content distributors and not content providers since they 
produced relatively little of their own content. The disastrous acquisition of Time Warner 
Communications by AOL for $165 billion in 2000 in an attempt to marry content and distri­
bution made telecom firms hesitant to develop proprietary content. Their concern was that 
they would compete with their own content-producing advertising customers. Also, as was 

	
Inside Mergers and Acquisitions: Turmoil Among Media Companies	
131
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
demonstrated with the AOL–Time Warner tie-up, corporate cultures between content provid­
ers and distributors can be very different, potentially creating an integration nightmare.
While Facebook is not widely considered a content company, it is increasingly looking like 
one. For example, Facebook’s Instant Article’s feature introduced in mid-2015 has the poten­
tial to change the web if the company can persuade publishers through revenue sharing to 
abandon publishing stories on their own websites in favor of publishing them as content on 
Facebook. The New York Times, The Guardian, BuzzFeed, and National Geographic were among 
the first “partners” to sign up for the Facebook service. Under the terms of the deal, entire 
news stories from those partners will appear inside Facebook’s mobile app and be able to be 
read on the app, as opposed to the traditional practice of news publishers posting an excerpt 
and a link to their website.
With parallels to Amazon.com and its partners and Walmart and its vendors, the grow­
ing dependence by content providers on Facebook and Google means that they are ceding 
bargaining power to potential competitors. What makes this dependence perilous for media 
companies is that Facebook and Google are constantly tweaking their algorithms that dictate 
which items gain prominence in their search results. Content providers willing to pay more 
get greater visibility in front of those most likely to be interested in their content. While still 
in its infancy, Facebook’s search engine will be able to make its indexing of content more ef­
ficient in the future. Critics argue that Google through its highly regarded search engine has 
been publishing and prioritizing its own content for some time on Google search websites 
over external content. Whether this will pass antitrust muster is another question.1
Fearing that they are lagging the shift by consumers to mobile devices and that their core 
businesses are in peril, the large media companies are resurrecting the strategy adopted by 
AOL in its ill-fated takeover of Time Warner. Comcast was among the first to revive this strat­
egy when it completed its takeover of NBCUniversal by buying the remaining 49% it did not 
already own from General Electric in 2013. The total paid for all of NBCUniversal exceeded 
$30 billion. In 2015, wireless and cable TV giant AT&T completed its acquisition of DirecTV 
for $48 billion and cable provider Charter Communications catapulted itself into the second 
position in the mature cable industry by acquiring Time Warner Cable for an eye-popping 
$55 billion.2
The traditional media firms, struggling to protect their mature cable and wireless 
businesses, see their futures in a remarkably similar way: as both providers and distribu­
tors of premium content. Their strategies are very similar in that they are acquiring or 
developing proprietary premium content (including video streaming) that can be bundled 
and sold to their customer base across a variety of mobile devices. Cable TV and wireless 
firms also hope to tap into the explosion of advertising on mobile devices. The firm likely 
to be most successful among those pursuing “me too” strategies will be the one who can 
execute the best.
1In mid-2015, the European Union accused Google of violating antitrust laws after years of investigation by 
allegedly prioritizing its own products and services in Google searches.
2See the sections “Inside Mergers and Acquisitions: Comcast’s Attempted 2015 Takeover of Time Warner Unravels 
in the Face of Vigorous Opposition” and “End of Chapter Case Study: Regulators Approve Merger of AT&T and 
DirecTV but Not Comcast and Time Warner Cable” in Chapter 2 for a detailed discussion of these deals.

132	
4.  Planning: Developing Business and Acquisition Plans
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
In contrast, nontraditional media companies Google and Facebook seem more willing to 
continuously redefine themselves: Google moving well beyond its core search business and 
Facebook beyond its social networking roots. Both traditional and nontraditional media firms 
have spent aggressively in making acquisitions believing that this would be the best way to 
keep up with the rapidly changing competitive landscape. The danger to both traditional and 
nontraditional media firms is that they will overpay for acquisitions and be unable to earn the 
financial returns their investors require.
CHAPTER OVERVIEW
History is littered with businesses that failed because they did not satisfy an important 
and sustainable customer need better than their competitors. Bad ideas even if well executed 
are still bad ideas. The same logic extends to mergers and acquisitions (M&As). A poorly 
designed business strategy is among the reasons commonly given when M&A fail to satisfy 
expectations. Too often, the overarching role planning should take in conceptualizing and 
implementing business combinations is ignored.
Some companies view M&A as a business growth strategy. Here, in accord with the view 
of many successful acquirers,3 M&As are not considered a business strategy but rather a 
means of implementing a business strategy. While firms may accelerate overall growth in the 
short run through acquisition, the higher growth rate often is not sustainable without a busi­
ness plan—which serves as a road map for identifying additional acquisitions to fuel future 
growth. For example, Verizon’s acquisitions of AOL in 2015 and Yahoo in 2016 were driven 
by its announced strategy of building up its online business advertising revenue. In an effort 
to become the nation’s largest paid TV firm in the United States, AT&T reached an agreement 
to acquire Time Warner in late 2016.
This chapter focuses on the first two phases of the acquisition process—building the 
business and acquisition plans—and on the tools commonly used to evaluate, display, and 
communicate information to key constituencies both inside the corporation (e.g., board of 
directors and management) and outside (e.g., lenders and stockholders). Phases 3–10 are dis­
cussed in Chapter 5. Subsequent chapters detail the remaining phases of the M&A process. A 
review of this chapter (including practice questions and answers) is available in the file folder 
entitled Student Study Guide and a listing of Common Industry Information Sources is con­
tained on the companion site to this book (https://www.elsevier.com/books-and-journals/
book-companion/9780128016091).
THE ROLE OF PLANNING IN MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS
The acquisition process envisioned here can be separated into two stages. The planning 
stage comprises developing business and acquisition plans. The implementation stage (dis­
cussed in Chapter 5) includes the search, screening, contacting the target, negotiation, inte­
gration planning, closing, integration, and evaluation activities.
3Palter and Srinivasan (2006).

	
The Role of Planning in Mergers and Acquisitions	
133
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
Key Business Planning Concepts
A planning-based acquisition process starts with both a business plan or business model 
and a merger/acquisition plan, which drive all subsequent phases of the acquisition pro­
cess. The business plan articulates a mission or vision for the firm and a business strategy for 
realizing that mission for all of the firm’s stakeholders. Stakeholders are constituent groups, 
such as customers, shareholders, employees, suppliers, lenders, regulators, and communi­
ties. While the objective of the firm is to maximize shareholder value, this is most likely to 
be achieved when the interests of all major stakeholder groups are considered. Overlooking 
the interests of one group can easily derail the most well-thought-out strategies. The busi­
ness strategy is oriented to the long term and usually cuts across organizational lines to af­
fect many different functional areas. Typically, it is broadly defined and provides relatively 
little detail.
With respect to business strategy, it is important to distinguish between corporate-level 
and business-level strategies. Corporate-level strategies are set by the management of a diversi­
fied or multiproduct firm and generally cross business unit organizational lines. They entail 
decisions about financing the growth of certain businesses, operating others to generate cash, 
divesting some units, and pursuing diversification. Business-level strategies are set by the man­
agement of a specific operating unit within the corporate organizational structure. They may 
involve a unit’s attempting to achieve a low-cost position in the markets it serves, differentiat­
ing its product offering, or narrowing its focus to a specific market niche.
The implementation strategy refers to the way in which the firm chooses to execute the busi­
ness strategy. It is usually far more detailed than the business strategy. The merger/acquisition 
plan is a specific type of implementation strategy and describes in detail the motivation for the 
acquisition and how and when it will be achieved. For example, social media firm Twitter’s 
revenue-generating business strategy is to attract advertisers by providing more granular 
data to achieve more effective target marketing. Its merger/acquisition plan would include 
identifying, contacting, negotiating, and completing deals enabling the implementation of 
its business strategy. For example, the firm acquired a five-person artificial intelligence start-
up called Whetlab in late 2015 to accelerate its own internal “machine learning” efforts. The 
acquisition enabled Twitter to obtain the team’s talent and patent-pending software. This 
acquisition followed a similar acquisition in late 2014 of start-up Madbits. Machine learning 
focuses on the development of software allowing computer programs to teach themselves 
to change when exposed to new data. Such computer programs could be used to identify 
emerging trends among the millions of comments made on Twitter before they are readily 
observable by marketing analysts.
Functional strategies describe in detail how each major function within the firm (e.g., manu­
facturing, marketing, and human resources) will support the business strategy. Contingency 
plans are actions that are taken as an alternative to the firm’s current business strategy. The 
selection of which alternative action to pursue may be contingent on the occurrence of certain 
events called trigger points (e.g., failure to realize revenue targets or cost savings). When the 
trigger points are reached, the firm faces a number of alternatives, sometimes referred to as 
real options. These include abandoning, delaying, or accelerating an investment strategy. Un­
like the strategic options discussed later in this chapter, real options are decisions that can be 
made after an investment has been made.

134	
4.  Planning: Developing Business and Acquisition Plans
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
THE MERGER AND ACQUISITION PROCESS
An M&A process is the series of activities culminating in the transfer of ownership from the 
seller to the buyer. Some individuals shudder at following a structured process because they be­
lieve it may delay responding to opportunities, both anticipated and unanticipated. Anticipated 
opportunities are those identified as a result of the business planning process: understanding 
the firm’s external operating environment, assessing internal resources, reviewing a range of 
options, and articulating a clear vision of the future of the business and a realistic strategy for 
achieving that vision. Unanticipated opportunities may emerge as new information becomes 
available. Having a well-designed business plan does not delay pursuing opportunities; rather, 
it provides a way to evaluate the opportunity, rapidly and substantively, by determining the 
extent to which the opportunity supports realization of the business plan.
Fig. 4.1 illustrates the 10 phases of the M&A process described in this and subsequent 
chapters. These phases fall into two distinct sets of activities: prepurchase and postpurchase 
FIGURE 4.1  Flow diagram for the acquisition process.

	
Phase 1: Building the Business Plan	
135
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
decision activities. Negotiation, with its four largely concurrent and interrelated activities, is 
the crucial phase of the acquisition process. The decision to purchase or walk away is deter­
mined as a result of continuous iteration through the four activities comprising the negotia­
tion phase.
The phases of the M&A process are summarized as follows:
Phase 1: Business Plan—Develop a strategic plan for the entire business.
Phase 2: Acquisitions Plan—Develop the acquisition plan supporting the business plan.
Phase 3: Search—Search actively for acquisition candidates.
Phase 4: Screen—Screen and prioritize potential candidates.
Phase 5: First Contact—Initiate contact with the target.
Phase 6: Negotiation—Refine valuation, structure the deal, perform due diligence, and 
develop the financing plan.
Phase 7: Integration Plan—Develop a plan for integrating the acquired business.
Phase 8: Closing—Obtain the necessary approvals, resolve postclosing issues, and 
execute the closing.
Phase 9: Integration—Implement the postclosing integration.
Phase 10: Evaluation—Conduct the postclosing evaluation of acquisition.
PHASE 1: BUILDING THE BUSINESS PLAN
A well-designed business plan results from eight key activities, summarized next. The 
process of developing a business plan can be facilitated by addressing a number of detailed 
questions corresponding to each of these activities.4
The first activity is the external analysis to determine where to compete [i.e., which indus­
try or market(s)] and how to compete [i.e., how the firm can most effectively compete in its 
chosen market(s)]. This is followed by the internal analysis, or self-assessment, of the firm’s 
strengths and weaknesses relative to its competition. The combination of these two activi­
ties—the external and internal analyses—is often called SWOT analysis because it determines 
the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats of a business. Once this analysis is com­
pleted, management has a clearer understanding of emerging opportunities and threats to the 
firm and of the firm’s primary internal strengths and weaknesses. Information gleaned from 
the external and internal analyses drives the development of business, implementation, and 
functional strategies.
The third activity is to define a mission or vision statement that summarizes where and how 
the firm has chosen to compete, based on the external analysis, as well as management’s basic 
operating beliefs and values. Fourth, objectives are set, and quantitative measures of financial 
and nonfinancial performance are developed. Having completed these steps, the firm is ready 
to select a business strategy likely to achieve the objectives in an acceptable period of time, sub­
ject to constraints identified in the self-assessment. The business strategy defines, in general 
4Extensive checklists can be found in Porter (1985). Answering these types of questions requires gathering substan­
tial economic, industry, and market information.

136	
4.  Planning: Developing Business and Acquisition Plans
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
terms, how the business intends to compete (i.e., through cost leadership, differentiation, or 
increased focus).
Next, an implementation strategy is selected that articulates how to implement the business 
strategy from among a range of reasonable options. The firm may choose to act independent­
ly, partner with others, or acquire/merge with another firm. This is followed by development 
of a functional strategy that defines the roles, responsibilities, and resource requirements of 
each major functional area within the firm needed to support the business strategy.
The final activity is to establish strategic controls to monitor actual performance to plan, 
implement incentive systems, and take corrective actions as necessary. Bonus plans and other 
incentive mechanisms to motivate all employees to achieve their individual objectives on or 
ahead of schedule are put in place. When significant deviations from the implementation 
plan occur, the firm may take corrective actions (e.g., cutting output or costs) included in cer­
tain contingency plans. Let’s look at each of these eight activities in greater detail.
External Analysis
The external analysis involves developing an understanding of the business’s customers 
and their needs, the market/industry competitive dynamics or factors determining profit­
ability and cash flow, and emerging trends that affect customer needs and industry competi­
tion. This analysis begins with answering two basic questions: where to compete and how to 
compete. The output of the external analysis is the identification of growth opportunities and 
competitive threats.
Determining Where to Compete
Critical to building a business plan is deciding where a firm should compete. It begins 
with identifying the firm’s current and potential customers and their primary needs, and it 
is based on the process of market segmentation, which involves identifying customers with 
common characteristics and needs. For example, a firm may segment markets until it finds 
customers whose buying decisions are based on price, quality, or service. In determining 
where to compete, the firm is identifying where it will concentrate its resources. Frequently, 
firms lose sight of what has made them successful in the past, in a vain hope of accelerating 
earnings growth. In 2011, Cisco Systems Inc. sold or closed its consumer business, eliminating 
hundreds of millions of dollars spent on acquisitions. The company stated publicly that it had 
strayed from its core market, making networking equipment for business customers.
Whether it is made up of individual consumers or other firms, collections of customers 
comprise markets. A collection of markets is said to comprise an industry—for example, the 
automotive industry includes the new and used car markets as well as the after-market for re­
placement parts. Markets may be further subdivided by examining cars by makes and model 
years. The automotive industry could also be defined regionally (e.g., New England, North 
America, Europe) or by country. Each subdivision, whether by product or geographic area, 
defines a new market within the automotive industry.
Another example is the cloud computing industry that consists of firms providing custom­
ers remote access in three discrete markets: software, infrastructure, and platform services. 
The software services market consists of such firms as Salesforce and Workday providing 
customers on-demand licensing of their software applications for a fee. The infrastructure 

	
Phase 1: Building the Business Plan	
137
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
services market allows companies to rent on demand operating systems, servers, and storage 
services from such competitors as Microsoft, Google, and Amazon.com. The platform market, 
consisting of the likes of Google, Amazon.com, and Salesforce, offers templates for customers 
to create software to meet their specific needs.
How a firm selects target industries/markets depends on the firm’s selection criteria and 
how it ranks the relative importance of each criterion in its decision-making process. Ex­
amples of selection criteria include market size and growth rate, profitability, cyclicality, price 
sensitivity of customers, amount of regulation, degree of unionization, and existence of entry 
and exit barriers. While the selection process generally involves the collection of substantial 
amounts of data, the ultimate decision often reflects the risk tolerance and imagination of the 
firm’s board and senior management.
Determining How to Compete
Determining how to compete requires a clear understanding of the factors that are critical 
for competing successfully in the targeted market. This outward-looking analysis applies to 
the primary factors governing the firm’s external environment. Understanding the market/
industry competitive dynamics (i.e., how profits and cash flow are determined) and knowing 
the areas in which the firm must excel in comparison to the competition (e.g., high-quality or 
low-cost products) are crucial if the firm is to compete effectively in its chosen market.
Market profiling entails collecting sufficient data to assess and characterize accurately 
a firm’s competitive environment within its chosen markets. Using Michael Porter’s well-
known “Five Forces” framework, the market or industry environment can be described in 
terms of competitive dynamics, such as the firm’s customers, suppliers, current competi­
tors, potential competitors, and product substitutes.5 The determinants of the intensity of 
competition in an industry include competition among existing firms, the threat of entry 
of new firms, and the threat of substitute products. While the degree of competition de­
termines the potential to earn abnormal profits (i.e., those in excess of what would be 
expected for the degree of assumed risk), the actual profits are influenced by the rela­
tive bargaining power of the industry’s customers and suppliers. See the section “End of 
Chapter Case Study: Life Technologies Undertakes a Strategic Review” in Chapter 9 for 
an illustration of how the “Five Forces” model can be used to understand an industry’s 
competitive dynamics.
This framework may be modified to include other factors that determine actual industry 
profitability and cash flow, such as the severity of government regulation, and the impact of 
global influences such as fluctuating exchange rates. Labor costs may also be included. While 
they represent a relatively small percentage of total expenses in many areas of manufacturing, 
they frequently constitute the largest expense in the nonmanufacturing sector. The analysis 
should also include factors such as the bargaining power of labor. Fig. 4.2 brings together 
these competitive dynamics. The data required to analyze industry competitive dynamics 
include the types of products and services; market share (in terms of dollars and units); pric­
ing metrics; selling and distribution channels and associated costs; type, location, and age of 
the production facilities; product quality metrics; customer service metrics; compensation by 
major labor category; research and development (R&D) expenditures; supplier performance 
5Porter (1985).

138	
4.  Planning: Developing Business and Acquisition Plans
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
FIGURE 4.2  Defining market/industry competitive dynamics. Source: Adapted from Palepu et al. (2004).

	
Phase 1: Building the Business Plan	
139
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
metrics; and financial performance (in terms of growth and profitability). These data must be 
collected on all significant competitors in the firm’s chosen markets.
Determinants of the Intensity of Industry Competition
The overall intensity of industry competition reflects different factors in several categories. 
The first category includes the industry growth rate, industry concentration, degree of dif­
ferentiation and switching costs, scale and scope economies, excess capacity, and exit barri­
ers, which all affect the intensity of competition among current industry competitors. If an 
industry is growing rapidly, existing firms have less need to compete for market share. If 
an industry is highly concentrated, firms can more easily coordinate their pricing activities; 
in contrast, this is more difficult in a highly fragmented industry, in which price competition 
is likely to be very intense.
Even when an industry is concentrated, firms may compete largely on the basis of price 
when their product/service offerings are largely undifferentiated to gain market share. To 
illustrate, consider the rapid migration of businesses to the “cloud” in which small and large 
firms rent technology inexpensively over the Internet instead of buying hardware and soft­
ware outright. This market is dominated currently by Google, Amazon.com, and Microsoft. 
With their service offerings perceived by potential clients as similar, these three firms are 
competing by discounting prices aggressively in an attempt to gain more customers.
If the cost of switching from one supplier to another is minimal because of low perceived 
differentiation, customers are likely to switch based on relatively small differences in price. In 
industries in which production volume is important, companies may compete aggressively 
for market share to realize economies of scale. Moreover, firms in industries exhibiting sub­
stantial excess capacity often reduce prices to fill unused capacity. Finally, competition may 
be intensified in industries in which it is difficult for firms to exit due to high exit barriers such 
as large unfunded pension liabilities and single-purpose assets.
The second category is the potential for new entrants offering products similar to those 
provided by current competitors in the industry. Competitors within an industry character­
ized by low barriers to entry have limited pricing power. Attempts to raise prices resulting 
in abnormally large profits will attract new competitors, thereby adding to the industry’s 
productive capacity. In contrast, high entry barriers may give existing competitors significant 
pricing power. Barriers to new entrants include situations in which the large-scale operations 
of existing competitors give them a potential cost advantage due to economies of scale. The 
“first-mover advantage”—that is, being an early competitor in an industry—may also create 
entry barriers because first movers achieve widespread brand recognition, establish indus­
try standards, develop exclusive relationships with key suppliers and distributors, establish 
large installed user bases, and amass huge customer databases. Finally, legal constraints, such 
as copyrights and patents, may inhibit the entry of new firms.
Examples of how barriers to entry impact competition abound. Google’s use of accumu­
lated and indexed search information enables it to provide superior customized searches; its 
immense database of customer buying patterns makes Amazon.com better able to provide 
targeted advertising. These capabilities enable both firms to attract more visitors (and in turn 
advertising revenue) making it exceedingly difficult for start-ups to compete. With hardware 
and software revenues falling due to the accelerating migration of businesses to the cloud, 

140	
4.  Planning: Developing Business and Acquisition Plans
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
IBM has belatedly attempted to establish a presence in providing cloud computing services. 
Despite substantial investments and acquisitions to gain the capabilities to compete in this 
space, IBM has been unable to build the technical know-how and customer base to compete 
profitably with existing competitors. Although it had a lengthy history of successfully com­
peting for government contracts, the US Central Intelligence Agency awarded a large cloud 
computing contract to Amazon.com in 2013. As an early competitor in this market, Amazon.
com was able to gain strong brand recognition and to achieve substantial economies of scale 
giving it a significant competitive edge over IBM that the CIA concluded was a “high-risk 
choice.”
High entry barriers may also stifle innovation. New ideas often emerge from start-up firms 
lacking the capital to overcome substantial entry barriers to achieve an economically viable 
market share. Small potential market entrants may seek to be acquired by current industry 
competitors rather than to be marginalized or pushed into bankruptcy.6 Consequently, the 
leading competitors in the industry are able to incorporate innovations via acquisitions either 
into their own products or services or to prevent them from being used to their detriment.
The third category includes the potential for substituting products and services. The sell­
ing price of one product compared to that of a close substitute—called the relative price—
determines the threat of substitution, along with the performance of competing products, 
perceived quality, and the willingness of the customer to switch. Potential substitutes could 
come from current or potential competitors and include those that are substantially similar to 
existing products and those performing the same function—for example, a tablet computer 
rather than a hardcover book.
Recent moves by Apple Inc. illustrate how the intensity of industry competition can fun­
damentally change a firm’s strategy. Apple, the company that turned digital music into a 
mainstream phenomenon, made its largest acquisition ever in late 2014 when it acquired 
Beats Electronics, known for its highly popular headphones and music streaming service, 
for $3 billion in cash. When Apple founder Steve Jobs introduced the firm’s iTunes Store, the 
objective was to displace major record companies by allowing customers to buy any tunes 
they wanted one at a time. This was in marked contrast to the major record companies who, 
at the time, were interested only in selling CDs containing a number of tunes, many of which 
the customer did not want. The iTunes Store opened in 2003 and dominated digital music 
sales for a decade.
While Jobs had resisted music subscription services believing consumers did not want 
to rent songs, Spotify and Pandora, which allow people to stream music freely with ads or 
with a paid subscription, have demonstrated that more than one-half of the world’s popula­
tion having smartphones would readily download apps for streaming music. In an effort to 
adapt to changing consumer buying patterns and intensified competition, Apple intends to 
operate the Beats brand as a standalone business, offering Beats’ streaming music service and 
premium headphones along with iTunes sale of individual songs and albums and streaming 
radio service. While Beats has a substantially smaller subscriber base than such rivals as Spo­
tify, the firm provides considerable branding power and the expertise of the firm’s founders 
Jimmy Iovine and Dr. Dre.
6Norback et al. (2014).

	
Phase 1: Building the Business Plan	
141
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
Further evidence of changes in Apple’s business strategy due to the intensity of industry 
competition and changing market trends arose in late 2014 when the firm announced an al­
liance with former rival IBM to develop more than 100 business applications for Apple’s 
iPhone and iPad tablet computers. Historically, former Apple CEO Steve Jobs did little to hide 
his scorn for selling to businesses. However, his successor, Tim Cook, has assumed a much 
friendlier approach to corporate buyers. As part of the alliance, IBM’s employees will serve 
as a sales force for selling Apple products and for providing on-site service. The alliance tar­
gets a growing market in which people desire to have a single device for both business and 
personal use.
Determinants of Actual Profits and Cash Flow
The bargaining powers of customers, suppliers, and the labor force are all important fac­
tors that affect profits and cash flow. Others include the degree of government regulation and 
global exposure. The relative bargaining power of buyers depends on their primary buying 
criteria (i.e., price, quality/reliability, service, convenience, or some combination), price sen­
sitivity or elasticity, switching costs, and their number and size as compared to the number 
and size of suppliers.
A customer whose primary buying criterion is product quality and reliability may be will­
ing to pay a premium for a BMW because it is perceived to have higher relative quality. 
Customers are more likely to be highly price sensitive in industries characterized by largely 
undifferentiated products and low switching costs. Buyers are likely to have considerable 
bargaining power when there are relatively few large buyers relative to the number of sup­
pliers. The relative leverage of suppliers reflects the ease with which customers can switch 
suppliers, perceived differentiation, their number, and how critical they are to the customer.
Switching costs are highest when customers must pay penalties to exit long-term sup­
ply contracts or when new suppliers would have to undergo an intensive learning process 
to meet the customers’ requirements. Moreover, reliance on a single or a small number of 
suppliers shifts pricing power from the buyer to the seller. Examples include Intel’s global 
dominance of the microchip market and Microsoft’s worldwide supremacy in the market for 
personal computer operating systems.
Work stoppages create opportunities for competitors to gain market share. Customers are 
forced to satisfy their product and service needs elsewhere. Although the loss of custom­
ers may be temporary, it may become permanent if the customer finds that another firm’s 
product or service is superior. Frequent work stoppages also may have long-term impacts 
on productivity and production costs as a result of a less motivated labor force and increased 
labor turnover. Governments may choose to regulate industries that are heavily concentrat­
ed, are natural monopolies (e.g., electric utilities), or provide a potential risk to the public. 
Regulatory compliance adds significantly to an industry’s operating costs. Regulations also 
create barriers to both entering and exiting an industry. Global exposure is the extent to which 
participation in an industry necessitates having a multinational presence. The automotive in­
dustry is widely viewed as a global industry in which participation requires having assembly 
plants and distribution networks in major markets worldwide. Global exposure introduces 
the firm to the impact of currency risk on profit repatriation and political risk such as the 
confiscation of the firm’s properties.

142	
4.  Planning: Developing Business and Acquisition Plans
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
Internal Analysis
The primary output of internal analysis is to determine the firm’s strengths and weaknesses. 
What are they compared to the competition? Can the firm’s critical strengths be easily dupli­
cated and surpassed by the competition? Can they be used to gain advantage in the firm’s 
chosen market? Can competitors exploit the firm’s key weaknesses? These questions must be 
answered as objectively as possible for the information to be useful in formulating a viable 
strategy.
Ultimately, competing successfully means doing a better job than the competitors of satis­
fying the needs of the firm’s targeted customers. A self-assessment identifies those strengths 
or competencies—so-called success factors—necessary to compete successfully in the firm’s 
chosen or targeted market. These may include high market share compared to that of the 
competition, product line breadth, cost-effective sales distribution channels, age and geo­
graphic location of production facilities, relative product quality, price competitiveness, R&D 
effectiveness, customer service effectiveness, corporate culture, and profitability.
Recall that the combination of the external and internal analyses just detailed can be sum­
marized as a SWOT analysis to determine the strengths and weaknesses of a business as well 
as the opportunities and threats confronting a business. The results of a SWOT analysis can 
be displayed on a SWOT matrix. Based on the results of this analysis, firms can select how to 
prioritize opportunities and threats and how to focus corporate resources to exploit selected 
opportunities or to reduce their vulnerability to perceived threats. This information helps 
management set a direction in terms of where and how the firm intends to compete, which is 
then communicated to the firm’s stakeholders in the form of a mission/statement and a set of 
quantifiable financial and nonfinancial objectives.
Table 4.1 illustrates a hypothetical SWOT analysis for Facebook. It is not intended to be a 
comprehensive list of perceived strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats. Rather, it 
is provided only for illustrative purposes. Facebook’s management using similar information 
may have opted to acquire mobile message service WhatsApp for an eye-popping $21.8 billion 
in early 2014 to adapt to the shift of internet users to mobile devices and to preclude competi­
tors such as Google from acquiring this explosively growing mobile messaging firm.
Mark Zuckerberg has stated his vision for Facebook is to make the world more open and 
connected.7 How? By giving people the power to share whatever they want and to be con­
nected to whatever they want no matter where they are. While Facebook dominates the social 
network space in which users are able to share everything they want others to know, Face­
book also wants to dominate how people communicate. The opportunity is to build the best 
and most ubiquitous mobile product, a platform where every app that is created can support 
social interaction and enable people to share, and to build Facebook into one of the world’s 
most valuable companies. The threat is that others such as Google may acquire the business 
propelling them to the forefront of the mobile communications space.
The acquisition of WhatsApp in early 2014 illustrates Mark Zuckerberg’s understanding 
that people want to communicate in different ways: sometimes broadly through Facebook 
and sometimes narrowly through WhatsApp’s mobile messaging capability. However, Face­
book’s efforts to do so in recent years to penetrate the mobile messaging market have largely 
7Carlson (2013).

	
Phase 1: Building the Business Plan	
143
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
failed. Facebook sorely needed a platform to make inroads in the mobile messaging market. 
Enter WhatsApp with its frenetic growth.
With the WhatsApp acquisition not yet closed, Facebook acquired start-up Oculus VR, 
the maker of virtual reality headsets, in mid-2014 for $2 billion. In an effort to increase user 
engagement or time spent online (a current Facebook strength), the deal represents a bet 
that virtual reality can eventually turn social networking into an immersive, 3D experience. 
Perhaps as a response to Google Glass that enables access to the internet through high-tech 
eyewear (a potential threat to Facebook), the Oculus acquisition represents an investment 
for Facebook in wearable hardware that “reimagines” how people will one day interact with 
information and other types of content.
Defining the Mission/Vision Statement
In 2009, Apple Computer’s board and management changed the way they wished to be 
perceived by the world by changing their company name to Apple Inc. The change was in­
tended to be transformative, reflecting the firm’s desire to change from being a computer 
hardware and software company to a higher-margin, faster-growing consumer electronics 
firm characterized by iPod- and iPhone-like products. In other words, the firm was establish­
ing a new corporate mission. In 2011, Starbucks dropped the word coffee from its logo and 
TABLE 4.1  Hypothetical Facebook 2014 SWOT Matrix
Strengths
Weaknesses
1.	Brand recognition
2.	Global scale with 1.86 monthly active users as 
of December 31, 2016
3.	User engagement (time spent online)
4.	Extensive user database attractive to advertisers
5.	Integrated website and applications widens user 
appeal
6.	Ability to monetize increasing mobile traffic 
through Instagram
1.	Privacy issues
2.	Dependence on display ads that have lower user 
“click-through” rate
3.	Dependence on advertising for more than 80% of 
revenue
4.	Aging user demographics
5.	Lack of website customization limits user 
personalization
6.	Poor protection of user information
Opportunities
Threats
1.	Increasing use of Facebook through mobile devices
2.	Expansion in emerging nations
3.	Diversify revenue sources
4.	Continuing shift of traditional shift of advertising 
online
5.	Adding new features and functions to enable 
customization
6.	Expanded “graph search” advertisinga
1.	Accelerating shift toward accessing internet 
through mobile devices, including wearable 
technology such as Google Glass
2.	Alterative social networks (e.g., Twitter, Tumblr, 
LinkedIn, Pinterest, and Google+) compete for 
users and advertisers
3.	Increasing user privacy concerns
4.	Lack of website customization
5.	Highly competitive ad market putting downward 
pressure on ad rates
6.	Increased frequency of identity theft
a Graph Search is a search engine that allows Facebook users to look up anything shared with them throughout their history on Facebook. This 
expands the firm’s user database to enable advertisers to track changes in buying patterns and personal interests.

144	
4.  Planning: Developing Business and Acquisition Plans
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
acquired upscale juice maker Evolution Fresh in an effort to transform itself from a chain of 
coffee shops into a consumer products firm selling products outside of its stores.
A mission/vision statement describes the corporation’s purpose for being, what business it is in, 
and where it hopes to go. The mission statement should not be so general as to provide little practi­
cal direction. A good mission statement should include references to the firm’s targeted markets, 
reflecting the fit between the corporation’s primary strengths and competencies and its ability to 
satisfy customer needs better than the competition. It should define the product offering relatively 
broadly to allow for the introduction of new products that might be derived from the firm’s core 
competencies. Distribution channels—how the firm chooses to distribute its products—should 
be identified, as should the customers targeted by the firm’s products and services. The mission 
statement should state management beliefs with respect to the firm’s primary stakeholders; these 
establish the underpinnings of how the firm intends to behave toward those stakeholders.
Too narrow a definition could be disastrous as it becomes difficult to ascertain opportuni­
ties and threats to the core business that do not fall neatly within the firm’s mission. A mission 
statement should not be tied to a specific product or service the firm currently produces. If 
railroads had defined their missions more broadly as establishing a strong market share in 
the transportation industry rather than limiting their positions to the rail business, they may 
have retained the preeminent position they once enjoyed. That is, by defining their positions 
narrowly around existing products and services, railroads failed to see alternative forms of 
transportation emerging in time to be proactive.
For a mission/vision statement to energize a firm’s employees, it must be widely under­
stood and accepted. Senior management must continually communicate the mission state­
ment so that everyone clearly understands. In turnaround situations, employees should be 
given an opportunity to commit to the desired behaviors communicated by top management. 
When CEO Marissa Mayer of Yahoo required employees working from remote locations to 
work onsite, she was asking for more effective employee engagement and communication. 
She understood that some disaffected employees would leave but that the firm’s culture 
would be better off without those unwilling to conform to the culture she was attempting to 
create. Management also must be receptive, not dismissive of, to new ideas. Finally, manage­
ment must be willing to celebrate successes by acknowledging what the firm has done well. 
But this does not mean lessening pressure to achieve the vision.
Setting Strategic or Long-Term Business Objectives
A business objective is what must be accomplished within a specific period. Good business 
objectives are measurable and have a set time frame in which to be realized. They include rev­
enue growth rates, minimum acceptable financial returns, and market share; these and others 
are discussed in more detail later. A good business objective might state that the firm seeks to 
increase revenue from the current $1 to $5 billion by a given year. A poorly written objective 
would simply state the firm seeks to increase revenue substantially.
Common Business Objectives
Corporations typically adopt a number of common business objectives. For instance, the 
firm may seek to achieve a rate of return that will equal or exceed the return required by its 
shareholders, lenders, or the combination of the two (cost of capital) by a given year. The 

	
Phase 1: Building the Business Plan	
145
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
firm may set a size objective, seeking to achieve some critical mass, defined in terms of sales 
volume, to realize economies of scale by a given year.
Several common objectives relate to growth. Accounting-related growth objectives include 
seeking to grow earnings per share (EPS), revenue, or assets at a specific rate of growth per 
year. Valuation-related growth objectives may be expressed in terms of the firm’s price-to-
earnings ratio, book value, cash flow, or revenue. Diversification objectives are those where 
the firm desires to sell current products in new markets, new products in current markets, 
or new products in new markets. For example, the firm may set an objective to derive 25% 
of its revenue from new products by a given year. It is also common for firms to set flexibility 
objectives, aiming to possess production facilities and distribution capabilities that can be 
shifted rapidly to exploit new opportunities as they arise. For example, major automotive 
companies have increasingly standardized parts across car and truck platforms to reduce the 
time required to introduce new products, giving them greater flexibility to facilitate a shift 
in production from one region to another. Technology objectives may reflect a firm’s desire to 
possess capabilities in core technologies. Microchip and software manufacturers as well as 
defense contractors are good examples of industries in which keeping current with, and even 
getting ahead of, new technologies is a prerequisite for survival.
Selecting the Appropriate Corporate, Business, and Implementation Strategies
Each level of strategy serves a specific purpose. Implementation strategies, necessarily more 
detailed than corporate-level strategies, provide specific guidance for a firm’s business units.
Corporate-Level Strategies
Corporate-level strategies may include all or some of the business units that are either 
wholly or partially owned by the corporation. A growth strategy focuses on accelerating the 
firm’s consolidated revenue, profit, and cash flow growth and may be implemented in many 
different ways. For example, CEO Satya Nadella’s corporate-level growth strategy for Micro­
soft is oriented around cloud computing, mobile platforms, content, and productivity soft­
ware. In addition, the firm is increasingly interested in selling its software as a subscription, 
even if it is not used on the Windows operating system. The firm’s 2014 acquisition of Mo­
jang, the video game developer that created Minecraft, for $2.5 billion illustrates how a single 
acquisition can contribute to multiple aspects of the firm’s corporate growth strategy. The 
acquisition enabled Microsoft to own the top game on Xbox (making this valuable content 
proprietary to Microsoft) and also the leading paid app on iOS and Android in the United 
States (selling such content on different mobile operating systems). The acquisition ensures 
that Minecraft will also run on Microsoft’s Windows Phone mobile operating system (making 
the firm’s own mobile operating system more competitive).
A diversification strategy involves a decision at the corporate level to enter new businesses. 
These businesses may be related to the corporation’s existing businesses or completely unre­
lated. Relatedness may be defined in terms of the degree to which a target firm’s products and 
served markets are similar to those of the acquiring firm. An operational restructuring strategy, 
sometimes called a turnaround or defensive strategy, usually refers to the outright or partial sale 
of companies or product lines, downsizing by closing unprofitable or nonstrategic facilities, 
obtaining protection from creditors in bankruptcy court, or liquidation. A financial restructuring 

146	
4.  Planning: Developing Business and Acquisition Plans
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
strategy describes actions by the firm to change its total debt and equity structure. The motiva­
tion for this strategy may be better utilization of excess corporate cash balances through share-
repurchase programs, reducing the firm’s cost of capital by increasing leverage or increasing 
management’s control by acquiring a company’s shares through a management buyout.
Business-Level Strategies
A firm should choose the business strategy from among the range of reasonable options 
that enables it to achieve its stated objectives in an acceptable period, subject to resource 
constraints. These include limitations on the availability of management talent and funds. 
Business strategies fall into one of four basic categories: price or cost leadership, product dif­
ferentiation, focus or niche strategies, and hybrid strategies.
Price or Cost Leadership
The price or cost leadership strategy reflects the influence of a series of tools, including the 
experience curve and product life cycle, introduced and popularized by the Boston Consult­
ing Group (BCG). This strategy is designed to make a firm the cost leader in its market by 
constructing efficient production facilities, controlling overhead expenses tightly, and elimi­
nating marginally profitable customer accounts.
The experience curve states that as the cumulative historical volume of a firm’s output in­
creases, cost per unit of output decreases geometrically as the firm becomes more efficient in 
producing that product. The firm with the largest historical output should also be the lowest-
cost producer, so this theory suggests. This implies that the firm should enter markets as early 
as possible and reduce product prices aggressively to maximize market share. The experience 
curve seems to work best for largely commodity-type industries, in which scale economies 
can lead to reductions in per-unit production costs, such as PC or cellphone handset manu­
facturing. The strategy of continuously driving down production costs makes most sense for 
the existing industry market share leader, since it may be able to improve its cost advantage 
by pursuing market share more aggressively through price-cutting.
BCG’s second major contribution is the product life cycle, which characterizes a product’s 
evolution in four stages: embryonic, growth, maturity, and decline. Strong sales growth and 
low barriers to entry characterize the first two stages. Over time, however, entry becomes more 
costly as early entrants into the market accumulate market share and experience lower per-unit 
production costs as a result of the effects of the experience curve. New entrants have poorer 
cost positions thanks to their small market shares compared with earlier entrants, and they 
cannot catch up to the market leaders as overall market growth slows. During the later phases, 
characterized by slow market growth, falling product prices force marginal firms and unprofit­
able firms out of the market or force them to consolidate with other firms. Knowing the firm’s 
stage of the product life cycle can help project future cash flow growth, which is necessary for 
valuation purposes. During the high growth phase, firms in the industry normally have high 
investment requirements and operating cash flow is normally negative. During the mature and 
declining growth phases, investment requirements are lower, and cash flow becomes positive.
Product Differentiation
Differentiation encompasses a range of strategies in which the product offered is perceived 
by customers to be slightly different from other product offerings in the marketplace. Brand 

	
Phase 1: Building the Business Plan	
147
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
image is one way to accomplish differentiation. Another is to offer customers a range of fea­
tures or functions. For example, many banks issue MasterCard or Visa credit cards, but each 
bank tries to differentiate its card by offering a higher credit line or a lower interest rate or 
annual fee or with awards programs. Apple Computer has used innovative technology to 
stay ahead of competitors selling MP3 players, most recently with cutting-edge capabilities 
of its newer iPads. Giving customers convenient access to diverse content on multiple devices 
through its embryonic video streaming service has the potential to distinguish AT&T from 
its competitors and to spur customer growth in the wake of its slowing wireless business and 
moribund landline operation.
Focus or Niche Strategies
Firms adopting focus or niche strategies tend to concentrate their efforts by selling a 
few products or services to a single market, and they compete primarily by understanding 
their customers’ needs better than does the competition. In this strategy, the firm seeks to 
carve out a specific niche with respect to a certain group of customers, a narrow geograph­
ic area, or a particular use of a product. Examples include the major airlines, airplane 
manufacturers (e.g., Boeing), and major defense contractors (e.g., Lockheed-Martin).
Hybrid Strategies
Hybrid strategies involve some combination of the three strategies just discussed (Table 4.2). 
For example, Coca Cola pursues both a differentiated and a highly market-focused strategy. 
The company derives the bulk of its revenues by focusing on the worldwide soft drink mar­
ket, and its main product is differentiated, in that consumers perceive it to have a distinctly 
refreshing taste. Fast-food industry giant McDonald’s pursues a differentiated strategy, com­
peting on the basis of providing fast food of a consistent quality in a clean, comfortable en­
vironment, at a reasonable price. The firm strives to contain costs by applying best practices 
across its restaurants and by using bulk purchases to hold down its food input costs.
Blue Ocean Strategy
Proponents of this strategy argue that instead of competing with others in your own indus­
try, a firm should strive to create unique products for new markets and to profit from these 
new markets or “blue oceans.”8 Apple Inc.’s record of introducing highly innovative and pop­
ular products is perhaps the best example of this strategy. The firm has a record of innovating 
8Kim et al. (2015) argue that it is possible to pursue both a differentiated and a low-cost strategy at the same time 
by giving the customer only what they want at a reasonable price. This is in effect a strategy of giving the customer 
the best value for their money.
TABLE 4.2  Hybrid Strategies
Cost leadership
Product differentiation
Niche focus approach
Cisco Systems
WD-40
Coca-Cola
McDonalds
Multimarket approach
Walmart
Oracle
Google
Microsoft

148	
4.  Planning: Developing Business and Acquisition Plans
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
new products that consumers did not even know they wanted but who learned to find them 
“cool” and indispensable. Firms that compete in conventional or traditional markets are said 
to work in “red ocean” conditions, where businesses fight for a share of an existing market. In 
contrast, “blue ocean” opportunities offer the prospect of a market free of competitors. Why? 
They are unique and desirable.
Implementation Strategies
Once a firm has determined the appropriate business strategy, it must decide the best 
means of implementation. Typically, a firm has five choices: implement the strategy based 
solely on internal resources (the solo venture, go it alone, or build approach), partner with 
others, invest, acquire, or swap assets. There is little evidence that one strategy is con­
sistently superior to another. In fact, failure rates among alternative strategies tend to be 
remarkably similar to those documented for M&As9; this should not be surprising in that 
if one strategy consistently outperformed alternative approaches, all firms would adopt 
a similar growth strategy. Table 4.3 compares the advantages and disadvantages of these 
options.
9Nielsen (2002) estimates the failure rate for new product introductions at well over 70%. Failure rates for alliances 
of all types exceed 60% (Klein, 2004).
TABLE 4.3  Strategy Implementation
Basic options
Advantages
Disadvantages
Solo venture or build 
(organic growth)
•	Control
•	Capital/expensea requirements
•	Speed
Partner (shared growth/
shared control)
•	Marketing/
distribution alliance
•	Joint venture
•	License
•	Franchise
•	Limits capital and expense investment 
requirements
•	May be precursor to acquisition
•	Lack of or limited control
•	Potential for diverging objectives
•	Potential for creating a 
competitor
Invest (e.g., minority 
investments in other 
firms)
•	Limits initial capital/expense 
requirements
•	High risk of failure
•	Lack of control
•	Time
Acquire or merge
•	Speed
•	Control
•	Capital/expense requirements
•	Potential earnings dilution
Swap assets
•	Limits use of cash
•	No earnings dilution
•	Limits tax liability if basis in assets 
swapped remains unchanged
•	Finding willing parties
•	Reaching agreement on assets to 
be exchanged
a Expense investment refers to expenditures made on such things as application software development, database construction, research and 
development, training, and advertising to build brand recognition, which (unlike capital expenditures) usually are expensed in the year in which 
the monies are spent.

	
Phase 1: Building the Business Plan	
149
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
In theory, choosing among alternative options should be based on discounting projected 
cash flows to the firm resulting from each option. In practice, many other considerations are 
at work such as intangible factors and the plausibility of underlying assumptions.
The Role of Intangible Factors
Although financial analyses are conducted to evaluate the various strategy implementa­
tion options, the ultimate choice may depend on the senior manager’s risk profile, patience, 
and ego. The degree of control offered by the various alternatives is often the central issue 
senior management must confront as this choice is made. Although the solo venture and 
acquisition options offer the highest degree of control, they can be the most expensive, al­
though for very different reasons. Typically, a build strategy will take considerably longer 
to realize key strategic objectives, and it may have a significantly lower current value than 
the alternatives—depending on the magnitude and timing of cash flows generated from the 
investments. Gaining control through acquisition can also be very expensive because of the 
substantial premium the acquirer normally has to pay to gain a controlling interest in another 
company. The joint venture may be a practical alternative to either a build or an acquire 
strategy; it gives a firm access to skills, product distribution channels, proprietary processes, 
and patents at a lower initial expense than might otherwise be required. Asset swaps may be 
an attractive alternative to the other options, but in most industries they are generally very 
difficult to establish unless the physical characteristics and use of the assets are substantially 
similar and the prospects for realizing economies of scale and scope are attractive.10
Analyzing Assumptions
Financial theory suggests that the option with the highest net present value is generally 
the preferred strategy. However, this may be problematic if the premise on which the strategy 
is based is questionable. Therefore, it is critical to understand the key assumptions underly­
ing the chosen strategy as well as those underlying alternative strategies. This forces senior 
management to make choices based on a discussion of the reasonableness of the assumptions 
associated with each option rather than simply the numerical output of computer models.
Functional Strategies
Functional strategies focus on short-term results and generally are developed by func­
tional areas. These strategies result in a series of concrete actions for each function or business 
group, depending on the company’s organization. It is common to see separate plans with 
specific goals and actions for the marketing, manufacturing, R&D, engineering, and financial 
and human resources functions. Functional strategies should include clearly defined objec­
tives, actions, timetables for achieving those actions, resources required, and identifying the 
individual responsible for ensuring that the actions are completed on time and within budget.
Specific functional strategies might read as follows:
10In 2016, French drug maker Sanofi agreed to transfer its animal healthcare business in exchange for $5.2 bil­
lion and Boehringer Ingleheim’s consumer healthcare business. In 2011, Starbucks assumed 100% ownership of 
restaurants in major Chinese provinces from its joint venture partner, Maxim’s Caterers, in exchange for Maxim’s 
assuming full ownership of the JV’s restaurants in Hong Kong and Macau.

150	
4.  Planning: Developing Business and Acquisition Plans
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
•	 Set up a product distribution network in the northeastern United States that is capable of 
handling a minimum of 1 million units of product annually by 12/31/20XX. (Individual 
responsible: Oliver Tran; estimated budget: $5 million.)
•	 Develop and execute an advertising campaign to support the sales effort in the 
northeastern United States by 10/31/20XX. (Individual responsible: Maria Gomez; 
estimated budget: $0.5 million.)
•	 Hire a logistics manager to administer the distribution network by 9/15/20XX. 
(Individual responsible: Patrick Petty; estimated budget: $250,000.)
•	 Acquire a manufacturing company with sufficient capacity to meet the projected demand 
for the next 3 years by 6/30/20XX at a purchase price not to exceed $250 million. 
(Individual responsible: Chang Lee.)
Perhaps an application software company is targeting the credit card industry. Here is an 
example of how the company’s business mission, business strategy, implementation strategy, 
and functional strategies are related:
•	 Mission: To be recognized by our customers as the leader in providing accurate, high-
speed, high-volume transactional software for processing credit card remittances by 
20XX.
•	 Business Strategy: Upgrade our current software by adding the necessary features and 
functions to differentiate our product and service offering from our primary competitors 
and satisfy projected customer requirements through 20XX.
•	 Implementation Strategy: Purchase a software company at a price not to exceed $400 
million that is capable of developing “state-of-the-art” remittance processing software by 
12/31/20XX. (Individual responsible: Daniel Stuckee.)
•	 Functional Strategies to Support the Implementation Strategy (Note each requires a completion 
date)
•	 R&D: Identify and develop new applications for remittance processing software.
•	 Marketing and Sales: Assess the impact of new product offerings on revenue generated 
from current and new customers.
•	 Human Resources: Determine appropriate staffing requirements.
•	 Finance: Identify and quantify potential cost savings generated from improved 
productivity as a result of replacing existing software with the newly acquired 
software and from the elimination of duplicate personnel in our combined companies. 
Evaluate the impact of the acquisition on our combined companies’ financial 
statements.
•	 Legal: Ensure that all target company customers have valid contracts and that these 
contracts are transferable without penalty. Also, ensure that we will have exclusive 
and unlimited rights to use the remittance processing software.
•	 Tax: Assess the tax impact of the acquisition on our cash flow.
Strategic Controls
Strategic controls include both incentive and monitoring systems. Incentive systems include 
bonus, profit sharing, or other performance-based payments made to motivate both acquirer 
and target company employees to work to implement the business strategy for the combined 

	
The Business Plan as a Communication Document	
151
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
firms. Typically, these would have been agreed to during negotiation. Incentives often include re­
tention bonuses for key employees of the target firm if they remain with the combined companies 
for a specific period following completion of the transaction. Monitoring systems are implement­
ed to track the actual performance of the combined firms against the business plan. They may 
be accounting based and monitor financial measures such as revenue, profits, and cash flow, or 
they may be activity based and monitor variables that drive financial performance such as cus­
tomer retention, average revenue per customer, employee turnover, and revenue per employee.
THE BUSINESS PLAN AS A COMMUNICATION DOCUMENT
The business plan is an effective means of communicating with key decision makers and 
stakeholders. A good business plan should be short, focused, and well documented. There are 
many ways to develop such a document. Exhibit 4.1 outlines the key features that should be 
addressed in a good business plan—one that is so well reasoned and compelling that decision 
makers accept its recommendations. The executive summary may be the most important and 
difficult piece of the business plan to write. It must communicate succinctly and compellingly 
what is being proposed, why it is being proposed, how it is to be achieved, and by when. It must 
also identify the major resource requirements and risks associated with the critical assumptions 
underlying the plan. The executive summary is often the first and only portion of the busi­
ness plan that is read by a time-constrained CEO, lender, or venture capitalist. As such, it may 
represent the first and last chance to catch the attention of the key decision maker. Supporting 
documentation should be referred to in the business plan text but presented in the appendices.
EXHIBIT 4.1  TYPICAL BUSINESS UNIT-LEVEL BUSINESS 
PLAN FORMAT
1.	 Executive summary: In one or two pages, describe what you are proposing to do, why, how it 
will be accomplished, by what date, critical assumptions, risks, and resource requirements.
2.	 Industry/market definition: Define the industry or market in which the firm competes in terms of 
size, growth rate, product offering, and other pertinent characteristics.
3.	 External analysis: Describe industry/market competitive dynamics in terms of the factors 
affecting customers, competitors, potential entrants, product or service substitutes, and 
suppliers and how they interact to determine profitability and cash flow (e.g., Porter five forces 
model; Fig. 4.2). Discuss the major opportunities and threats that exist because of the industry’s 
competitive dynamics. Information accumulated in this section should be used to develop the 
assumptions underlying revenue and cost projections in building financial statements.
4.	 Internal analysis: Describe the company’s strengths and weaknesses and how they compare 
with the competition. Identify those strengths and weaknesses critical to the firm’s targeted 
customers, and explain why. These data can be used to develop cost and revenue assumptions 
underlying the businesses’ projected financial statements.
5.	 Business mission/vision statement: Describe the purpose of the corporation, what it intends 
to achieve, and how it wishes to be perceived by its stakeholders. An automotive parts 

152	
4.  Planning: Developing Business and Acquisition Plans
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
PHASE 2: BUILDING THE MERGER–ACQUISITION 
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN
If a firm decides to execute its business strategy through an acquisition, it will need an 
acquisition plan. Here, the steps of the acquisition planning process are discussed, includ­
ing detailed components of an acquisition plan.11 The acquisition plan is a specific type of 
11Note that if the implementation of the firm’s business strategy required some other business combination, such 
as a joint venture or a business alliance, the same logic of the acquisition planning process described here would 
apply.
manufacturer may envision itself as being perceived by the end of the decade as the leading 
supplier of high-quality components worldwide by its customers and as fair and honest by its 
employees, the communities in which it operates, and its suppliers.
6.	 Quantified strategic objectives (including completion dates): Indicate both financial goals (e.g., 
rates of return, sales, cash flow, share price) and nonfinancial goals (e.g., market share; being 
perceived by customers or investors as number 1 in the targeted market in terms of market 
share, product quality, price, innovation).
7.	 Business strategy: Identify how the mission and objectives will be achieved (e.g., become a cost 
leader, adopt a differentiation strategy, focus on a specific market, or some combination of these 
strategies). Show how the chosen business strategy satisfies a key customer need or builds 
on a major strength possessed by the firm. A firm whose customers are highly price sensitive 
may pursue a cost leadership strategy to enable it to lower selling prices and increase market 
share and profitability. A firm with a well-established brand name may choose a differentiation 
strategy by adding features to its product that are perceived by its customers as valuable.
8.	 Implementation strategy: From a range of reasonable options (i.e., solo venture or “go it alone” 
strategy; partner via a joint venture or less formal business alliance, license, or minority investment; 
or acquire–merge), indicate which option would enable the firm to best implement its chosen 
business strategy. Indicate why the chosen implementation strategy is superior to alternative 
options. An acquisition strategy may be appropriate if the perceived “window of opportunity” is 
believed to be brief. A solo venture may be preferable if there are few attractive acquisition targets 
or the firm believes it has the resources to develop the needed processes or technologies.
9.	 Functional strategies: Identify plans and resources required by major functional areas, including 
manufacturing, engineering, sales and marketing, research and development, finance, legal, 
and human resources.
10.	 Business plan financials and valuation: Provide projected annual income, balance sheet, and cash 
flow statements for the firm, and estimate the firm’s value based on the projected cash flows. 
State key forecast assumptions underlying the projected financials and valuation.
11.	 Risk assessment: Evaluate the potential impact on valuation by changing selected key 
assumptions one at a time. Briefly identify contingency plans (i.e., alternative ways of 
achieving the firm’s mission or objectives) that would be undertaken if critical assumptions 
prove inaccurate. Identify specific events that would cause the firm to pursue a contingency 
plan. Such “trigger points” could include deviations in revenue growth of more than x% or the 
failure to acquire or develop a needed technology within a specific period.

	
Phase 2: Building the Merger–Acquisition Implementation Plan	
153
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
implementation strategy that focuses on tactical or short-term issues rather than on strategic 
or longer-term issues. It includes management objectives, a resource assessment, a market 
analysis, senior management’s guidance regarding management of the acquisition process, a 
timetable, and the name of the individual responsible for making it all happen. These and the 
criteria to use when searching acquisition targets are codified in the first part of the planning 
process; once a target has been identified, several additional steps must be taken, including 
contacting the target, developing a negotiation strategy, determining the initial offer price, and 
developing both financing and integration plans. These activities are discussed in Chapter 5.
Development of the acquisition plan should be directed by the “deal owner”—typically a 
high-performing manager. Senior management should, early in the process, appoint the deal 
owner to this full- or part-time position. It can be someone in the firm’s business development 
unit, for example, or a member of the firm’s business development team with substantial deal-
making experience. Often, it is the individual who will be responsible for the operation and in­
tegration of the target, with an experienced deal maker playing a supporting role. The first steps 
in the acquisition planning process are undertaken prior to selecting the target firm and involve 
documenting the necessary plan elements before the search for an acquisition target can begin.
Not surprisingly, observing the outcome of previous deals in the same industry can be 
highly useful in planning an acquisition. Researchers have documented a strong positive 
relationship between premerger planning involving an analysis of past M&As in the same 
industry and postmerger performance. The correlation is particularly strong in cross-border 
deals where cultural differences are the greatest.12
Plan Objectives
The acquisition plan’s objectives should be consistent with the firm’s strategic objectives. 
Financial and nonfinancial objectives alike should support realization of the business plan 
objectives. Moreover, as is true with business plan objectives, the acquisition plan objectives 
should be quantified and include a date when such objectives are expected to be realized.
Financial objectives could include a minimum rate of return or operating profit, rev­
enue, and cash flow targets to be achieved within a specified period. Minimum or required 
rates of return targets may be substantially higher than those specified in the business 
plan, which relate to the required return to shareholders or to total capital. The required 
return for the acquisition may reflect a substantially higher level of risk as a result of the 
perceived variability of the amount and timing of the expected cash flows resulting from 
the acquisition.
Nonfinancial objectives address the motivations for making the acquisition that support 
achieving the financial returns stipulated in the business plan. They could include obtaining 
rights to specific products, patents, copyrights, or brand names; providing growth opportu­
nities in the same or related markets; developing new distribution channels in the same or 
related markets; obtaining additional production capacity in strategically located facilities; 
adding R&D capabilities; and acquiring access to proprietary technologies, processes, and 
skills.13 Because these objectives identify the factors that ultimately determine whether a firm 
12Francis et al. (2014a, 2014b).
13DePamphilis (2001).

154	
4.  Planning: Developing Business and Acquisition Plans
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
will achieve its desired financial returns, they may provide more guidance than financial 
targets. Table 4.4 illustrates how acquisition plan objectives can be linked with business plan 
objectives.
Resource/Capability Evaluation
Early in the acquisition process, it is important to determine the maximum amount of the 
firm’s available resources senior management will commit to a deal. This information is used 
when the firm develops target selection criteria before undertaking a search for target firms. 
TABLE 4.4  Examples of Linkages Between Business and Acquisition Plan Objectives
Business plan objective
Acquisition plan objective
Financial: The firm will
•	Achieve rates of return that will equal or 
exceed its cost of equity or capital by 20XX
•	Maintain a debt/total capital ratio of x%
Financial returns: The target firm should have
•	A minimum return on assets of x%
•	A debt/total capital ratio ≤y%
•	Unencumbered assetsa of $z million
•	Cash flow in excess of operating requirements of $x 
million
Size: The firm will be the number 1 or 2 market 
share leader by 20XX
•	Achieve revenue of $x million by 20XX
Size: The target firm should be at least $x million in 
revenue
Growth: The firm will achieve through 20XX 
annual average
•	Revenue growth of x%
•	Earnings per share growth of y%
•	Operating cash flow growth of z%
Growth: The target firm should
•	Have annual revenue, earnings, and operating cash flow 
growth of at least x, y, and z%, respectively
•	Provide new products and markets resulting in $z by 
20XX
•	Possess excess annual production capacity of x million 
units
Diversification: The firm will reduce earnings 
variability by x%
Diversification: The target firm’s earnings should be largely 
uncorrelated with the acquirer’s earnings
Flexibility: The firm will achieve flexibility in 
manufacturing and design
Flexibility: The target firm should use flexible 
manufacturing techniques
Technology: The firm will be recognized by its 
customers as the industry’s technology leader
Technology: The target firm should own important patents, 
copyrights, and other forms of intellectual property
Quality: The firm will be recognized by its 
customers as the industry’s quality leader
Quality: The target firm’s product defects must be less than 
x per million units manufactured
Service: The firm will be recognized by its 
customers as the industry’s service leader
Warranty record: The target firm’s customer claims per 
million units sold should not be greater than x
Cost: The firm will be recognized by its customers 
as the industry’s low-cost provider
Labor costs: The target firm should be nonunion and not 
subject to significant government regulation
Innovation: The firm will be recognized by its 
customers as the industry’s innovation leader
R&D capabilities: The target firm should have introduced 
new products accounting for at least x% of total revenue in 
the past 2 years
a Unencumbered assets are those that are not being used as collateral underlying current loans. As such, they may be used to collateralize 
additional borrowing to finance an acquisition.

	
Phase 2: Building the Merger–Acquisition Implementation Plan	
155
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
Financial resources that are potentially available to the acquirer include those provided by in­
ternally generated cash flow in excess of normal operating requirements plus funds from the 
equity and debt markets. In cases where the target firm is known, the potential financing pool 
includes funds provided by the internal cash flow of the combined companies in excess of 
normal operating requirements, the capacity of the combined firms to issue equity or increase 
leverage, and proceeds from selling assets not required to execute the acquirer’s business plan. 
Financial theory suggests that an acquiring firm will always be able to attract sufficient fund­
ing for an acquisition if it can demonstrate that it can earn its cost of capital. In practice, senior 
management’s risk tolerance plays an important role in determining what the acquirer believes 
it can afford to spend on a merger or acquisition. Risk-averse managers may be inclined to com­
mit only a small portion of the total financial resources that are potentially available to the firm.
Three basic types of risk confront senior management who are considering an acquisi­
tion. How these risks are perceived will determine how much of potential available resources 
management will be willing to commit to making an acquisition. Operating risk addresses the 
ability of the buyer to manage the acquired company. Generally, it is perceived to be higher 
for M&As in markets unrelated to the acquirer’s core business. Financial risk refers to the buy­
er’s willingness and ability to leverage a transaction as well as the willingness of shareholders 
to accept dilution of near-term EPS. To retain a specific credit rating, the acquiring company 
must maintain certain levels of financial ratios, such as debt-to-total capital and interest cov­
erage. A firm’s incremental debt capacity can be approximated by comparing the relevant 
financial ratios to those of comparable firms in the same industry that are rated by the credit 
rating agencies. The difference represents the amount the firm, in theory, could borrow with­
out jeopardizing its current credit rating.14 Senior management could also gain insight into 
how much EPS dilution equity investors may be willing to tolerate through informal discus­
sions with Wall Street analysts and an examination of comparable deals financed by issuing 
stock. Overpayment risk involves the dilution of EPS or a reduction in its growth rate resulting 
from paying significantly more than the economic value of the acquired company. The effects 
of overpayment on earnings dilution can last for years.15
Management Guidance
To ensure that the process is managed in a manner consistent with management’s risk 
tolerance, management must provide guidance to those responsible for finding and valuing 
the target as well as negotiating the deal. Upfront participation by management will help 
dramatically in the successful implementation of the acquisition process. Senior management 
15To illustrate the effects of overpayment risk, assume that the acquiring company’s shareholders are satisfied with 
the company’s projected increase in EPS of 20% annually for the next 5 years. The company announces it will be 
acquiring another firm and that “restructuring” expenses will slow EPS growth next year to 10%. Management ar­
gues that savings resulting from merging the two companies will raise the combined EPS growth rate to 30% in the 
second to fifth year of the forecast. The risk is that the savings cannot be realized in the time assumed by manage­
ment and the slowdown in earnings extends well beyond the first year.
14Suppose the combined acquirer and target firms’ interest coverage ratio is 3 and the combined firms’ debt-to-total 
capital ratio is 0.25. Assume further that other firms within the same industry with comparable interest coverage 
ratios have debt-to-total capital ratios of 0.5. Consequently, the combined acquirer and target firms could increase 
borrowing without jeopardizing their combined credit rating until their debt-to-total capital ratio equals 0.5.

156	
4.  Planning: Developing Business and Acquisition Plans
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
frequently avoids providing input early in the process, inevitably leading to miscommunica­
tion, confusion, and poor execution later in the process. Exhibit 4.2 provides examples of the 
more common types of management guidance that might be found in an acquisition plan.
Timetable
A properly constructed timetable recognizes all of the key events that must take place in 
the acquisition process. Each event should have beginning and ending dates and milestones 
along the way and should identify who is responsible for ensuring that each milestone is 
achieved. The timetable of events should be aggressive but realistic. The timetable should 
be sufficiently aggressive to motivate all involved to work as expeditiously as possible to 
meet the plan’s management objectives, while also avoiding overoptimism that may de­
motivate individuals if uncontrollable circumstances delay reaching certain milestones. 
Exhibit 4.3 recaps the components of a typical acquisition planning process. The first two 
elements were discussed in detail in this chapter; the remaining items will be the subject of 
the next chapter.
SOME THINGS TO REMEMBER
The success of an acquisition depends on the focus, understanding, and discipline inher­
ent in a thorough and viable business plan that addresses four overarching questions: Where 
should the firm compete? How should the firm compete? How can the firm satisfy customer 
EXHIBIT 4.2  EXAMPLES OF MANAGEMENT GU IDANCE 
PROVIDED TO ACQU ISITION TEAM
1.	 Determining the criteria used to evaluate prospective candidates (e.g., size, price range, 
current profitability, growth rate, geographic location, and cultural compatibility)
2.	 Specifying acceptable methods for finding candidates (e.g., soliciting board members; 
analyzing competitors; contacting brokers, investment bankers, lenders, law firms, and the 
trade press)
3.	 Establishing roles and responsibilities of the acquisition team, including the use of outside 
consultants, and defining the team’s budget
4.	 Identifying acceptable sources of financing (e.g., equity issues, bank loans, unsecured bonds, 
seller financing, or asset sales)
5.	 Establishing preferences for an asset or stock purchase and form of payment
6.	 Setting a level of tolerance for goodwill (i.e., the excess of the purchase price over the fair 
market value net acquired assets: acquired assets less assumed liabilities)
7.	 Indicating the degree of openness to partial rather than full ownership
8.	 Specifying willingness to launch an unfriendly takeover
9.	 Setting affordability limits (which can be expressed as a maximum price to after-tax earnings, 
earnings before interest and taxes, or cash flow multiple or maximum dollar amount)
10.	 Indicating any desire for related or unrelated acquisitions

	
Some Things to Remember	
157
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
EXHIBIT 4.3  ACQU ISITION PLAN FOR THE ACQU IRING FIRM
1.	 Plan objectives: Identify the specific purpose of the acquisition. This should include what 
specific goals are to be achieved (e.g., cost reduction, access to new customers, distribution 
channels or proprietary technology, expanded production capacity) and how the achievement 
of these goals will better enable the acquiring firm to implement its business strategy.
2.	 Timetable: Establish a timetable for completing the acquisition, including integration if the 
target firm is to be merged with the acquiring firm’s operations.
3.	 Resource/capability evaluation: Evaluate the acquirer’s financial and managerial capability to 
complete an acquisition. Identify affordability limits in terms of the maximum amount the 
acquirer should pay for an acquisition. Explain how this figure is determined.
4.	 Management guidance: Indicate the acquirer’s preferences for a “friendly” acquisition; 
controlling interest; using stock, debt, cash, or some combination; and so on.
5.	 Search plan: Develop criteria for identifying target firms and explain plans for conducting the 
search, why the target ultimately selected was chosen, and how you will make initial contact 
with the target firm (see Chapter 5).
6.	 Negotiation strategy: Identify key buyer/seller issues. Recommend a deal structure (i.e., terms 
and conditions) addressing the primary needs of all parties involved. Comment on the 
characteristics of the deal structure. Such characteristics include the proposed acquisition 
vehicle (i.e., the legal structure used to acquire the target firm; see Chapter 11 for more detail), 
the postclosing organization (i.e., the legal framework used to manage the combined businesses 
following closing), and the form of payment (i.e., cash, stock, or some combination). Other 
characteristics include the form of acquisition (i.e., whether assets or stock are being acquired) 
and tax structure (i.e., whether it is a taxable or a nontaxable transaction; see Chapter 12 for 
more detail). Indicate how you might “close the gap” between the seller’s price expectations 
and the offer price. These considerations will be discussed in more detail in Chapter 5.
7.	 Determine initial offer price: Provide projected 5-year income, balance sheet, and cash flow 
statements for the acquiring and target firms individually and for the consolidated acquirer 
and target firms with and without the effects of synergy. (Note that the projected forecast 
period can be longer than 5 years if deemed appropriate.) Develop a preliminary minimum and 
maximum purchase price range for the target. List key forecast assumptions. Identify an initial 
offer price, the composition (i.e., cash, stock, debt, or some combination) of the offer price, 
and why you believe this price is appropriate in terms of meeting the primary needs of both 
target and acquirer shareholders. The appropriateness of the offer price should reflect your 
preliminary thinking about the deal structure (see Chapters 11 and 12 for a detailed discussion 
of the deal-structuring process).
8.	 Financing plan: Determine if the proposed offer price can be financed without endangering the 
combined firm’s creditworthiness or seriously eroding near-term profitability and cash flow. 
For publicly traded firms, pay particular attention to the near-term impact of the acquisition on 
the EPS of the combined firms (see Chapter 13).
9.	 Integration plan: Identify integration challenges and possible solutions (see Chapter 6 for a 
detailed discussion of how to develop integration strategies). For financial buyers, identify an 
“exit strategy.” Highly leveraged transactions are discussed in more detail in Chapter 13.

158	
4.  Planning: Developing Business and Acquisition Plans
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
needs better than the competition? Why is the chosen strategy preferable to other reasonable 
options? An acquisition is only one of many options available for implementing a business 
strategy. The decision to pursue an acquisition often rests on the desire to achieve control 
and a perception that the acquisition will result in achieving the desired objectives more 
rapidly than other options. Once a firm has decided that an acquisition is critical to realizing 
the strategic direction defined in the business plan, a merger/acquisition plan should be 
developed.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
4.1	 How does planning facilitate the acquisition process?
4.2	 What is the difference between a business plan and an acquisition plan?
4.3	 What are the advantages and disadvantages of using an acquisition to implement a 
business strategy compared with a joint venture?
4.4	 Why is it important to understand the assumptions underlying a business plan or an 
acquisition plan?
4.5	 Why is it important to get senior management involved early in the acquisition 
process?
4.6	 In your judgment, which of the elements of the acquisition plan discussed in this 
chapter are the most important, and why?
4.7	 After having acquired the OfficeMax superstore chain, Boise Cascade announced 
the sale of its paper and timber products operations to reduce its dependence on this 
cyclical business. Reflecting its new emphasis on distribution, the company changed 
its name to OfficeMax, Inc. How would you describe the OfficeMax mission and 
business strategy implicit in these actions?
4.8	 Dell Computer is one of the best known global technology companies. In your opin­
ion, who are Dell’s primary customers? Current and potential competitors? Suppli­
ers? How would you assess Dell’s bargaining power with respect to its customers 
and suppliers? What are Dell’s strengths and weaknesses versus those of its current 
competitors?
4.9	 Discuss the types of analyses inside General Electric that may have preceded its 2008 
announcement that it would spin off its consumer and industrial business to its share­
holders.
4.10	 Ashland Chemical, the largest US chemical distributor, acquired chemical 
manufacturer Hercules Inc. for $3.3 billion. This move followed Dow Chemical 
Company’s purchase of Rohm & Haas. The justification for both acquisitions was to 
diversify earnings and offset higher oil costs. How will this business combination 
offset escalating oil costs?
Answers to these discussion questions are found on the online instructors’ site available for this book 
(https://textbooks.elsevier.com/web/Manuals.aspx?isbn=9780128016091).

	
Discussion Questions	
159
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
END OF CHAPTER CASE STUDY: YAHOO’S FALL 
FROM GRACE
Case Study Objectives: To Illustrate
•	 The tenuous nature of competitive advantage
•	 The connection between ineffective governance and shareholder wealth destruction
•	 How investor impatience can limit management and board options
Nowhere is the impact of creative destruction more apparent than on the internet. We can be 
sure that the growth of the internet will continue to spawn new innovations challenging the surviv­
ability of current competitors. The process of “creative destruction” in which current businesses 
give way to new businesses with new ways of doing things will continue to change the competitive 
landscape for years to come. Moreover, the pace of creative destruction is accelerating due to the 
quickening pace of technological change. The inescapable conclusion is that factors contributing to 
a firm’s competitive advantage today may be irrelevant tomorrow causing firms once dominant in 
their chosen markets to fall by the wayside. This is the story of one such firm, Yahoo, a former inter­
net darling that failed to keep pace with the changing realities of the marketplace.
The internet is currently dominated by three behemoths: Amazon.com, Facebook, and Google. 
Each has satisfied a large and growing user need in cyberspace. Amazon.com has become the online 
retailer of choice in a space whose growth is fueled by the ongoing shift from brick and mortar to 
online retailing. Facebook dominates the exploding social media space by giving people the power 
to share whatever they want, with whomever they want, and whenever they want. Finally, internet 
search is controlled largely by Google’s juggernaut search engine as the demand for more timely 
and relevant information escalates. Notably, all three firms have rapidly made the shift from offer­
ing primarily desktop computer access to their websites to enabling mobile communication to make 
purchasing, socializing, and searching an anywhere, anytime event. At more than 90%, Facebook 
and Google make the bulk of their revenue from advertising in news feeds and mobile ads. Ama­
zon.com generates the majority of its revenue from fees from its partners who sell products through 
the firm’s websites and from its own branded products and services.16
It is in the shadow of these three powerhouses that Yahoo has struggled to find its place on the 
internet. Largely locked out of selling products and services on the internet because of its diminu­
tive size, the firm derived the bulk of its revenue and profits from advertising. But with online users 
flocking to Facebook, Google, and Amazon.com to satisfy their needs, Yahoo became less attractive 
for advertisers.
After more than a decade of mismanagement, Yahoo announced that it had reached an agree­
ment on July 25, 2016, to sell its core internet operating assets to wireless telecom giant Verizon Inc. 
for $4.8 billion in cash.17 The remaining assets would include investments in Chinese e-commerce 
firm Alibaba, Yahoo Japan, and a small patent portfolio. How did a firm that once dominated inter­
net search and served as an online gateway for millions fall from grace? A look into the past helps 
to answer this question.
When Yahoo went public in 1996 in an initial public offering, the internet in many ways was still 
in its infancy. Consumers were quick to gravitate to Yahoo’s quirky brand and soon became reliant 
on the firm’s search capability to help them find interesting and meaningful content. Yahoo also 

160	
4.  Planning: Developing Business and Acquisition Plans
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
pioneered the “internet portal” concept offering consumers a single site to satisfy the majority of 
their online needs. The firm was known for its fierce independence and for a culture that was slow 
to adapt to technologies not invented by Yahoo. While still one of the most popular destinations 
on the internet, it was dwarfed by its major competitors. The firm’s annual revenue declined from 
$7.3 billion in 2008 to about $4.3 billion in 2015. While the firm did receive major cash infusions 
from the partial sale of its stake in Alibaba, the Chinese mega e-commerce business, its operating 
profits have been sliding inexorably lower in recent years. Most of its market value was a result of 
its investment made years ago in Alibaba.
The firm appeared directionless, with the board thrashing about trying to develop a successful 
business strategy. But to what end? Could the firm deliver the greatest shareholder value by rein­
vigorating its core assets with new products and services? Or did it make more sense to break up 
the firm by spinning off shares in its stakes in Alibaba and Yahoo Japan or specific operating units 
to shareholders or returning cash to shareholders by selling operating units and declaring a special 
cash distribution? Alternatively, should Yahoo spin off or sell its core operating units and retain its 
investments in Alibaba and Yahoo Japan?
These are questions best addressed in a coherent planning process, something Yahoo seems to 
have been lacking for years. The firm appeared more reactive than proactive to changes in its ex­
ternal environment and to have seriously overestimated its current core capabilities or its ability to 
acquire the competences needed to compete in the online environment. More importantly, the firm 
seemed almost schizophrenic in its view of the future and what constitutes a range of reasonable 
strategic options for delivering value to shareholders. Sometimes it would position the firm as a 
media business and other times a technology business, while more recently seeing greater value 
in breaking itself up and returning cash through special distributions or shares through spin-offs 
to shareholders. Not having a clear vision of what the firm should look like in the future made it 
almost impossible to develop a sound and consistent business strategy.
Yahoo failed to fully grasp that the internet was in a bubble in the late 1990s, that consumers 
wanted a highly efficient search capability, and that the world was shifting from desktop to mobile 
computing. Caught up in the internet stock market euphoria of the late 1990s, the firm used its 
inflated stock price as an acquisition currency resulting in overpaying for a series of acquisitions. 
Yahoo also was slow to recognize that consumers did not want a portal but rather an efficient search 
capability so as not to be tethered to a single gateway to internet content. Failure to update its search 
capability to accommodate changing consumer tastes allowed Google to leapfrog Yahoo. Finally, Ya­
hoo’s bureaucratic infrastructure was slow to move to mobile from desktop access to internet search 
and content, while its competitors moved at breakneck speed to accommodate this important trend.
Yahoo’s assets at the end of 2015 consisted of a series of investments in other companies and in 
wholly owned and operated businesses. The firm’s most valuable investments included Alibaba 
and Yahoo Japan. At that time, the value of Yahoo’s stake in Alibaba was $32.5 billion and its stake in 
Yahoo Japan was $8.6 billion. The company’s net cash—or cash minus debt—was $4.2 billion. This 
sums to $45.3 billion and compares to the stock market’s then valuation of the firm of $32.5 billion. 
Investors’ lower valuation of the firm reflected a lack of confidence in the board’s ability to enhance 
the value of its operating units.
The firm’s websites were one of its greatest assets. Yahoo claimed on its website that every day 
43 million people come to its sites for the “best the web has to offer” and they on average return daily.18 

	
Discussion Questions	
161
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
The challenge has been to find a way to convert this traffic into an accelerating (rather than a de­
clining) revenue stream. The Yahoo brand while highly recognizable may have been as much a 
hindrance to growing revenue as a boon due to its greater association by millennials with the past 
rather than the future of the internet.
Perhaps the greatest factor limiting Yahoo’s turnaround in recent years has been a rapid suc­
cession of CEOs and muddled governance. The firm’s governance issues included the failure to 
provide consistent leadership at the top, board oversight, lack of an enduring mission statement 
and successful business strategy, poor stewardship of the firm’s financial resources, and an inability 
to align the firm’s culture with longer-term objectives. Since 2008, the firm changed CEOs five times 
and experienced an unsolicited takeover attempt by Microsoft, a proxy contest, several public flare-
ups with activist investors, as well as a loss of board members and key management personnel.
Historically, Yahoo had a reputation as a largely bureaucratic organization that stifled innova­
tion and growth. In an effort to make the organization more nimble, on becoming CEO in 2012, 
Marissa Mayer recruited new people to key posts in the belief that a new and strong management 
team with fresh perspectives would break down the bureaucratic nature of Yahoo’s culture. While 
she has had some successes in updating the firm’s website and Yahoo Mail, what stands out to 
many investors about Marissa Mayer’s 4-year tenure as CEO is one thing: spending. Yahoo em­
ployees enjoyed perks like free iPhones and food while Mayer has a penchant for throwing lavish 
parties that have been widely publicized gimmicks for boosting employee morale. SpringOwl, 
an asset management company, estimated in a December 13, 2015, critique that Yahoo’s waste­
ful spending has cost the company around $450 million in the past 4 years.19 Presumably these 
“missteps” were approved by the board casting doubt among investors about its effectiveness in 
promoting their interests.
The firm’s board and management had been unable to settle on a clearly defined and credible 
vision that could be effectively communicated to consumers and businesses that describes where 
and how the firm chooses to compete. This has left consumers and businesses confused about what 
Yahoo is and why they should be using it. Yahoo in its 2015 vision statement viewed itself as “a 
guide focused on informing, connecting, and entertaining our users. By creating highly personal­
ized experiences for our users, we (Yahoo) keep people connected to what matters most to them, 
across devices and around the world. In turn, we create value for advertisers by connecting them 
with the audiences that build their businesses.”20 This statement on its face seems to lack the speci­
ficity to provide clear direction for the firm and to forge a unified culture intent on achieving this 
undertaking. At its worst, it seems to allow the firm broad sway in making acquisitions and corpo­
rate investments.
The lack of a clear and crisp vision has contributed to a muddled business strategy punctu­
ated by a number of time-consuming detours in an effort to turnaround the firm’s operating per­
formance. These ranged from an intense focus on media by making big investments on digital 
magazines to expensive video deals to a race to compete with Google in search. Another strand of 
the strategy was a series of seemingly disjointed acquisitions that appeared aimed more at bring­
ing talent to the firm than at concentrating on a specific objective. Still another aspect of the firm’s 
hapless strategy has been its emphasis on getting top TV talent to attract more site visitors, but this 
appears to have had little success as many of the deals done in 2014 were largely written off during 
2015 due to lack of viability.

162	
4.  Planning: Developing Business and Acquisition Plans
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
During the first 2 years as CEO, Ms. Mayer had been able to emerge largely unscathed despite 
these missteps because of investors’ focus on the firm’s stake in Alibaba. In recent years, much of 
Mayer’s and the board’s time seems to have been taken up in 2015 by what to do with the Alibaba 
investment. Throughout 2015, Yahoo’s board and management were under considerable pressure to 
deliver value to shareholders and to do it soon. Or else face the prospect of a proxy fight for control 
of the board.
Private equity firm, Starboard Value, which has a track record of successfully forcing firms to 
change management, board members, and strategies, had been most active in seeking a complete 
restructure of Yahoo. On November 19, 2015, Starboard CEO Jeffrey Smith sent a letter to the board 
and management expressing its displeasure with Yahoo’s performance and that it had a “dim view 
of the company’s current strategy.” Smith argued that a change in direction was needed and that 
changes in the board were required to end any further shareholder value destruction. In response 
to growing shareholder pressure, the Yahoo board and management in early 2016 ceased efforts to 
sell their investments in Alibaba and Yahoo Japan, which would have generated a huge tax liability 
for the firm’s shareholders, deciding instead to retain these investments and sell off or spin off its 
core operating businesses. However, Yahoo’s actions subsequent to the announcement of their new 
strategy seemed half-hearted, leaving investors questioning the board’s commitment to making it 
happen. On March 24, 2016, Starboard Value’s management lost patience with the Yahoo board an­
nouncing its intention of submitting its own slate of nine candidates in an effort to oust the entire 
Yahoo board, including Marissa Mayer. This forced the Yahoo board to redouble their efforts to sell 
off its core operating businesses.
Looking back, Yahoo’s problems seem to lie in the inability of the board to exercise effective 
oversight over bloated staffing levels and frivolous spending, and its approval of underperform­
ing acquisitions. We shall never know if Ms. Mayer’s vision and strategy for the business could 
have been successful due to investor impatience. Investors wanted to either see improved operating 
performance or cash out. Activist investors moved aggressively to resolve the firm’s floundering 
performance. While some progress had been made with mobile revenues increasing as a share of 
total revenue and increasing monthly visitors, the firm’s competitive position relative to Google in 
search and Facebook in social media worsened. Investors simply lost confidence in the firm’s ability 
to compete in markets subject to rapid technological change, viewing the firm as irrelevant in online 
advertising, search, social media, and commerce.
In the end, frustrated investors forced the dramatic restructuring of the business. What re­
mains of the once-revered and growth-oriented internet operating business is a holding company 
with passive investments in other internet properties and technology patents. Exiting these in­
vestments, without triggering a huge tax liability, represents the next big challenge for the Yahoo 
board. With the sale of its operating units, the Yahoo’s total market value of $36.4 billion as of the 
end of July 2016 reflected its 15% stake in Alibaba Group and its 35.5% investment in joint venture 
Yahoo Japan. Therefore, considerable restructuring activity remains before Yahoo is completely 
liquidated.21

	
Discussion Questions	
163
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
Discussion Questions
1.	 How would you describe the Yahoo corporate culture prior to Marissa Mayer becoming CEO? 
How might this have slowed her ability to transform the company?
2.	 How did the culture change after Mayer’s appointment as CEO in 2012? Be specific.
3.	 Do you believe the expectations for Mayer were excessive when she became CEO in 2012? 
What would you have done differently if you were the CEO of Yahoo?
4.	 What corporate governance issues does Yahoo face? How do these issues impact Yahoo’s 
strategy?
5.	 Discuss how Yahoo’s “legacy” investments in Alibaba and Yahoo Japan constrained its ability 
to revitalize its core operating businesses. Be specific.
6.	 Discuss how the Yahoo brand represented both an asset and a potential liability for the firm in 
implementing new strategies. Be specific.
Answers to these questions are found in the Online Instructor’s Manual available for instructors using 
this book (https://textbooks.elsevier.com/web/Manuals.aspx?isbn=9780128016091).
16While all three firms are profitable on a GAAP basis, Google and Facebook display substantially larger profit margins 
than Amazon.com.
17Closing the deal was hampered by the discovery in November 2016 of several hacks of more than 1 billion Yahoo email 
users’ private accounts that had occurred in 2013 and 2014 and the potential reduction in the firm’s value resulting 
from these incidents. Verizon argued the hacks resulted in a material loss of value and attempted to negotiate a lower 
purchase price. Yahoo countered that its value was unaffected as it did not experience any loss of email users during the 
years subsequent to the hacks. Further complicating the process, the SEC initiated an investigation of Yahoo’s failure 
to make public sooner these potentially material events in late December 2016. Nonetheless, at the time of this writing, 
the firms were still negotiating this issue in early 2017 making the timing of the deal (or possible termination) closing 
uncertain.
18https://advertising.yahoo.com/yahoo-sites/Homepage/index.htm.
19http://www.wsj.com/public/resources/documents/yahoopresentation.pdf.
20Yahoo Announces SEC Filing for Planned Spin-Off of Remaining Stake in Alibaba Group, Press Release, July 17, 2015.
21Various forms of split-offs represent possible strategies to exit its remaining investments to minimize potential tax 
liabilities. With Softbank owning 43% of its shares, Yahoo Tokyo shares trade only on Japan exchanges and tend to be 
relatively illiquid and unattractive for US shareholders. To get as much cash as possible for its shareholders, Yahoo 
could execute a cash-rich split-off with Yahoo Japan. Yahoo Japan would create a subsidiary and contribute cash and 
an operating business that has been active for at least 5 years in order to receive IRS approval for a tax-free deal. Yahoo 
Japan would then give this subsidiary to Yahoo in exchange for Yahoo’s shares in Yahoo Japan. Creating such a deal is 
challenging as Yahoo Japan would need to give up an operating asset it does not want to Yahoo. Yahoo in turn would 
then have to divest the operating units received and distribute the proceeds to its shareholders. Since Alibaba is a 
far more liquid stock trading on the NYSE, Yahoo could offer its shareholders the option of exchanging their shares 
in Yahoo for Alibaba shares in a split-off exchange as a means of exiting the Alibaba investment. See Chapter 16 for 
more detail.

164	
4.  Planning: Developing Business and Acquisition Plans
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
A D D I T I O N A L  C A S E  S T U D Y  R E C O M M E N D AT I O N S 
( S E A R C H  H A RVA R D  B U S I N E S S  S C H O O L  P U B L I S H I N G 
S I T E  B Y  N A M E  O F  C A S E :  h b s p . h a r v a r d . e d u )
High Noon at Universal Pipe: Sell Out or 
Risk Everything?, Arich A. Ullman, Publica-
tion Date: December 1, 2011, Source: North 
American Case Research Association, hbsp.
harvard.edu.
	
Subjects covered: Five Forces Model, 
Industry Analysis, Management Decision 
Making.
Innovation Without Walls: Alliance Man-
agement at Eli Lilly and Company, Charles 
Dhanaraj, Marjorie Lyles, YuPeng Lai, Publi-
cation Date: April 25, 2007, Product Number: 
907M15-PDF-ENG, Source: Ivey Publishing, 
hbsp.harvard.edu.
	
Subjects covered: Business Strategy, 
Analyzing Strategic Options, Managing 
alliances, International Business.
Polycom’s Acquisition Process, Michael 
A. Roberto, Gina M. Carioggia, Publica-
tion Date: June 2, 2005, Product Number: 
304040-PDF-ENG, Source: Harvard Business 
School, hbsp.harvard.com.
	
Subjects covered: Business and 
Acquisition Plan Development, Target 
Selection, Decision Making, Resource 
Management.
The Learning Co., James Henderson, 
Revision Date: December 7, 2004, Product 
Number: BAB050-PDF-ENG, Source: 
Babson College, hbsp.harvard.edu.
	
Subjects covered: Industry Analysis, 
Strategy Formulation, Mergers.

C H A P T E R
165
Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring Activities. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-801609-1.00005-1
Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
5
Implementation: 
Search Through Closing
Phases 3–10 of the Acquisition Process
O U T L I N E
Inside M&A: Struggling Johnson 
Controls and Tyco Merge 
to Create a More Focused 
Global Business	
166
Chapter Overview	
167
Characteristics of High-Performing 
Acquirers	
168
Phase 3: The Search Process	
169
Phase 4: The Screening Process	
172
Phase 5: First Contact	
173
Discussing Value	
175
Preliminary Legal Transaction 
Documents	
175
Phase 6: Negotiation	
177
Refining Valuation	
177
Deal Structuring	
178
Conducting Due Diligence	
179
The Rise of the Virtual Data Room	
182
Developing the Financing Plan	
182
Defining the Purchase Price	
184
Phase 7: Developing the Integration Plan	185
Contract-Related Issues	
186
Earning Trust	
186
Choosing the Integration Manager 
and Other Critical Decisions	
187
Phase 8: Closing	
187
Gaining the Necessary Approvals	
187
Assigning Customer 
and Vendor Contracts	
187
Completing the Acquisition/Merger 
Agreement	
188
Phase 9: Implementing Postclosing 
Integration	
191
Communication Plans	
191
Employee Retention	
191
Satisfying Cash Flow Requirements	
192
Employing Best Practices	
192
Cultural Issues	
192
Phase 10: Conducting a Postclosing 
Evaluation	
192
Do Not Change Performance 
Benchmarks	
192

166	
5.  Implementation: Search Through Closing 
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
A man that is very good at making excuses is probably good at nothing else. — Ben Franklin
INSIDE M&A: STRUGGLING JOHNSON CONTROLS AND TYCO 
MERGE TO CREATE A MORE FOCUSED GLOBAL BUSINESS
KEY POINTS
•	 Having a clear business strategy makes target selection easier.
•	 Approaching the target firm at the appropriate time with a compelling vision for the combined 
firms increases the probability of reaching a deal.
•	 Friendly acquisitions often offer the greatest potential for synergy and shareholder wealth 
creation by promoting cooperation.
Continuing a long-term trend, many companies have been narrowing their product and 
market focus in an effort to make their businesses easier to manage and for investors to un­
derstand. The shares of more focused firms often tend to trade at a higher price-to-earnings 
multiple than those that are highly diversified. Tyco International Plc (Tyco) and Johnson 
Controls Inc. are recent examples of firms attempting to boost their share prices in this man­
ner. Both firms were pursuing business strategies that involved attempting to achieve greater 
focus while leveraging their resources.
Tyco, at one time a high-flying conglomerate, had been restructuring its operations for years 
to become a global company offering security systems and fire suppression equipment. With 
annual sales of $10 billion in 2015, Tyco is a shadow of its conglomerate days in the 1990s. The 
firm has been downsizing for years by selling or spinning off such business as electronic com­
ponents and surgical equipment to become the world’s largest “pure-play” fire protection and 
security systems company. Similarly, Johnson Controls, maker of systems to optimize energy 
use in buildings and car batteries and seat components, with annual sales of $37 billion, seek­
ing to reinvigorate earnings growth and to narrow its product offering, announced in 2015 that 
it would spin off Adient. Adient is its slow-growing automotive business, which at one time 
accounted for as much as two-thirds of Johnson Controls’ annual revenue.
Despite these efforts, the share prices of both firms had underperformed the overall stock 
market in recent years making it clear to their boards of directors that more had to be done. 
On January 25, 2016, Johnson Controls announced that it had reached an agreement to merge 
with Tyco in a deal valued at about $15 billion. The new firm will have $32 billion in annual 
Ask the Difficult Questions	
193
Learn From Mistakes	
193
The Increasing Application of 
“Data Analytics” in M&As	
193
Some Things to Remember	
195
Discussion Questions	
195
Case Study: Michael Dell Completes 
the Biggest Deal in Tech History 
in Buying Storage Maker EMC	
196
Additional Case Study Recommendations 
(Search Harvard Business School 
Publishing Site by Name of Case: 
Hbsp.Harvard.Edu	
201

	
Chapter Overview	
167
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
revenue and earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (EBITDA) of $4.5 
billion before synergies (but including the planned spin-off of Adient) on a proforma basis.1
Tyco’s CEO, George Oliver, initially contacted Mr. Alex Molinaroli, CEO of Johnson 
Controls, about structuring a smaller deal involving the Johnson Control’s systems controls 
business. By October, discussions between the two firms had escalated to a merger involving 
the two firms. The two CEOs believe that together the firms could leverage their combined 
resources. How? By offering packages of products and services consisting of fire, security, 
heating and air conditioning, power solutions, and energy storage controls and systems to 
serve various end markets including large institutions, commercial buildings, retail, indus­
trial, small business, and residential.
The expected benefits of the transaction included additional revenue growth by selling 
complementary products to each firm’s customer groups, $500 million in annual pretax cost 
savings, and $150 million in annual tax savings resulting from moving the combined firm’s 
headquarters from the United States to Ireland in what is known as a corporate inversion.2 
The $500 million in operating synergies is to be achieved by increasing efficiencies, eliminat­
ing redundancies, integrating the global branch networks, and realizing the economies of 
scale associated with an over $20-billion buildings’ business.
On completion of the merger, the new firm will be renamed Johnson Controls Plc, with 
the firm’s legal domicile and global headquarters in Cork, Ireland. Operational headquarters 
are in Milwaukee, WI, where Johnson Controls had its headquarters. Both Johnson Controls 
and Tyco shareholders will receive shares of Adient (Johnson Controls automotive business) 
following its spin-off in 2017.
CHAPTER OVERVIEW
Much can be learned from acquirers with a successful track record who have established 
a discipline that increases the likelihood that they will achieve their goals in future deals. As 
such, the chapter begins with a discussion of the characteristics of high-performing acquirers 
(HPAs) to provide a context for the subsequent discussion of Phases 3–10 of the acquisition 
process: search, screening, first contact, negotiation, integration planning, closing, postmerger 
integration, and evaluation.
Once a firm has a viable business plan (Phase 1), it must determine the appropriate im­
plementation strategy (Phase 2). This chapter assumes the firm requires an acquisition to 
execute its business plan. A review of this chapter (including practice questions and answers) 
is contained in the file folder entitled Student Study Guide on the companion site to this 
book 
(https://www.elsevier.com/books-and-journals/book-companion/9780128016091). 
The companion site also contains a comprehensive due diligence question list.
1Proforma basis refers to the illustration of how the two companies’ financial statements would look hypothetically 
if combined.
2This deal is the 12th inversion undertaken by US firms since the US Department of the Treasury attempted to 
curb such deals through new regulations in September 2014. Johnson Controls and Tyco structured their deal to 
reap maximum tax benefits. With Johnson Controls investors owning less than 60% of the combined company, the 
firms side stepped regulations that might have made the deal less attractive. See Chapter 12 for more detail on 
inversions.

168	
5.  Implementation: Search Through Closing 
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
CHARACTERISTICS OF HIGH-PERFORMING ACQUIRERS
McKinsey & Company’s 2015 Global Survey of merger and acquisition (M&A) practices 
and capabilities defines “HPAs” as respondents who describe themselves as having met or 
surpassed targets for both cost and revenue synergies in their transactions of the past 5 years. 
Typically, HPAs more frequently review their portfolio of new opportunities, move more 
quickly through deal negotiation and due diligence, and better manage cultural differences 
across organizations and the realization of synergy. However, most respondents feel they 
could do a better job in balancing incentives among different stakeholders in the process.3
While many firms report reviewing their investment opportunities for acquisitions, joint 
ventures, and divestitures at least once annually, HPAs tend to do so more often. More fre­
quent reviews enable HPAs to stay abreast of changing market dynamics and to seize op­
portunities on a timelier basis. For example, with the pace of M&As reaching record levels 
in recent years, the attractiveness of firms cited previously as potential targets may change 
as their market valuations increase. If the opportunity arises, it is important to move quickly 
rather than to simply react after a competitor has already made an offer for the firm.
HPAs also differentiate themselves from their peers in how they manage deal negotiation 
and due diligence. Deal negotiation includes the elapsed time from a nondisclosure agreement 
to a binding offer. HPAs tend to move through these activities in less than 6 months while 
low performers tend to take longer. The longer it takes to get a binding offer, the greater the 
likelihood of an information leak and for uncertainty to grow among investors, employees, 
customers, and suppliers. Lengthy and highly intrusive due diligences can have similar im­
pacts. Investor speculation can boost the target’s share price and in turn the acquisition cost; 
employee anxiety about their futures within the combined firms can cause key employees 
to leave; and customers uncertain about future selling prices, product quality, and delivery 
times seek alternative suppliers.
Finally, HPAs tend to be more effective in managing cultural differences across the or­
ganizations and in setting and realizing synergy targets. Improperly handing cultural dif­
ferences can result in a mass exodus of key employees, slumping productivity of those 
who remain, and a decline in customer service. The net effect of these impacts is to in­
crease operating costs, contribute to customer attrition, and erode profits. Setting unreal­
istic synergy targets can result in the need to take corrective actions at a later date due to 
excessive layoffs or a too rapid integration of information technology (IT) and customer 
service functions, leading to growing customer dissatisfaction. Moreover, employees may 
become demotivated and leave if they feel they cannot perform to the expectations of the 
new owner. While this may contribute to realizing cost synergies in the short term, it can 
also increase costs in the longer term due to hiring and training costs associated with new 
employees.
Most survey respondents felt they could do a better job in balancing stakeholder incen­
tives between the need to complete the deal on a timely basis and the desire to smoothly and 
efficiently integrate the businesses following closing. Those having a stake in the closing of 
the deal often are different from those who have to integrate the firms postclosing. Highly 
acquisitive firms often have extremely professional “in-house” M&A teams whose primary 
3Doherty et al. (2015)

	
Phase 3: The Search Process	
169
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
incentive is to get a deal, albeit within the terms demanded by senior management and the 
board. In contrast, the “deal owners” or the team expected to manage the business following 
closing has an incentive to build relationships with employees in the acquired firm to gain 
cooperation and information sharing. The two incentives can be at odds. The M&A team may 
seek to uncover as many “synergy opportunities” as possible to justify paying a higher price 
to close the deal. However, a higher purchase price makes realizing the desired financial 
return on invested assets that much more difficult for the postmerger management team. 
Why? They must realize even greater revenue gains and cost reductions to recover the pre­
mium paid. This may involve wholesale layoffs and, if possible, renegotiation of supplier and 
customer contracts to get better terms. While this may help profits in the short run, it can be 
deleterious to longer-term performance.
PHASE 3: THE SEARCH PROCESS
The first step in searching for acquisition candidates is to establish a small number of pri­
mary selection criteria, including the industry and the size of the transaction. Deal size is 
best defined in terms of the maximum purchase price a firm is willing to pay, expressed as a 
maximum price-to-earnings ratio, book, cash flow, or revenue ratio, or a maximum purchase 
price stated in terms of dollars. It also may be appropriate to limit the search to a specific 
geographic area.
Consider a private acute care hospital holding company that wants to buy a skilled nurs­
ing facility within 50  miles of its largest hospital in Allegheny County, PA. Management 
believes it cannot afford to pay more than $45 million for the facility. Its primary selection 
criteria could include an industry (skilled nursing), a location (Allegheny County, PA), and 
a maximum price (five times cash flow, not to exceed $45 million). Similarly, a Texas-based 
manufacturer of patio furniture with manufacturing operations in the southwestern United 
States seeks to expand its sales in California. The company decides to try to find a patio 
furniture manufacturer that it can purchase for no more than $100 million. Its primary selec­
tion criteria could include an industry (outdoor furniture), a geographic location (California, 
Arizona, and Nevada), and a maximum purchase price (10 times operating earnings, not to 
exceed $100 million).
The next step is to search available computerized databases using the selection criteria. 
Common databases and directory services include Disclosure, Dun & Bradstreet, Standard 
& Poor’s Corporate Register, and Capital IQ. Firms also may query their law, banking, and 
accounting firms to identify other candidates. Investment banks, brokers, and leveraged buy­
out firms are also fertile sources of potential candidates, although they are likely to require 
an advisory or finder’s fee. Google Finance, Yahoo! Finance, Hoover’s, and EDGAR Online 
enable analysts to obtain data quickly about competitors and customers. These sites provide 
easy access to a variety of documents filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission. 
Exhibit 5.1 provides a comprehensive listing of alternative information sources.
If confidentiality is not an issue, a firm may advertise its interest in acquiring a particular 
type of firm in the Wall Street Journal or the trade press. While likely to generate interest, 
it is less likely to produce high-quality prospects. Rather, it will probably result in a lot of 
responses from those interested in getting a free valuation of their own company or from 

170	
5.  Implementation: Search Through Closing 
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
EXHIBIT 5.1  INFORMATION SOUCES ON INDIVIDUAL 
COMPANIES
SEC Filings (Public Companies Only)
10-K. Provides detailed information on a company’s annual operations, business conditions, 
competitors, market conditions, legal proceedings, risk factors in holding the stock, and other, 
related information.
10-Q. Updates investors about the company’s operations each quarter.
S-1. Filed when a company wants to register new stock. Can contain information about the 
company’s operating history and business risks.
S-2. Filed when a company is completing a material transaction, such as a merger or 
acquisition. Provides substantial detail underlying the terms and conditions of the transaction, 
the events surrounding the transaction, and justification for the merger or acquisition.
8-K. Filed when a company faces a “material event,” such as a merger.
Schedule 14A. A proxy statement. Gives details about the annual meeting and biographies of 
company officials and directors including stock ownership and pay.
Websites
www.aol.com
www.bizbuysell.com
www.capitaliq.com
www.dialog.com
www.edgar-online.com
http://edgarscan.pwcglobal.com/serviets.edgarscan
www.factset.com
http://finance.yahoo.com
www.freeedgar.com
www.hooversonline.com
www.lexisnexis.com
www.mergernetwork.com
www.mergers.net
www.onesource.com
www.quicken.com
www.sec.gov
www.washingtonresearchers.com
www.worldm-anetwork.com
Organizations
Value Line Investment Survey: Information on public companies
Directory of Corporate Affiliations: Corporate affiliations
LexisNexis: Database of general business and legal information
Thomas Register: Organizes firms by products and services
Frost & Sullivan: Industry research

	
Phase 3: The Search Process	
171
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
brokers claiming that their clients fit the buyer’s criteria, as a ruse to convince you that you 
need the broker’s services.4
Finding reliable information about privately owned firms is a major problem. Sources such 
as Dun & Bradstreet and Experian may only provide fragmentary data. Publicly available in­
formation may offer additional details. For example, surveys by trade associations or the US 
Census Bureau often include industry-specific average sales per employee. A private firm’s 
sales can be estimated by multiplying this figure by an estimate of the firm’s workforce, which 
may be obtained by searching the firm’s product literature, website, or trade show speeches 
or even by counting the number of cars in the parking lot during each shift.
Credit rating agencies, independent firms that assign a rating to a firm’s ability to repay its 
debt, provide an independent assessment of the viability of both publicly traded and privately 
owned firms. Information about rated firms may be available on the rating agency’s website or 
through a paid subscription. Studies show that acquirers of target firms are less likely to over­
pay because of access to financial information used by the rating agencies. Rated targets receive 
lower premiums and generate higher acquirer postmerger returns than nonrated firms.5
The IPO market can expedite the search process by providing information about private 
firms, especially in the absence of any significant publicly available information. By scouring 
the prospectus accompanying an IPO, it is possible to gain insights into how other private 
firms similar to the one that had “gone public” operate as well as their potential growth pros­
pects. Also, the resulting price to sales, profit, or cash flow multiples associated with the IPO 
can be applied to similar private firms in order to estimate their fair market value.6
6Aktas et al. (2016)
4It is important to respond in writing if you receive a solicitation from a broker or finder, particularly if you reject 
their services. If at a later date you acquire the firm they claim to have represented, the broker or finder may sue 
your firm for compensation.
5Jory et al. (2016).
Findex.com: Financial information
Competitive Intelligence Professionals: Information about industries
Dialog Corporation: Industry databases
Wards Business Directory of US and public companies
Predicasts: Provides databases through libraries
Business Periodicals Index: Business and technical article index
Dun & Bradstreet Directories: Information about private and public companies
Experian: Information about private and public companies
Nelson’s Directory of Investment Research: Wall Street research reports
Standard & Poor’s Publications: Industry surveys and corporate records
Harris Infosource: Information about manufacturing companies
Hoover’s Handbook of Private Companies: Information on large private firms
Washington Researchers: Information on public and private firms, markets, and industries
The Wall Street Journal Transcripts: Wall Street research reports
Directory of Corporate Affiliations (published by LexisNexis Group)

172	
5.  Implementation: Search Through Closing 
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
Increasingly, companies—even midsize firms—are moving investment banking “in-
house.” Rather than use brokers or so-called “finders”7 as part of their acquisition process, 
they are identifying potential targets, doing valuation, and performing due diligence on their 
own. This reflects efforts to save on investment banking fees, which can easily be more than 
$5 million plus expenses on a $500-million transaction.8
PHASE 4: THE SCREENING PROCESS
The screening process is a refinement of the initial search process. It begins by pruning the 
initial list of potential candidates created using the primary criteria discussed earlier. Because 
relatively few primary criteria are used, the initial list may be lengthy. It can be shortened using 
secondary selection criteria, but care should be taken to limit the number of these criteria. An 
excessively long list of selection criteria will severely limit the number of candidates that pass 
the screening process. The following selection criteria should be quantified whenever possible.
Market Segment: A lengthy list of candidates can be shortened by identifying a 
subsegment of a target market. For example, a manufacturer of flat rolled steel coils 
wishes to move up the value chain by acquiring a steel fabricated products company. 
While the primary search criterion could be for United States–based steel fabricating 
firms, a secondary criterion could stipulate segmenting the market further to target only 
those firms making steel tubing.
Product Line: The product line criterion identifies a specific product line within the target 
market segment. The same flat rolled steel coils manufacturer may decide to focus its 
search on companies manufacturing steel tubular products used for lawn and patio 
furniture.
Profitability: Profitability should be defined in terms of the percentage return on sales, 
assets, or total investment. This allows a more accurate comparison among candidates of 
different sizes. A firm with operating earnings of $5 million on sales of $100 million may 
be less attractive than a firm with $3 million in operating income on sales of $50 million 
because the latter firm may be more efficient.
Degree of Leverage: Debt-to-equity or debt-to-total capital ratios are used to measure the 
level of leverage or indebtedness. The acquiring company may not want to purchase a 
7A broker has a fiduciary responsibility to either the potential buyer or the seller and is not permitted to represent 
both parties. Compensation is paid by the client to the broker. A finder is someone who introduces both parties but 
represents neither party. The finder has no fiduciary responsibility to either party and is compensated by either one 
or both parties.
8Actual fee formulas are most often based on the purchase price. The so-called Lehman formula was at one time a 
commonly used fee structure; in it, broker or finder fees would be equal to 5% of the first $1 million of the purchase 
price, 4% of the second, 3% of the third, 2% of the fourth, and 1% of the remainder. Today, this formula is often ig­
nored in favor of a negotiated fee structure consisting of a basic fee (or retainer) paid regardless of whether the deal 
is consummated, an additional closing fee paid on closing, and an “extraordinary” fee paid under unusual circum­
stances that may delay the eventual closing, such as gaining antitrust approval or achieving a hostile takeover. Fees 
vary widely, but 1% of the total purchase price plus reimbursement of expenses is often considered reasonable. For 
small deals, the Lehman formula may apply.

	
Phase 5: First Contact	
173
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
firm whose debt burden may cause the combined company’s leverage ratios to jeopardize 
its credit rating.
Market Share: The acquiring firm may be interested only in firms that are number 1 or 2 
in market share in the targeted industry or in firms whose market share is some multiple 
(e.g., 2 × the next-largest competitor).9
Cultural Compatibility: Insights into a firm’s corporate culture can be obtained from public 
statements about the target’s vision for the future and its governance practices as well 
as its reputation as a responsible corporate citizen. Examining employee demographics 
reveals much about the diversity of a firm’s workforce.10 Finally, an acquirer needs to 
determine whether it can adapt to the challenges of dealing with foreign firms such as 
different languages and customs.
Age of CEO or Controlling Shareholder: Like many things in life, timing often is everything. 
For public firms, CEOs are more inclined to support an offer to buy their firms if they 
are at or close to retirement age. Why? Because target firm CEOs are generally unlikely 
to find a position with the acquirer and have less to lose since they are about to retire.11 
For privately owned firms, the age of the founder or controlling shareholder often is an 
important determinant of when a firm is likely to be willing to sell. If there is not a likely 
successor, the firm may be more receptive to an offer to buy the firm.
Simply satisfying the search/screening process does not ensure that a firm will pursue an 
attractive candidate. The firm’s approval process may require consensus among the firm’s 
board members and senior managers and the decision to make contact with a potential target 
firm may become mired in internal politics. Board members may have different priorities or 
perceptions. Some may feel that they will be not be included in a merger in which the target 
and acquirer boards are merged. Disagreement among key managers also may arise if some 
feel that their positions may be threatened. Others may feel that they may personally benefit 
more from the acquisition of an alternative target firm. The determination of what takeover 
candidates a firm pursues may ultimately depend on the firm’s ability to resolve these inter­
nal political issues to reach consensus among key decision makers. Such consensus often is 
critical to the successful integration of the acquiring and target firms. Without it, organiza­
tions may reject attractive opportunities.12
PHASE 5: FIRST CONTACT
Using both the primary and secondary selection criteria makes it possible to bring the 
search to a close and to begin the next part of the acquisition planning process, first contact. 
For each target firm, it is necessary to develop an approach strategy in which the potential 
9Firms that have substantially greater market share than their competitors often are able to achieve lower-cost posi­
tions than their competitors because of economies of scale and experience curve effects.
10America Online’s 2001 acquisition of Time Warner highlighted how difficult it can be to integrate a young, hetero­
geneous employee population with a much older, more homogeneous group. Also, as a much newer firm, AOL had 
a much less structured management style than was found in Time Warner’s more staid environment.
11Jenter and Lewellen (2015).
12Angwin et al. (2015).

174	
5.  Implementation: Search Through Closing 
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
acquirer develops a profile of each firm to be contacted in order to outline the reasons the 
target firm should consider an acquisition proposal. Such reasons could include the need for 
capital, a desire by the owner to “cash out,” and succession planning issues.
Research efforts should extend beyond publicly available information and include inter­
views with customers, suppliers, ex-employees, and trade associations in an effort to un­
derstand better the strengths, weaknesses, and objectives of potential target firms. Insights 
into management, ownership, performance, and business plans help provide a compelling 
rationale for the proposed acquisition and heighten the prospect of obtaining the target firm’s 
interest.
How initial contact is made depends on the size of the company, whether the potential 
acquirer has direct contacts with the target, whether the target is publicly or privately held, 
and the acquirer’s time frame for completing a transaction. The last factor can be extremely 
important. If time permits, there is no substitute for developing a personal relationship with 
the sellers—especially if the firm is privately held. Developing a rapport often makes it pos­
sible to acquire a company that is not thought to be for sale. Personal relationships must be 
formed only at the highest levels within a privately held target firm. Founders or their heirs 
often have a strong paternalistic view of their businesses, whether they are large or small. 
Such firms often have great flexibility in negotiating a deal that “feels right” rather than sim­
ply holding out for the highest possible price. In contrast, personal relationships can go only 
so far when negotiating with a public company that has a fiduciary responsibility to its share­
holders to get the best price. If time is a critical factor, acquirers may not have the luxury of 
developing personal relationships with the seller. Under these circumstances, a more expedi­
tious approach must be taken.
For small companies with which the buyer has no direct contacts, it may only be neces­
sary to initiate contact through a vaguely worded letter expressing interest in a joint venture 
or marketing alliance. During the follow-up telephone call, be prepared to discuss a range of 
options with the seller. Preparation before the first telephone contact is essential. If possible, 
script your comments. Get to the point quickly but indirectly. Identify yourself, your com­
pany, and its strengths. Demonstrate your understanding of the contact’s business and how 
an informal partnership could make sense. Be able to explain the benefits of your proposal 
to the contact—quickly and succinctly. If the opportunity arises, propose a range of options, 
including an acquisition. Listen carefully to the contact’s reaction. If the contact is willing to 
entertain the notion of an acquisition, request a face-to-face meeting.13
Whenever possible, use a trusted intermediary to make contact, generally at the highest 
level possible in the target firm. In some instances, the appropriate contact is the most senior 
manager, but it could be a disaffected large shareholder. Intermediaries include members of 
the acquirer’s board of directors or the firm’s outside legal counsel, accounting firm, lender, 
broker/finder, or investment banker. Intermediaries can be less intimidating than if you take 
a direct approach. When firms have a common board member, empirical research suggests 
13To ensure confidentiality, choose a meeting place that provides sufficient privacy. Create a written agenda for the 
meeting after soliciting input from all participants. The meeting should start with a review of your company and 
your perspective on the outlook for the industry. Encourage the potential target firm to provide information on its 
own operations and its outlook for the industry. Look for areas of consensus. After the meeting, send an email to 
the other party highlighting what you believe was accomplished, and then await their feedback.

	
Phase 5: First Contact	
175
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
that the likelihood of a deal closing is greater and the duration of the negotiation is usually 
shorter.14 Why? Direct or common connections enable both parties to gather information about 
the other party more easily that tends to promote trust. However, a high degree of familiarity 
between board members and senior management of the acquirer and target firms can lower 
announcement date acquirer financial returns if it causes cronyism resulting in less objective 
analysis and flawed decision making. There is evidence that in the presence of significant so­
cial ties there is a greater likelihood that the target’s CEO and a larger fraction of the target’s 
preacquisition board will remain on the board of the combined firms after the merger.15
For public companies, making contact at the highest level possible is extremely important. 
Discretion is critical because of the target’s concern about being “put into play”—that is, cir­
cumstances suggest that it may be an attractive investment opportunity for other firms. Even 
rumors of an acquisition can have adverse consequences for the target, as customers and 
suppliers express concern about a change of ownership and key employees leave concerned 
about an uncertain future. Such a change could imply variation in product or service quality, 
reliability, and the level of service provided under product warranty or maintenance con­
tracts. Suppliers worry about possible disruptions in their production schedules as the tran­
sition to the new owner takes place. Employees worry about possible layoffs or changes in 
compensation.16 Shareholders may experience a dizzying ride as arbitrageurs, buying on the 
rumor, bid up the price of the stock, only to bail out if denial of the rumor appears credible.
Discussing Value
Neither the buyer nor the seller has any incentive to be the first to provide an estimate of 
value. It is difficult to back away from a number put on the table by either party should new 
information emerge. Getting a range may be the best you can do. Discussing values for recent 
acquisitions of similar businesses is one way to get a range. Another is to agree to a formula 
for calculating the purchase price. The purchase price may be defined in terms of a price to 
current year operating earnings multiple, enabling both parties to perform due diligence to 
reach a consensus on the actual current year’s earnings for the target firm. The firm’s current 
year’s earnings are then multiplied by the previously agreed-on price-to-earnings multiple to 
estimate the purchase price.
Preliminary Legal Transaction Documents
Typically, parties to M&A transactions negotiate a confidentiality agreement, a term sheet, 
and a letter of intent (LOI) early in the process. These are explained next.
Confidentiality Agreement
All parties to the deal usually want a confidentiality agreement (also called a nondisclo­
sure agreement), which is generally mutually binding—that is, it covers all parties to the 
14Renneboog and Zhao (2013).
15Ishii and Xuan (2014).
16Competitors will do what they can to fan these concerns in an effort to persuade current customers to switch and 
potential customers to defer buying decisions; key employees will be encouraged to defect to the competition.

176	
5.  Implementation: Search Through Closing 
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
transaction. In negotiating the agreement, the buyer requests as much audited historical data 
and supplemental information as the seller is willing to provide. The prudent seller requests 
similar information about the buyer to assess the buyer’s financial credibility. The seller 
should determine the buyer’s credibility as soon as possible so as not to waste time with a 
potential buyer incapable of raising the financing to complete the transaction. The agreement 
should cover only information that is not publicly available and should have a reasonable 
expiration date.17
Term Sheet
A term sheet outlines the primary areas of agreement and is often used as the basis for 
a more detailed LOI. A standard term sheet is two to four pages long and stipulates the to­
tal consideration or purchase price (often as a range), what is being acquired (i.e., assets or 
stock), limitations on the use of proprietary data, a no-shop provision preventing the seller 
from sharing the terms of the buyer’s bid with other potential buyers, and a termination date. 
Many transactions skip the term sheet and go directly to negotiating an LOI.
Letter of Intent
Unlike the confidentiality agreement, not all parties to the deal may want an LOI. While 
the LOI can be useful in identifying areas of agreement and disagreement early in the process, 
the rights of all parties to the transaction, and certain protective provisions, it may delay the 
signing of a definitive purchase agreement and may also result in some legal risk to either 
the buyer or the seller if the deal is not consummated. Public companies that sign an LOI for 
a transaction that is likely to have a “material” impact on the buyer or seller may need to an­
nounce the LOI publicly to comply with securities law.
The LOI formally stipulates the reason for the agreement and major terms and conditions. 
It also indicates the responsibilities of both parties while the agreement is in force, a reason­
able expiration date, and how all fees associated with the transaction will be paid. Major 
terms and conditions include a deal structure outline such as the payment of cash or stock 
for certain assets and the assumption of certain target company liabilities. The letter may also 
include an agreement that selected personnel of the target will not compete with the com­
bined companies for some period should they leave. Another condition may indicate that a 
certain portion of the purchase price will be allocated to the noncompete agreement.18 The 
LOI also may place a portion of the purchase price in escrow. The proposed purchase price 
may be expressed as a specific dollar figure, as a range, or as a multiple of some measure of 
value, such as operating earnings or cash flow. The LOI also specifies the types of data to be 
exchanged and the duration and extent of the initial due diligence. It terminates if the buyer 
and seller do not reach agreement by a certain date. Legal, consulting, and asset transfer fees 
(i.e., payments made to governmental entities when ownership changes hands) may be paid 
for by the buyer or the seller, or they may be shared.
18Such an allocation of the purchase price is in the interests of the buyer because the amount of the allocation can 
be amortized over the life of the agreement. As such, it can be taken as a tax-deductible expense. However, it may 
constitute taxable income for the seller.
17The confidentiality agreement can be negotiated independently or as part of the term sheet or LOI.

	
Phase 6: Negotiation	
177
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
A well-written LOI usually contains language limiting the extent to which the agreement 
binds the two parties. Price or other provisions are generally subject to closing conditions, 
such as the buyers having full access to all of the seller’s books and records; having complet­
ed due diligence; having obtained financing; and having received approval from boards of 
directors, stockholders, and regulatory bodies. Other standard conditions include requiring 
signed employment contracts for key target firm executives and the completion of all neces­
sary M&A documents. Failure to satisfy any of these conditions will invalidate the agreement. 
The LOI should also describe the due diligence process in some detail, stipulating how the 
buyer should access the seller’s premises, the frequency and duration of such access, and how 
intrusive such activities should be.
PHASE 6: NEGOTIATION
The negotiation phase often is the most complex aspect of the acquisition process. It is 
during this phase that the actual purchase price paid for the acquired business is determined, 
and often it will be quite different from the initial target company valuation. In this section, 
the emphasis is on negotiation in the context of problem solving or interest-based bargaining, 
in which parties look at their underlying interests rather than simply stating positions and 
making demands. In most successful negotiations, parties to the transaction search jointly for 
solutions to problems. All parties must be willing to make concessions that satisfy their own 
needs as well as the highest-priority needs of the others involved in the negotiation.
The party to the negotiations with access to the most reliable information often has a defi­
nite advantage in the process. For this reason, acquirers hiring a target’s former investment 
bankers appear to benefit from information they possess. Such acquirers tend to pay lower 
premiums and receive a larger portion of merger synergies, while target shareholders are less 
likely to receive competing bids and often earn lower abnormal financial returns. About 10% 
of acquirers hire target firm ex-investment bankers as advisors despite the potential for being 
sued for conflicts of interest.19
The negotiation phase consists of four iterative activities that may begin at different times 
but tend to overlap (Fig. 5.1). Due diligence starts as soon as the target is willing to allow it 
and, if permitted, runs throughout the negotiation process. Another activity is refining the 
preliminary valuation based on new data uncovered as part of due diligence, enabling the 
buyer to understand the target’s value better. A third activity is deal structuring, which in­
volves meeting the most important needs of both parties by addressing issues of risk and 
reward. The final activity, the financing plan, provides a reality check for the buyer by defin­
ing the maximum amount the buyer can expect to finance and, in turn, pay for the target 
company. These activities are detailed next.
Refining Valuation
The starting point for negotiation is to update the preliminary target company valuation 
based on new information. A buyer usually requests at least 3–5 years of historical financial 
19Chang et al. (2016).

178	
5.  Implementation: Search Through Closing 
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
data. While it is desirable to examine data audited in accordance with Generally Accepted 
Accounting Principles, such data may not be available for small, privately owned companies. 
Moreover, start-up firms are unlikely to have any significant historical data as well.
The historical data should be normalized, or adjusted for nonrecurring gains, losses, or 
expenses.20 Such adjustments allow the buyer to smooth out irregularities to understand the 
dynamics of the business. Each major expense category should be expressed as a percentage 
of revenue. By observing year-to-year changes in these ratios, trends in the data are more 
discernible.
Deal Structuring
Deal structuring is the process of identifying and satisfying as many of the highest-priority 
objectives of the parties involved in the transaction as possible. The process begins with each 
party determining its own initial negotiating position, potential risks, options for managing 
risk, risk tolerance, and conditions under which either party will “walk away” from the nego­
tiations. Deal structuring also entails understanding potential sources of disagreement—from 
simple arguments over basic facts to substantially more complex issues, such as the form of 
payment and legal, accounting, and tax structures. It also requires identifying conflicts of 
interest that can influence the outcome of discussions. For example, when a portion of the 
purchase price depends on the long-term performance of the acquired business, its manage­
ment—often the former owner—may not behave in a manner that serves the acquirer’s best 
interests.
20Nonrecurring gains or losses can result from the sale of land, equipment, product lines, patents, software, or 
copyrights. Nonrecurring expenses include severance payments, employee signing bonuses, and settlements of 
litigation.
FIGURE 5.1  Viewing negotiation as a process. aAlternatively, the potential buyer could adopt a more hostile 
approach, such as initiating a tender offer to achieve a majority stake in the firm or a proxy contest to change the 
composition of the target’s board or to eliminate defenses.

	
Phase 6: Negotiation	
179
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
Decisions made throughout the deal-structuring process influence various attributes of the 
deal, including how ownership is determined, how assets are transferred, how ownership is 
protected (i.e., governance), and how risk is apportioned among parties to the transaction. 
Other attributes include the type, number, and complexity of the documents required for 
closing; the types of approvals required; and the time needed to complete the transaction. 
These decisions will influence how the combined companies will be managed, the amount 
and timing of resources committed, and the magnitude and timing of current and future tax 
liabilities.
The deal-structuring process can be viewed as comprising a number of interdependent 
components, including the acquisition vehicle, postclosing organization, legal form of the 
selling entity, form of payment, form of acquisition, and tax and accounting considerations. 
The acquisition vehicle refers to the legal structure (e.g., corporation or partnership) used 
to acquire the target company. The postclosing organization is the organizational and legal 
framework (e.g., corporation or partnership) used to manage the combined businesses fol­
lowing the completion of the transaction. The legal form of the selling entity refers to whether 
the seller is a C or Subchapter S Corporation, a limited liability company, or a partnership.
The form of payment may consist of cash, common stock, debt, or some combination. 
Some portion of the payment may be deferred or be dependent on the future performance of 
the acquired entity. The form of acquisition reflects what is being acquired (e.g., stock or as­
sets) and how ownership is being transferred. As a general rule, a transaction is taxable if re­
muneration paid to the target company’s shareholders is primarily something other than the 
acquirer’s stock, and it is nontaxable (i.e., tax deferred) if what they receive is largely acquirer 
stock. Finally, accounting considerations refer to the potential impact of financial reporting 
requirements on the earnings volatility of business combinations, due to the need to revalue 
acquired assets periodically to their fair market value as new information becomes available. 
Fair market value is what a willing buyer and seller, having access to the same information, 
would pay for an asset.21
Conducting Due Diligence
Due diligence is an exhaustive review of records and facilities and typically continues 
throughout the negotiation phase. Although some degree of protection is achieved through a 
well-written contract, legal documents should never be viewed as a substitute for conducting 
formal due diligence. Remedies for violating contract representations and warranties often 
require litigation, with the outcome uncertain. Due diligence may help to avoid the need for 
costly litigation by enabling the acquirer to identify and value target liabilities and to adjust 
the purchase price paid at closing accordingly. As such, reliance on contract remedies to re­
cover M&A-related costs may be reduced because there are likely to be fewer surprises.22
21Changes in the value of assets and liabilities can result in one-time gains or losses recorded on the income state­
ment thereby contributing to swings in earnings. For a more detailed discussion of how to structure M&A transac­
tions, see DePamphilis (2010b).
22Even if the acquirer was to win its lawsuit, receiving remuneration for breach of contract may be impossible if the 
seller declares bankruptcy, disappears, or moves assets to offshore accounts.

180	
5.  Implementation: Search Through Closing 
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
The failure to do an exhaustive due diligence can be disastrous. Technology giant, Hewlett-
Packard, claimed in 2012 that it had been duped into overpaying for its acquisition of UK soft­
ware maker Autonomy in October 2011. HP wrote off $5 billion of the $11.1 billion it had paid 
for the firm alleging the seller engaged in “outright misrepresentations” in the agreement of 
purchase and sale signed by the two parties. Similarly, shoddy due diligence failed to uncov­
er certain potential liabilities when Facebook acquired virtual reality headset maker Oculus 
in 2014 for $3 billion. ZeniMax Media sued Facebook for theft of trade secrets alleging Oculus 
had misused certain information when it hired former ZeniMax employees who had been 
covered under a nondisclosure agreement not to divulge ZeniMax’s intellectual proproperty.
Table 5.1 lists convenient online sources of information that are helpful in conducting due 
diligence.23 While due diligence is most often associated with buyers, both sellers and lenders 
will also conduct due diligence.24
An expensive and exhausting process, due diligence is highly intrusive, and it places con­
siderable demands on managers’ time and attention. Frequently, the buyer wants as much 
time as possible, while the seller will want to limit the length and scope. Due diligence rarely 
works to the advantage of the seller because a long and detailed due diligence is likely to un­
cover items the buyer will use as a reason to lower the purchase price. Consequently, sellers 
may seek to terminate due diligence before the buyer feels it is appropriate. If the target firm 
succeeds in reducing the amount of information disclosed to the target firm, it can expect to 
23A detailed preliminary acquirer due diligence question list is provided on the companion site to this book.
24For a detailed discussion of the due diligence process and best practices, see Selim (2003).
TABLE 5.1  Convenient Information Sources for Conducting Due Diligence
Web address
Content
Securities and Exchange Commission
www.sec.gov
http://www.sec.gov/litigation.shtml
Financial information/security law violations
Public filings for almost 10 years available through 
the Edgar database
Enforcement actions
US Patent Office
www.uspto.gov
www.uspto.gov/patft/index.html
Intellectual property rights information
Search patent database if you have the patent number
Federal Communications Commission
www.fcc.gov
http://www.fcc.gov/searchtools.html
Regulates various commercial practices
General information
Access to database of individuals sanctioned for il­
legal marketing practices
US and State Attorneys General Offices
http://www.naag.org/ag/full_ag_table.php
Information on criminal activities
Listing of state attorneys general
Better Business Bureau (BBB)
http://search.bbb.org/search.html
Compiles consumer complaints database
Paid Services
US Search (www.ussearch.com)
KnowX (www.knowx.com)
Information on:
Criminal violations
Liens/bankruptcies
Credit history
Litigation

	
Phase 6: Negotiation	
181
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
be required to make more representations and warranties as to the accuracy of its claims and 
promises in the purchase and sale agreement.
There is evidence that acquirer and target firms choosing a common auditor to perform 
due diligence reduce potential conflicts of interest and deal uncertainty. When common au­
ditors are used, both the acquiring and target firms split the auditor’s fees thereby reducing 
the potential for the auditor to show favoritism to the party paying them the most. Auditing 
firms often have different ways of interpreting data and applying accounting rules. Audi­
tors representing both parties can ensure that available data and accounting standards are 
applied consistently leading to a reduction in uncertainty. Finally, auditors auditing both 
parties face greater litigation risk as the common auditor may be sued for earnings mis­
reporting by either the acquirer or the target. Arguably, the common auditor has a greater 
incentive to limit misreporting of information. There is, however, conflicting evidence un­
der special circumstances where shared auditor deals (about 25% involving publicly traded 
firms) does appear to favor acquirers, specifically when both the acquirer and the target 
share an auditor from the same practice office and when the target is small. It is unclear 
whether this information “leak” is intentional or is simply passed inadvertently through 
informal conversations.25
The Components of Due Diligence
Due diligence consists of three primary reviews; they often occur concurrently. The 
strategic and operational review conducted by senior operations and marketing management 
asks questions that focus on the seller’s management team, operations, and sales and mar­
keting strategies. Senior managers should confirm that the proposed deal indeed supports 
the realization of the firm’s business strategy. The financial review, directed by financial and 
accounting personnel, focuses on the quality, timeliness, and completeness of the seller’s fi­
nancial statements. That is, CFOs generally agree that high-quality financial statements are 
those recorded in a consistent manner over time, are supported by actual cash flows, are 
not subject to frequent or significant one-time adjustments, and whose earnings are sustain­
able.26 The financial review also confirms that the anticipated synergies are real and can be 
achieved within a reasonable time frame. A legal review, which is conducted by the buyer’s 
legal counsel, deals with corporate records, financial matters, management and employee 
issues, tangible and intangible assets of the seller, and material contracts and obligations of 
the seller such as litigation and claims. Due diligence requires the creation of comprehensive 
checklists (see website accompanying this book for such a checklist). The interview process 
provides invaluable sources of information. By asking the same questions of a number of key 
managers, the acquirer is able to validate the accuracy of its conclusions.
Buyer, Seller, and Lender Due Diligence
Buyers use due diligence to validate assumptions underlying their preliminary valua­
tion and to uncover new sources of value and risk. Key objectives include identifying and 
confirming sources of value or synergy and mitigating real or potential liability by look­
ing for fatal flaws that reduce value. From the perspective of the buyer’s attorney, the due 
26Dichev et al. (2013).
25Dhaliwal et al. (2016).

182	
5.  Implementation: Search Through Closing 
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
diligence review represents an opportunity to learn about the target firm in order to allocate 
risk properly among the parties to the negotiation, to unearth issues that reduce the likeli­
hood of closing, and to assist their client in drafting the reps and warranties for the acquisi­
tion agreement. Table 5.2 categorizes potential sources of value from synergy that may be 
uncovered or confirmed during due diligence and the impact these may have on operating 
performance.
Although the bulk of due diligence is performed by the buyer on the seller, the prudent sell­
er should also perform due diligence on the buyer and on its own personnel and operations. 
By investigating the buyer, the seller can determine whether the buyer has the financial where­
withal to finance the purchase. As part of its internal due diligence, a seller often requires its 
managers to sign affidavits attesting (to the “best of their knowledge”) to the truthfulness of 
what is being represented in the contract that pertains to their areas of responsibility. In doing 
so, the seller hopes to mitigate liability stemming from inaccuracies in the seller’s representa­
tions and warranties made in the definitive agreement of purchase and sale.
If the acquirer is borrowing to buy a target firm, the lender(s) will want to perform their 
own due diligence independent of the buyer’s effort. Multiple lender investigations, often 
performed concurrently, can be quite burdensome to the target firm’s management and em­
ployees. Sellers should agree to these activities only if confident the transaction will be con­
summated.
The Rise of the Virtual Data Room
The proliferation of new technologies has impacted the way in which data is stored, ac­
cessed, and analyzed during the due diligence process. While smaller deals often still involve 
presentations and the exchange of data (sometimes indexed in boxes or filing cabinets) in 
conference rooms, more and more deals utilize the virtual data room (VDR). A VDR is an 
online site used for storage and distribution of documents during the due diligence process. 
It provides a convenient means of editing, indexing, and disseminating documents in a se­
cure and confidential environment at any time and from any location. In some instances, the 
VDR has become a means of conducting data and document exchange throughout the entire 
deal. The VDR also provides an excellent “audit trail” or means of determining which parties 
accessed what data and when.
Data security is the number one challenge in using VDRs. The participants in the deal pro­
cess must make sure that the data is as secure when stored in the “cloud” as it might be when 
overseen by a firm’s internal IT department.
Developing the Financing Plan
The last of the four negotiation phase activities is to develop the balance sheet, income, 
and cash flow statements for the combined firms. Unlike the financial projections of cash flow 
made to value the target, these statements should include the expected cost of financing the 
transaction. Developing the financing plan is a key input in determining the purchase price, 
because it places a limitation on the amount the buyer can offer the seller. The financing plan 
is appended to the acquirer’s business and acquisition plans and is used to obtain financing 
for the transaction (see Chapter 13).

	
Phase 6: Negotiation	
183
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
TABLE 5.2  Identifying Potential Sources of Value
Potential source of value
Examples
Potential impact
OPERATING SYNERGY
•	Eliminating functional overlap
•	Reduce duplicate overhead 
positions
•	Improved margins
•	Productivity improvement
•	Increased output per employee
•	Same
•	Purchasing discounts
•	Volume discounts on raw 
material purchases
•	Same
•	Working capital management
•	Reduced days in receivables 
due to improved collection of 
accounts receivable
•	Improved return on total 
assets
•	Fewer days in inventory due to 
improved inventory turns
•	Same
•	Facilities management
•	Economies of scale
•	Increased production in 
underutilized facilities
•	Same
•	Economies of scope
•	Data centers, R&D functions, 
call centers, and so on, support 
multiple product lines/
operations
•	Same
•	Organizational realignment
•	Reducing the number of layers 
of management
•	Reduced bureaucratic inertia
FINANCIAL SYNERGY
•	Increased borrowing capacity
•	Target has little debt and many 
unencumbered assets
•	Increased access to financing
•	Increased leverage
•	Access to lower-cost source of 
funds
•	Lower cost of capital
MARKETING/PRODUCT SYNERGY
•	Access to new distribution 
channels
•	Increased sales opportunities
•	Increased revenue
•	Cross-selling opportunities
•	Selling acquirer products to 
target customers and vice versa
•	Same
•	Research and development
•	Cross-fertilization of ideas
•	More innovation
•	Product development
•	Increased advertising budget
•	Improved market share
CONTROL
•	Opportunity identification
•	Acquirer identifies 
opportunities not seen by 
target’s management
•	New growth opportunities
•	More proactive management style
•	More decisive decision making
•	Improved financial returns

184	
5.  Implementation: Search Through Closing 
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
Defining the Purchase Price
The three commonly used definitions of purchase price are total consideration, total pur­
chase price/enterprise value, and net purchase price. Each serves a different purpose.
Total Consideration
In the purchase agreement, the total consideration consists of cash (C), stock (S), new 
debt issues (ND), or some combination of all three paid to the seller’s shareholders. It is 
a term commonly used in legal documents to reflect the different types of remuneration 
received by target company shareholders. Note that the remuneration can include both 
financial and nonfinancial assets such as real estate. Nonfinancial compensation some­
times is referred to as payment in kind. The debt counted in the total consideration is what 
the target company shareholders receive as payment for their stock, along with any cash 
or acquiring company stock. Each component should be viewed in present value terms; 
therefore, the total consideration is itself expressed in present value terms (PVTC). The 
present value of cash is its face value. The stock component of the total consideration is 
the present value (PVS) of future dividends or net cash flows or the acquiring firm’s stock 
price per share times the number of shares to be exchanged for each outstanding share of 
the seller’s stock. New debt issued by the acquiring company as part of the compensa­
tion paid to shareholders can be expressed as the present value (PVND) of the cumulative 
interest payments plus principal discounted at some appropriate market rate of interest 
(see Chapter 7).
Total Purchase Price/Enterprise Value27
The total purchase price (PVTPP) or enterprise value of the target firm consists of the to­
tal consideration (PVTC) plus the market value of the target firm’s debt (PVAD) assumed by 
the acquiring company. The enterprise value is sometimes expressed as the total purchase 
price plus net debt. Net debt includes the market value of debt assumed by the acquirer 
less cash and marketable securities on the books of the target firm. The enterprise value 
of the firm often is quoted in the media as the purchase price because it is most visible 
to those who are not familiar with the details. For example, the enterprise value paid for 
US cable business Cablevision in late 2015 by French telecommunications giant, Altice, 
was $17.7 billion, consisting of $8.1 billion in assumed Cablevision debt plus $9.6 billion 
paid for Cablevision equity. It is important to analysts and shareholders alike, because it 
approximates the total investment28 made by the acquiring firm. It is an approximation 
because it does not necessarily measure liabilities the acquirer is assuming that are not 
visible on the target firm’s balance sheet. Nor does it reflect the potential for recovering a 
portion of the total consideration paid to target company shareholders by selling under­
valued or redundant assets. These considerations are reflected in the net purchase price, 
discussed next.
27In Chapter 7, enterprise value used for valuation purposes will be defined in more detail. The enterprise value 
here is discussed as it is normally defined in the popular media.
28Total investment equals what the acquirer pays the shareholders plus assumed liabilities such as long-term debt.

	
Phase 7: Developing the Integration Plan	
185
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
Net Purchase Price
The net purchase price (PVNPP) is the total purchase price plus other assumed target firm 
liabilities (PVOAL)29 less the proceeds from the sale of discretionary or redundant target assets 
(PVDA)30 on or off the balance sheet. PVOAL are those assumed liabilities not fully reflected on 
the target firm’s balance sheet or in the estimation of the economic value of the target firm. 
The net purchase price is the most comprehensive measure of the actual price paid for the 
target firm. It includes all known cash obligations assumed by the acquirer as well as any por­
tion of the purchase price that is recovered through the sale of assets. The various definitions 
of price can be summarized as follows:
=
=
+
+
Total consideration
PV
C
PV
PV
S
TC
ND
=
=
+
Total purchase price or enterprise value
PV
PV
PV
TPP
TC
AD
=
=
+
=
+
Net purchase price
PV
PV
PV
– PV
(C +  PV + PV
+  PV
)
PV
– PV
NPP
TPP
OAL
DA
S
ND
AD
OAL
DA
Although the total consideration is most important to the target company’s shareholders as 
a measure of what they receive in exchange for their stock, the acquirer’s shareholders often 
focus on the total purchase price/enterprise value as the actual amount paid for the target’s 
equity plus the value of assumed debt. However, the total purchase price tends to ignore other 
adjustments that should be made to determine actual or pending “out-of-pocket” cash spent 
by the acquirer. The net purchase price reflects adjustments to the total purchase price and is a 
much better indicator of whether the acquirer overpaid for the target firm. The application of 
the various definitions of the purchase price is addressed in more detail in Chapter 9.
PHASE 7: DEVELOPING THE INTEGRATION PLAN
Part of the premerger integration planning process involves the preclosing due dili­
gence activity. One responsibility of the due diligence team is to identify ways in which as­
sets, processes, and other resources can be combined to realize cost savings, productivity 
29If the target firm’s balance sheet reserves reflected all known future obligations and there were no potential off-
balance-sheet liabilities, there would be no need to adjust the purchase price for assumed liabilities other than for 
short- and long-term debts assumed by the acquiring company. Earnings would reflect the impact of known liabili­
ties. Operating cash flows, reflecting both earnings and changes in balance sheet items, would also reflect future li­
abilities. Valuations based on a multiple of earnings, book value, or discounted cash flow would accurately reflect the 
value of the business. In practice, reserves are often inadequate to satisfy pending claims. Common examples include 
underfunded or underreserved employee pension and healthcare obligations and uncollectable receivables. To the 
extent that such factors represent a future use of cash, the present value of their future impact should be estimated.
30Discretionary assets are those not required to operate the target and can be sold to recover some portion of the pur­
chase price. Such assets include land valued at its historical cost. Other examples include cash balances in excess 
of normal working capital needs and product lines or operating units considered nonstrategic by the buyer. The 
sale of discretionary assets is not considered in the calculation of the value of the target because economic value is 
determined by future operating cash flows before consideration is given to how the transaction will be financed.

186	
5.  Implementation: Search Through Closing 
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
improvements, or other perceived synergies. This information is also essential for refining 
the valuation process by enabling planners to understand better the necessary sequencing of 
events and the resulting pace at which the expected synergies may be realized.
Contract-Related Issues
Integration planning also involves addressing human resource, customer, and supplier issues 
that overlap the change of ownership. These are transitional issues to resolve as part of the pur­
chase agreement, and it is critical that the seller’s responsibilities be negotiated before closing to 
make the actual transition as smooth as possible. For example, the agreement may stipulate how 
target company employees will be paid and how their benefit claims will be processed.31
A prudent buyer will want to include assurances in the purchase agreement to limit its 
postclosing risk. Most seller representations and warranties (i.e., claims or statements of fact) 
made to the buyer refer to the past and present conditions of the seller’s business. They per­
tain to items such as the ownership of securities; real and intellectual property; current levels 
of receivables, inventory, and debt; pending lawsuits, worker disability, and customer war­
ranty claims; and an assurance that the target’s accounting practices are in accordance with 
GAAP. Although “reps and warranties” apply primarily to the past and current states of 
the seller’s business, they do have ramifications for the future. If a seller claims there are no 
lawsuits pending and a lawsuit is filed shortly after closing, the buyer may seek to recover 
damages from the seller. The buyer also may insist that certain conditions be satisfied before 
closing can take place. Common closing conditions include employment contracts, agree­
ments not to compete, financing, and regulatory and shareholder approval. Finally, the buyer 
will want to make the final closing contingent on receiving approval from the appropriate 
regulatory agencies and shareholders of both companies before any money changes hands.
Earning Trust
Decisions made before closing affect postclosing integration activity.32 Successfully 
integrating firms requires getting employees in both firms to work to achieve common 
31Systems must be in place to ensure that employees of the acquired company continue to be paid without disrup­
tion. If the number of employees is small, this may be accommodated easily by loading the acquirer’s payroll 
computer system with the necessary salary and personal information before closing or by having a third-party 
payroll processor perform these services. For larger operations or where employees are dispersed geographically, 
the target’s employees may continue to be paid for a specific period using the target’s existing payroll system. As 
for benefits, employee healthcare or disability claims tend to escalate just before a transaction closes as employees, 
whether they leave or stay with the new firm, file more health and disability claims for longer periods after down­
sizing. The sharp increase in such expenses can pose an unexpected financial burden for the acquirer and should be 
addressed in the merger agreement. For example, all claims incurred within a specific number of days before clos­
ing but not submitted by employees until after closing will be reimbursed by the seller. Alternatively, such claims 
may be paid from an escrow account containing a portion of the purchase price.
32Benefits packages, employment contracts, and retention bonuses to keep key employees typically are negotiated 
before the closing. Contractual covenants and conditions also affect integration. Earnouts, which are payments 
made to the seller based on the acquired business’s achieving certain profit or revenue targets, can limit the buyer’s 
ability to integrate the target effectively into the acquirer’s operations.

	
Phase 8: Closing	
187
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
objectives. This comes about through building credibility and trust, not through superficial 
slogans and empty promises. Trust comes from cooperation, keeping commitments, and 
experiencing success.
Choosing the Integration Manager and Other Critical Decisions
The buyer should designate an integration manager who possesses excellent interpersonal 
and project management skills. The buyer must also determine what is critical to continu­
ing the acquired company’s success during the first 12–24 months after the closing. Critical 
activities include identifying key managers, vendors, and customers and determining what is 
needed to retain them. Preclosing integration planning activities should determine the oper­
ating standards required for continued operation of the businesses: executive compensation, 
labor contracts, billing procedures, product delivery times, and quality metrics. Finally, there 
must be a communication plan for all stakeholders that can be implemented immediately 
following closing; see Chapter 6 for more details.
PHASE 8: CLOSING
Closing entails obtaining all necessary shareholder, regulatory, and third-party consents 
(e.g., customer and vendor contracts) and also completing the definitive purchase agreement. 
These are discussed next.
Gaining the Necessary Approvals
The buyer’s legal counsel is responsible for ensuring that the transaction is in com­
pliance with securities, antitrust, and state corporation laws. Care must be exercised to 
ensure that all filings required by law have been made with the Federal Trade Commis­
sion and the Department of Justice. Finally, many deals require approval by the acquirer 
and target firm shareholders. See Chapter 11 for detail on when shareholder approval is 
required.
Assigning Customer and Vendor Contracts
In a purchase of assets, many customer and vendor contracts cannot be assigned to the 
buyer without receiving written approval from the other parties. While often a formality, 
both vendors and customers may attempt to negotiate more favorable terms. Licenses must 
be approved by the licensor, which can be a major impediment to a timely closing. A major 
software vendor demanded a substantial increase in royalty payments before agreeing to 
transfer the software license to the buyer. The vendor knew that the software was critical for 
the ongoing operation of the target company’s data center. From the buyer’s perspective, the 
exorbitant increase in the fee had an adverse impact on the economics of the transaction and 
nearly caused the deal to collapse.

188	
5.  Implementation: Search Through Closing 
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
Completing the Acquisition/Merger Agreement
The acquisition/merger or definitive agreement is the cornerstone of the closing documents. 
It indicates all of the rights and obligations of the parties both before and after the closing.
Deal Provisions
In an asset or stock purchase, deal provisions define the consideration or form of payment, 
how it will be paid, and the specific assets or shares to be acquired. In a merger, this section 
of the agreement defines the number (or fraction) of acquirer shares to be exchanged for each 
target share in a share exchange.
Price
The purchase price or total consideration may be fixed at the time of closing, subject to 
future adjustment, or it may be contingent on future performance. For asset transactions, it 
is common to exclude cash on the target’s balance sheet; the price paid for noncurrent assets, 
such as plant and intangible assets, will be fixed, but the price for current assets will depend 
on their levels at closing following an audit.
Allocation of Price
The buyer often tries to allocate as much of the purchase price as possible to depreciable 
assets, such as fixed assets, customer lists, and noncompete agreements, enabling them to 
depreciate or amortize these upwardly revised assets and reduce future taxable income. 
However, such an allocation may constitute taxable income to the seller. Both parties should 
agree on how the purchase price should be allocated in an asset transaction before closing, 
eliminating the chance that conflicting positions will be taken for tax reporting purposes.
Payment Mechanism
Payment may be made at closing by wire transfer or cashier’s check, or the buyer may defer 
the payment of a portion of the purchase price by issuing a promissory note to the seller. The 
buyer may agree to put the unpaid portion of the purchase price in escrow or through a holdback 
allowance, thereby facilitating the settlement of claims that might be made in the future.33
Assumption of Liabilities
The seller retains those liabilities not assumed by the buyer. In instances such as environ­
mental liabilities, unpaid taxes, and inadequately funded pension obligations, the courts may 
go after the buyer and the seller. In contrast, the buyer assumes all known and unknown li­
abilities in a merger or share purchase.
Representations and Warranties
Reps and warranties are claims made as “statements of fact” by buyers and sellers. As 
currently used, the terms are virtually indistinguishable from one another. They serve three 
purposes: disclosure, termination rights, and indemnification rights.
33The escrow account involves the buyer putting a portion of the purchase price in an account held by a third party, 
while the holdback allowance generally does not.

	
Phase 8: Closing	
189
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
Disclosure: Contract reps and warranties should provide for full disclosure of all 
information germane to the deal, typically covering the areas of greatest concern to both 
parties. These include financial statements, corporate organization and good standing, 
capitalization, absence of undisclosed liabilities, current litigation, contracts, title to 
assets, taxes and tax returns, no violation of laws or regulations, employee benefit plans, 
labor issues, and insurance coverage.
Termination rights: Reps and warranties serve to allocate risk by serving as a closing 
condition. At closing, representations such as those concerning the state of the business 
and financial affairs are again reviewed, such that they must still be accurate despite the 
lapse of time between the signing of the agreement and the actual closing. If there has 
been a material change in the target’s business or financial affairs between signing and 
closing, the bidder has the right to terminate the transaction.
Indemnification rights: Often in transactions involving private firms, certain representations 
will extend beyond closing. As such, they serve as a basis for indemnification, that is, the 
buyers being compensated for costs incurred subsequent to closing. For example, a seller 
may represent that there are no lawsuits pending, which turns out to be untrue after closing 
when the buyer incurs significant costs to settle a legal dispute initiated before there was a 
change in control. Indemnification will be discussed in more detail later in this chapter.
Covenants
Covenants are agreements by the parties about actions they agree to take or refrain from 
taking between signing the definitive agreement and the closing. The seller may be required 
to continue conducting business in the usual and customary manner and to seek approval for 
all expenditures that may be considered out of the ordinary such as one-time dividend pay­
ments or sizeable increases in management compensation. In contrast to reps and warranties, 
covenants do not relate to a point in time (e.g., at signing or closing) but, rather, relate to future 
behavior between signing and closing. While they usually expire at closing, covenants some­
times survive closing. Typical examples include a buyer’s covenant to register stock that it is 
issuing to the seller and to complete the dissolution of the firm following closing in an asset sale.
Covenants may be either negative (restrictive) or positive (requirement to do something). 
Negative covenants restrict a party from taking certain actions such as the payment of divi­
dends or the sale of an asset without the permission of the buyer between signing and closing. 
Positive covenants may require the seller to continue to operate its business in a way that is 
consistent with its past practices. Many purchase agreements include virtually the same lan­
guage in both representations and covenants.
Closing Conditions
The satisfaction of negotiated conditions determines whether a party to the agreement 
must consummate the deal. Among the most important of the closing conditions is the so-
called bring-down provision, requiring that representations made at the signing are still true as 
of the closing date. Other examples include obtaining all necessary legal opinions, the execu­
tion of other agreements (e.g., promissory notes), and the absence of any “material adverse 
change” in the condition of the target company. The effects of material adverse change clauses 
(MACs) in agreements of purchase and sale became very visible during the disruption in 
the financial markets in 2008. Many firms that had signed M&A contracts looked for a way 

190	
5.  Implementation: Search Through Closing 
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
out. The most common challenge in negotiating such clauses is defining what constitutes 
materiality (e.g., a 20% reduction in earnings or sales?) and the specific conditions under 
which MACs are triggered. Because of the inherent ambiguity, the contract language is usu­
ally vague, and it is this very ambiguity that has enabled so many acquirers to withdraw from 
contracts. Lenders, too, use these clauses to withdraw financing.
There is evidence that a broadly defined clause (i.e., the greater the number of circumstanc­
es under which the parties can withdraw from the deal without penalty) is associated with 
higher target and acquirer announcement date returns and a lower likelihood that MACs will 
be triggered. The more broadly defined clause communicates to the acquirer that the target 
firm is confident that the information disclosed during due diligence and perceived synergies 
are sufficient to ensure that the deal will close.34
Indemnification
In effect, indemnification is the reimbursement of the other party for a loss incurred fol­
lowing closing for which they were not responsible. The definitive agreement requires the 
seller to indemnify or absolve the buyer of liability in the event of misrepresentations or 
breaches of warranties or covenants. Similarly, the buyer usually agrees to indemnify the 
seller. Both parties generally want to limit the period during which the indemnity clauses 
remain in force.35
Other Closing Documents
In addition to resolving the issues just outlined, closing may be complicated by the number 
and complexity of other documents required to complete the transaction. In addition to the 
definitive agreement, the more important documents often include patents, licenses, royalty 
agreements, trade names, and trademarks; labor and employment agreements; leases; mort­
gages, loan agreements, and lines of credit; stock and bond commitments and details; and 
supplier and customer contracts. Other documents could include distributor and sales repre­
sentative agreements, stock option and employee incentive programs, and health and other 
benefit plans (which must be in place at closing, to eliminate lapsed coverage).
Complete descriptions of all foreign patents, facilities, and investments; insurance poli­
cies, coverage, and claims pending; intermediary fee arrangements; litigation pending for 
and against each party; and environmental compliance issues resolved or on track to be 
resolved often are part of the closing documents. Furthermore, seller’s corporate minutes 
of the board of directors and any other significant committee information, as well as ar­
ticles of incorporation, bylaws, stock certificates, and corporate seals, are part of the final 
documentation.36
34Macias and Moeller (2016).
35At least 1 full year of operation and a full audit are necessary to identify claims. Some claims (e.g., environmental) 
extend beyond the survival period of the indemnity clause. Usually, neither party can submit claims to the other 
until some minimum threshold, expressed in terms of the number or dollar size of claims, has been exceeded. 
Firms also may purchase warranty and indemnity insurance, which provides compensation for losses arising from 
breach of warranties and indemnities given in the merger agreement.
36Sherman (2006).

	
Phase 9: Implementing Postclosing Integration	
191
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
Financing Contingencies
Most agreements of purchase and sale contain a financing contingency. The buyer is not 
subject to the terms of the contract if the buyer cannot obtain adequate funding to complete 
the transaction. Breakup fees can be particularly useful to ensure that the buyer will attempt 
as aggressively as possible to obtain financing. In some instances, the seller may require the 
buyer to put a nonrefundable deposit in escrow, to be forfeited if the buyer is unable to obtain 
financing to complete the transaction.37
PHASE 9: IMPLEMENTING POSTCLOSING INTEGRATION
The postclosing integration activity is widely viewed as among the most important phases 
of the acquisition process and is discussed in detail in Chapter 6. What follows is a discussion 
of those activities required immediately following closing, which fall into five categories.
Communication Plans
Implementing an effective communication plan immediately after the closing is crucial for 
retaining employees of the acquired firm and maintaining or boosting morale and productiv­
ity. The plan should address employee, customer, and vendor concerns. The message always 
should be honest and consistent. Employees need to understand how their compensation, 
including benefits, might change under the new ownership. They may find a loss of specific 
benefits palatable if they are perceived as offset by improvements in other benefits or work­
ing conditions. Customers want reassurance that there will be no deterioration in product or 
service quality or delivery time during the transition from old to new ownership. Vendors 
also are very interested in understanding how the change in ownership will affect their sales 
to the new firm.
Whenever possible, communication is best done on a face-to-face basis. Senior managers 
of the acquiring company can be sent to address employee groups (on site, if possible). They 
also should contact key customers (preferably in person or at least by telephone) to provide 
the needed reassurances. Meeting, with complete candor, reasonable requests for informa­
tion from employees, customers, and vendors immediately following closing will contribute 
greatly to the sense of trust among stakeholders necessary for the ultimate success of the 
acquisition.
Employee Retention
Retaining middle-level managers should be a top priority during this phase of the ac­
quisition process. Frequently, senior managers of the target company that the buyer choos­
es to retain are asked to sign employment agreements as a condition of closing. Although 
senior managers provide overall direction for the firm, middle-level managers execute the 
37Most deals involving privately owned firms do not involve breakup fees, termination fees, or liquidated damage 
provisions, because such sellers are viewed as highly motivated. If the seller refuses to sell the business once hav­
ing signed an agreement to do so, the buyer has a breach of contract lawsuit that it can bring against the seller.

192	
5.  Implementation: Search Through Closing 
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
day-to-day operations of the firm. Bonuses, stock options, and enhanced sales commission 
schedules are commonly put in place to keep such managers.
Satisfying Cash Flow Requirements
Conversations with middle-level managers following closing often reveal areas in which 
maintenance expenditures have been deferred. Receivables previously thought to be collect­
able may have to be written off. Production may be disrupted as employees of the acquired 
firm find it difficult to adapt to new practices introduced by the acquiring company’s man­
agement or if inventory levels are inadequate to maintain desired customer delivery times. 
Finally, more customers than had been anticipated may be lost to competitors that use the 
change in ownership as an opportunity to woo them away with various types of incentives.
Employing Best Practices
The combined firms often realize potential synergies by employing the “best practices” of 
both. However, in some areas, neither company may be employing what its customers be­
lieve to be the best practices in the industry. Management should look beyond its own opera­
tions to adopt the practices of other companies in the same or other industries.
Cultural Issues
Corporate cultures reflect the set of beliefs and behaviors of the management and em­
ployees of a corporation. Some firms are paternalistic, and others are “bottom-line” oriented. 
Some empower employees, whereas others believe in highly centralized control. Some pro­
mote problem solving within a team environment; others encourage individual performance. 
Inevitably, different corporate cultures impede postacquisition integration efforts. The key to 
success is taking the time to explain to all of the new firm’s employees what behaviors are 
expected and why and to tell managers that they should “walk the talk.”
Cultural differences can be even more pronounced in cross-border deals. In late 2016, merg­
er talks between Germany-based Linde AG and United States–based Praxair Inc. cratered 
over Linde’s insistence that the merged entity be headquartered in Munich. The suitor Linde’s 
historical ties and attachment to customs made this issue largely nonnegotiable.
PHASE 10: CONDUCTING A POSTCLOSING EVALUATION
The primary reasons for conducting a postclosing evaluation of deals are to determine if 
the acquisition is meeting expectations, to undertake corrective actions if necessary, and to 
identify what was done well and what should be done better in future deals.
Do Not Change Performance Benchmarks
Once the acquisition appears to be operating normally, evaluate the actual performance to 
that projected in the acquisition plan. Success should be defined in terms of actual to planned 

II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
	
THE INCREASING APPLICATION OF “DATA ANALYTICS” IN M&As	
193
performance. Too often, management simply ignores the performance targets in the acqui­
sition plan and accepts less than plan performance to justify the acquisition. This may be 
appropriate if circumstances beyond the firm’s control cause a change in the operating envi­
ronment such as a recession or a change in the regulatory environment.
Ask the Difficult Questions
The types of questions asked vary with the time elapsed since the closing. After 
6 months, what has the buyer learned about the business? Were the original valuation 
assumptions reasonable? If not, what did the buyer not understand about the target com­
pany, and why? What did the buyer do well? What should have been done differently? 
What can be done to ensure that the same mistakes are not made in future acquisitions? 
After 12 months, is the business meeting expectations? If not, what can be done to put 
the business back on track? Is the cost of fixing the business offset by expected returns? 
Are the right people in place to manage the business for the long term? After 24 months,38 
does the acquired business still appear attractive? If not, should it be divested? If yes, 
when and to whom?
Learn From Mistakes
It always pays to identify lessons learned from each transaction. This is often a neglected 
exercise and results in firms repeating the same mistakes. This occurs because those involved 
in the acquisition process may change from one deal to another. Highly acquisitive compa­
nies can benefit greatly by dedicating certain legal, human resource, marketing, financial, 
and business development resources to support acquisitions made throughout the company. 
Despite evidence that abnormal financial returns to frequent acquirers tend to decline on 
average,39 there is evidence that such firms learn from experience through repetitive deals, 
especially when the acquirer’s CEO remains the same and the successive deals are similar.40
THE INCREASING APPLICATION OF “DATA ANALYTICS” IN M&As
Often described as the identification and interpretation of meaningful patterns in data, 
data analytics relies on the application of statistics, computer programing, and model build­
ing to uncover insights helpful in business decision making. In an age when the cost of data 
38The acquirer should use the financial projections in the acquisition plan as performance benchmarks against 
which the target’s future performance can be measured. These benchmarks may allow for continued operating 
losses during the first few years as the business reinvests to fuel future growth. The decision to exit the business 
should be based on whether the actual losses are consistent with the projected benchmarks.
39Fuller et al. (2002) document that acquirers, completing at least five deals within a 3-year period, earn an 
average 1.7% cumulative abnormal return, but from the fifth deal on they earn only 0.52%. While this could 
reflect overconfidence, Aktas et al. (2009) argue that this is consistent with learning by doing because experienced 
acquirers are better able to assess expected synergies and are willing to pay more to complete deals.
40Aktas et al. (2013).

194	
5.  Implementation: Search Through Closing 
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
storage, organization, and manipulation has been declining, senior executives often are con­
fronted with vast amounts of data on their customers, suppliers, employees, etc. Just as ex­
ecutives attempt to use such data to describe, predict, and improve business performance, 
data analytics can be applied to all phases of the M&A process described in this book.
Putting a deal together often requires access to large amounts of granular data and the 
ability to achieve an understanding of historical patterns that underlie predictions of future 
performance. While the spreadsheet models discussed in Chapters  9 and  14 of this book 
are examples of how analytical tools can be used to address value and risk issues related 
to M&As, they often fail to identify and explain more complex issues. So-called “structured 
data” such as 10K financial statements are more easily accessible and manipulated than “un­
structured data” that range from those gleaned from social media to customer preference 
survey results, census data, and weather information. Thus, analytical tools that use both 
structured and unstructured data may provide insights into patterns not observable in the 
output of financial spreadsheet models.
The application of data analytics to M&A has increased in acceptance and popularity with 
40% of 2016 Deloitte & Touche survey respondents viewing data analytics as critical to M&A 
analysis. Larger firms are more inclined to use data analytics with 58% of firms with revenue 
exceeding $5 billion viewing data analytics as a core component of M&A analysis; firms with 
annual revenue under $500 million showed less interest in such tools.41
Data analytical tools can be applied throughout the M&A process. For example, text read­
ing software can organize the review of legal contracts through key word (or phrase) searches 
based on names, locations, and dollar amounts. A page by page review of legal documents, 
once time consuming, can now be done automatically. Another application is in assessing 
the target firm’s talent pool by identifying the number of employees with certain types of 
degrees or certifications and length of work experience. Comparisons can be made between 
the target’s and acquirer’s compensation structures to determine what changes might have to 
be made and the potential impact on the combined firm’s cost structure. Automated natural 
language processing (i.e., training computers to understand all forms of human communica­
tion) can be used to assess the intellectual property of the target firm and to cross-reference 
those descriptions of the property with other databases to avoid potential future litigation or 
regulatory challenges.
While data analytics can provide valuable insights, it is subject to significant limitations. 
It is predicated implicitly on the notion that more data is better than less. A deluge of data 
makes it difficult to focus on what is really important. While software can sift through reams 
of data to identify patterns, it is not always clear that the patterns are not simply an anomaly 
or whether they are significant and sustainable over time. Furthermore, the management of 
the target firm is likely to balk at handing over voluminous data during due diligence. As ex­
plained elsewhere, it is in the interest of sellers to comply with requests for specific data rather 
than to go through the exhaustive and expensive process of supplying large volumes of data. 
Analytical tools can be expensive, difficult to use, and appear to executive decision makers 
as “black boxes.” When executives don’t understand how the conclusions were reached, they 
are less likely to have a high degree of confidence in them.
41Deloitte & Touche LLP, http://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/global/Documents/Deloitte-
Analytics/dttl-analytics-us-da-3minMAAnalytics.pdf.

	
Discussion Questions	
195
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
SOME THINGS TO REMEMBER
The acquisition process consists of 10 phases. The first phase defines the business plan. If an 
acquisition is believed necessary to implement the business strategy, an acquisition plan, devel­
oped during the second phase, defines the key objectives, available resources, and management 
preferences for completing an acquisition. The next phase consists of the search for appropri­
ate acquisition candidates. The screening phase is a refinement of the search phase. How the 
potential acquirer initiates first contact depends on the urgency of completing a deal, target 
size, and access to highly placed contacts within the target firm. The negotiation phase consists 
of refining valuation, deal structuring, conducting due diligence, and developing a financing 
plan. Integration planning must be done before closing. The closing phase includes wading 
through all the necessary third-party consents and regulatory and shareholder approvals. The 
postclosing integration phase entails communicating effectively with all stakeholders, retaining 
key employees, and identifying and resolving immediate cash flow needs. While commonly 
overlooked, the postclosing evaluation is critical if a firm is to learn from past mistakes.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
5.1	 Identify at least three criteria that might be used to select a manufacturing firm as a 
potential acquisition candidate. A financial services firm? A high-technology firm?
5.2	 Identify alternative ways to make “first contact” with a potential acquisition tar­
get. Why is confidentiality important? Under what circumstances might a potential 
acquirer make its intentions public?
5.3	 What are the differences between total consideration, total purchase price/enterprise 
value, and net purchase price? How are these different concepts used?
5.4	 What is the purpose of the buyer’s and the seller’s performing due diligence?
5.5	 Why is preclosing integration planning important?
5.6	 In a rush to complete its purchase of health software producer HBO, McKesson did not 
perform adequate due diligence but, rather, relied on representations and warranties 
in the agreement of sale and purchase. Within 6 months following closing, McKesson 
announced that it would have to reduce revenue by $327 million and net income by 
$191.5 million for the preceding 3 fiscal years to correct for accounting irregularities. 
The company’s stock fell by 48%. If HBO’s financial statements had been declared to 
be in accordance with GAAP, would McKesson have been justified in believing that 
HBO’s revenue and profit figures were 100% accurate? Explain your answer.
5.7	 Find a transaction currently in the news. Speculate as to what criteria the buyer may have 
employed to identify the target company as an attractive takeover candidate. Be specific.
5.8	 Fresenius, a German manufacturer of dialysis equipment, acquired APP Pharmaceu­
ticals for $4.6 billion. The deal includes an earnout, under which Fresenius would pay 
as much as $970 million if APP reaches certain future financial targets. What is the 
purpose of the earnout? How does it affect the buyer and the seller?
5.9	 MACs allow parties to the contract to determine who will bear the risk of adverse 
events between the signing of an agreement and the closing. They are frequently not 
stated in dollar terms. How might MACs affect the negotiating strategies of the par­
ties to the agreement during the period between signing and closing?

196	
5.  Implementation: Search Through Closing 
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
5.10	 Despite disturbing discoveries during due diligence, Mattel acquired The Learning 
Company (TLC), a leading developer of software for toys, in a stock-for-stock transac­
tion valued at $3.5 billion. Mattel had determined that TLC receivables were over­
stated, a $50-million licensing deal had been prematurely put on the balance sheet, 
and TLC brands were becoming outdated. TLC also had substantially exaggerated 
the amount of money put into research and development for new software products. 
Nevertheless, driven to become a big player in children’s software, Mattel closed on 
the transaction, aware that TLC cash flows were overstated. After restructuring charg­
es associated with the acquisition, Mattel’s consolidated net loss was $82.4 million on 
sales of $5.5 billion. Mattel’s stock fell by more than 35% to end the year at about $14 
per share. What could Mattel have done to protect its interests better?
Answers to these Chapter Discussion Questions are available in the Online Instructor’s Manual for 
instructors using this book (https://textbooks.elsevier.com/web/Manuals.aspx?isbn=9780128016091).
END OF CHAPTER CASE STUDY: MICHAEL DELL COMPLETES 
THE BIGGEST DEAL IN TECH HISTORY IN BUYING STORAGE 
MAKER EMC
Case Study Objectives: To Illustrate
•	 Challenges of strategically realigning a firm
•	 What it takes to achieve a “competitive edge”
•	 The importance of getting out in front of rather than simply reacting to market changes
With the PC market maturing, Michael Dell continued his effort to shift the firm more toward 
software and services. In doing so, he closed the biggest deal in tech history in 2016 in acquiring 
data storage provider EMC in a deal valued at more than $63 billion. Dell reasoned that the takeover 
would enable Dell Inc. to achieve a “competitive edge” over others battling it out in the software 
and services marketplace. A competitive advantage involves a strategy allowing a firm to gain sales, 
increase profit margins, or both over its primary competitors by better satisfying customer needs 
than its competitors. A competitive advantage can result from the pursuit of cost leadership, dif­
ferentiation, focus, or in rare cases some combination of these strategies. The extent to which it can 
be sustained often reflects the ability of a firm to build barriers that insulate it from the actions of 
its competitors.
The size of the deal was possible largely because Dell Inc. was a private company and ownership 
was heavily concentrated. As such, Dell Inc. was able to make decisions without interference from 
public shareholders that might have occurred due to the potential reduction in near-term earnings 
per share. The firm was able to finance the deal as a result of a substantial reduction in the amount 
of debt incurred when Dell Inc. was taken private and through the use of tracking stock as a form of 
payment. The latter reduced the amount Dell Inc. had to borrow to pay for the transaction. Finally, 
the time was right. Unwilling to break up the company, EMC’s senior management and board had 
run out of options and were experiencing considerable pressure from activist shareholders to im­
prove performance.

	
Discussion Questions	
197
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
The takeover of EMC represented another bold move by Michael Dell to reposition the firm 
bearing his name for the 21st century. What follows is a discussion of Dell’s efforts to transform the 
company from one concentrating on personal computers to a firm offering customers an array of in­
tegrated solutions to problems whose resolution was critical to the performance of their businesses, 
the methods used, and the challenges remaining to achieve this transformation.
Dell Computer was founded by Michael Dell in his college dormitory room in 1987. One year 
later, he took the company public at 23 years of age. He was 29 when his firm hit $1 billion in reve­
nue and 31 when it achieved $5 billion. By 2001, the company became the global leader in PCs. Over 
the next 3 years, the firm sustained continued growth by diversifying into servers, storage, printers, 
mobile phones, and MP3 players. In 2004, Dell stepped down from the day-to-day operations as 
CEO, appointing Kevin Rollins to that position, but he retained his role as Chairman of the board.
The success was not to last as the firm failed to anticipate the massive shift of the desktop PC, its 
primary revenue source, to the notebook PC. By 2006, Dell had lost its number one spot in the PC 
market. In 2007, Michael Dell assumed control of the firm again and moved quickly to expand its 
software, networking, security, and services offerings. The firm’s long-term business strategy was 
to shift its focus from its end-user computing business (EUC), which includes PC, mobility, and 
third-party software, to its enterprise solutions and services business (ESS), which provides higher-
margin enterprise-wide solutions and services to businesses. The firm spent $13 billion to acquire 
20 firms including spending $3.9 billion for IT services provider Perot Systems.
The transformation to become a more ESS-driven business proved to be more challenging than 
first believed. Other tech firms had a commanding lead in the software and services business in­
cluding HP, IBM, Cisco, and Oracle. As a global IT company with significant dependence on the PC 
market, the Company continued to be highly vulnerable to the fundamental long-term changes in 
this market.
What the firm was trying to do would require years and in the near term the firm’s earnings 
would suffer. Shareholders were unlikely to accept a protracted period of depressed earnings. Mi­
chael Dell was at a cross-road: To remain public or to take the company private by buying out its 
public shareholders. He opted for the latter strategy.
The events of 2013 surrounding the conversion of Dell Inc. from a public to a private company 
proved turbulent, pitting billionaire entrepreneur Michael Dell against billionaire activist investor 
Carl Icahn. Sensing an opportunity to save the multibillion-dollar tech firm he had created in the 
late 1980s, Michael Dell initiated an audacious move to buy out public investors. The objective was 
to change the firm from one dependent on PCs to one focused on software and services. To be suc­
cessful, he felt he needed to gain unfettered control over the firm.
The strategy required layering bone-crushing debt on the already foundering firm. Midway 
through Michael Dell’s effort to privatize the firm, well-known corporate raider Carl Icahn entered 
the fray using social media such as Twitter and TV interviews to vilify Michael Dell’s leadership 
and personal ethics. Both Dell and Icahn were smart, aggressive, and accustomed to winning. The 
subsequent effort to take the firm private became one the nastiest tech takeovers in recent history. 
The stage was set for a battle of the billionaire titans.
From start to finish, the deal took more than 1 year to complete. On October 31, 2013, Dell Inc., 
one of the world’s leading PC manufacturers, ended its 25-year history as a public firm. Dell paid 
$13.88 per share, which represented a 36% premium over Dell’s share price 90 days prior to the 

198	
5.  Implementation: Search Through Closing 
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
merger announcement date, and which valued the Company at $24.9 billion.42 The deal included 
Michael Dell’s 16% ownership stake, valued at more than $3 billion, and another $750 million of his 
cash along with $21.2 billion from Silver Lake Partners, a consortium of lenders, and excess cash on 
Dell Inc.’s balance sheet. The transaction boosted Michael Dell’s ownership stake in the firm to 75%, 
with Silver Lake holding the remaining equity.
In 2015, the new Dell Corporation has more than 160,000 channel distribution partners (i.e., par­
ties selling Dell products), with about $20 billion of the firm’s $65 billion in annual revenue coming 
from these partners. This compares to zero in 2008. The firm has also doubled the number of sales 
specialists with technical training to 8000 from 2009. The firm is experiencing increasing success 
in encouraging existing customers to buy more expensive products and services. About 90% of its 
customers that buy PCs also buy other products and services.
With 110,000 employees worldwide, the firm’s current objectives are cash flow and growth: cash 
flow to pay off the firm’s debt and growth to increase the firm’s value when it is again taken public. 
Incremental cash flow is expected to come from increased sales and slashing costs, with a target of 
$2 billion in annual cost savings. As a private firm, it will have fewer regulatory hurdles and dis­
closures than a public firm, allowing for a speedier execution of its business strategy of growing its 
enterprise solutions business.
The challenges the “New Dell” faces are daunting. Michael Dell must transform the firm from 
one dominated by PCs to software and services and to generate sufficient cash to pay off the $20 
billion in debt. Dell’s market share in software and services is about 1%, but these are the only cat­
egories making money. Dell is battling traditional rivals in software and services such as Hewlett-
Packard and IBM and must now combat new entrants such as Amazon and Rackspace that are 
expanding in the cloud-based storage and services business.
The firm’s fortunes improved markedly in 2015. According to tech-industry analytical firm IDC, 
Dell’s global PC shipments increased by about 10% over the prior year. In the United States, Dell’s 
shipments increased by almost 20% bringing its total share of the US PC market to 26%. This compares 
to market leader Hewlett-Packard’s share of about 28%. The improvement in the firm’s PC sales may 
provide sufficient cash to finance Dell’s changing product focus. Dell’s operating performance appears 
to be holding up as its share of the global PC market has held steady in recent years at about 14%.
While taking the firm private appears to have improved the firm’s financial performance, Michael 
Dell believed that more change was necessary to achieve his strategic vision. Dell saw EMC as an 
opportunity to accelerate movement toward realizing this vision. He believed that acquiring EMC 
would enable the firm to combine its server businesses with EMC’s storage and virtualization busi­
nesses to offer a broader range of products to challenge Cisco Systems, IBM, and HP in the areas of 
cloud computing, mobility, and cybersecurity.
In striking its deal for storage provider EMC, Dell and its financial partner, private equity firm 
Silver Lake, are betting that this huge acquisition will help Dell, one of the best-known names in the 
industry, move increasingly into the fastest-growing areas of the IT industry. Both Michael Dell and 
his private equity partner Silver Lake had shown an ability to consolidate industries.
42Some shareholders argued they had been shortchanged and initiated a lawsuit to have their stock appraised. In 
late 2016, a Delaware court concluded that Michael Dell and Silver Lake Partners had paid shareholders at least 
20% less than its then fair market value. However, only those having voted against the deal will receive compensa­
tion under Delaware law.

	
Discussion Questions	
199
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
Understanding how the EMC transaction unfolded requires an appreciation of the personalities 
of the CEOs of the firms involved. Billionaire Michael Dell had a passion for preserving and grow­
ing the business bearing his name, and the 68-year-old EMC CEO Joseph Tucci sought to protect 
his legacy. He had been considering retiring since 2009 but postponed it several times amid his 
firm’s slumping stock performance, pressure from activist investors, and a changing environment 
for computer storage. In agreeing to the deal, Mr. Tucci had an opportunity to establish a positive 
legacy and generate almost $27 million more in compensation than he would have received had he 
willingly retired. His employment contract provided for his receiving the additional compensation 
if he were ousted due to a change in control of the firm. He built EMC into what it is. EMC had 
become his identity, and he didn’t want to see it dismembered.
Activist hedge fund manager Paul Singer of Elliott Management was among EMC’s largest 
investors and had been pushing the board and management to break up the firm. Investors had 
shown their dismay with the firm’s performance by pushing down EMC’s share price by over 15% 
during the 3 years prior to the announced takeover by Dell. Founded in Boston, MA, 40 years ago, 
EMC has struggled over the past decade as the cost of data storage has plummeted. Subsequent 
acquisitions have failed to reverse the firm’s operating outlook. The bulk of the firm’s value is 
concentrated in its 81% ownership stake in VMware, a popular maker of virtualization software 
that emulates different operating systems. As a collection of largely unrelated businesses ranging 
from data storage to networking to content management, the value of EMC’s shares suffered from 
a conglomerate discount.
But Mr. Tucci balked at the idea of spinning off VMware. Instead, he sought to be acquired by 
Hewlett-Packard, although these talks reportedly ended in late 2014 after more than a year of discus­
sions. The failure of these discussions provided an opportunity for Michael Dell to contact Mr. Tucci.
Dell agreed to pay the equivalent of $33.15 per share for all of EMC’s outstanding shares. The 
offer consisted of $24.05 in cash and tracking stock valued at $9.10. The tracking stock mirrors the 
value of the roughly 20% of VMware’s outstanding shares already trading on the New York Stock 
Exchange. In theory, the tracking stock should fluctuate with the value of VMware’s publicly traded 
shares as investors have the option of holding either the tracking shares or the VMware common 
shares traded publicly. The purchase price represents an approximate 27% premium over EMC’s 
trading price just prior to the announcement of the deal.43
In the past, tracking stocks have often performed poorly, particularly when they were linked 
to the performance of nonpublic companies. Why? Governance issues can be greater for firms 
with highly concentrated ownership and more opaque financial reporting. Tracking stocks tend 
to underperform the overall stock market in the years immediately following their issue. This has 
been especially true of private firms not subject to the discipline of public investors. Moreover, 
tracking shares usually have inferior voting rights—or none at all, and holders often do not receive 
dividends.
43Tracking shares are not actual common stock of VMware; rather, they are issued by Dell. A company issuing 
tracking stock still owns all the assets associated with the business being tracked, but some of its risks and benefits 
are sold to investors interested in the “pure play” of the tracking stock. Holders of tracking stock are considered to 
hold equity in the parent firm (Dell) and not the specific entity represented by the tracking stock (VMware). Deter­
mined during the negotiation process, EMC shareholders at closing received tracking stock representing 0.111 share 
of VMware for each EMC share they owned.

200	
5.  Implementation: Search Through Closing 
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
While the EMC offer represented a 27% premium to the EMC trading price immediately prior to 
the announcement of the deal, most of the premium comes from the problematic valuation of the 
tracking stock. Dell valued the deal at $33.15 per EMC share but investors questioned the valuation 
as EMC’s share value rose to only $28.07 at the end of trading on the announcement date. Shares of 
VMware dropped by 10%, reflecting concern about the loss of key employees and the uncertainty 
associated with future decisions made by the Dell board. EMC shareholders also fretted that the 
issuance of tracking shares (shares that trade like VMware shares) would increase the supply of 
VMware shares and depress the price. Nevertheless, EMC shareholders approved the deal since the 
outlook for EMC as an independent entity was dire, with the firm’s core enterprise business falter­
ing and the promising cloud-software unit too small to have much of an impact. VMware’s server 
virtualization business was doing better resulting in EMC’s investment in VMware accounting for 
almost one-half of the consolidated company’s market capitalization. In other words, the Dell deal 
simply seemed to EMC shareholders as better than no deal at all.
The new firm (including EMC) has more than $50 billion in debt on its consolidated balance sheet. 
Interest paid on the debt amounts to $2.5 billion annually. That is $2.5 billion less to spend on R&D 
and other critical activities, thereby potentially limiting new product development and improving 
customer service. In addition, integrating EMC and Dell, which combined have more than $75 billion 
in revenue and nearly 200,000 employees, is a massive undertaking and an enormous distraction for 
employees and their management team as two very different cultures come together and a new busi­
ness strategy is implemented. Moreover, bringing two business portfolios together will require a sig­
nificant amount of pruning overlapping and unprofitable products, which will be disruptive to their 
business and create confusion for their customers. Customers simply will not know if the products 
they are buying today from either company will be supported in a year or two. Finally, since many of 
these products are sold through distributors, this merger is going to cause chaos in the distribution 
channels as they bring together two different distributor programs and marketing approaches.
Large acquisitions often are used to rapidly change corporate direction and are referred to as 
transformative to appear as bold and imaginative moves. However, history shows that many large 
acquisitions fail to live up to their expectations either because of a flawed strategy, overpayment, 
inadequate integration, or simply bad postmerger execution. Time will tell whether Michael Dell’s 
“bold” changes represented true strategic thinking or simply a series of desperate moves.
Discussion Questions
1.	 Discuss the pros and cons of taking a company private. Is a private firm better positioned than 
a public company to make acquisitions? Explain your answer.
2.	 What are the key trends external to Dell Inc. that you believe are driving Michael Dell’s effort 
to transform the firm? Be specific.
3.	 Speculate as to the strengths and weaknesses of the new firm (i.e., the combined Dell Inc. and 
EMC). Consider the various stakeholder groups in your answer. Be specific.
4.	 Characterize Dell Inc.’s business strategy as a cost leadership, differentiation, focus, or some 
combination. Justify your answer.
5.	 In what sense was Dell’s takeover strategic and in what way was it opportunistic? Be specific.
Solutions to these case study discussion questions are found in the Online Instructor’s Manual available 
to instructors using this book (https://textbooks.elsevier.com/web/Manuals.aspx?isbn=9780128016091).

	
Discussion Questions	
201
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
A D D I T I O N A L  C A S E  S T U D Y  R E C O M M E N D AT I O N S 
( S E A R C H  H A RVA R D  B U S I N E S S  S C H O O L 
P U B L I S H I N G  S I T E  B Y  N A M E  O F  C A S E : 
h b s p . h a r v a r d . e d u )
Newell Co.: Corporate Strategy, Cynthia A. 
Montgomery; Elizabeth J. Gordon, Revised 
Publication Date: January 31, 2005, Source: 
HBS Premier Case Selection, Product 
Number: 799139-PDF-ENG, hbsp.harvard.
edu.
Subjects covered: Acquisition Target 
Selection, Conglomerates, Corporate 
Strategy, Diversification.
Bank of America-Merrill Lynch, Guhan 
Subramanian, Nithyasri Sharma, Revised 
Publication Date: 2012, Product Number: 
910026-PDF-ENG, Source: Harvard Business 
School, hbsp.harvard.edu.
Subjects covered: Government 
Intervention, Negotiation.
Tata Motors’ Acquisition of Daewoo 
Commercial Company, Meera Harish 
Sanjay Singh, Kulwant Singh, Publication 
Date: December 4, 2008, Product Number: 
908M94-PDF-ENG, Source: IVEY Publishing, 
hbsp.harvard.edu.
Subjects covered: International 
Expansion, Bidding Process, Cultural 
Barriers, Criteria for a Successful 
Acquisition, Market Entry Strategies.
Polycom’s Acquisition Process, Michael 
A. Roberto, Gina M. Carioggia, Publication 
Date: June 2, 2005, Product Number: 
304040-PDF-ENG, Source: Harvard Business 
School, hbsp.harvard.com.
Subjects covered: Business and 
Acquisition Plan Development, Target 
Selection, Decision Making, Resource 
Management.


C H A P T E R
203
Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring Activities. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-801609-1.00006-3
Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
6
Postclosing Integration
Mergers, Acquisitions, and Business Alliances
Whether you think you can, or you think you can’t—you’re right. —Henry Ford
O U T L I N E
Inside Merger and Acquisitions: 
How a Chinese Oil Giant Stumbled 
in its Largest Cross-Border Postmerger 
Integration Effort	
204
Chapter Overview	
205
The Role of Integration in Successful 
Acquisitions	
206
Realizing Projected Financial Returns	
207
The Impact of Employee Turnover	
207
Acquisition-Related Customer Attrition	
208
Rapid Integration Does Not Mean 
Doing Everything at the Same Pace	
209
Integration Is a Process, Not an Event	
209
Premerger Integration Planning	
209
Putting the Postmerger Integration 
Organization in Place 
Before Closing	
210
Developing Communication 
Plans for Key Stakeholders	
212
Creating a New Organization	
214
Functional Integration	
217
Building a New Corporate Culture	
221
When Time Is Critical	
223
Digital Tools and Change 
Management	
223
Integrating Business Alliances	
224
Integrating Mechanisms	
225
Integrating Family-Owned Firms	
226
Some Things to Remember	
226
Chapter Discussion Questions	
227
Case Study: Men’s Wearhouse and Jos. 
A. Bank Stumble During Postmerger 
Integration	
227
Case Study Objectives	
227
Discussion Questions	
230
Additional Case Study 
Recommendations	
231

204	
6.  Postclosing Integration
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
INSIDE MERGER AND ACQUISITIONS: HOW A CHINESE 
OIL GIANT STUMBLED IN ITS LARGEST CROSS-BORDER 
POSTMERGER INTEGRATION EFFORT
KEY POINTS
•	 Postmerger integration often is a highly complex and lengthy process.
•	 How smoothly postmerger integration goes often depends on actions taken prior to closing the 
deal and developments beyond the control of the merger partners.
•	 Protracted integration often reduces the ability of the acquirer to recover the premium paid for 
the target firm.
Three years after having acquired Canadian oil and gas company Nexen Inc., China’s 
largest oil company, CNOOC, was beset with problems managing its investment. Pub­
licly traded CNOOC is 64% owned by state-owned China National Offshore Oil Corpo­
ration. In its largest foreign takeover ever, CNOOC paid $15.1 billion for Nexen in 2013, 
giving it new offshore production in the North Sea, the Gulf of Mexico, offshore of West 
Africa, and oil and gas properties in the Middle East and Canada. It also gave CNOOC 
a bet on the future development of nonconventional oil and gas reserves such as the Ca­
nadian oil sands. What appeared at the time of closing to have fulfilled CNOOC’s three-
decade-old vision of becoming a global oil company was soon to become a management 
nightmare.
Oil sands require high-cost forms of extraction and produce heavy oil, not easily extracted 
during production, that sells at a discount on the world market. Despite these limitations, 
technological innovation and high crude prices triggered an oil sands production boom over 
the past decade. The process by which oil sands are converted to usable crude oil releases 
more carbon into the atmosphere than conventional crude extraction. This has created sub­
stantial opposition among environmental groups seeking to limit or eliminate further devel­
opment of oil sands. Environmental groups in North America immediately urged regulators 
not to approve the takeover. Concerns in the United States about national security issues 
made it clear from the outset that getting regulatory approval in the United States was going 
to be an uphill battle.
When oil prices were in excess of $100 per barrel, the Nexen deal looked like a good bet. 
CNOOC believed that they could make concessions necessary to get regulatory approval and 
that global energy prices would continue to rise enabling the firm to earn back any premium 
paid for Nexen. In their rush to get the deal done, CNOOC’s management seems to have 
downplayed the implications of such concessions and the fact that historically oil prices have 
shown both sharp increases and decreases. CNOOC’s troubles with Nexen really began be­
fore it actually took control.
To convince shareholders to sell and to appease those concerned about the impact on the 
environment, the firm paid a 61% premium to Nexen shareholders and made certain public 
commitments to environmental groups in Canada. As a result, Nexen shareholders readily 
accepted the offer in October 2012 and the deal received Canadian regulatory approval in 
December 2012. However, to close, CNOOC still had to overcome opposition among US law­
makers who publicly expressed concerned about Chinese government control of Nexen’s 

II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
	
INSIDE MERGER AND ACQUISITIONS	
205
Gulf of Mexico assets and other national security issues. To get US regulatory approval, 
CNOOC ceded operating control over several Gulf of Mexico oil drilling platforms to US or 
European firms with whom it had partnered to develop these offshore properties paving the 
way for the deal to close in February 2013.
Since closing, the Nexen acquisition has sopped up huge amounts of management time and 
corporate capital to fix a unit contributing only 2% of the firm’s consolidated profits. CNOOC 
seriously underestimated the challenges with its Canadian purchase including cost overruns 
in Canada, US investment controls that forced CNOOC to relinquish operating control over its 
Gulf of Mexico assets, and a withdrawal from Nexen’s Yemen business amid a civil war.
CNOOC’s problems have been compounded by the collapse in global oil prices and a 
pipeline oil spill creating a public furor in Canada. Nexen’s oil sands project called Long Lake 
is typical of CNOOC’s woes associated with this deal. Long Lake is one of the least produc­
tive oil sands operations in northern Alberta province. Initially expected to cost 3.4 billion 
Canadian dollars, the project’s costs have more than doubled putting pressure on Nexen’s 
profit margins. The oil spill came at a time when Canadian oil producers were anxious to ease 
growing public concerns about pipeline safety and raised questions about Nexen’s quality 
control and fail-safe protocols.
In response to these developments, CNOOC has cut capital spending by 30% from earlier 
estimates and reported a reduction in the value of the Nexen acquisition by $700 million in 
recognition of the unit’s fair market value having dropped below its book value. The firm also 
reneged on a preclosing pledge it had made to retain existing management and minimize any 
layoffs related to the deal. Frustrated by CNOOC’s refusal to share its long-term strategy with 
Nexen senior management in Canada, Canadian managers ran Nexen as if it were a totally 
autonomous unit. CNOOC forced out existing management in April 2014. As world oil prices 
continued to slide throughout 2015, the Long Lake project became increasingly uncompeti­
tive. The Chinese owners have moved aggressively to cut costs through layoffs and the in­
tegration of some business operations in North America. This confluence of events created a 
public relations nightmare for CNOOC in Canada.
CNOOC’s senior managers assumed that they could overcome technical problems at the 
Long Lake project and that Nexen’s management at the time of closing was up to the job of 
developing the oil sands reserves. CNOOC also confidently believed global oil prices over 
which they had no control would continue to rise making the oil sands reserves highly profit­
able in the future, despite operating problems at the Long Lake project that were known at 
the time of closing. Even the risk associated with the oil reserves in the turbulent country of 
Yemen often on the brink of civil war was ignored. In the end, a combination of managerial 
overconfidence and too great a fixation on a corporate vision helped create an ongoing corpo­
rate management nightmare.
CHAPTER OVERVIEW
Deciding if and when to integrate an acquisition often depends on the type of acquirer: 
financial or strategic. Financial buyers—those who buy a business for eventual resale—tend 
not to integrate the acquired business into another entity, at least not in a significant way. 
Rather than manage the business, they are inclined to monitor the effectiveness of current 

206	
6.  Postclosing Integration
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
management and intervene only if there is a significant and sustained deviation between ac­
tual and projected performance. Sometimes, financial buyers will “roll up” a fragmented in­
dustry by buying a firm within the industry and subsequently use it as a platform for acquir­
ing additional businesses. Successive acquisitions are integrated into the initial acquisition in 
an effort to gain additional market share, an improved cost position, and eventually higher 
financial returns. In either case—whether the financial buyer manages the acquired business 
as a stand-alone operation or uses it to consolidate an industry—the objective remains the 
same. Take the business public through an initial public offering, sell to a strategic buyer, or 
sell to another financial buyer.
In contrast, strategic buyers want to make a profit by managing the acquired business for an 
extended period. How they manage the business postmerger can range from operating the target 
as a separate subsidiary to partially or wholly integrating the acquired business into the parent. 
Partial or complete integration of the target into the acquirer often reflects the desire to realize 
rapidly anticipated synergy to earn back any premium paid for the target. There is evidence that 
merged firms often continue to create synergy as long as 5 years after the closing date.1
Synergy is commonly created in combining firms through the transfer of proprietary 
knowledge, functional and managerial skills, and sharing of resources such as functional de­
partments and operations. However, integration of the target with the acquirer is not without 
risk. If the target’s value lies in the accumulated knowledge of its management and work­
force, unique culture, and management style, full or even partial integration could under­
mine the value of the target firm.2
For our purposes here, assume that integration is the goal of the acquirer immediately after 
the transaction closes. A practical process, as outlined in this chapter, makes for effective inte­
gration. The factors critical to a successful postmerger integration include careful premerger 
planning (including the selection of the appropriate postmerger integration strategy), candid 
and continuous communication, adopting the right pace for combining the businesses, ap­
pointing an integration manager and team with clearly defined goals and lines of authority, 
and making the difficult decisions early in the process. This chapter concludes with a discus­
sion of how to overcome some of the unique obstacles encountered in integrating business 
alliances. In addition to an end of chapter case study illustrating concepts discussed in this 
chapter, additional case studies that may be of interest are listed. A chapter review (consist­
ing of practice questions and answers) is available in the file folder entitled “Student Study 
Guide” on the companion site to this book (https://www.elsevier.com/books-and-journals/
book-companion/9780128016091).
THE ROLE OF INTEGRATION IN SUCCESSFUL ACQUISITIONS
Rapid integration is more likely to result in a merger that achieves the acquirer’s expecta­
tions.3 Andersen Consulting studied 100 global acquisitions, each valued at more than $500 
million, and concluded that most postmerger activities are completed within 6 months to 
2Mukherji et al. (2015).
3Cooper and Lybrand (1996) and Marks (1996).
1Alhenawi and Krishnaswami (2015).

	
The Role of Integration in Successful Acquisitions	
207
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
1 year and that integration done quickly generates the financial returns expected by share­
holders and minimizes employee turnover and customer attrition.4
This does not mean that restructuring ends entirely within this time period. Integration 
may continue in terms of plant sales or closures for years following the acquisition. Almost 
one-half of acquirers either sell or close target firms’ plants within 3 years of the acquisition. 
Acquirers having more experience in managing the target’s plants are more likely to retain 
the target’s operations than those whose experience in operating such plants is limited. If we 
extend the period to 5 years following closing, plant divestitures and closures increase by an 
additional 9%–10%.5
Realizing Projected Financial Returns
A simple example demonstrates the importance of rapid integration to realizing pro­
jected financial returns. Suppose a firm’s current market value of $100 million accurately 
reflects the firm’s future cash flows discounted at its cost of capital (i.e., the financial return 
the firm must earn or exceed to satisfy the expectations of its shareholders and lenders). 
Assume an acquirer is willing to pay a $25-million premium for this firm over its cur­
rent share price, believing it can recover the premium by realizing cost savings resulting 
from integrating the two firms. The amount of cash the acquirer will have to generate to 
recover the premium will increase the longer it takes to integrate the target company. If 
the cost of capital is 10% and integration is completed by the end of the first year, the ac­
quirer will have to earn $27.5 million by the end of the first year to recover the premium 
plus its cost of capital [$25 + ($25 × 0.10)]. If integration is not completed until the end of 
the second year, the acquirer will have to earn an incremental cash flow of $30.25 million 
[$27.5 + ($27.5 × 0.10)], and so on.
The Impact of Employee Turnover
Although there is little evidence that firms necessarily experience an actual reduction 
in their total workforce following an acquisition, there is evidence of increased turnover 
among management and key employees after a corporate takeover. Some loss of manag­
ers is intentional as part of an effort to eliminate redundancies, overlapping positions, and 
incompetent managers. For example, target firm CEOs commonly are replaced following 
a takeover. Their departure often is associated with a longer-term improvement in the tar­
get firm’s operating performance.6 This is consistent with the often-cited observation that 
mergers and acquisitions (M&As) are frequently motivated to remove ineffective manage­
ment. Other managers, often those the acquirer would like to retain, frequently quit during 
the integration turmoil.
4Andersen Consulting (1999).
5Maksimovic et al. (2011).
6Demirtas and Simsir (2016).

208	
6.  Postclosing Integration
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
In many acquisitions, talent and management skills represent the primary value of the 
target company to the acquirer—especially in high-technology and service companies, 
for which assets are largely the embodied knowledge of their employees—and it is dif­
ficult to measure whether employees who leave represent a significant “brain drain” or 
loss of key managers. If it does, though, this loss degrades the value of the target com­
pany, making the recovery of any premium paid to target shareholders difficult for the 
buyer.
The cost of employee turnover also may be high simply because the target firm’s top, ex­
perienced managers are removed as part of the integration process and replaced with new 
managers—who tend to have a high failure rate in general. When a firm selects an insider 
(i.e., a person already in the employ of the merged firms) to replace a top manager (e.g., a 
CEO), the failure rate of the successor (i.e., the successor is no longer with the firm 18 months 
later) is 34%. When the board selects an outside successor (i.e., one not currently employed by 
the merged firms) to replace the departing senior manager, the 18-month failure rate is 55%. 
Therefore, more than half of the time, an outside successor will not succeed, with an insider 
succeeding about two-thirds of the time.7
The cost of employee turnover does not stop with the loss of key employees. The loss of 
any significant number of employees can be very disruptive. Current employees have already 
been recruited and trained; lose them, and you will incur new recruitment and training costs 
to replace them with equally qualified employees. Moreover, the loss of employees is likely to 
reduce the morale and productivity of those who remain.
Acquirers are well aware of the need to minimize unwanted employee turnover and often 
tend to raise significantly target firm employee compensation to retain employees following 
acquisition. This is particularly true when the value of the target is dependent on certain em­
ployees whose skills would be difficult to replace.8
Acquisition-Related Customer Attrition
During normal operations, a business can expect a certain level of churn in its custom­
er list. Depending on the industry, normal churn as a result of competitive conditions 
can be anywhere from 20 to 40%. A newly merged company will experience a loss of 
another 5%–10% of its existing customers as a direct result of a merger,9 reflecting un­
certainty about on-time delivery and product quality and more aggressive postmerger 
pricing by competitors. Moreover, many companies lose revenue momentum as they 
concentrate on realizing expected cost synergies. The loss of customers may continue 
well after closing.10
8Macias and Pirinsky (2015).
9Down (1995).
10A McKinsey study of 160 acquisitions by 157 publicly traded firms in 11 different industries in 1995 and 1996 
found that, on average, these firms grew 4 percentage points less than their peers during the 3 years following 
closing. Moreover, 42% of the sample actually lost ground. Only 12% of the sample showed revenue growth signifi­
cantly ahead of their peers (Bekier et al., 2001).
7Dalton (2006).

	
Integration Is a Process, Not an Event	
209
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
Rapid Integration Does Not Mean Doing Everything at the Same Pace
Rapid integration may result in more immediate realization of synergies, but it also con­
tributes to employee and customer attrition. Therefore, intelligent integration involves man­
aging these trade-offs by quickly identifying and implementing projects that offer the most 
immediate payoff and deferring those whose disruption would result in the greatest revenue 
loss. Acquirers often postpone integrating data-processing and customer-service call centers 
until much later in the integration process if such activities are pivotal to maintaining on-time 
delivery and high-quality customer service.
State labor protections may also affect the pace with which postmerger integration can 
be realized. Many state and federal laws view workers not covered by collective bargaining 
agreements or individual employment contracts as “at-will” employees. As such, they can 
be dismissed by their employers for any reason and without notice.11 A number of states 
have modified the general rule that employees are at will by holding that employees have 
implied rights under common law to fair treatment by their employers. Consequently, acquir­
ers may be limited in the pace with which they can eliminate redundant workers following 
closing that impacts the magnitude and timing of realizing cost synergies. Reflecting these 
considerations, acquirers of targets in states with weak labor protections often realize some­
what larger announcement date returns than takeovers of targets in states with stronger labor 
protections.12
INTEGRATION IS A PROCESS, NOT AN EVENT
Integrating a business into the acquirer’s operations involves six major activities that fall 
loosely into the following sequence: premerger planning, resolving communication issues, 
defining the new organization, developing staffing plans, integrating functions and depart­
ments, and building a new corporate culture. Some activities are continuous and, in some 
respects, unending. For instance, communicating with all major stakeholder groups and 
developing a new corporate culture are largely continuous activities, running through the 
integration period and beyond. Table 6.1 outlines the sequence.
Premerger Integration Planning
Premerger integration planning should coincide with the onset of due diligence.13 During 
this period, the acquirer is accumulating information about the target that is generally not 
11For larger firms employer discretion is limited by the Worker Adjustment and Retraining Notification Act 
(WARN), which is a US labor law requiring employers with 100 or more workers to provided 60-day advance 
notification of plant closing and mass layoffs.
12John et al. (2015).
13Generally, due diligence begins while the negotiation of the merger agreement is underway. When the seller has 
substantial leverage over the buyer, due diligence is postponed until after an agreement is signed. But the agree­
ment is contingent of the buyer conducting adequate due diligence, the terms of which are described in the sales 
agreement.

210	
6.  Postclosing Integration
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
available publicly. This enables the acquirer to make more accurate assessments of potential 
synergy, a reasonable timetable for realizing synergy, and any costs that are likely to be in­
curred during postmerger integration. The planning activity involves identifying and priori­
tizing the critical actions that must be completed to combine the businesses. Planning enables 
the acquiring company to refine its original estimate of the value of the target and deal with 
postclosing transition issues in the context of the merger agreement. Furthermore, it gives 
the buyer an opportunity to insert into the agreement the appropriate representations and 
warranties as well as conditions of closing that facilitate the postmerger integration process. 
Finally, the planning process creates a postmerger integration organization to expedite the 
integration process after the closing.
To minimize potential confusion, it is critical to get the integration manager involved in 
the process as early as possible—ideally as soon as the target has been identified or at least 
well before the negotiation process begins.14 Doing so makes it more likely that the strategic 
rationale for the deal remains well understood by those involved in conducting due diligence 
and postmerger integration.
Putting the Postmerger Integration Organization in Place Before Closing
A postmerger integration organization with clearly defined goals and responsibilities 
should be in place before the closing. For friendly mergers, the organization—including 
supporting work teams—should consist of individuals from both the acquiring and target 
14Uhlaner and West (2008).
TABLE 6.1  Viewing Merger Integration as a Process
Integration 
planning
Developing 
communication 
plans
Creating a new 
organization
Developing 
staffing plans
Functional 
integration
Building 
a new 
corporate 
culture
Premerger 
Planning:
Select 
appropriate 
integration 
strategy
Refine 
valuation
Resolve 
transition 
issues
Negotiate 
contractual 
assurances
Stakeholders:
Employees
Customers
Suppliers
Investors
Lenders
Communities 
(including 
regulators)
Learn from the 
past
Business 
needs drive 
organizational 
structure
Determine 
personnel 
requirements 
for the
new organization
Determine 
resource 
availability
Establish staffing 
plans and 
timetables
Develop 
compensation 
strategy
Create needed 
information 
systems
Revalidate due 
diligence data
Conduct 
performance 
benchmarking
Integrate 
functions:
Operations
Information 
technology
Finance
Sales
Marketing
Purchasing
R&D
Human 
resources
Identify 
cultural 
issues 
through 
corporate 
profiling
Integrate 
through 
shared:
Goals
Standards
Services
Space

	
Integration Is a Process, Not an Event	
211
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
companies with a vested interest in the newly formed company. During a hostile takeover, of 
course, it can be problematic to assemble such a team, given the lack of trust that may exist 
between the parties to the transaction. The acquiring company will likely find it difficult to 
access needed information and involve the target company’s management in the planning 
process before the transaction closes.
If the plan is to integrate the target firm into one of the acquirer’s business units, it is critical 
to place responsibility for integration in that business unit. Personnel from the business unit 
should be well represented on the due diligence team to ensure they understand how best to 
integrate the target to realize synergies expeditiously.
The Postmerger Integration Organization: Composition and Responsibilities
The postmerger integration organization should consist of a management integration team 
(MIT) and integration work teams focused on implementing a specific portion of the integra­
tion plan. Senior managers from the two merged organizations serve on the MIT, which is 
charged with realizing synergies identified during the preclosing due diligence. Involving 
senior managers from both firms captures the best talent from both organizations and sends 
a comforting signal to all employees that decision makers who understand their particular 
situations are in agreement.
The MIT’s emphasis during the integration period should be on activities that create the 
greatest value for shareholders. Exhibit 6.1 summarizes the key tasks the MIT must perform 
to realize anticipated synergies.
In addition to driving the integration effort, the MIT ensures that the managers not in­
volved in the endeavor remain focused on running the business. Dedicated work teams per­
form the detailed integration work. These teams should also include employees from both 
the acquiring company and the target company. Other team members might include outside 
advisors such as investment bankers, accountants, attorneys, and consultants.
EXHIBIT 6.1  KEY MANAGEMENT INTEGRATION TEAM 
RESPONSIBILITIES
1.	 Build a master schedule of what should be done by whom and by what date.
2.	 Determine the required economic performance for the combined entity.
3.	 Establish work teams to determine how each function and business unit will be combined (e.g., 
structure, job design, and staffing levels).
4.	 Focus the organization on meeting ongoing business commitments and operational 
performance targets during the integration process.
5.	 Create an early warning system consisting of performance indicators to ensure that both 
integration activities and business performance stay on plan.
6.	 Monitor and expedite key decisions.
7.	 Establish a rigorous communication campaign to support aggressively the integration plan. 
Address both internal constituencies (e.g., employees) and external constituencies (e.g., 
customers, suppliers, and regulatory authorities).

212	
6.  Postclosing Integration
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
The MIT allocates dedicated resources to the integration effort and clarifies non–team 
member roles and enables day-to-day operations to continue at premerger levels. It should 
be careful to give the teams not only the responsibility to do certain tasks but also the au­
thority and resources to get the job done. To be effective, the work teams must have access 
to timely, accurate information, receive candid, timely feedback, and be kept informed of 
the broader perspective of the overall integration effort to avoid becoming too narrowly 
focused.
Developing Communication Plans for Key Stakeholders
Before publicly announcing an acquisition, the acquirer should prepare a communication 
plan targeted at major stakeholder groups. Effective communication plans often can over­
come resistance to change by those impacted by an M&A.15 The interests of each stakeholder 
group are discussed in more detail in the subsequent text.
Employees: Addressing the “Me” Issues Immediately
Employees need to understand early on what is expected of them and why. Simply telling 
employees what to expect following a takeover is not enough. They need to know why. Any 
narrative provided by the acquiring firm to explain the justification for the takeover and its 
implications for employees of both the target and acquired firms can be disruptive in that it 
can create angst by challenging current practices and core beliefs.
How employees feel about a takeover (i.e., their emotional mindset) can determine its ul­
timate success.16 Methodologies exist such as “critical incident techniques” to determine how 
employees feel about a takeover.17 Without employee acceptance, employees can resist inte­
gration efforts either openly (actively) or passively. The latter is perhaps the most insidious as 
employees can appear to be cooperating but in fact are not. They are either slow to respond 
to requests for information or behavioral changes or not responding at all. In the absence of 
overt resistance (openly refusing to do something), passive resistance (sometimes called pas­
sive aggressive behavior) often becomes a major challenge to the effective integration of the 
acquirer and target firms.
Acquirer and target firm employees are interested in any information pertaining to the 
merger and how it will affect them, often in terms of job security, working conditions, and 
total compensation. For example, if the acquirer expects to improve worker productivity 
or reduce the cost of benefit packages, it is critical to explain that the long-term viability 
of the business requires such actions as the markets in which the firms compete have be­
come increasingly competitive. Thus, consistent and candid communication is of paramount 
importance.
Target firm employees often represent a substantial portion of the acquired company’s val­
ue, particularly for technology and service-related businesses with few tangible assets. The 
CEO should lead the effort to communicate to employees at all levels through on-site meet­
ings or via teleconferencing. Communication to employees should be as frequent as possible; 
15Kansal and Chandani (2014).
16Gunkel et al. (2015).
17For more about this methodology see Durand (2016).

	
Integration Is a Process, Not an Event	
213
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
it is better to report that there is no change than to remain silent. Direct communication to all 
employees at both firms is critical. Deteriorating job performance and absence from work are 
clear signs of workforce anxiety. Many companies find it useful to create a single information 
source accessible to all employees, be it an individual whose job is to answer questions or a 
menu-driven automated phone system programmed to respond to commonly asked ques­
tions. The best way to communicate in a crisis, however, is through regularly scheduled em­
ployee meetings.
All external communication in the form of press releases should be coordinated with the 
PR department to ensure that the same information is released concurrently to all employees. 
Internal email systems, voice mail, or intranets may be used to facilitate employee communi­
cations. In addition, personal letters, question-and-answer sessions, newsletters, and video­
tapes are highly effective ways to deliver messages.
Customers: Undercommitting and Overdelivering
Attrition can be minimized if the newly merged firm commits to assuring customers 
that it will maintain or improve product quality, on-time delivery, and customer service. 
Such assurances are more credible if the merged firms dedicate an account management 
team to each major customer account. Each team’s responsibilities would include all 
communications with the customer and the resolution of issues that might arise while 
minimizing the amount of change each customer experiences. Commitments should be 
realistic in terms of what needs to be accomplished during the integration phase. The firm 
must communicate to customers realistic benefits associated with the merger. From the 
customer’s perspective, the merger can increase the range of products or services offered 
or provide lower selling prices as a result of economies of scale and new applications of 
technology.
Suppliers: Developing Long-Term Vendor Relationships
The new company should seek long-term relationships rather than simply ways to reduce 
costs. Aggressive negotiation may win high-quality products and services at lower prices in 
the short run, but that may be transitory if the new company is a large customer of the sup­
plier and if the supplier’s margins are squeezed continually. The supplier’s product or service 
quality will suffer, and the supplier eventually may exit the business.
Investors: Maintaining Shareholder Loyalty
The new firm must be able to present to investors a compelling vision of the future. In 
a share exchange, target shareholders become shareholders in the newly formed company. 
Loyal shareholders tend to provide a more stable ownership base and may contribute to low­
er share price volatility. All firms attract particular types of investors—some with a preference 
for high dividends and others for capital gains—and they may clash over their preferences, 
as America Online’s acquisition of Time Warner in January 2000 illustrates. The combined 
market value of the two firms lost 11% in the 4 days following the announcement: Inves­
tors fretted over what had been created, and there was a selling frenzy that likely involved 
investors who bought Time Warner for its stable growth and America Online for its meteoric 
growth rate of 70% per year.

214	
6.  Postclosing Integration
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
Lenders: Reassuring Lenders
The acquirer generally must get permission from the target firm’s lenders to allow it to 
assume responsibility for any outstanding debt held by the target firm. Lenders must be con­
fident that the new firm will generate sufficient cash flow to ensure that the principal and in­
terest payments on their debt will be paid on a timely basis. Additional borrowing to finance 
the deal cannot violate loan covenants (i.e., commitments by the borrower to maintain certain 
financial ratios or limitations on the payment of dividends) on debt held by the acquirer or 
target firms in order not to allow lenders to immediately demand repayment of any outstand­
ing balances. Many loan agreements have “cross-default” clauses such that if a borrower is in 
default (i.e., fails to satisfy certain obligations) with respect to one lender, other lenders can 
also demand repayment. A firm may be technically in default for a number of reasons such 
as missing or being late on the payment of principal and interest or experiencing declining 
interest coverage ratios (i.e., operating income to interest expense). Lenders are most likely 
to be satisfied if the combined firms result in a new company with substantially greater un­
encumbered liquid assets (i.e., those not used to collateralize existing debt and which can be 
readily converted to cash) and increased predictable cash flow in excess of what is needed to 
keep the company operating.
Communities: Building Strong, Credible Relationships
Good working relations with surrounding communities are simply good public relations. 
Companies should communicate plans to build or keep plants, stores, or office buildings in 
a community as soon as they can be confident that these actions will be implemented. Such 
steps often translate into new jobs and increased tax collections for the community. There is 
evidence that acquirers viewed as “socially responsible” are more likely to experience eas­
ier postmerger integration and higher announcement day financial returns than acquirers 
viewed as less socially responsible.18
Creating a New Organization
Despite the requirement to appoint dozens of managers—including heads of key func­
tions, groups, and even divisions—creating a new top management team must be given first 
priority.
Establishing a Structure
Building new reporting structures for combining companies requires knowledge of the tar­
get company’s prior organization, some sense as to the effectiveness of this organization, and 
the future business needs of the new firm. Prior organization charts provide insights into how 
individuals from both companies will interact within the new company, because they reveal the 
past experience and future expectations of individuals with regard to reporting relationships.
The next step is to create a structure that meets the business needs of the new firm. Common 
structures include functional, product or service, and divisional organizations. In a functional 
organization, people are assigned to specific departments, such as accounting, engineering, and 
18Deng et al. (2013).

	
Integration Is a Process, Not an Event	
215
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
marketing. In a product or service organization, functional specialists are grouped by product 
line or service offering, and each has its own accounting, human resources, sales, marketing, 
customer service, and product development staffs. Divisional organizations, in which groups of 
products are combined into divisions or strategic business units (SBUs), are the most common. 
Such organizations have their own management teams and tend to be highly decentralized.
The popularity of decentralized versus centralized management structures varies with the 
state of the economy. During recessions, when top management is under great pressure to 
cut costs, companies may tend to move toward centralized management structures, only to 
decentralize when the economy recovers. Highly decentralized authority can retard the pace 
of integration because there is no single authority to resolve issues or determine policies.
A centralized structure may make postmerger integration much easier. Senior management 
can dictate policies governing all aspects of the combined companies, centralize all types of 
functions that provide support to operating units, and resolve issues among the operating 
units. Still, centralized control can be highly detrimental and can destroy value if policies im­
posed by the central headquarters are inappropriate for the operating units—such as policies 
that impose too many rigid controls, focus on the wrong issues, hire or promote the wrong 
managers, or establish the inappropriate performance measures. Moreover, centralized com­
panies often have multiple layers of management and centralized functions providing services 
to the operating units. The parent companies pass on the costs of centralized management and 
support services to the operating units, and these costs often outweigh the benefits.19
The benefits of a well-managed, rapid postmerger integration suggest a centralized man­
agement structure initially with relatively few management layers. The distance between 
the CEO and division heads, measured in terms of intermediate positions, has decreased 
substantially, while the span of a CEO’s authority has widened.20 This does not mean all 
integration activities should be driven from the top. Once integration is complete, the new 
company may move to a more decentralized structure in view of the well-documented costs 
of centralized corporate organizations.
Developing Staffing Plans
Staffing plans should be formulated early in the integration process. The early develop­
ment of such plans provides an opportunity to include key personnel from both firms in the 
integration effort. Other benefits include the increased likelihood of retaining employees with 
key skills and talents, maintaining corporate continuity, and team building. Fig. 6.1 presents 
the logical sequencing of staffing plans and the major issues addressed in each segment.
Personnel Requirements
The appropriate organizational structure is one that meets the current functional require­
ments of the business and is flexible enough to be expanded to satisfy future requirements. 
Before establishing the organizational structure, the integration team should agree on the spe­
cific functions needed to run the combined businesses and project each function’s personnel 
requirements based on a description of the function’s ideal structure to achieve its objectives.
19Campbell et al. (1997).
20Wulf and Rajan (2003) report a 25% decrease in intermediate positions between 1986 and 1999, with about 50% 
more positions reporting directly to the CEO.

216	
6.  Postclosing Integration
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
Employee Availability
Employee availability refers to the number of each type of employee required by the new 
organization. The skills of the existing workforce should be documented and compared with 
the current and future requirements of the new company. The local labor pool can be a source 
of potential new hires for the combined firms to augment the existing workforce. Data should 
be collected on the educational levels, skills, and demographic composition of the local work­
force as well as prevailing wage rates by skill category.
Staffing Plans and Timetable
A detailed staffing plan can be developed once the preceding steps are completed. Gaps 
in the firm’s workforce that need to be filled via outside recruitment can be readily identi­
fied. The effort to recruit externally should be tempered by its potentially adverse impact 
on current-employee morale. Filling needed jobs should be prioritized and phased in over 
time in recognition of the time required to fill certain types of positions and the impact of 
major hiring programs on local wage rates in communities with a limited availability of 
labor.
Compensation Plans
Merging compensation plans must be done in compliance with prevailing regulations 
and with sensitivity. Total compensation consists of base pay, bonuses or incentive plans, 
benefits, and special contractual agreements. Bonuses may take the form of a lump sum of 
cash or stock paid to an employee for meeting or exceeding these targets. Special contrac­
tual agreements may consist of noncompete agreements, in which key employees, in ex­
change for an agreed-on amount of compensation, sign agreements not to compete against 
the newly formed company if they should leave. Special agreements also may take the form 
of golden parachutes (i.e., lucrative severance packages) for senior management. Finally, 
retention bonuses often are given to employees if they agree to stay with the new company 
for a specific period.21
21In 2014, Facebook’s $3-billion acquisition of virtual reality headset company, Oculus, included $700 million in 
retention bonuses to retain the services of the founder and other key personnel.
FIGURE 6.1  Staffing strategy sequencing and associated issues.

	
Integration Is a Process, Not an Event	
217
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
Personnel Information Systems
The acquiring company may choose to merge all personnel data into a new database, 
merge one corporate database into another, or maintain the separate personnel databases of 
each business. A single database enables authorized users to access employee data more read­
ily, plan more efficiently for future staffing requirements, and conduct workforce analyses. 
Maintenance expenses associated with a single database also may be lower. The decision to 
keep personnel databases separate may reflect plans to divest the unit in the future.
Functional Integration
So far, you have learned about the steps involved in planning the integration process. Now 
let’s look at functional integration—the actual execution of the plans. The MIT must first 
determine the extent to which the two firms’ operations and support staffs are to be central­
ized or decentralized. The main areas of focus should be IT, manufacturing operations, sales, 
marketing, finance, purchasing, R&D, and the requirements to staff these functions. How­
ever, before any actual integration takes place, it is crucial to revalidate data collected during 
due diligence, benchmark all operations by comparing them to industry standards, and reset 
synergy expectations.
Revalidating Due Diligence Data
Data collected during due diligence should be reviewed immediately after closing. The 
pressure exerted by both buyer and seller to complete the transaction often results in a hap­
hazard preclosing due diligence review. For example, to compress the time devoted to due 
diligence, sellers often allow buyers access only to senior managers. For similar reasons, site 
visits by the buyer often are limited to those with the largest number of employees—and so 
risks and opportunities that might exist at other sites are ignored or remain undiscovered. 
The buyer’s legal and financial reviews typically are conducted only on the largest customer 
and supplier contracts, promissory notes, and operating and capital leases. Receivables are 
evaluated, and physical inventory is counted using sampling techniques. The effort to de­
termine whether intellectual property has been properly protected, with key trademarks or 
service marks registered and copyrights and patents filed, is often spotty.
Benchmarking Performance
Benchmarking important functions such as the acquirer and target manufacturing and 
IT operations is a useful starting point for determining how to integrate these activities. 
Standard benchmarks include the International Organization for Standardization’s (ISO) 
9000 Quality Systems—Model for Quality Assurance in Design, Development, Production, 
Installation, and Servicing. Other benchmarks that can be used include the US Food and 
Drug Administration’s Good Manufacturing Practices and the Department of Commerce’s 
Malcolm Baldrige Award.
Reset Synergy Expectations
Companies that reexamine their synergy assumptions after closing seem to achieve higher 
synergies than those that do not. Companies that are most successful in realizing incremental 

218	
6.  Postclosing Integration
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
value resulting from integrating the target firm often are those that use their predeal esti­
mates of synergy as baseline estimates (i.e., the minimum they expect to achieve) and actively 
seek new synergy opportunities during integration. Such firms are four times more likely to 
characterize their deals more highly successful than executives of acquiring firms that do not 
reset their synergy expectations. Additional value is often realized by making fundamental 
operational changes or from providing customers with new products or services that were 
envisioned during the due diligence process.22
Integrating Manufacturing Operations
The objective should be to reevaluate overall capacity, the potential for future cost reduc­
tions, the age and condition of facilities, the adequacy of maintenance budgets, and compli­
ance with environmental laws and safety laws. The integration should consider carefully 
whether target facilities that duplicate manufacturing capabilities are potentially more ef­
ficient than those of the buyer. As part of the benchmarking process, the operations of both 
the acquirer and the target company should be compared with industry standards to evaluate 
their efficiency properly.
Efficiency may be evaluated in terms of following processes: production planning, materi­
als ordering, order entry, and quality control. The production planning and materials order­
ing functions need to coordinate activities because the amount and makeup of the materials 
ordered depends on the accuracy of sales projections. Inaccurate projections create shortages 
or costly excess inventory accumulation. Order entry may offer significant opportunities for 
cost savings. Companies that produce in anticipation of sales, such as automakers, often carry 
large finished-goods inventories, while others, such as personal computer manufacturers, of­
ten build only when an order is received, to minimize working capital requirements. Finally, 
the efficiency of quality control can be measured in terms of the percentage of products that 
have to be reworked due to their failure to meet quality standards.
Plant consolidation begins with adopting a set of common systems and standards for all 
manufacturing activities. Such standards often include the time between production runs, 
cost per unit of output, and scrap rates. Vertical integration can be achieved by focusing on 
different stages of production. Different facilities specialize in the production of selected com­
ponents, which are then shipped to other facilities to assemble the finished product. Finally, a 
company may close certain facilities whenever there is excess capacity.
Integrating Information Technology
IT spending constitutes an ever-increasing share of most business budgets—and about 
80% of software projects fail to meet their performance expectations or deadlines.23 Nearly 
one-half are scrapped before completion, and about one-half cost two to three times their 
original budgets and take three times as long as expected to complete. Managers seem to 
focus too much on technology and not enough on the people and processes that will use 
that technology. If the buyer intends to operate the target company independently, the in­
formation systems of the two companies may be kept separate as long as communications 
links between them can be established. If the buyer intends to integrate the target, though, 
22Agrawal et al. (2011).
23Financial Times (1996).

	
Integration Is a Process, Not an Event	
219
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
the process can be daunting. Nearly 70% of buyers choose to combine their information 
systems immediately after closing, and almost 90% of acquirers eventually combine these 
operations.24
Recent evidence suggests that the successful integration of the acquirer’s and target’s 
IT systems is largely a function of the inclusion of an extensive investigation of the target’s 
IT function during due diligence. This heightens the probability that the combined firm’s IT 
functions will better support the firm’s business strategy.25 Examples include the acquirer’s 
efforts to improve manufacturing efficiency, procurement, order entry, and customer service.
Integrating Finance
Some target companies will be operated as stand-alone operations with separate finance 
functions, while others will be completely merged, including finance functions, with the ac­
quirer’s existing business. International acquisitions involve companies in geographically re­
mote areas and operate largely independent of the parent. This requires considerable effort to 
ensure that the buyer can monitor financial results from a distance, even if the parent has its 
representative on site. The acquirer should also establish a budgeting process and signature 
approval levels to control spending at remote locations.
Integrating Sales
Significant cost savings may result from integrating sales forces, which eliminates dupli­
cate sales representatives and related support expenses, such as travel and entertainment 
expenses, training, and management. A single sales force may also minimize customer confu­
sion by allowing customers to deal with a single salesperson when buying multiple products.
Whether the sales forces of the two firms are wholly integrated or operated independently 
depend on their relative size, the nature of their products and markets, and their geographic 
location. A small sales force may be readily combined with the larger sales force if they sell 
sufficiently similar products and serve similar markets. The sales forces may be kept sepa­
rate if the products they sell require in-depth understanding of the customers’ needs and 
a detailed knowledge of the product. It is quite common for firms that sell highly complex 
products such as robotics or enterprise software to employ a particularly well-trained and so­
phisticated sales force that uses a “consultative selling” approach. This approach may entail 
the firm’s sales force working with the customer to develop a solution tailored to their specific 
needs and may require keeping the sales forces of merged firms separate. Sales forces in glob­
ally dispersed businesses often are kept separate to reflect the uniqueness of their markets. 
However, support activities such as sales training and technical support often are centralized.
Integrating Marketing
Enabling the customer to see a consistent image in advertising and promotional campaigns 
may be the greatest challenge facing the integration of the marketing function. Steps to ensure 
consistency, however, should not confuse the customer by radically changing a product’s im­
age or how it is sold. The location and degree of integration of the marketing function depend 
on the global nature of the business, the diversity or uniqueness of product lines, and the 
24Cossey (1991).
25Baker and Niederman (2014).

220	
6.  Postclosing Integration
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
pace of change in the marketplace. A business with operations worldwide may be inclined to 
decentralize marketing to the local countries to increase awareness of local laws and cultural 
patterns. Companies with a large number of product lines that can be grouped into logical 
categories or that require extensive product knowledge may decide to disperse the marketing 
function to the various operating units to keep marketing personnel as close to the customer 
as possible.
Integrating Purchasing
Managing the merged firm’s purchasing function aggressively and efficiently can reduce 
the total cost of goods and services purchased by merged companies by 10%–15%.26 The op­
portunity to reap such substantial savings from suppliers comes immediately after the clos­
ing of the transaction. A merger creates uncertainty among both companies’ suppliers, par­
ticularly if they might have to compete against each other for business with the combined 
firms. Many will offer cost savings and new partnership arrangements, given the merged 
organization’s greater bargaining power to renegotiate contracts. The new company may 
choose to realize savings by reducing the number of suppliers. As part of the premerger due 
diligence, both the acquirer and the acquired company should identify a short list of their 
most critical suppliers, with a focus on those accounting for the largest share of purchased 
materials expenses.
Integrating Research and Development
Often, the buyer and seller R&D organizations are working on duplicate projects or proj­
ects not germane to the buyer’s long-term strategy. Senior managers and the integration team 
must define future areas of R&D collaboration and set priorities for future R&D research. 
However, barriers to R&D integration abound. Some projects require considerably more time 
(measured in years) to produce results than others. Another obstacle is that some personnel 
stand to lose in terms of titles, prestige, and power if they collaborate. Finally, the acquirer’s 
and the target’s R&D financial return expectations may differ. The acquirer may wish to give 
R&D a higher or lower priority in the combined operation of the two companies. A starting 
point for integrating R&D is to have researchers from both companies share their work with 
each other and colocate.
Integrating Human Resources
Human resources departments have traditionally been highly centralized, responsible for 
evaluating management, conducting employee surveys, developing staffing plans, and pro­
viding training. Such departments may be used to evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of 
potential target company management teams and workforce, integrate the acquirer’s and 
target’s management teams, implement pay and benefit plans, and communicate information 
about acquisitions. Due to expense and a perceived lack of responsiveness, the trend in recent 
years has been to move the HR function to the operating unit, where hiring and training may 
be done more effectively. Despite this trend, the administration of benefit plans, management 
of HR information systems, and organizational development often remain centralized due to 
their complexity and requirements for specialized expertise.
26Chapman et al. (1998).

	
Integration Is a Process, Not an Event	
221
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
Building a New Corporate Culture
Corporate culture is a common set of values, traditions, and beliefs that influence manage­
ment and employee behavior within a firm. Large, diverse businesses have an overarching 
culture and a series of subcultures that reflect local conditions. When two companies with 
different cultures merge, the newly formed company often will take on a new culture that is 
quite different from either the acquirer’s or the target’s culture. Cultural differences can instill 
creativity in the new company or create a contentious environment. Corporate culture also 
can be a source of competitive advantage if it can be changed to reinforce the firm’s desired 
business strategy. Postmerger integration can be a time for senior managers to diagnose the 
acquired firm’s corporate culture and to decide strategies for modifying the new firm’s cul­
ture to be compatible with that desired for the combined firms.
But this is far easier said than done, because it is often unobservable core beliefs held by 
employees that drive their observable behaviors. In a 2016 survey of more than 7000 business 
executives, 82% of survey respondents viewed culture as a potential source of competitive 
advantage. Despite this recognition, most executives admitted to only a limited understand­
ing of their firm’s cultures, with only (28%) believing they actually understood their firm’s 
culture.27
Tangible symbols of culture include statements hung on walls containing the firm’s mis­
sion and principles as well as status associated with the executive office floor and designated 
parking spaces. Intangible forms include the behavioral norms communicated through im­
plicit messages about how people are expected to act. Since they represent the extent to which 
employees and managers actually “walk the talk,” these messages are often far more influ­
ential in forming and sustaining corporate culture than the tangible trappings of corporate 
culture.28 With senior executives serving as role models, desired behaviors can be reinforced.
Employees, customers, and other constituencies can readily see the extent to which a firm’s 
top management values honesty and integrity if their public pronouncements are consistent 
with what is actually happening. Management that blames their firm’s poor performance on 
factors beyond their control often is viewed as untruthful. In contrast, management willing 
to take responsibility for a firm’s underperformance often is viewed by investors as willing to 
take the needed corrective actions. As such, investors reward such firms by bidding up their 
share prices and penalize others whose management is viewed as deceitful.29
Trust in the corporation is undermined after a merger, in part by the ambiguity of the new 
organization’s identity. Employee acceptance of a common culture can build identification 
with and trust in the corporation. As ambiguity abates and acceptance of a common culture 
grows, trust can be restored, especially among those who identified closely with their previ­
ous organization.30
The culture emerging from Belgian brewer InBev’s takeover of US brewer Anheuser-Busch 
in 2008 clearly reflected a combination of the two firm’s premerger cultures. InBev had been 
27Deloitte Consulting LLP (2016).
28Kennedy and Moore (2003) argue that the most important source of communication of cultural biases in an orga­
nization is the individual behavior of others, especially those with the power to reward appropriate behavior and 
to punish inappropriate behavior.
29Chance et al. (2015).
30Rao-Nicholson et al. (2016).

222	
6.  Postclosing Integration
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
viewed as a risk taker and bottom line oriented while Anheuser-Busch was far more pater­
nalistic. The combined firms represented more of the best of both. Anheuser-Busch’s training 
programs and long-term incentive plans have been rolled out to the combined firm’s opera­
tions worldwide. Once viewed as highly risk averse, Anheuser-Busch managers have been 
willing to take much greater risk. Threatened by increased competition from craft beers and 
lower consumer spending since the 2008–09 recession, the firm has become much more in­
novative with a wave of new products and packaging.31
Identifying Cultural Issues Through Cultural Profiling
The first step in building a new corporate culture is to develop a cultural profile of both the 
acquirer and acquired companies through employee surveys and interviews and by observ­
ing management styles and practices. Sometimes it is difficult to identify the root causes of 
observable behaviors. As such, it may be helpful to work backwards by hypothesizing what 
is driving such behaviors in order to understand their origin. The information is then used to 
show the similarities and differences between the two cultures as well as their comparative 
strengths and weaknesses and to diagnose potential problems that need changing.
The relative size and maturity of the acquirer and target firms can have major implica­
tions for cultural integration.32 Start-up companies typically are highly informal in terms of 
dress and decision making. Compensation may be largely stock options and other forms of 
deferred income. Benefits, beyond those required by state and federal law, and “perks” such 
as company cars are largely nonexistent. Company policies frequently do not exist, are not 
in writing, or are drawn up only as needed. Internal controls covering employee expense ac­
counts are often minimal. In contrast, larger, mature companies are often more highly struc­
tured, with well-defined internal controls, compensation structures, benefits packages, and 
employment policies all in place because the firms have grown too large and complex to 
function in an orderly manner without them. Employees usually have clearly defined job 
descriptions and career paths.
Once senior management reviews the information in the cultural profile, it must decide 
which characteristics of both cultures to emphasize. The most realistic expectation is that em­
ployees in the new company can be encouraged to adopt a shared vision, a set of core values, 
and behaviors deemed important by senior management. Anything more is probably wish­
ful thinking: a company’s culture evolves over a long period, but getting to the point where 
employees wholly embrace management’s desired culture may take years at best or never be 
achieved.
Overcoming Cultural Differences
Cultural differences can be very difficult to overcome because they may have become en­
trenched in an organization over many years. For example, in a firm in which the CEO for the 
past decade had been very directive and intolerant of dissent, employees may be reluctant to 
share their ideas. Consequently, efforts to change the culture can take many years.
Sharing common goals, standards, services, and space can be a highly effective and prac­
tical way to integrate disparate cultures. Common goals drive different units to cooperate. 
31Brown (2013).
32Brueller et al. (2015).

	
Integration Is a Process, Not an Event	
223
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
At the functional level, setting exact timetables and processes for new product development 
can drive different operating units to collaborate as project teams strive to introduce the prod­
uct by the target date. At the corporate level, incentive plans spanning many years can focus 
all operating units to pursue the same goals. Although it is helpful in the integration process 
to have shared or common goals, individuals must still have specific goals to minimize the 
tendency of some to underperform while benefiting from the collective performance of others.
Shared standards or practices enable one unit or function to adopt the “best practices” 
found in another. Standards include operating procedures, technological specifications, ethi­
cal values, internal controls, employee performance measures, and comparable reward sys­
tems throughout the combined companies. Some functional services can be centralized and 
shared by multiple departments or operating units. Commonly centralized services include 
accounting, legal, public relations, internal audit, and information technology. The most com­
mon way to share services is to use a common staff. Alternatively, a firm can create a support 
services unit and allow operating units to purchase services from it or to buy similar services 
outside the company.
Mixing offices or even locating acquired company employees in space adjacent to the 
parent’s offices is a highly desirable way to improve communication and idea sharing. 
Common laboratories, computer rooms, and lunchrooms also facilitate communication and 
cooperation.33
When Time Is Critical
Although every effort should be made to merge corporate cultures by achieving consensus 
around certain core beliefs and behaviors, the need for nimble decision making may require 
a more expeditious approach. Japanese corporations have a reputation for taking the time 
to build consensus before implementing corporate strategies. Historically, this approach has 
served them well. However, in the increasingly fast pace of the global marketplace, this is 
a luxury they may not be able to afford. Recent moves by Panasonic in 2012 to consolidate 
past acquisitions illustrate a growing trend among Japanese conglomerates to buy out minor­
ity shareholders in their majority-owned subsidiaries in order to gain full control. Minor­
ity investors may impede a firm’s ability to implement its business strategy by slowing the 
decision-making process.
Digital Tools and Change Management
Programs designed to change corporate culture often fail due to employee opposition 
or a lack of management commitment. Success rates tend to be higher if “digital tools” are 
33The challenges are enormous in companies with disparate cultures. In early 2006, Jeffrey Bewkes, the president 
of Time Warner, stopped requiring corporate units to cooperate. It was a complete turnabout from the philosophy 
espoused following the firm’s 2001 merger with AOL. Then, executives promised to create a well-oiled vertically 
integrated profit generator. Books and magazines and other forms of content would feed the television, movie, and 
Internet operations. The 2006 change encouraged managers to cooperate only if they could not make more money 
on the outside. Other media companies, such as Viacom and Liberty Media, have broken themselves up because 
their efforts to achieve corporate-wide synergies with disparate media businesses proved unsuccessful.

224	
6.  Postclosing Integration
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
properly applied to accelerate and simplify the ability of an organization to adopt a new 
set of desired behaviors.34 Such tools offer the prospect for immediate feedback, personaliz­
ing communication to the employee’s experience, circumventing hierarchy, building shared 
purpose, and communicating progress. Each of these areas is described in more detail in the 
subsequent text.
Immediate feedback involves offering employees the right information when they can ac­
tually use it to adjust their behavior to what is desired by the corporation. For example, es­
tablishing a short messaging system (SMS) can keep widely dispersed employees informed 
about new products, customer developments, and market changes.
Personalizing communications makes information more important to the user as it can 
show how the individual fits in the overall organization and how their actions contrib­
ute to achieving corporate goals. This requires limiting broadcast messages throughout 
the corporation and increasing focus on directly communicating information relevant 
to a specific employee’s function such as finance, human resources, engineering, and 
marketing.
Circumventing hierarchy involves direct communication with employees across business 
unit or organizational lines. This enables more employees to see firsthand material commu­
nicated by senior management without having it reviewed and filtered by their supervisors. 
However, this is not without risk in that information that can put the firm at a competitive 
disadvantage can more easily leak into the marketplace.
Building shared purpose is especially challenging in organizations that are widely dis­
persed geographically. Giving employees in all regions access to the same databases, activ­
ities conducted by other team members, and online opinion forums facilitate information 
flow. Shared information and commentary can help employees to understand what is expect­
ed and how others are adapting to the new cultural behaviors. For example, all employees 
could be given online access to databases showing job vacancies, hiring practices, candidates 
identified and interviewed, and eventual job placements. By achieving greater transparency, 
employees in remote locations can have more confidence in the fairness of the human re­
source system.
Communicating progress toward corporate goals can help employees see the “fruit” of 
their collective effort by tracking the firm’s progress against key corporate goals. When em­
ployees see progress, it creates a sense of success, confidence in current business strategies, 
and greater acceptance of desired corporate behaviors.
INTEGRATING BUSINESS ALLIANCES
Business alliances also must pay close attention to integration activities. Unlike M&As, 
alliances usually involve shared control. Successful implementation requires maintaining a 
good working relationship between venture partners. When this is not possible, the alliance is 
destined to fail. The breakdown in the working relationship is often a result of an inadequate 
integration.35
34Ewenstein et al. (2015).
35Lynch (1993, pp. 189–205).

	
Integrating Business Alliances	
225
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
Integrating Mechanisms
Robert Porter Lynch suggests six integration mechanisms to apply to business alliances: 
leadership, teamwork and role clarification, control by coordination, policies and values, con­
sensus decision making, and resource commitments.
Leadership
Although the terms leadership and management often are used interchangeably, there are 
critical differences. A leader sets direction and makes things happen, whereas a manager fol­
lows through and ensures that things continue to happen. Leadership involves vision, drive, 
enthusiasm, and selling skills; management involves communication, planning, delegating, 
coordinating, problem solving, making choices, and clarifying lines of responsibility. Success­
ful alliances require the proper mix of both sets of skills. The leader must provide direction, 
values, and behaviors to create a culture that focuses on the alliance’s strategic objectives as 
its top priority. Managers foster teamwork in the shared control environment of the business 
alliance.
Teamwork and Role Clarification
Teamwork is the underpinning that makes alliances work. It comes from trust, fairness, 
and discipline. Teams reach across functional lines and often consist of diverse experts or 
lower-level managers with critical problem-solving skills. The team provides functional man­
agers with the broader, flexible staffing to augment their own specialized staff. Teams tend 
to create better coordination and communication at lower levels of the alliance as well as be­
tween partners in the venture. Because teams represent individuals with varied backgrounds 
and possibly conflicting agendas, they may foster rather than resolve conflict.
Coordination
In contrast to an acquisition, no one company is in charge. Alliances do not lend them­
selves to control through mandate; rather, in the alliance, control is best exerted through co­
ordination. The best alliance managers are those who coordinate activities through effective 
communication. When problems arise, the manager’s role is to manage the decision-making 
process, not necessarily to make the decision.
Policies and Values
Alliance employees need to understand how decisions are made, what has high priority, 
who will be held accountable, and how rewards will be determined. When people know 
where they stand and what to expect, they are better able to deal with ambiguity and uncer­
tainty. This level of clarity can be communicated through a distinct set of policies and proce­
dures that are well understood by joint venture or partnership employees.
Consensus Decision Making
Consensus decision making does not mean that decisions are based on unanimity; 
rather, decisions are based on the premise that all participants have had an opportunity 
to express their opinions and are willing to accept the final decision. Operating decisions 
must be made within a reasonable time frame. The formal decision-making structure 

226	
6.  Postclosing Integration
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
varies with the type of legal structure. Joint ventures often have a board of directors and 
a management committee that meet quarterly and monthly, respectively. Projects nor­
mally are governed by steering committees. Many alliances are started to take advantage 
of complementary skills or resources available from alliance participants. The alliance can 
achieve its strategic objective only if all parties to the alliance provide the resources they 
agreed to commit.
INTEGRATING FAMILY-OWNED FIRMS
The integration process described in this chapter deals with the challenges of combining 
public firms. While there are significant similarities when acquiring a family or privately 
owned firm, the acquirer often is confronted with a range of issues not necessarily found in 
public firms.
The acquirer is buying not just a company but also a long history of strong ties between in­
dividuals with extensive shared experiences. In such situations, the pace of integration often 
is much slower as the buildup of respect and trust may take much longer.36 The integrating 
mechanisms discussed in the previous section for business alliances often apply to integrat­
ing family or privately owned firms.
Chapter 10 describes in detail the hurdles associated with such businesses including primi­
tive internal controls and reporting systems, limited product and customer diversification, 
and employee interests and time horizons differing from those in public firms. Acquirers 
must recognize that realizing anticipated synergy often takes longer in these situations than 
it might for public targets. As such, a prudent acquirer may choose to discount the offer price 
from what they believe to be the true value of the target in recognition of the daunting chal­
lenges associated with integrating successfully nonpublic firms.
SOME THINGS TO REMEMBER
M&As that are successfully integrated often demonstrate leadership by candidly and con­
tinuously communicating a clear vision, a set of values, and clear priorities to all employ­
ees. Successful integration efforts are those that are well planned, that appoint an integration 
manager and a team with clearly defined lines of authority, and that make the tough deci­
sions early in the process, be they about organizational structure, reporting relationships, 
spans of control, personnel selection, roles and responsibilities, or workforce reduction. The 
focus must be on those issues with the greatest near-term impact. Because alliances involve 
shared control, the integration process requires good working relationships with the other 
participants. Successful integration also requires leadership that is capable of defining a clear 
sense of direction and well-defined priorities and managers who accomplish their objectives 
as much by coordinating activities through effective communication as by unilateral decision 
making.
36Meier and Schier (2014).

	
Chapter Discussion Questions	
227
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
CHAPTER DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
6.1	 Why is the integration phase of the acquisition process considered so important?
6.2	 Why should acquired companies be integrated quickly?
6.3	 Why is candid and continuous communication so important during the integration 
phase?
6.4	 What messages might be communicated to the various audiences or stakeholders of 
the new company?
6.5	 Cite examples of difficult decisions that should be made early in the integration pro­
cess.
6.6	 When Daimler Benz acquired Chrysler Corporation, it announced that it could take 
6–8 years to integrate fully the combined firm’s global manufacturing operations and 
certain functions such as purchasing. Speculate as to why it might take that long.
6.7	 In your judgment, are acquirers more likely to underestimate or overestimate antici­
pated cost savings? Explain your answer.
6.8	 Cite examples of expenses you believe are commonly incurred in integrating target 
companies. Be specific.
6.9	 A common justification for mergers of competitors is the potential cross-selling op­
portunities it would provide. Comment on the challenges that might be involved in 
making such a marketing strategy work.
6.10	 Billed as a merger of equals, Citibank and Travelers resorted to a co-CEO arrangement 
when they merged. Why do you think they adopted this arrangement? What are the 
advantages and disadvantages of such an arrangement?
Answers to these Chapter Discussion Questions are available in the Online Instructor’s Manual for 
instructors using this book (https://textbooks.elsevier.com/web/Manuals.aspx?isbn=9780128016091).
END OF CHAPTER CASE STUDY: MEN’S WEARHOUSE 
AND JOS. A. BANK STUMBLE DURING POSTMERGER 
INTEGRATION
Case Study Objectives: To Illustrate
•	 The challenges in realizing revenue and cost-related synergies even when firms appear to be 
substantially similar
•	 The potential long-term debilitating impact on corporate performance of a lengthy or 
incomplete integration of a large acquisition
•	 How the size of acquisition premiums impact the pace and extent of postmerger integration
•	 Potential conflicts of interest of activist investors promoting a takeover
Pressured by activist investors to pursue growth, Men’s Wearhouse is the story of a clothing 
retailer that undertook an expensive and ultimately value-destroying acquisition. The firm had a 
history of growth and of making intelligent (value-enhancing) acquisitions, such as tuxedo rental 

228	
6.  Postclosing Integration
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
business After Hours Formal Wear (later renamed Tux). Completed in 2006, the acquisition allowed 
Men’s Wearhouse to tap additional customers in an era of declining brick and mortar retail sales. 
From 2009 to 2013, revenue and profitability at Men’s Wearhouse showed continuous improvement. 
However, in 2013, the firm’s financial performance foundered.
To restore growth in revenue and profitability, the firm acquired competitor Jos. A. Bank in late 
2014 for $1.8 billion after a heated bidding war. The final bid of $65 in cash for each Jos. A. Bank’s 
share represented a 56% premium to the closing price in early October 2013.The combined company 
had annual revenue of $3.5 billion and projected annual savings of $100–150 million consisting 
of lower overhead, more efficient marketing, and improved customer service. The combination of 
Jos. A. Bank, a seller of men’s tailored and casual clothing, US retail operations seemed to line up 
geographically with the larger Men’s Wearhouse, which operated in the United States, Canada, and 
Puerto Rico. The potential for substantial cost savings through elimination of overhead, redundant 
stores, and economies of scale and purchasing appeared substantial. But actually realizing these 
potential savings would be challenging.
The animosity that had been created between the management groups of both firms made col­
laborative premerger integration planning for the culturally disparate organizations difficult. In­
stead, closing occurred in an atmosphere of mistrust and insecurity among employees, as well as 
confusion and uncertainty among suppliers and customers. During the following 24 months, Men’s 
Wearhouse stock fell 70% from its level at closing reflecting investor concern about the long-term 
viability of the merger.
A specialty retailer of men’s suits and a provider of tuxedo rental in the United States and Cana­
da, the new Men’s Wearhouse Inc. operates in two segments: retail and corporate apparel. The retail 
operation offers its products and services through its four retail merchandising brands and Internet 
Websites. The firm’s corporate segment provides corporate clothing uniforms and related work ap­
parel. As of December 2016, the firm operated a total of 1758 retail stores.
Private equity firm, Eminence Capital, which owned a 4.9% stake in Jos. A. Bank and a 10% posi­
tion in Men’s Wearhouse prior to the takeover, had been pushing Jos. A. Bank to make a deal for 
months. In fact, both Men’s Wearhouse and Jos. A. Bank’s management teams had clung stubbornly 
to their desire to remain independent. Expressing growing impatience, Eminence Capital unsuc­
cessfully took Jos. A. Bank to court to try to force the retailer to negotiate exclusively with Men’s 
Wearhouse.
Eminence Capital, which had at first backed Jos. A. Bank’s bid to acquire Men’s Wearhouse, 
switched sides and encouraged Men’s Wearhouse to adopt a so-called Pac Man defense in which the 
hunted becomes the hunter. It was hedging its bets with investments in both firms, and the combi­
nation of the two firms offered to be a winner for the private equity firm. As evidenced by the firm’s 
increased ownership stake after the merger, Eminence fervently believed that substantial synergy 
between the two clothiers would unlock substantial value for shareholders.
Another private equity firm that also stood to benefit from a deal between Jos. A. Bank and 
Men’s Wearhouse was Golden Gate Capital, which owned outdoor gear retailer Eddie Bauer. Jos. 
A. Bank had agreed to buy Eddie Bauer for $825 million in a bid to discourage Men’s Wearhouse’s 
takeover bid. The merger agreement with Eddie Bauer stipulated that any alternative bidder such 
as Men’s Wearhouse that came along with a higher bid would pay Golden Gate $48 million as a 
breakup fee. Golden Gate also had been a financing source in Jos. A. Bank’s original bid for Men’s 

	
Chapter Discussion Questions	
229
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
Wearhouse. The Golden Gate break-up fee forced Men’s Wearhouse to up its initial bid putting an 
additional $210 million into Jos. A. Bank’s shareholders’ pockets. At closing it appeared that both 
Eminence and Golden Gate came out winners as well as Jos. A. Bank shareholders. However, the 
longer-run outlook for Men’s Wearhouse shareholders appeared uncertain due to its problematic 
ability to digest Jos. A. Bank.
Once the merger was completed, Men’s Wearhouse was faced with the task of figuring out how 
to make good on its publicly stated commitment to eliminate $100–150 million in costs over 3 years. 
These anticipated synergies were a major part of the justification for paying the substantial pre­
mium for Jos. A. Bank, and Men’s Wearhouse was under considerable pressure to realize these sav­
ings as quickly as possible. To assist in the integration, the firm hired advisory firm AlixPartners, a 
well-known retailer turnaround firm, to support the integration process.
In addition to implementing cost savings programs, Men’s Wearhouse pursued an aggressive 
strategy to rationalize Jos. A. Bank’s marketing strategy. The latter competed almost exclusively on 
the basis of price and frequent promotional campaigns. Men’s Wearhouse sought to change Jos. A. 
Bank’s customer base by weaning them away from what had attracted them in the first place: highly 
aggressive pricing and promotion campaigns. Jos. A. Bank’s promotions such as “buy one get three 
free” have proven toxic to Men’s Wearhouse. Sensing a chance to turn around the brand, the new 
owners saw an opportunity to gain market share.
Men’s Wearhouse tried to move away from the Jos. A. Bank strategy of being “always on sale” 
by cutting the number of promotional events in favor of a single, bigger buy-one-get-three-free sale 
at the end of a quarter. This approach was not well received by Jos. A. Bank customers who had 
historically been accustomed to regular sales promotions. The strategy change not only cut into 
Jos. A. Bank’s revenue but also discouraged the number of potential customers from visiting the 
retailer’s outlets. In hindsight, it is apparent that these overly generous promotions are what drove 
large numbers of customers to shop at Jos. A. Bank and that these customers became addicted to 
them. Despite the negative customer reaction, Men’s Wearhouse CEO Doug Ewert remained reso­
lute about the need to transition away from the unsustainable promotional strategy inherited from 
Jos. A. Bank. The objective was to have fewer sales such that the firm could charge higher average 
prices throughout the year.
While overly aggressive promotional campaigns can hurt profitability, it can be far more damag­
ing to revenue by eroding store traffic. History has not been kind to retailers who have tried to alter 
customer expectations. Men’s Wearhouse founder and former CEO George Zimmer expressed con­
cern that the aggressive cost cutting to make the integration work was going too quickly and that it 
would undermine the firm’s ability to grow sales. Zimmer, who had been fired by Men’s Wearhouse 
over governance and compensation issues, reasoned that, given the similarity of the two firms’ of­
ferings, former Jos. A. Bank customers were simply shopping at nearby Men’s Wearhouse stores.
From the outset, management at Men’s Wearhouse said publicly they would not rebrand Bank’s 
stores believing the two firms had separate customer bases and different corporate cultures. Where 
Jos. A. Bank retains the more classic lines, Men’s Wearhouse revels in its trendier image. Because of 
that, the ability to cut costs by closing stores was slow to materialize. Moreover, realizing supply 
chain efficiencies along with cuts in advertising costs and duplicative corporate functions created 
friction between the two firms’ workforces, impairing communication and the implementation of 
new programs.

230	
6.  Postclosing Integration
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
In addition to changing its promotional strategy, Men’s Wearhouse sought to update Jos. A. 
Bank’s merchandise by adding more tailored fits and accessories, such as shoes. The chain also 
rolled out a new ad campaign and worked to retrain employees to sell products under the new pro­
motional strategy. Postmerger integration efforts also included integrating the brands and upgrad­
ing the e-commerce system. The buy-one-get-three-free promotions have ended and were replaced 
with a buy-one-and get-two-free promotion at Jos. A. Bank. In addition to promotional changes, 
the firm has launched a new loyalty program. Furthermore, Men’s Wearhouse signed an agreement 
with Macy’s to open licensed tuxedo rental shops aiming to attract new customers.
The challenge to date of integrating Jos. A. Bank has proven to be bruising for Men’s Wearhouse. 
The firm was forced to take in 2015 a $90.1-million noncash write-down in the value of the Jos. A. 
Bank brand due to its declining revenue. Men’s Wearhouse also has been burdened by the need to 
make principal and interest payments on its staggering debt load that has limited reinvestment in 
stores that needed updating. To finance the deal Men’s Wearhouse borrowed $1.6 billion. In ad­
dition to its long-term debt, Men’s Wearhouse also carried off balance sheet debt from operating 
leases for its stores totaling $700 million bringing total debt at the time of closing to $2.3 billion.
Two years after buying rival Jos. A. Bank, Men’s Wearhouse has seen the market value of its eq­
uity and debt plunge as investors and bondholders question the firm’s ability to reverse the decline 
in sales at Jos. A. Bank. When the deal closed in September 2014, the firm’s equity value exceeded 
$2.6 billion eventually topping out at $3.2 billion in October 2015. Since then the firm’s equity value 
has fallen to less than $700 million by the end of 2016. The firm’s 7% bonds due in 2022 also plunged 
to 65¢ per dollar of face value from $104 during the same period. Standard & Poor’s lowered the 
firm’s credit rating to well below investment grade.
Throughout the turmoil, Eminence Capital, the activist investor that had pushed so hard for the 
merger, has remained the firm’s largest investor. The private equity firm has expressed confidence in 
the clothier’s long-term strategy pointing out that Men’s Wearhouse brand remains strong and that 
Jos. A. Bank accounts for only 24% of consolidated sales. While management remains adamant that 
there are no plans to divest or spin off Jos. A. Bank, only time will tell if the unit can be turned around.
Discussion Questions
1.	 How does the size of the premium paid for Jos. A. Bank affect the pace and extent of 
postmerger integration?
2.	 How did private equity investments in both firms affect the size of the premium paid for Jos. 
A. Bank? Were the Private equity firms simply interested in getting a deal since it boosted the 
value of their investment? Explain your answer.
3.	 What key external and internal factors affected postmerger integration?
4.	 How does a hostile takeover impact the likelihood of a successful integration?
5.	 What is the key premise underlying Men’s Wearhouse’s belief that the two firms can be 
successfully integrated? Was the premise correct? Be specific.
6.	 What is the fatal flaw in the integration effort?
7.	 George Zimmer, the founder of Men’s Wearhouse, argued that the integration was too fast. Why 
would his argument to slow the integration make sense only if the premium paid had been smaller?
Answers to these questions are found in the Online Instructor’s Manual for instructors using this book 
(https://textbooks.elsevier.com/web/Manuals.aspx?isbn=9780128016091).

	
Chapter Discussion Questions	
231
II.  The Mergers and Acquisitions Process
A D D I T I O N A L  C A S E  S T U D Y  R E C O M M E N D AT I O N S 
( S E A R C H  H A RVA R D  B U S I N E S S  S C H O O L 
P U B L I S H I N G  S I T E  B Y  N A M E  O F  C A S E : 
h b s p . h a r v a r d . e d u )
Cultural Challenges of Integration: Value 
Creation and Daiichi Sankyo’s Indian 
Acquisition, Beng Geok Wee, Wilfred 
Chua, Revised Publication Date: November 
20, 2012, Source: ABCC at Nanyang Tech 
University, Product Number: NTU027-PDF-
ENG, hbsp.harvard.edu.
Subjects covered: Organizational 
behavior, Role of Culture in Cross-Border 
M&A, post-M&A Integration Process, Cross-
Cultural Relations.
Big (Double) Deal: Anadarko’s 
Acquisition of Kerr-McGee and Western Gas 
Resources, Clayton Christensen, Curtis B. 
Rising, Publication Date: October 10, 2009, 
Product Number: 610020-PDF-ENG, Source: 
Harvard Business School, hbsp.harvard.edu.
Subjects covered: Due diligence, 
Integration Planning, Cultural Issues, 
Negotiation.
Ben & Jerry’s and Unilever: The 
Bohemian and the Behemoth, L.J. Bourgeois, 
Elio Mariani, Vivian Jen Yu, Publication 
Date: January 30, 2004, Product Number: 
UV0597-PDF-ENG, Source: Darden School of 
Business, hbsp.harvard.edu.
Subjects covered: Integration Planning, 
Business Ethics, Corporate Cultural Issues, 
Governance.
InBev and Anheuser-Busch, Andrew C. 
Inkpen, Publication Date: November 16, 
2010, Product Number: TB0251-PDF-ENG, 
Source: Thunderbird School of Management, 
hbsp.harvard.edu.
Subjects covered: Takeovers, Synergy, 
Premiums, Integration.


P A R T III
MERGERS AND 
ACQUISITIONS 
VALUATION AND 
MODELING
Source: Cartoonstock.com.

234	
III.  MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS VALUATION AND MODELING
﻿ ﻿﻿
The intrinsic value of a business is the actual cash-generating capacity of its 
tangible and intangible assets less the liabilities required to finance the creation 
of these assets. Far more an art than a science, business valuation is the process 
for determining a business’s current value, which can differ from its intrinsic 
value due to investor optimism or pessimism.
Part III covers alternative valuation methods and basic financial modeling 
techniques, ranging from the simple to the complex, used to estimate the cur­
rent value of a business. The applicability of each valuation methodology var­
ies by situation, with each subject to significant limitations. An average of esti­
mates using different methodologies is more likely to provide a better estimate 
of firm value than any single approach. Moreover, there is little evidence that 
complex methods provide consistently more accurate estimates than relatively 
simple ones.
Chapter 7 provides a primer on constructing valuation cash flows, the dis­
count rates necessary to convert projected cash flows to a present value, and 
commonly used discounted cash flow (DCF) methods. This chapter also deals 
with how to apply the capital asset pricing model when interest rates may 
not accurately reflect risk. Alternatives to DCF techniques are discussed in 
Chapter 8, including relative valuation, asset-oriented, and replacement cost 
methods. Implicit in the DCF approach to valuation is that management has 
no flexibility once an investment decision has been made. In practice, manage­
ment may decide to accelerate, delay, or abandon investments as new informa­
tion becomes available. This decision-making flexibility may be reflected in the 
value of the target firm by adjusting DCFs for the value of so-called real options.
Chapter 9 discusses how to build financial models in the context of mergers 
and acquisitions (M&As). Such models are very helpful in answering ques­
tions pertaining to valuation, financing, and deal structuring. (Deal-structur­
ing considerations are discussed in detail in Chapters 11 and 12.) Such models 
may be particularly helpful in determining a range of values for a target firm 
reflecting different sets of assumptions. Moreover, such models are powerful 
tools during M&A negotiations, allowing the participants to evaluate rapidly 
the attractiveness of alternative proposals. (Chapter 14 discusses in detail how 
complex models are used in deal negotiations.) Finally, Chapter 10 addresses 
valuing privately held firms and how to adjust purchase prices for liquidity 
and noncontrolling discounts as well as for the value of control. This chapter 
is particularly relevant, since the vast majority of firms involved in M&As are 
privately held.

C H A P T E R
235
Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring Activities. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-801609-1.00007-5
Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
7
Mergers and Acquisitions Cash Flow 
Valuation Basics
O U T L I N E
Inside M&A: The Role of Valuation 
Methodologies in Fairness Opinions 
and Appraisal Rights	
236
Chapter Overview	
237
Estimating Required Financial Returns	
238
Cost of Equity and the Capital Asset 
Pricing Model	
238
Estimating Market Risk Premiums	
238
Applying CAPM in a Near-Zero 
(or Negative) Interest Rate 
Environment	
240
Pretax Cost of Debt	
241
Cost of Preferred Stock	
243
Cost of Capital	
243
Risk Assessment	
244
Effects of Financial and Operating 
Leverage on β	
245
Calculating Free Cash Flows	
249
Free Cash Flow to the Firm 
(Enterprise Cash Flow)	
249
Selecting the Right Tax Rate	
250
Dealing With Operating Leases	
250
Free Cash Flow to Equity Investors 
(Equity Cash Flow)	
251
Applying Discounted Cash Flow 
Methods	
251
Enterprise Discounted Cash Flow 
Model (Enterprise or FCFF 
Method)	
252
Equity Discounted Cash Flow 
Model (Equity or FCFE 
Method)	
253
The Zero-Growth Valuation Model	
253
The Constant-Growth Valuation 
Model	
254
The Variable-Growth (Supernormal 
or Nonconstant) Valuation Model	
255
Determining the Duration of the 
High-Growth Period	
258
Determining the Stable or Sustainable 
Growth Rate	
258
Determining the Appropriate Discount 
Rate	
258
Using the Enterprise Method to 
Estimate Equity Value	
259
Determining the Market Value of 
Long-Term Debt	
259
Determining the Market Value of 
Operating Leases	
261

236	
7.  Mergers and Acquisitions Cash Flow Valuation Basics
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
It is better to buy a great business at a fair price than a fair business at a great price. —Warren Buffett
INSIDE M&A: THE ROLE OF VALUATION METHODOLOGIES 
IN FAIRNESS OPINIONS AND APPRAISAL RIGHTS
KEY POINTS
•	 Investment bankers often are hired to provide opinions about whether a proposed purchase 
price is “fair” to shareholders.
•	 Alternative valuation methods often result in different estimates of value.
•	 Dissenting shareholders may have their shares valued by an independent appraiser according 
to the appraisal rights described in state statutes.
Discounted cash flow (DCF), relative valuation, recent comparable sales, and asset-based 
valuation methods often are used in “fairness opinions” to assess the reasonableness of an of­
fer made to target firm shareholders. They are designed to help protect the target firm’s board 
and management from future litigation in which it is argued that the sale price was too low. 
Acquirers also may use fairness opinions if the board and management are sued over having 
allegedly paid too much for a target firm.
If subsequent to closing, minority shareholders dispute the accuracy of the price of­
fered for their shares, they can exercise their “appraisal rights” specified in the statutes 
of the state in which the target is incorporated. Appraisal rights represent the statutory 
option of a firm’s minority shareholders to have the fair market value of their stock price 
Determining the Cash Impact of 
Deferred Taxes	
261
Determining the Cash Impact of 
Unfunded Pension Liabilities	
262
Determining the Cash Impact of 
Employee Options	
262
Determining the Cash Impact of 
Other Provisions and Contingent 
Liabilities	
262
Determining the Market Value of 
Noncontrolling Interests	
264
Valuing Nonoperating Assets	
264
Cash and Marketable Securities	
265
Investments in Other Firms	
266
Unutilized and Undervalued Assets	
266
Patents, Service Marks, and 
Trademarks	
266
Overfunded Pension Plans	
266
Putting it All Together	
266
Some Things to Remember	
270
Discussion Questions	
270
Practice Problems and Answers	
271
Case Study: Court Rules Dell Underpaid 
Public Shareholders Highlighting Legal 
Distinction Between Fair Value and 
Fair Market Value	
274
Case Study Objectives	
274
Discussion Questions	
276
Additional Case Study 
Recommendations	
276

	
Chapter Overview	
237
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
determined by an independent appraiser and the obligation of the acquiring firm to buy 
back shares at that price. While alternative valuation methodologies often are used to es­
timate the fair market value of shares in dispute, courts often defer to the merger price or 
actual price paid as long as the process used to determine the price was fair. A recent court 
case illustrates this point.
Most US companies are incorporated in Delaware and are covered by the state’s corporate 
law. The Delaware Chancery Court’s opinion in Merlin Partners v AutoInfo Inc. in mid-2015 
provided guidance regarding the court’s determination of fair value in an appraisal action. 
Private equity company Comvest Partners completed its takeover of AutoInfo, a supply chain 
logistics company, on April 13, 2013, for $1.05 per share in cash. This price constituted a 7% 
premium to AutoInfo’s closing share price on February 28, 2013, and a 21% premium over its 
average closing price for the 6 months ending February 28, 2013.
In the sales process, AutoInfo, the target, with the assistance of its investment bank, con­
tacted 164 potential strategic and financial buyers, 70 of which entered into nondisclosure 
agreements. The company eventually signed a letter of intent that provided for an acquisition 
of AutoInfo at $1.30 per share. After that deal fell through. AutoInfo reached an agreement 
to sell the firm to Comvest for $1.26 per share. During due diligence, Comvest uncovered 
numerous accounting issues, and subsequent negotiations resulted in an agreement for Com­
vest to acquire the company at $1.05 per share.
Merlin Partners, a private equity firm with a minority stake in AutoInfo, filed an appraisal 
action, arguing that the fair value of the company was $2.60 per share. Merlin presented two 
comparable companies analyses and a “DCF” analysis prepared by Merlin’s financial expert. 
In its defense, AutoInfo’s management argued that comparable companies and DCF analyses 
could not be reliably performed with the available data and that the sales price represented 
fair value based on the integrity of the sales process and the merger price paid by Comvest 
(an unrelated third party). The Chancery Court on April 30, 2015, rejected Merlin Partners’ 
claims, concluding that the DCF and comparable company methods were unreliable, and the 
actual price paid (i.e., merger price) was the most dependable indicator of fair market value 
as long as the negotiating process was viewed as fair.
The obvious lesson is that valuation methodologies are only as meaningful as the reli­
ability of their inputs. The court case highlights the importance of process in merger and 
acquisition (M&A) transactions. The actual merger price paid for a target firm may be the 
best indicator of fair value as long as the price was determined in a fair auction. The court 
viewed the use of alternative valuation methods like DCF analysis as “necessarily a second-
best method to derive value.”
CHAPTER OVERVIEW
This chapter provides an overview of the basics (including limitations) of valuing M&As 
using DCF methods; additional methods are discussed in Chapter 8. This chapter concludes 
with a series of discussion questions, practice problems, a short case study, and recommen­
dations for other case studies germane to this chapter. A review of this chapter is available 
in the file folder entitled “Student Study Guide” in the companion website to this book 
(https://www.elsevier.com/books-and-journals/book-companion/9780128016091).

238	
7.  Mergers and Acquisitions Cash Flow Valuation Basics
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
ESTIMATING REQUIRED FINANCIAL RETURNS
Investors require a minimum rate of return that must be at least equal to what the investor 
can receive on alternative investments exhibiting a comparable level of perceived risk.
Cost of Equity and the Capital Asset Pricing Model
The cost of equity (ke) is the rate of return required to induce investors to purchase a firm’s 
equity. It is a return to shareholders after corporate taxes have been paid but before personal 
taxes. It may be estimated using the capital asset pricing model (CAPM), which measures the 
relationship between expected risk and return. Presuming investors require higher rates of 
return for accepting higher levels of risk, the CAPM states that the expected return on an asset 
is equal to a risk-free rate of return plus a risk premium.
A risk-free rate of return is one for which the expected return is free of default risk.1 Other 
types of risk remain such as the reinvestment rate (i.e., the rate of return that can be earned 
at the end of the investor’s holding period), the potential loss of principal if the security is 
sold before its maturity date (market risk), and the loss of purchasing power due to inflation 
(inflation risk). Despite widespread agreement on the use of US Treasury securities as assets 
that are free of default risk, analysts differ over whether a short- or long-term Treasury rate 
should be applied. Which rate should be used depends on how long the investor intends to 
hold the investment. The investor who anticipates holding an investment for 5 or 10 years 
should use either a 5- or 10-year Treasury bond rate.2 In this book, a 10-year Treasury bond 
rate is used to represent the risk-free rate, since it would be most appropriate for a strategic 
or long-term acquirer.
Estimating Market Risk Premiums
The market risk, or equity premium, is the additional return in excess of the risk-free rate that 
investors require to purchase a firm’s equity. Intuitively, the risk premium is what the inves­
tor requires to be “adequately” compensated for buying a risky asset and is the only factor the 
basic CAPM model uses to approximate the incremental risk of adding a stock to a diversified 
portfolio. While the risk premium should be forward looking, obtaining precise estimates of 
future market returns is exceedingly difficult. Analysts often look to historical data, despite 
results that vary based on the time periods selected and whether returns are calculated as 
arithmetic or geometric averages. CAPM relates the cost of equity (ke) to the risk-free rate of 
return and market risk premium as follows:
β
=
+
−
k
R
R
R
CAPM :
(
)
e
f
m
f
	
(7.1)
1Default risk refers to the degree of certainty that an investor will receive the nominal value of his or her investment 
plus accumulated interest according to the terms of their agreement with the borrower. That is, if $10,000 is invested 
at some rate of interest for 10 years, the investor will receive $10,000 at the end of 10 years plus interest paid annually.
2A 3-month Treasury bill rate is not free of risk for a 5- or 10-year period, since interest and principal received at 
maturity must be reinvested at 3-month intervals, resulting in considerable reinvestment risk.

	
Estimating Required Financial Returns	
239
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
where Rf, risk-free rate of return; β, beta (see the section in this chapter titled “Analyzing 
Risk”)3; Rm, expected rate of return on equities; and Rm − Rf, 5.5% (i.e., risk premium equal to 
the difference between the return on a diversified portfolio of stocks and the risk-free rate).4
Despite its intuitive appeal, studies show that actual returns on risky assets frequently dif­
fer significantly from those returns predicted by basic CAPM reflecting the well-documented 
limitations of CAPM.5 Since the CAPM measures a stock’s risk relative to the overall market 
and ignores returns on assets other than stocks, some analysts use multifactor models.6 Studies 
show that, of those variables improving the CAPM’s accuracy, firm size tends to be among 
the more important.7 The size premium serves as a proxy for factors such as smaller firms 
being subject to higher default risk and generally being less liquid than large-capitalization 
firms. Table 7.1 provides estimates of the adjustment to the cost of equity to correct for firm 
size based on actual data since 1963.8
3Statistically, a β measures the variation of an individual stock’s return with the overall market as a percent of the 
variation of the overall market (i.e., the covariance of a stock’s return to a broadly defined market index/variance 
of the broadly defined index).
4Fernandez et al. (2015) found the median and average equity risk premium for about three-fourths of the 41 coun­
tries surveyed fell within a range of 5.0%–7.0%. In the United States, the survey documented a median and average 
equity risk premium in 2015 used by those surveyed of 5.5 and 5.3%, respectively.
5For a summary of the extensive literature discussing CAPM’s shortcomings, see Fernandez (2014); CAPM’s reli­
ability has been particularly questionable since 2008 due to the suppression of government bond rates (often used 
as a measure of risk-free rates) due to aggressive purchases of such securities by central banks.
6Such models adjust the CAPM by adding other risk factors that determine asset returns, such as firm size, bond 
default premiums, the bond term structure, and inflation. Fama and French (2015) argue that a five-factor model 
captures the effects of size, value (market to book ratio), profitability, and firm investment better than models using 
fewer factors but fails to capture the low returns on small stocks whose firms invest heavily despite low profitability.
7Shapovalova and Subbotin (2011).
8The magnitude of the size premium should be adjusted to reflect such factors as a comparison of the firm’s key 
financial ratios (e.g., liquidity and leverage) with comparable firms and after interviewing management.
TABLE 7.1  Size Premium Estimates
Market value ($000,000)
Percentage points added 
to CAPM estimate
Book value ($000,000)
Percentage points added 
to CAPM estimate
>21,589
0
>11,465
0
7,150–21,589
1.3
4,184–11,465
1.0
2,933–7,150
2.4
1,157–4,184
2.1
1,556–2,933
3.3
923–1,157
3.0
687–1,556
4.4
382–923
3.7
111–687
5.2
60–382
4.4
<111
7.2
<60
5.6
CAPM, Capital asset pricing model. Source: Size premium estimates were calculated by collapsing the 25 groupings of firms by 
size in a study conducted by Duff & Phelps LLC into 7 categories. Duff & Phelps examined the relationship between firm size and 
financial returns between 1963 and 2008 and found that small firms displayed a higher premium whether size is measured by 
market value, book value, or some other performance measure (e.g., operating profit, number of employees). The Duff and Phelps 
(2010) findings are listed in Pratt and Grabowski.

240	
7.  Mergers and Acquisitions Cash Flow Valuation Basics
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
Eq. (7.1) can be rewritten to reflect an adjustment for firm size as follows:
β
=
+
−
+
k
R
R
R
CAPM :
(
)
FSP
e
f
m
f
	
(7.2)
where FSP, firm size premium.
Assume that a firm has a market value of less than $111 million and a β of 1.75. Also assume 
that the risk-free rates of return and equity premium are 5 and 5.5%, respectively. The firm’s 
cost of equity using the CAPM method adjusted for firm size can be estimated as follows:
ke = 0.05 + 1.75(0.055) + 0.072 (Table 7.1) = 0.218 × 100 = 21.8%
Applying CAPM in a Near-Zero (or Negative) Interest Rate Environment
For more than a decade (as of this writing), interest rates in many developed countries 
have been at or near historical lows (and in some instances negative). Since central bank poli­
cies in many countries have been to inject massive amounts of liquidity into financial markets 
during this period, it is unclear whether interest rates have been more reflective of anemic 
global economic growth or central bank policies or both.
One school of thought argues that the low interest rate environment is more a result of 
weak financial market conditions due to expectations of lackluster economic growth as central 
banks exert only limited control of short-term interest rates and little influence on long-term 
interest rates.9 Others argue that the continuing low interest rate environment reflects the 
highly aggressive liquidity injections by central banks during this period.10
If we believe low interest rates reflect primarily financial market factors such as anemic or 
uncertain global economic growth, historically low or negative risk-free rates do not bias tar­
get firm valuations. Why? Historically low risk-free rates will be offset partially by increasing 
risk premiums on stocks keeping the magnitude of the cost of equity comparatively stable. 
If the expected return on stocks remains the same, equity premiums must widen by defini­
tion as risk-free rates decline.11 To illustrate how changes in the risk-free rate are offset partly 
by changes in the risk premium, consider the following calculations. Assuming the risk-free 
rate is −0.5%, the expected return on all stocks is 6%, and the target firm’s β is 1.2, the cost 
of equity using CAPM is 7.3% [i.e., cost of equity = −0.005 + 1.2(0.06 − (−0.005)]. The cost 
of equity is little changed at 7.1% [i.e., cost of equity = 0.005 + 1.2(0.06 − 0.005)] if we use the 
same assumptions except for a positive 0.5% risk-free rate. This model is the same as the basic 
two-factor CAPM discussed previously.
If we believe that interest rates are depressed by central bank policies and do not accurately 
reflect financial market conditions, application of the CAPM can result in an underestimation 
9Fama (2013).
10The US Federal Reserve ceased quantitative easing (aggressively buying treasury and mortgage-backed securities) 
in late 2014, deciding to simply reinvest cash from maturing bonds and interest earnings. Despite a less aggressive 
Fed, US interest rates continued to decline as ongoing easing by foreign central banks pushed interest rates in those 
countries lower, increasing the demand for US treasuries. Moreover, unlike cash from maturing securities, interest 
earnings reinvested by the Fed represents additional market liquidity that unless offset weighs on US interest rates.
11Duarte and Rosa (2015) concluded that increases in the equity risk premium in recent years were a result of de­
clining risk-free interest rates.

	
Estimating Required Financial Returns	
241
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
of the cost of equity and subsequent target firm overvaluation. To minimize this bias, the risk-
free rate should be the expected future risk-free rate, as the CAPM is predicated on future 
cash flows and their associated risk. However, any estimation of future interest rates is highly 
problematic. A more practical alternative is to use a historical average of an appropriate long-
term risk-free rate over several decades in order to capture more than one interest rate cycle. 
Nonetheless, using a historical average as a proxy for future rates is subjective due to the dif­
ficulty in determining the appropriate length of the historical time period and may overstate 
the cost of equity.12
In summary, current low interest rates reflect most likely both sluggish growth and central 
bank policies. It is doubtful the relative importance of each factor can be determined because 
they are interdependent. That is, many central banks continue to aggressively inject liquid­
ity into the financial markets because of slow economic growth and growth is slow in part 
because of these bank policies.13 Without compelling evidence that adjusting CAPM for the 
current low interest rates provides more reliable estimates, the author recommends using the 
basic two-factor CAPM, adjusted for firm size if such data are available, to estimate the cost of 
equity. Nevertheless, it should be evident to the reader that any method used to estimate the 
cost of equity is heavily dependent on “faith-based” assumptions. At a minimum, an analyst 
should average estimates supplied by multiple methodologies to approximate the true cost 
of equity.
Pretax Cost of Debt
Interest is the cost of borrowing each additional dollar of debt and is tax deductible by the 
firm; in bankruptcy, bondholders are paid before shareholders as the firm’s assets are liqui­
dated. For these reasons, debt is generally cheaper than equity. Default risk, the likelihood the 
firm will fail to repay interest and principal on a timely basis, can be measured by the firm’s 
credit rating.14 Interest paid by the firm on its current debt can be used as an estimate of the 
current cost of debt if nothing has changed since the firm last borrowed.
When conditions have changed, the analyst must estimate the cost of debt reflecting current 
market interest rates and default risk. To do so, analysts use the yield to maturity (YTM)15 of the 
company’s long-term, option-free bonds. This requires knowing the price of the security and its 
14Default rates vary from an average of 0.52% for AAA-rated firms over a 15-year period to 54.38% for those rated 
CCC by Standard & Poor’s Corporation. See Burrus and McNamee (2002).
15YTM is the internal rate of return on a bond held to maturity, assuming scheduled payment of principal and inter­
est, which takes into account the capital gain on a discount bond or capital loss on a premium bond.
13Historically low interest rates discourage business spending because it is difficult to assess investment risk, create 
expectations of future slow growth and potentially deflationary pressures, discourage bank lending, contribute to 
speculative bubbles and capital misallocation, and may force consumers to defer spending and to save more for re­
tirement. While the US savings rate of about 5% is lower than some historical periods, it is higher than what would 
have been expected considering record low interest rates.
12Using a historical average risk-free rate with today’s equity premiums instead of the lower actual current rate 
may tend to overstate the cost of equity as equity premiums are already high due in part to the uncertainty created 
by the artificially low interest rate environment. To avoid this bias, the analyst should use the average risk-free rate 
and equity risk premium over the same historical period in applying CAPM.

242	
7.  Mergers and Acquisitions Cash Flow Valuation Basics
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
coupon value and face value.16 In general, the cost of debt is estimated by calculating the YTM 
on each of the firm’s outstanding bond issues. We then compute a weighted average YTM, 
with the estimated YTM for each issue weighted by its percentage of total debt outstanding. In 
Table 7.2, Microsoft’s weighted average YTM on the bulk of its long-term debt on January 24, 
2011, was 2.4%. The source for the YTM for each debt issue was found in the Financial Industry 
Regulatory Authority’s (FINRA) Trace database: www.finra.org/marketdata.17
YTM represents the most reliable estimate of a firm’s cost of debt as long as the firm’s debt 
is investment grade,18 since the difference between the expected rate of return and the prom­
ised rate of return is small. The promised rate of return assumes that the interest and principal 
are paid on time. The YTM is affected by the cost of debt, the probability of default, and the 
expected recovery rate on the debt if the firm defaults and is a good proxy for actual future 
returns on investment-grade debt, since the potential for default is low.
Non–investment-grade debt rated less than BBB by Standard & Poor’s and Baa by Moody’s 
represents debt whose default risk is significant due to the firm’s leverage, deteriorating cash 
flows, or both. Ideally, the expected YTM would be calculated based on the current market 
price of the non–investment-grade bond, the probability of default, and the potential recov­
ery rate following default.19 Since such data are frequently unavailable, an alternative is to use 
the YTM for a number of similarly rated bonds of other firms. Such bonds include a so-called 
default premium, which reflects the compensation that lenders require over the risk-free rate to 
buy non–investment-grade debt.
To illustrate, on January 24, 2011, HCA Healthcare Inc.’s 9% fixed rate noncallable bond 
(i.e., the bond cannot be repurchased by the issuing firm before maturity) that would reach 
16YTM is not appropriate for valuing short-term bonds, since their term to maturity often is much less than the du­
ration of the company’s cash flows. YTM is affected by the bond’s cash flows and not those of the firm’s; therefore, 
it is distorted by corporate bonds, which also have conversion or callable features, since their value will affect the 
bond’s value but not the value of the firm’s cash flows.
17FINRA is the largest independent regulator for all securities firms in the Unites States and administers the Series 
79 exam for those looking to become investment bankers. For access to financial market data and a more detailed 
discussion of FINRA, see http://cxa.marketwatch.com/finra/MarketData/CompanyInfo/default.aspx.
18Investment-grade bonds are those whose credit quality is considered to be among the most secure by indepen­
dent bond-rating agencies: BBB or higher by Standard & Poor’s and Baa or higher by Moody’s Investors Service.
19Titman and Martin (2010, pp. 144–147).
TABLE 7.2  Weighted Average Yield to Maturity of Microsoft’s Long-Term Debt
Coupon 
rate (%)
Maturity
Book value 
(face value in 
$ million)
Percentage 
of total debt
Price (% of 
par)
Yield to 
maturity (%)
0.88
9/27/2013
1250
0.25
99.44
1.09
2.95
6/1/2014
2000
0.40
104.27
1.63
4.20
6/1/2019
1000
0.20
105.00
3.50
5.20
6/1/2039
750
0.15
100.92
5.14
5000
1.00
2.40

	
Estimating Required Financial Returns	
243
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
maturity on December 15, 2015 (rated CCC by Standard & Poor’s and Caa1 by Moody’s), 
had a YTM of 7.41%, according to FINRA’s TRACE database. With 5-year US Treasury bonds 
offering a YTM of 1.94%, the implied default risk premium was 5.47% (i.e., 7.41 minus 1.94). 
This same process could then be repeated for a number of similarly rated bonds in order to 
calculate an average YTM. For nonrated firms, the analyst may estimate the current pretax 
cost of debt for a specific firm by comparing debt-to-equity ratios, interest coverage ratios, 
and operating margins with those of similar rated firms. The analyst would then use the in­
terest rates paid by these comparably rated firms as the pretax cost of debt for the firm being 
analyzed.20
Cost of Preferred Stock
Preferred stock is similar to long-term debt, in that its dividend is generally constant and 
preferred stockholders are paid after debt holders but before common shareholders if the firm 
is liquidated. Because preferred stock is riskier than debt but less risky than common stock 
in bankruptcy, the cost to the company to issue preferred stock should be less than the cost of 
equity but greater than the cost of debt. The cost of preferred stock should also exceed the cost 
of debt because with debt investors are certain to receive the principal of the bond if they hold 
such bonds until maturity. In contrast, the likelihood the investor will recover their initial 
investment with preferred stock issued without any redemption date is uncertain, depending 
on market conditions when such stock is sold.
Viewing preferred dividends as paid in perpetuity, the cost of preferred stock (kpr) can be cal­
culated as dividends per share of preferred stock (dpr) divided by the market value of the pre­
ferred stock (PR) (see the section “The Zero-Growth Valuation Model”). Consequently, if a firm 
pays a $2 dividend on its preferred stock, whose current market value is $50, the firm’s cost of 
preferred stock is 4% (i.e., $2/$50). The cost of preferred stock can be generalized as follows:
=
k
d
PR
pr
pr
	
(7.3)
Cost of Capital
The weighted average cost of capital (WACC) is the broadest measure of the firm’s cost of 
funds and represents the return that a firm must earn to induce investors to buy its common 
stock, preferred stock, and bonds. The WACC21 is calculated using a weighted average of the 
firm’s cost of equity (ke), cost of preferred stock (kpr), and pretax cost of debt (i):
=
+
+
+
−
+
+
+
+
+
k
E
D
E
i
t
D
D
E
k
D
E
WACC
PR
(1
)
PR
PR
PR
e
pr
	
(7.4)
20Much of this information can be found in local libraries in such publications as Moody’s Company Data; Standard 
& Poor’s Descriptions, the Outlook, and Bond Guide; and Value Line’s Investment Survey. In the United States, the 
FINRA TRACE database also is an excellent source of interest rate information.
21Note that Eq. (7.4) calculates WACC assuming the firm has one type of common equity, long-term debt, and pre­
ferred stock. This is for illustrative purposes only, for a firm may not have any preferred stock and may have many 
different types of common stock and debt of various maturities.

244	
7.  Mergers and Acquisitions Cash Flow Valuation Basics
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
where E, the market value of common equity; D, the market value of debt; PR, the market 
value of preferred stock; and t, the firm’s marginal tax rate.
A portion of interest paid on borrowed funds is recoverable by the firm because of the 
tax deductibility of interest. For every dollar of taxable income, the tax owed is equal to $1 
multiplied by t. Since each dollar of interest expense reduces taxable income by an equivalent 
amount, the actual cost of borrowing is reduced by (1 − t). Therefore, the after-tax cost of 
borrowed funds to the firm is estimated by multiplying the pretax interest rate, i, by (1 − t).
Note that the weights [E/(D + E + PR)], [D/(D + E + PR)], and [PR/(D + E + PR)] associ­
ated with the cost of equity, preferred stock, and debt, respectively, reflect the firm’s target 
capital structure or capitalization. These are targets in that they represent the capital struc­
ture the firm hopes to achieve and sustain in the future. The actual market value of equity, 
preferred stock, and debt as a percentage of total capital (i.e., D + E + PR) may differ from 
the target. Market values rather than book values are used because the WACC measures the 
cost of issuing debt, preferred stock, and equity securities, which are issued at market and 
not book value. The use of the target capital structure avoids the circular reasoning associ­
ated with using the current market value of equity to construct the WACC, which is subse­
quently used to estimate the firm’s current market value. Non–interest-bearing liabilities, 
such as accounts payable, often are excluded from the estimation of the cost of capital for 
the firm to simplify the calculation of WACC.22 Estimates of industry β, cost of equity, and 
WACC are provided by firms such as Ibbotson Associates, Value Line, Standard & Poor’s, 
and Bloomberg.
RISK ASSESSMENT
Risk is the degree of uncertainty associated with the outcome of an investment. It consists 
of two components: diversifiable, or nonsystematic, risk, such as strikes and lawsuits that are 
specific to a firm; and a nondiversifiable, or systematic, risk, such as inflation and war, that af­
fects all firms. In theory, risk specific to a firm can be eliminated by investors selecting a port­
folio of stocks whose cash flows are uncorrelated. β is a measure of nondiversifiable risk, or 
22The cost of capital associated with such liabilities (kCL) is included in the price paid to vendors for purchased 
products and services and affects cash flow through its inclusion in operating expenses (e.g., the price paid for raw 
materials). However, if a firm uses substantial amounts of current liabilities (CL) such as short-term debt, Eq. (7.4) 
should be modified as follows:
=
+
+
+
+
−
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
ke
E
D
E
i
t
D
D
E
k
D
E
k
D
E
WACC
PR
CL
(1
)
PR
CL
pr
PR
PR
CL
cl
CL
(
PR
CL)
Some current liabilities, such as accruals, are interest free, and accounts and notes payable have an associated capi­
tal cost approximated by the firm’s short-term cost of funds. Since the market and book value of current liabilities 
are usually similar, book values can be used in calculating capital cost of current liabilities.Some current liabilities, 
such as accruals, are interest free, and accounts and notes payable have an associated capital cost approximated by 
the firm’s short-term cost of funds. Since the market and book value of current liabilities are usually similar, book 
values can be used in calculating capital cost of current liabilities.

	
Risk Assessment	
245
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
the extent to which a firm’s financial return changes because of a change in the general stock 
market’s return. While all stocks are impacted by stock market fluctuations, the extent of the 
impact on each stock will differ resulting in wide variation in the magnitude of β from one 
stock to the next.
β are commonly estimated by regressing the percent change in the total return on a specific 
stock with that of a broadly defined stock market index such as the S&P 500 index. The re­
sulting β estimated in this manner for an individual security incorporates both the security’s 
volatility and its correlation with the overall stock market. Volatility measures the magnitude 
of a security’s fluctuations relative to the overall stock market, and correlation measures the 
direction. Consequently, when β = 1, the stock is as risky as the general market. When β < 1, 
the stock is less risky; when β > 1, the stock is riskier than the overall stock market.
The CAPM states that all risk is measured from the perspective of a marginal or incremen­
tal investor, who is well diversified. Investors are compensated only for risk that cannot be 
eliminated through diversification (i.e., nondiversifiable, or systematic, risk).23 Estimates of 
public company β may be obtained by going to finance.yahoo.com, finance.google.com, and 
reuters.com. Alternatively, a firm’s β may be calculated based on the β of a sample of similar 
firms at a moment in time. This process is described in the next section.
Effects of Financial and Operating Leverage on β
Leverage represents the additional increase (decrease) in profit once a firm’s revenue ex­
ceeds (falls short of) its fixed expenses and the variable expenses incurred to realize the in­
cremental revenue.24 Fixed expenses related to a firm’s operating activities do not vary with 
output and include depreciation, rent, and obligations such as employee and vendor con­
tracts that do not vary with production. Fixed expenses related to a firm’s financing activi­
ties include interest and lease expenses and principal repayments on debt. Operating leverage 
refers to the way in which a firm combines fixed and variable expenses often measured by 
the ratio of a firm’s fixed expenses to total cost of sales. Financial leverage describes the way in 
which a firm combines debt and equity to finance its operations often measured by the ratio 
of its debt to equity.
In the absence of debt, the β is called an unlevered β, denoted βu. βu is determined by the 
firm’s operating leverage and by the type of industry in which the firm operates (e.g., cycli­
cal or noncyclical). If a firm borrows, the unlevered β must be adjusted to reflect the risk 
that the firm may not be able to repay the debt when due. By borrowing, the firm is able to 
invest more in its operation without increasing equity, resulting in a proportionately larger 
(or smaller) return to equity holders. The resulting β is called a leveraged or levered β, denoted 
βl. Both operating and financial leverage increase the volatility of a firm’s profits and financial 
returns substantially.
23β in this context applies to the application of CAPM to public firms, where the marginal investor is assumed to 
be fully diversified. For private firms in which the owner’s net worth is disproportionately tied up in the firm, 
analysts sometimes calculate a total β, which reflects both systematic and nonsystematic risk. See Chapter 10.
24Recall that operating profits equal total revenue less fixed and variable costs. If revenue and fixed and variable 
costs are $100, 50, and 25 million (variable costs are 25% of revenue), respectively, the firm’s operating profits are 
$25 million. If revenue doubles to $200 million, the firm’s profit increases to $100 million (i.e., $200 − $50 − $50).

246	
7.  Mergers and Acquisitions Cash Flow Valuation Basics
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
Table 7.3 illustrates the effects of operating leverage on financial returns. The three cases 
reflect the same level of fixed expenses but varying levels of revenue and the resulting impact 
on financial returns. The illustration assumes in Case 1 that the firm’s total cost of sales is 80% 
of revenue and that fixed expenses comprise 60% of the total cost of sales. Note the volatil­
ity of the firm’s return on equity resulting from fluctuations of 25% in the firm’s revenue in 
Cases 2 and 3. There is evidence that the degree of operating leverage can impact the timing 
of acquisition decisions.25
Table 7.4 shows how financial leverage increases the volatility of a firm’s financial returns 
substantially. This is because equity’s share of total capital declines faster than the decline in 
net income as debt’s share of total capital increases. The three cases in the table reflect vary­
ing levels of debt but the same earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT). Between Case 1 and 
Case 3, net income declines by one-fourth and equity declines by one-half, magnifying the 
impact on returns.
If a firm’s stockholders bear all the risk from operating and financial leverage and interest 
paid on debt is tax deductible, then leveraged and unleveraged β can be calculated as follows 
for a firm whose debt-to-equity ratio is denoted by D/E:
β
β
=
+
−








t
D
E
1
(1
)
l
u
	
(7.5)
and
β
β
=
+
−t D E
1
(1
)( / )
u
l
	
(7.6)
25Chung et al. (2017) argue that the business cycle can impact acquirer decisions by documenting that bidders favor 
targets with high operating leverage when the economy is booming and dislike such firms as the economy weak­
ens. Why? A strong economy favors firms with high operating leverage.
TABLE 7.3  How Operating Leverage Affects Financial Returnsa
Case 1
Case 2: revenue 
increases by 25%
Case 3: revenue 
decreases by 25%
Revenue
100
125
75
Fixed
48
48
48
Variableb
32
40
24
  Total cost of sales
80
88
72
Earnings before taxes
20
37
3
Tax liability at 40%
8
14.8
1.2
After-tax earnings
12
22.2
1.8
Firm equity
100
100
100
Return on equity (%)
12
22.2
1.8
aAll figures are in millions of dollars unless otherwise noted.
bIn Case 1, variable costs represent 32% of revenue. Assuming this ratio is maintained, variable costs in Cases 2 and 3 are estimated by 
multiplying total revenue by 0.32.

	
Risk Assessment	
247
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
Shareholders view risk as the potential for a firm not to earn sufficient future cash flow to 
satisfy their minimum required returns. Eq. (7.5) implies that increases in a firm’s leverage, 
denoted by D/E, will increase risk, as measured by the firm’s levered β because the firm’s 
interest payments represent fixed expenses that must be paid before payments can be made 
to shareholders. This increased risk is offset somewhat by the tax deductibility of interest, 
which increases after-tax cash flow available for shareholders. Thus, the levered β will, unless 
offset by other factors, increase with an increase in leverage and decrease with an increase in 
tax rates.
In summary, βu is determined by the characteristics of the industry in which the firm com­
petes and the firm’s degree of operating leverage. The value of βl is determined by the same 
factors and the degree of the firm’s financial leverage. Our objective is to estimate a β that 
reflects the relationship between risk and return in the future. Estimating β using historical 
data assumes the historical relationship will hold in the future, which often is not the case.
An alternative to using historical data is to estimate β using a sample of similar firms 
and applying Eqs. (7.5) and (7.6). Referred to as the “bottoms-up” approach, this three-step 
process suggests that the target firm’s β reflects the business risk (cyclicality and operating 
leverage only) of the average firm in the industry better than its own historical risk/return 
relationship. Step 1 requires selecting firms with similar cyclicality and operating leverage 
(i.e., firms usually in the same industry). The analyst should try to get the largest sample pos­
sible. Step 2 involves calculating the average unlevered β for firms in the sample to eliminate 
the effects of their current financial leverage on their β. Finally, in step 3, we relever the aver­
age unlevered β using the debt-to-equity ratio and the marginal tax rate of the target firm to 
reflect its capital structure and tax rate.
Network equipment and storage company Brocade Communications Systems’ β estimated 
using historical data is 0.88 and its current debt-to-equity ratio is 0.256. Assume analysts be­
lieve that the firm’s levered β estimated in this manner is too low. Using a representative data 
TABLE 7.4  How Financial Leverage Affects Financial Returnsa
Case 1: no debt
Case 2: 25% debt to total 
capital
Case 3: 50% debt to total 
capital
Equity
100
75
50
Debt
0
25
50
Total capital
100
100
100
Earnings before interest 
and taxes
20
20
20
Interest at 10%
0
2.5
5
Income before taxes
20
17.5
15
Less income taxes at 40%
8
7.0
6
After-tax earnings
12
10.5
9
After-tax returns on 
equity (%)
12
14
18
aAll figures are in millions of dollars unless otherwise noted.

248	
7.  Mergers and Acquisitions Cash Flow Valuation Basics
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
networking and storage industry sample, the firm’s levered β is estimated to be 1.50 using the 
“bottoms-up” methodology (Table 7.5).
Using Eqs. (7.5) and (7.6), the effects of different amounts of leverage on the cost of equity 
also can be estimated.26 The process is as follows:
1.	 Determine a firm’s current equity β * and (D/E)*.
2.	 Estimate the unlevered β to eliminate the effects of the firm’s current capital structure:
β
β
=
+
−t D E
*
1
(1
)( / )*
u
3.	 Estimate the firm’s levered β: βl = βu[1 + (1 − t)(D/E)**].
4.	 Estimate the firm’s cost of equity for the new levered β.
Here β* and (D/E)* represent the firm’s current β and the market value of the firm’s debt-
to-equity ratio before additional borrowing takes place. (D/E)** is the firm’s debt-to-equity 
ratio after additional borrowing occurs, and t is the firm’s marginal tax rate.
In an acquisition, an acquirer may anticipate increasing the target firm’s debt level 
after the closing. To determine the impact on the target’s β of the increased leverage, 
the target’s levered β, which reflects its preacquisition leverage, must be converted to 
an unlevered β, reflecting the target firm’s operating leverage and the cyclicality of the 
26The reestimation of a firm’s β to reflect a change in leverage requires that we first deleverage the firm to remove 
the effects of the firm’s current level of debt on its β and then releverage the firm using its new level of debt to 
estimate the new levered β.
TABLE 7.5  Estimating Brocade Communications Systems’ (Brocade) β Using the “Bottoms-Up” Approach
Step 1: select a sample of firms 
having similar cyclicality and 
operating leverage
Step 2: compute 
the average of the 
firms’ unlevered β
Step 3: relever 
average unlevered 
β using Brocade’s 
debt/equity ratio
Firm
Levered βa
Debt/equitya
Unlevered β b
Brocade relevered β c
EMC
1.62
0.301
1.37
NA
Sandisk
1.44
0.285
1.23
NA
Western Digital
1.51
0.273
1.30
NA
NetApp Inc.
1.83
0.254
1.59
NA
Terredata
1.12
0.149
1.03
NA
1.30
1.50
aYahoo! Finance (3/14/14). β estimates are based on the historical relationship between the firm’s share price and a broadly defined stock index.
bβu = βl/[1 + (1 − t)(D/E)], where βu and βl are unlevered and levered β, respectively; the marginal tax rate is 0.4. For example, the unlevered β 
for EMC = βu = 1.62/[1 + (1 − 0.6)0.301] = 1.37.
cβl = βu[1 + (1 − t)(D/E)]. Using Brocade’s debt/equity ratio of 0.256 and marginal tax rate of 0.4, Brocades’ relevered 
β = 1.30[1 + (1 − 0.4)0.256] = 1.50.

	
Calculating Free Cash Flows	
249
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
industry in which the firm competes. To measure the increasing risk associated with new 
borrowing, the resulting unlevered β is then used to estimate the levered β for the target 
firm (Exhibit 7.1).
CALCULATING FREE CASH FLOWS
Common definitions of cash flow used for valuation are free cash flow to the firm (FCFF), 
or enterprise cash flow, and free cash flow to equity (FCFE) investors, or equity cash flow. 
Referred to as valuation cash flows, they are constructed by adjusting GAAP cash flows for 
noncash factors.
Free Cash Flow to the Firm (Enterprise Cash Flow)
FCFF represents cash available to satisfy all investors holding claims against the firm’s 
resources. Claims holders include common stockholders, lenders, and preferred stockhold­
ers. Consequently, enterprise cash flow is calculated before the sources of financing are deter­
mined and, as such, is not affected by the firm’s financial structure.27
FCFF can be calculated by adjusting operating EBIT as follows:
=
−
+
−
−∆
FCFF
EBIT(1
Tax Rate)
Depreciation and Amortization
Gross Capital Expenditures
Net Working Capital
	
(7.7)
Only cash flow from operating and investment activities, but not from financing activities, 
is included. Why? Because this represents the cash flow available to compensate all those 
providing funds to the firm. The tax rate refers to the firm’s marginal tax rate. Net working 
27In practice, the financial structure may affect the firm’s cost of capital and, therefore, its value due to the potential 
for bankruptcy (see Chapter 17).
EXHIBIT 7.1  ESTIMATING THE IMPACT OF CHANGING DEBT 
LEVELS ON THE COST OF EQU ITY
Assume that a target’s current or preacquisition debt-to-equity ratio is 25%, the current levered β 
is 1.05, and the marginal tax rate is 0.4. After the acquisition, the debt-to-equity ratio is expected to 
rise to 75%. What is the target’s postacquisition levered β ?
Answer: Using Eqs. (7.5) and (7.6):
β
β
=
+
−
=
+
−
=
u
l
t D E
*
1
(1
)( / )*
1.05
1
(1
0.4)(0.25)
0.91
β
β
=
+
−







=
+
−
=
t
D
E
1
(1
)
* *
0.91[1
(1
0.4)(0.75)]
1.32
l
u
where (D/E)*, the target’s preacquisition debt-to-equity ratio; (D/E)**, the target’s postacquisi­
tion debt-to-equity ratio; and βl*, the target’s preacquisition β.

250	
7.  Mergers and Acquisitions Cash Flow Valuation Basics
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
capital is defined as current operating assets (excluding cash balances in excess of the amount 
required to meet normal operating requirements) less current operating liabilities.28 Depre­
ciation and amortization expenses are not actual cash outlays and are added to operating 
income in calculating cash flow.
Selecting the Right Tax Rate
The appropriate tax rate is either the firm’s marginal rate (i.e., the rate paid on each addi­
tional dollar of earnings) or its effective tax rate (i.e., taxes due divided by taxable income). 
The marginal tax rate in the United States at this time is usually 40%–35% for federal taxes 
for firms earning more than $10 million and 5% for most state and local taxes.29 The effec­
tive rate is usually less than the marginal rate due to the use of tax credits to reduce actual 
taxes paid or accelerated depreciation to defer tax payments. Once tax credits have been 
used and the ability to further defer taxes has been exhausted, the effective rate can exceed 
the marginal rate in the future. Effective rates lower than the marginal rate may be used 
in the early years of cash flow projections, if the current favorable tax treatment is likely 
to continue into the foreseeable future, and eventually the effective rates may be increased 
to the firm’s marginal tax rate. It is critical to use the marginal rate in calculating after-tax 
operating income in perpetuity. Otherwise, the implicit assumption is that taxes can be 
deferred indefinitely.
Dealing With Operating Leases
Currently, operating leases do not require a firm to record an asset or a liability on the 
balance sheet; instead, the lease charge is recorded as an expense on the income statement, 
and future lease commitments are recorded in footnotes to the firm’s financial statements. 
However, beginning in 2019 the Financial Accounting Standards Board will require that any 
firm that pays to lease real estate, office equipment, aircraft, or similar items must show such 
operating leases on the balance sheet.
For our purposes, we discuss how operating leases may be valued under existing FASB 
guidelines. Future lease payments should be discounted to the present at the firm’s pretax 
cost of debt (i), since leasing equipment represents an alternative to borrowing, and the pres­
ent value (PV) of the operating lease (PVOL) should be included in the firm’s total debt out­
standing.30 Once operating leases are converted to debt, operating lease expense (OLEEXP) 
must be added to EBIT because it is a financial expense and EBIT represents operating income 
30Cornaggia et al. (2013) have documented a huge shift in the way firms finance their capital assets, with operat­
ing lease financing increasing by 745% as a proportion of total debt and capital leases falling by half between 1980 
and 2007.
28In some instances, firms may have negative working capital. Since this is unlikely to be sustainable, it is prefer­
able to set net working capital to zero.
29At the time of this writing, the Trump administration is seeking to substantially reduce the corporate tax rate, 
perhaps as low as 15%. Consequently, the marginal tax rate used throughout this book should be 20%, 15% federal 
plus 5% for state and local taxes. Thus the only change in calculations in examples and in the models accompany­
ing this book would be to replace the 40% marginal tax rate with a 20% rate.

	
Applying Discounted Cash Flow Methods	
251
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
before such expenses. Lease payments include both an interest expense component (to reflect 
the cost of borrowing) and a depreciation component (to reflect the anticipated decline in the 
value of the leased asset).
An estimate of depreciation expense associated with the leased asset (DEPOL) then must be 
deducted from EBIT, as is depreciation expense associated with other fixed assets owned by 
the firm, to calculate an “adjusted” EBIT (EBITADJ). DEPOL may be estimated by dividing the 
firm’s gross plant and equipment by its annual depreciation expense. Studies show that the 
median asset life for leased equipment is 10.9 years.31 The EBITADJ then is used to calculate 
FCFF. EBIT may be adjusted as follows:
=
+
−
EBIT
EBIT
OLE
DEP
ADJ
EXP
OL
	
(7.8)
If EBIT, OLEEXP, PVOL, and the useful life of the leased equipment are $15 million, $2 million, 
$30 million, and 10 years, respectively, then EBITADJ equals $14 million [i.e., $15 + $2 − ($30/10)].
Free Cash Flow to Equity Investors (Equity Cash Flow)
FCFE investors is the cash flow remaining for returning cash through dividends or share 
repurchases to current common equity investors or for reinvesting in the firm after the firm 
satisfies all obligations. These obligations include debt payments, capital expenditures, 
changes in net working capital, and preferred dividend payments. FCFE can be defined as 
follows:
=
+
−
−∆
+
−
−
FCFE
Net Income
Depreciation and Amortization
Gross Capital Expenditures
Net Working Capital
New Debt and Preferred Equity Issues
Principal Repayments
Preferred Dividends
	
(7.9)
Exhibit 7.2 summarizes the key elements of enterprise cash flow [Eq. (7.7)] and equity cash 
flow [Eq. (7.9)]. Note that equity cash flow reflects operating, investment, and financing ac­
tivities, whereas enterprise cash flow excludes cash flow from financing activities.
APPLYING DISCOUNTED CASH FLOW METHODS
Widely used in valuation,32 DCF methods provide estimates of the economic value of a 
company at a moment in time, which do not need to be adjusted if the intent is to acquire 
a small portion of the company. However, if the intention is to obtain a controlling interest 
in the firm, a control premium must be added to the firm’s value to determine the purchase 
price.33
31Lim et al. (2004).
32In a survey of more than 300 financial planning professionals, about 80% said they routinely used DCF techniques 
in evaluating capital projects, including acquisitions (Association for Financial Professionals: March 2011).
33A controlling interest generally is considered more valuable to an investor than a noncontrolling interest because 
the investor has the right to approve important decisions affecting the business.

252	
7.  Mergers and Acquisitions Cash Flow Valuation Basics
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
Enterprise Discounted Cash Flow Model (Enterprise or FCFF Method)
The enterprise valuation method, or FCFF, approach discounts the after-tax free cash flow 
available to the firm from operations at the WACC to obtain the estimated enterprise value. 
The firm’s enterprise value (often referred to as firm value) reflects the market value of the entire 
business. It can be viewed as a theoretical takeover price. That is, it represents the sum of in­
vestor claims on the firm’s cash flows from all those holding securities, including those hold­
ing long-term debt, preferred stock, common shareholders, and noncontrolling shareholders. 
Since it reflects all claims, it is a much more accurate estimate of a firm’s takeover value than 
simply a firm’s market value or equity capitalization. For example, in addition to buying a 
target firm’s equity, an acquirer would generally have to assume responsibility for paying off 
the target firm’s debt and preferred stock.
Enterprise value is commonly calculated as the market value of the firm’s common eq­
uity plus long-term debt, preferred stock, and noncontrolling interest less cash and cash 
EXHIBIT 7.2  DEFINING VALUATION CASH FLOWS: EQU ITY 
AND ENTERPRISE CASH FLOWS
Free Cash Flow to Common Equity Investors (Equity Cash Flow: FCFE)
{
}
=
+
−∆
−
+
−
+
−
FCFE
{Net Income
Depreciation and Amortization
Working Capital}
Gross Capital Expenditures
New Preferred Equity Issues
Preferred Dividends
New Debt Issues
Principal Repayments
a
b
c
 Cash flow (after taxes, debt repayments and new debt issues, preferred dividends, pre­
ferred equity issues, and all reinvestment requirements) available for paying dividends 
and/or repurchasing common equity.
Free Cash Flow to the Firm (Enterprise Cash Flow: FCFF)
{
}
=
−
+
−∆
−
FCFF
Earnings Before Interest and Taxes(1
Tax Rate)
Depreciation and Amortization
Working Capital
Gross Capital Expenditures
a
b
 Cash flow (after taxes and reinvestment requirements) available to repay lenders and/or 
pay common and preferred dividends and repurchase equity.
aCash from operating activities.
bCash from investing activities.
cCash from financing activities.

	
Applying Discounted Cash Flow Methods	
253
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
equivalents.34 Thus measured, the enterprise value represents what an acquirer would have 
to pay for the target’s common and preferred equity and the cost of assuming the responsibil­
ity to repay the target’s debt while retaining its cash. The firm’s common equity value then 
is determined by subtracting the market value of the firm’s debt and other investor claims 
on cash flow, such as preferred stock and noncontrolling interest, from the enterprise value.35 
The enterprise method is used when information about the firm’s debt repayment schedules 
or interest expense is limited.
Equity Discounted Cash Flow Model (Equity or FCFE Method)
The equity valuation, or FCFE, approach discounts the after-tax cash flows available 
to the firm’s shareholders at the cost of equity. This approach is more direct than the en­
terprise method when the objective is to value the firm’s equity. The enterprise, or FCFF, 
method and the equity, or FCFE, method are illustrated in the following sections of this 
chapter using three cash flow growth scenarios: zero-growth, constant-growth, and vari­
able-growth rates.
The Zero-Growth Valuation Model
This model assumes that free cash flow is constant in perpetuity. The value of the firm at 
time zero (P0) is the discounted or capitalized value of its annual cash flow.36 The subscript 
FCFF or FCFE refers to the definition of cash flow used in the valuation:
=
P
FCFF
WACC
0,FCFF
0
	
(7.10)
where FCFF0, free cash flow to the firm at time 0; and WACC, the cost of capital.
=
P
k
FCFE
e
0,FCFE
0
	
(7.11)
where FCFE0, free cash flow to common equity at time 0; and ke, the cost of equity.
While simplistic, the zero-growth method has the advantage of being easily understood 
by all parties to the deal. There is little evidence that more complex methods provide consis­
tently better valuation estimates, due to their greater requirement for more inputs and as­
sumptions. This method often is used to value commercial real estate transactions and small, 
privately owned businesses (Exhibit 7.3).
35The estimate of equity derived in this manner equals the value of equity determined by discounting the cash 
flow available to the firm’s shareholders at the cost of equity, if assumptions about cash flow and discount rates are 
consistent.
36The PV of a constant payment in perpetuity is a diminishing series because it represents the sum of the PVs for 
each future period. Each PV is smaller than the preceding one; therefore, the perpetuity is a diminishing series that 
converges to 1 divided by the discount rate.
34Other long-term liabilities, such as the firm’s pension and healthcare obligations, may be ignored if they are fully 
funded. However, the unfunded portion of such liabilities should be added to enterprise value, while any recover­
able surplus should be deducted.

254	
7.  Mergers and Acquisitions Cash Flow Valuation Basics
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
The Constant-Growth Valuation Model
The constant-growth model is applicable for firms in mature markets, characterized by a 
somewhat predictable rate of growth. Examples include beverages, cosmetics, personal care 
products, prepared foods, and cleaning products. To project growth rates, extrapolate the 
industry’s growth rate over the past 5–10 years. The constant-growth model assumes that 
cash flow grows at a constant rate, g, which is less than the required return, ke. The assump­
tion that ke is greater than g is a necessary mathematical condition for deriving the model. In 
this model, next year’s cash flow to the firm (FCFF1), or the first year of the forecast period, is 
expected to grow at the constant rate of growth, g.37 Therefore, FCFF1 = FCFF0(1 + g):
=
−
P
g
FCFF
WACC
0,FCFF
1
	
(7.12)
=
−
P
k
g
FCFE
e
0,FCFE
1
	
(7.13)
where FCFE1 = FCFE0(1 + g).
This simple valuation model also provides a means of estimating the risk premium compo­
nent of the cost of equity as an alternative to relying on historical information, as is done in the 
capital asset pricing model. This model was developed originally to estimate the value of stocks 
in the current period (P0) using the level of expected dividends (d1) in the next period. This 
37Note that the zero-growth model is a special case of the constant-growth model for which g = 0.
EXHIBIT 7.3  THE ZERO-GROWTH VALUATION MODEL
1.	 What is the enterprise value of a firm whose annual FCFF0 of $1 million is expected to remain 
constant in perpetuity and whose cost of capital is 12% [Eq. (7.10)]?
=
=
P
$1
0.12
$8.3 million
0,FCFF
2.	 Calculate the weighted average cost of capital [Eq. (7.4)] and the enterprise value of a firm 
whose capital structure consists only of common equity and debt. The firm desires to limit its 
debt to 30% of total capital.a The firm’s marginal tax rate is 0.4, and its β is 1.5. The corporate 
bond rate is 8%, and the 10-year US Treasury bond rate is 5%. The expected annual return on 
stocks is 10%. Annual FCFF is expected to remain at $4 million indefinitely.
=
+
−
=
×
=
k
0.05
1.5(0.10
0.05)
0.125
100
12.5%
e
=
×
+
×
−
×
=
+
=
=
WACC
0.125
0.7
0.08
(1
0.4)
0.3
0.088
0.014
0.102
10.2%
=
=
P
$4
0.102
$39.2 million
0,FCFF
aIf the analyst knows a firm’s debt-to-equity ratio (D/E), it is possible to calculate the firm’s debt-to-total capital ratio 
[D/(D + E)] by dividing (D/E) by (1 + D/E), since D/(D + E) = (D/E)/(1 + D/E) = [(D/E)/(D + E)/E] = (D/E) × (E/
D + E) = D/(D + E).

	
Applying Discounted Cash Flow Methods	
255
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
model estimates the PV of dividends growing at a constant rate forever. Assuming the stock 
market values stocks correctly and that we know P0, d1, and g, we can estimate ke. Therefore,
=
−
=
+
P
d
k
g
k
d
P
g
and
e
e
0
1
1
0
	
(7.14)
For example, if d1 is $1, g is 10%, and P0 = $10, then ke is 20%. See Exhibit 7.4 for an illustra­
tion of how to apply the constant-growth model.
The Variable-Growth (Supernormal or Nonconstant) Valuation Model
Many firms experience periods of high growth followed by a period of slower, more stable 
growth. Examples include cellular phone firms, personal computer firms, and cable TV firms. 
Such firms experience double-digit growth rates for periods of 5–10 years because of low 
penetration early in the product’s life cycle. As the market becomes saturated, growth slows 
to a rate more in line with the overall growth of the economy or the general population. The 
PV of such firms is equal to the sum of the PV of the DCFs during the high-growth period 
plus the discounted value of the cash flows generated during the stable-growth period. The 
discounted value of the cash flows generated during the stable-growth period is often called 
the terminal, sustainable, horizon, or continuing-growth value.
The terminal value may be estimated using the constant-growth model.38 Free cash flow 
during the first year beyond the nth or final year of the forecast period, FCFFn+1, is divided 
by the difference between the assumed cost of capital and the expected cash flow growth rate 
beyond the nth-year forecast period. The terminal value is the PV in the nth year of all future 
cash flows beyond the nth year. To convert the terminal value to its value in the current year, it 
is necessary to discount it by the discount rate used to convert the nth-year value to a PV. Small 
38The use of the constant-growth model provides consistency, since the DCF methodology is used during both the 
variable- and stable-growth periods.
EXHIBIT 7.4  THE CONSTANT-GROWTH MODEL
1.	 Determine the enterprise value of a firm whose projected free cash flow to the firm (enterprise 
cash flow) next year is $1 million, WACC is 12%, and expected annual cash flow growth rate is 
6% [Eq. (7.12)].
=
−
=
P
$1
0.12
0.06
$16.7 million
0,FCFF
2.	 Estimate the equity value of a firm whose cost of equity is 15% and whose free cash flow to 
equity holders (equity cash flow) in the prior year is projected to grow 20% this year and then 
at a constant 10% annual rate thereafter. The prior year’s free cash flow to equity holders is 
$2 million [Eq. (7.13)].
=
×
−
=
P
($2.0
1.2)(1.1)
0.15
0.10
$52.8 million
0,FCFE

256	
7.  Mergers and Acquisitions Cash Flow Valuation Basics
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
changes in assumptions can result in dramatic swings in the terminal value and in the valua­
tion of the firm. Table 7.6 illustrates the sensitivity of a terminal value of $1 million to different 
spreads between the cost of capital and the stable growth rate. Note that, using the constant-
growth model formula, the terminal value declines dramatically as the spread between the 
cost of capital and expected stable growth for cash flow increases by 1 percentage point.39
Using the definition of FCFF, P0,FCFF can be estimated using the variable-growth model as 
follows:
∑
=
+
+
+
+
=
P
g
P
FCFF (1
)
(1
WACC)
(1
WACC)
t
t
t
t
n
n
n
0,FCFF
0
1
	
(7.15)
where 
=
+
−
P
g
g
FCFF (1
)
WACC
;
n
n
m
m
m
 FCFF0, FCFF in year 0; WACC, weighted average cost of capital 
through year n; WACCm, cost of capital assumed beyond year n (Note: WACC > WACCm); Pn, 
value of the firm at the end of year n (terminal value); gt, growth rate through year n; and gm, 
stabilized or long-term growth rate beyond year n (Note: gt > gm).
Similarly, the value of the firm to equity investors can be estimated using Eq. (7.15). How­
ever, projected FCFEs are discounted using the firm’s cost of equity.
The cost of capital is assumed to differ between the high-growth and the stable-growth 
periods when applying the variable-growth model. High-growth rates usually are associated 
with increased levels of uncertainty. A high-growth firm may have a β significantly above 1. 
However, when the growth rate becomes stable, it is reasonable to assume that the β should 
approximate 1. A reasonable approximation of the discount rate to be used during the stable-
growth period is to adopt the industry average cost of equity or WACC.
Eq. (7.15) can be modified to use the growing-annuity model40 to approximate the growth 
during the high-constant-growth period and the constant-growth model for the terminal 
39Terminal value also may be estimated using price-to-earnings, price-to-cash flow, or price-to-book ratios to value 
the target as if it were sold at the end of a specific number of years. At the end of the forecast period, the terminal 
year’s earnings, cash flow, or book value is projected and multiplied by a P/E, cash flow, or book value multiple 
believed to be appropriate for that year.
40Ross et al. (2008, pp. 238–240).
TABLE 7.6  Impact of Changes in Assumptions on a Terminal Value of $1 Million
Difference between cost of 
capital and cash flow growth rate (%)
Terminal value ($ million)
3
33.3a
4
25.0
5
20.0
6
16.7
7
14.3
a $1.0/0.03.

	
Applying Discounted Cash Flow Methods	
257
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
period. This formulation requires fewer computations if the number of annual cash flow 
projections is large. As such, P0,FCFF also can be estimated as follows:
=
+
−
−
+
+












+
+
P
g
g
g
P
FCFF (1
)
WACC
1
1
1
WACC
(1
WACC)
n
n
n
0,FCFF
0
	
(7.16)
See Exhibit 7.5 for an illustration of how to apply the variable-growth model and the grow­
ing-annuity model.
EXHIBIT 7.5  THE VARIABLE-GROWTH VALUATION MODEL
Estimate the enterprise value of a firm (P0) whose free cash flow is projected to grow at a compound 
annual average rate of 35% for the next 5 years. Growth then is expected to slow to a more normal 5% 
annual rate. The current year’s cash flow to the firm is $4 million. The firm’s weighted average cost of 
capital during the high-growth period is 18% and 12% beyond the fifth year, as growth stabilizes. The 
firm’s cash in excess of normal operating balances is assumed to be zero. Therefore, using Eq. (7.15), 
the present value of cash flows during the high-growth 5-year forecast period (PV1–5) is calculated as 
follows:
=
×
+
×
+
×
+
×
+
×
=
+
+
+
+
=
+
+
+
+
=
−
PV
$4.00
1.35
1.18
$4.00
(1.35)
(1.18)
$4.00
(1.35)
(1.18)
$4.00
(1.35)
(1.18)
$4.00
(1.35)
(1.18)
$5.40
1.18
$7.29
(1.18)
$9.84
(1.18)
$13.29
(1.18)
$17.93
(1.18)
$4.58
$5.24
$5.99
$6.85
$7.84
$30.50
1 5
2
2
3
3
4
4
5
5
2
3
4
5
Calculation of the terminal value (PVTV) is as follows:
=
×
×
−
=
=
PV
[$4.00
(1.35)
1.05]/(0.12
0.05)
(1.18)
$18.83/0.07
2.29
$117.60
TV
5
5
P
P
PV
$30.50
$117.60
$148.10
TV
0,FCFF
1–5
=
+
=
+
=
Alternatively, using the growing-annuity model to value the high-growth period and the con­
stant-growth model to value the terminal period [Eq. (7.16)], the present value of free cash flow to 
the firm could be estimated as follows:
=
×
−
×
−











+
×
×
−
=
+
=
PV
$4.00
1.35
0.18
0.35
1
1.35
1.18
[$4.00
(1.35)
1.05]/(0.12
0.05)
(1.18)
$30.50
$117.60
$148.10
5
5
5

258	
7.  Mergers and Acquisitions Cash Flow Valuation Basics
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
Determining the Duration of the High-Growth Period
Projected growth rates for sales, profit, and cash flow can be calculated based on the his­
torical experience of the firm or industry.41 The length of the high-growth period should be 
longer when the current growth rate of a firm’s cash flow is much higher than the stable-
growth rate and the firm’s market share is small. For example, if the industry is expected to 
grow at 5% annually and the target firm, which has only a negligible market share, is growing 
at three times that rate, it may be appropriate to assume a high-growth period of 5–10 years. 
If the terminal value constitutes more than 75% of the total PV, the annual forecast period 
should be extended beyond the customary 5 years to at least 10 years to reduce its impact on 
the firm’s total market value. Historical evidence shows that sales and profitability tend to 
revert to normal levels within 5–10 years,42 suggesting that the conventional use of a 5- to 10-
year annual forecast before calculating a terminal value makes sense.43
Determining the Stable or Sustainable Growth Rate
The stable growth rate generally is going to be less than or equal to the overall growth rate 
of the industry in which the firm competes or the general economy. Stable growth rates above 
these levels implicitly assume that the firm’s cash flow eventually will exceed that of its indus­
try or the general economy. Similarly, for multinational firms, the stable growth rate should not 
exceed the projected growth rate for the world economy or a particular region of the world.
Determining the Appropriate Discount Rate
In evaluating projects most firms use the WACC methodology to discount future cash 
flows. However, they often increase it to reflect business-specific risk, and firms adding the 
largest premiums to their WACC estimates also tend to hold the largest cash balances. By us­
ing higher discount rates, such firms fail to pursue projects that would have been attractive 
using their actual cost of capital in an effort to hoard cash in anticipation of future attractive 
opportunities. Even when firms are not financially constrained, firms may forgo attractive 
projects due to operational issues such as the time required to expand their workforce and 
the inability of current management to manage new projects effectively at that time. In these 
circumstances, firms inflate their discount rates above their cost of capital to account for these 
operational constraints.44
As with other investment opportunities, choosing the right discount rate is critical: one that 
is too low overvalues the target and risks overpayment while one that is too high undervalues 
the target and reduces the likelihood of being able to close the deal. Surveys show that many 
44Jagannathan et al. (2016).
42Palepu et al. (2004).
43More sophisticated forecasts of growth rates involve annual revenue projections for each customer or product, 
which are summed to provide an estimate of aggregate revenue. A product or service’s life cycle (see Chapter 4) is a 
useful tool for making such projections.
41See the document entitled “Primer on Cash Flow Forecasting” on the companion site to this text for a discussion 
on how to apply regression analysis to projecting a firm’s cash flow.

	
Using the Enterprise Method to Estimate Equity Value	
259
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
acquirers use a single firm-wide WACC to value target firms due to its simplicity. This is 
especially problematic when the acquirer has many lines of business and fails to use the 
WACC associated with each line of business.45 The correct discount rate is generally the tar­
get’s cost of capital if the acquirer is merging with a higher-risk business. However, either the 
acquirer’s or the target’s cost of capital may be used if the two firms are equally risky and 
based in the same country.
USING THE ENTERPRISE METHOD TO ESTIMATE EQUITY VALUE
A firm’s common equity value often is calculated by estimating its enterprise value, add­
ing the value of nonoperating assets, and then deducting nonequity claims on future cash 
flows. Such claims commonly include long-term debt, operating leases, deferred taxes, un­
funded pension liabilities, preferred stock, employee options, and noncontrolling interests. 
What follows is a discussion of how to value nonequity claims and nonoperating assets.46 
This approach is especially useful when a firm’s capital structure (i.e., debt-to-total capital 
ratio) is expected to remain stable. However, the presumption that a firm’s capital structure is 
likely to remain stable often is problematic. Actual leverage for many firms tends to vary over 
time and median average leverage tends to differ significantly across industries.47
Determining the Market Value of Long-Term Debt
The current value of a firm’s debt generally is independent of its enterprise value for finan­
cially healthy companies, but this is not true for financially distressed firms and for hybrid 
securities.
Financially Stable Firms
If the debt repayment schedule is unknown, the market value of debt may be estimated by 
treating the book value of the firm’s debt as a conventional coupon bond, in which interest 
is paid annually or semiannually and the principal is repaid at maturity. The coupon is the 
interest on all of the firm’s debt, and the principal at maturity is a weighted average of the 
maturity of all of the debt outstanding. The weighted average principal at maturity is the sum 
of the amount of debt outstanding for each maturity date multiplied by its share of total debt 
outstanding. The estimated current market value of the debt then is calculated as the sum of 
the annuity value of the interest expense per period plus the PV of the principal (Exhibit 7.6).48
Note that the book value of debt may be used unless interest rates have changed signifi­
cantly since the debt was incurred or the likelihood of default is high. If interest rates have 
increased since a firm first issued debt, the higher rates lessen the value of existing bonds. 
45Kruger et al. (2015).
46If these factors already are included in the projections of future cash flows, they should not be deducted from the 
firm’s enterprise value.
47DeAngelo and Roll (2015).
48The only debt that must be valued is the debt outstanding on the valuation date. Future borrowing is irrelevant 
if we assume that investments financed with future borrowings earn their cost of capital. As such, net cash flows 
would be sufficient to satisfy interest and principal payments associated with these borrowings.

260	
7.  Mergers and Acquisitions Cash Flow Valuation Basics
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
Why? Because newly issued bonds reflecting higher interest rates pay more than older ones 
causing the price of older bonds to fall. In these situations, value each bond issued by the firm 
separately by discounting cash flows at yields to maturity for comparably rated debt with 
similar maturities issued by similar firms. Book value also may be used for floating-rate debt, 
since its market value is unaffected by fluctuations in interest rates. In the United States, the 
current market value of a company’s debt can be determined using the FINRA TRACE data­
base. For example, Home Depot Inc.’s 5.40% fixed coupon bond maturing on March 1, 2016, 
was priced at $112.25 on September 5, 2010, or 1.1225 times par value. Multiply the book (par) 
value of debt, which for Home Depot was $3,040,000, by 1.1225 to determine its market value 
of $3,412,400 on that date.
Financially Distressed Firms
For such firms, the value of debt and equity reflect the riskiness of the firm’s cash flows. 
Therefore, debt and equity are not independent, and the calculation of a firm’s equity value 
cannot be estimated by simply subtracting the market value of the firm’s debt from the 
firm’s enterprise value. One solution is to estimate the firm’s enterprise value using two sce­
narios: one in which the firm is able to return to financial health and one in which the firm’s 
position deteriorates. For each scenario, calculate the firm’s enterprise value and deduct the 
book value of the firm’s debt and other nonequity claims. Each scenario is weighted by the 
EXHIBIT 7.6  ESTIMATING THE MARKET VALUE OF A FIRM’S 
DEBT AND CAPITALIZED OPERATING LEASES
According to its 10K report, Gromax, Inc. has two debt issues outstanding, with a total book value 
of $220 million. Annual interest expense on the two issues totals $20 million. The first issue, whose 
current book value is $120 million, matures at the end of 5 years; the second issue, whose book value 
is $100 million, matures in 10 years. The weighted average maturity of the two issues is 7.27 years 
[i.e., 5 × (120/220) + 10 × (100/220)]. The current cost of debt maturing in 7–10 years is 8.5%.
The firm’s 10K also shows that the firm has annual operating-lease expenses of $2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 
and 5 million in the fourth year and beyond (the 10K indicated the firm’s cumulative value in the 
fourth year and beyond to be $5 million). (For our purposes, we may assume that the $5 million is 
paid in the fourth year.) What is the total market value of the firm’s total long-term debt, including 
conventional debt and operating leases?
=
×
−
+
=
+
=
PV (Long-Term Debt)
$20
1
[1/(1.085)
]
0.85
$220
(1.085)
$105.27
$121.55
$226.82
D
a
7.27
7.27
=
+
+
+
=
+
+
+
=
PV
(Operating Leases)
$2.10
1.085
$2.20
(1.085)
$2.30
(1.085)
$5.00
(1.085)
$1.94
$1.87
$1.80
$3.61
$9.22
OL
2
3
4
=
+
=
PV
(Total Debt)
$226.82
$9.22
$236.04
TD
aThe present value of debt is calculated using the PV of an annuity formula for 7.27 years and an 8.5% interest rate plus 
the PV of the principal repayment at the end of 7.27 years.

	
Using the Enterprise Method to Estimate Equity Value	
261
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
probability that the analyst attaches to each scenario, such that the resulting equity value 
estimate represents a probability-weighted average (expected average) of the scenarios.
Hybrid Securities (Convertible Bonds and Preferred Stock)
Convertible bonds and stock represent conventional debt and preferred stock plus a con­
version feature, or call option to convert the bonds or stock to shares of common equity at 
a stipulated price per share. Since the value of the debt reflects the value of common equity, 
it is not independent of the firm’s enterprise value and therefore cannot be deducted from 
the firm’s enterprise value to estimate equity value. One approach to valuing such debt 
and preferred stock is to assume that all of it will be converted into equity when a target 
firm is acquired. This makes the most sense when the offer price for the target exceeds the 
price per share at which the debt can be converted. See Table 14.12 for an illustration of this 
method.
Determining the Market Value of Operating Leases
Both capital and operating leases also should be counted as outstanding debt of the firm. 
When a lease is classified as a capital lease, the PV of the lease expenses is treated as debt. In­
terest is imputed on this amount, which corresponds to debt of comparable risk and maturity 
and is shown on the income statement. Although operating-lease expenses are treated as op­
erating expenses on the income statement, they are not counted as part of debt on the balance 
sheet for financial reporting purposes. For valuation purposes, operating leases should be 
included in debt. Future operating-lease expenses are shown in financial statement footnotes. 
The discount rate may be approximated using the firm’s current pretax cost of debt, reflecting 
the market rate of interest that lessors would charge the firm. The principal amount of the 
leases also can be estimated by discounting the current year’s operating-lease payment as a 
perpetuity using the firm’s cost of debt (Exhibit 7.6).
Determining the Cash Impact of Deferred Taxes
Deferred tax assets and liabilities arise when the tax treatment of an item is temporarily 
different from its financial accounting treatment. Such taxes may result from uncollectible 
accounts receivable, warranties, options expensing, pensions, leases, net operating losses 
(NOLs), depreciable assets, and inventories. Deferred taxes have a current and a future or 
noncurrent impact on cash flow. The current impact is reflected by adding the change in 
deferred tax liabilities and subtracting the change in deferred tax assets in the calculation 
of working capital. The noncurrent impact of deferred assets generally is shown in other 
long-term assets and deferred tax liabilities in other long-term liabilities on the firm’s balance 
sheet. A deferred tax asset is a future tax benefit, in that deductions not allowed in the current 
period may be realized in some future period. A deferred tax liability represents the increase 
in taxes payable in future years. The excess of accelerated depreciation taken for tax purposes 
over straight-line depreciation often used for financial reporting reduces the firm’s current 
tax liability but increases future tax liabilities when spending on plant and equipment slows. 
The amount of the deferred tax liability equals the excess of accelerated over straight-line 
depreciation times the firm’s marginal tax rate.

262	
7.  Mergers and Acquisitions Cash Flow Valuation Basics
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
To estimate a firm’s equity value, the PV of net deferred tax liabilities (i.e., deferred tax 
assets less deferred tax liabilities) is deducted from the firm’s enterprise value.49 The use of 
net deferred tax liabilities is appropriate, since deferred tax liabilities often are larger than 
deferred tax assets for firms in the absence of significant NOLs. The impact on free cash flow 
of a change in deferred taxes can be approximated by the difference between a firm’s marginal 
and effective tax rates multiplied by the firm’s operating income before interest and taxes. The 
analyst may assume the effective tax rate is applicable for a specific number of years before re­
verting to the firm’s marginal tax rate. For example, the effective tax rate for 5 years increases 
the deferred tax liability to the firm during that period as long as the effective rate is below the 
marginal rate. The deferred tax liability at the end of the fifth year is estimated by adding to 
the current cumulated deferred tax liability the additional liability for each of the next 5 years. 
This liability is the sum of projected EBIT times the difference between the marginal and ef­
fective tax rates. Assuming tax payments on the deferred tax liability at the end of the fifth 
year will be spread equally over the following 10 years, the PV of the tax payments during 
that 10-year period is then estimated and discounted back to the current period (Exhibit 7.7).
Determining the Cash Impact of Unfunded Pension Liabilities
Deduct the PV of such liabilities from the enterprise value to estimate the firm’s equity value. 
Publicly traded firms are required to identify the PV of unfunded pension obligations; if not 
shown on the firm’s balance sheet, such data can be found in the footnotes to the balance sheet.50
Determining the Cash Impact of Employee Options
Key employees often receive compensation in the form of options to buy a firm’s common 
stock at a stipulated price (i.e., exercise price). Once exercised, these options impact cash flow 
as firms attempt to repurchase shares to reduce earnings-per-share dilution resulting from the 
firm’s issuance of new shares to those exercising their options. The PV of these future cash 
outlays to repurchase stock should be deducted from the firm’s enterprise value.51
Determining the Cash Impact of Other Provisions and Contingent Liabilities
Provisions (i.e., reserves) for future layoffs due to restructuring usually are recorded on the 
balance sheet in undiscounted form, since they usually represent cash outlays to be made in 
the near term. Such provisions should be deducted from the enterprise value because they 
are equivalent to debt. Contingent liabilities, whose future cash outlays depend on certain 
events, are shown not on the balance sheet but, rather, in footnotes. Examples include pend­
50If the unfunded liability is not shown in the footnotes, the footnote should indicate where they have been in­
cluded.
49Alternatively, noncurrent deferred taxes may be valued separately, with deferred tax assets added to and deferred 
tax liabilities subtracted from the firm’s enterprise value.
51Options represent employee compensation and are tax deductible for firms. Accounting rules require firms to re­
port the PV of all stock options outstanding based on estimates provided by option-pricing models (see Chapter 8) 
in the footnotes to financial statements.

	
Using the Enterprise Method to Estimate Equity Value	
263
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
EXHIBIT 7.7  ESTIMATING COMMON EQU ITY VALUE BY 
DEDUCTING THE MARKET VALUE OF DEBT, PREFERRED 
STOCK, DEFERRED TAXES FROM THE ENTERPRISE VALUE
Operating income, depreciation, working capital, and capital spending are expected to grow 10% 
annually during the next 5 years and 5% thereafter. The book value of the firm’s debt is $300 million, 
with annual interest expense of $25 million and term to maturity of 4 years. The debt is a conven­
tional “interest-only” note, with a repayment of principal at maturity. The firm’s annual preferred 
dividend expense is $20 million. The prevailing market yield on preferred stock issued by similar 
firms is 11%. The firm does not have any operating leases, and pension and healthcare obligations 
are fully funded. The firm’s current cost of debt is 10%. The firm’s weighted average cost of capital is 
12%. Because it is already approximating the industry average, it is expected to remain at that level 
beyond the fifth year. Because of tax deferrals, the firm’s current effective tax rate of 25% is expected 
to remain at that level for the next 5 years. The firm’s current net deferred tax liability is $300 million. 
The projected net deferred tax liability at the end of the fifth year is expected to be paid off in 10 equal 
amounts during the following decade. The firm’s marginal tax rate is 40%, and it will be applied to 
the calculation of the terminal value. What is the value of the firm to common equity investors?
Financial data (in $ million)
Current year
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
Year 4
Year 5
EBIT
200
220
242
266.2
292.8
322.1
EBIT (1 − t)
150
165
181.5
199.7
219.6
241.6
Depreciation 
(straight line)
8
8.8
9.7
10.7
11.7
12.9
∆Net working 
capital
30
33
36.
39.9
43.9
48.3
Gross capital 
spending
40
44
48.4
3.2
58.6
64.4
Free cash flow 
to the firm
88
96.8
106.5
117.3
128.8
141.8
=
−
×
−


+
×
−








=
+
=
P
$88.00(1.10)
0.12
0.10
1
1.10
1.12
$93.50
1.05/(0.12
0.05)
(1.12)
$416.98
$795.81
$1212.80
a
5
0,FCFF
5
b
=
×
−
+
=
+
=
+
=
PV (Debt)
$25
1
1/(1.04)
0.10
$300
(1.10)
$25(3.17)
$300(0.683)
$79.25
$204.90
$284.15
D
4
c
4
=
=
PV
(Preferred Stock)
$20.11
0.11
$181.82
PFD
d

264	
7.  Mergers and Acquisitions Cash Flow Valuation Basics
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
ing litigation and loan guarantees. Since such expenses are tax deductible, estimate the PV of 
future after-tax cash outlays discounted at the firm’s cost of debt, and deduct from the firm’s 
enterprise value.
Determining the Market Value of Noncontrolling Interests
When a firm owns less than 100% of another business, it is shown on the firm’s consoli­
dated balance sheet. That portion not owned by the firm is shown as a noncontrolling interest. 
For valuation purposes the noncontrolling interest has a claim on the assets of the majority-
owned subsidiary and not on the parent firm’s assets. If the less than wholly owned subsid­
iary is publicly traded, value the noncontrolling interest by multiplying the noncontrolling’s 
ownership share by the market value of the subsidiary. If the subsidiary is not publicly traded 
and you as an investor in the subsidiary have access to its financials, value the subsidiary by 
discounting the subsidiary’s cash flows at the cost of capital appropriate for the industry in 
which it competes. The resulting value of the noncontrolling interest also should be deducted 
from the firm’s enterprise value.
VALUING NONOPERATING ASSETS
Assets not used in operating the firm also may contribute to firm value and include excess 
cash balances, investments in other firms, and unused or underutilized assets. Their value 
should be added to the firm’s enterprise value to determine the total value of the firm.
=
+
+
+
+
+
−
=
Deferred Tax Liability by End of Year 5
$300
($220
$242
266.20
$292.80
$322.10)(0.40
0.25)
$501.47
=
×
−
=
×
=
PV
(Deferred Taxes)
$501.47
10
1
[1/(1.12) ]/(1.12)
0.12
$50.15
5.65
1.76
$160.99
5
DEF
10
=
−
−
−
=
P
$1212.80
$284.15
$181.82
$160.99
$585.84
0,FCFE
a See Eq. (7.16).
b The terminal value reflects the recalculation of the fifth-year after-tax operating income using the marginal tax rate of 
40% and applying the constant-growth model. Fifth-year free cash flow equals $322.1(1 − 0.4) + $12.9 − $48.3 − $64.4 
= $93.5.
c The present value of debt is calculated using the PV of an annuity for 4 years and a 10% interest rate plus the PV of the 
principal repayment at the end of 4 years. The firm’s current cost of debt of 10% is higher than the implied interest rate 
of 8% ($25/$300) on the loan currently on the firm’s books. This suggests that the market rate of interest has increased 
since the firm borrowed the $300 million “interest-only” note.
d The market value of preferred stock (PVPFD) is equal to the preferred dividend divided by the cost of preferred stock.

	
Valuing Nonoperating Assets	
265
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
Cash and Marketable Securities
Excess cash balances are cash and short-term marketable securities held in excess of the 
target firm’s minimum operating cash balance. What constitutes the minimum cash balance 
depends on the firm’s cash conversion cycle, which reflects the firm’s tendency to build inven­
tory, sell products on credit, and later collect accounts receivable. The length of time cash is 
committed to working capital can be estimated as the sum of the firm’s inventory conversion 
period plus the receivables collection period less the payables deferral period.52 To finance this 
investment in working capital, a firm must maintain a minimum cash balance equal to the 
average number of days its cash is tied up in working capital times the average dollar value 
of sales per day. The inventory conversion and receivables collection periods are calculated by 
dividing the dollar value of inventory and receivables by average sales per day. The payments 
deferral period is estimated by dividing the dollar value of payables by the firm’s average cost 
of sales per day. Exhibit 7.8 illustrates how to estimate minimum and excess cash balances.
While excess cash balances should be added to the PV of operating assets, any cash defi­
ciency should be subtracted from the value of operating assets to determine the value of the 
firm. This reduction in the value reflects the need for the acquirer to invest additional work­
ing capital to make up any deficiency.
The method illustrated in Exhibit 7.8 may not work for firms that manage working capital 
aggressively, so receivables and inventory are very low relative to payables. An alternative is 
to compare the firm’s cash and marketable securities as a percent of revenue with the indus­
try average. If the firm’s cash balance exceeds the industry average, the firm has excess cash 
balances, assuming there are no excess cash balances for the average firm in the industry. For 
example, if the industry average cash holdings as a percent of annual revenue is 5% and the 
target firm has 8%, the target holds excess cash equal to 3% of its annual revenue.
52The inventory conversion period is the average length of time in days required to produce and sell finished goods. 
The receivables collection period is the average length of time in days required to collect receivables. The payables 
deferral period is the average length of time in days between the purchase of and payment for materials and labor.
EXHIBIT 7.8  ESTIMATING MINIMUM AND EXCESS CASH 
BALANCES
Prototype Incorporated’s current inventory, accounts receivable, and accounts payables are val­
ued at $14, 6.5, and 6 million, respectively. Projected sales and cost of sales for the coming year total 
$100 and 75 million, respectively. Moreover, the value of the firm’s current cash and short-term 
marketable securities is $21,433,000. What minimum cash balance should the firm maintain? What 
is the firm’s current excess cash balance?
+
−
=
+
+
+
=
$14,000,000
$100,000,000/365
$6, 500,000
$100,000,000/365
$6,000,000
75,000,000/365
51.1
23.7
29.2days
29.2days
45.6days
Minimum Cash Balance = 45.6 days × $100,000,000/365 = $12,493,151
Excess Cash Balance = $21,433,000 − $12,493,151 = $8,939,849

266	
7.  Mergers and Acquisitions Cash Flow Valuation Basics
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
Investments in Other Firms
Such investments, for financial reporting purposes, may be classified as noncontrolling 
passive investments, noncontrolling active investments, or majority investments. These in­
vestments need to be valued individually and added to the firm’s enterprise value to deter­
mine the total firm value. See the companion website to this book for an explanation of the 
valuation methodology in a document entitled “Investments in Other Firms.”
Unutilized and Undervalued Assets
Target firm real estate may have a market value in excess of its book value. A firm may 
have an overfunded pension fund. Intangible assets such as patents and licenses may have 
substantial value. In the absence of a predictable cash flow stream, their value may be esti­
mated using the Black–Scholes model (see Chapter 8) or the cost of developing comparable 
technologies.
Patents, Service Marks, and Trademarks
A patent without a current application may have value to an external party, which can 
be determined by a negotiated sale or license to that party. When a patent is linked to a 
specific product, it is normally valued based on the “cost avoidance” method. This method 
uses after-tax royalty rates paid on comparable patents multiplied by the projected future 
stream of revenue from the products whose production depends on the patent discounted 
to its PV at the cost of capital. Products and services, which depend on a number of patents, 
are grouped together as a single portfolio and valued as a group using a single royalty rate 
applied to a declining percentage of the future revenue. Trademarks are the right to use a 
name, and service marks are the right to use an image associated with a company, product, 
or concept. Their value is name recognition reflecting the firm’s longevity, cumulative ad­
vertising expenditures, the effectiveness of its marketing programs, and the consistency of 
perceived product quality.
Overfunded Pension Plans
Defined benefit pension plans require firms to hold financial assets to meet future obliga­
tions. Shareholders have the legal right to assets in excess of what is needed. If such assets are 
liquidated and paid out to shareholders, the firm has to pay taxes on their value. The after-tax 
value of such funds may be added to the enterprise value.
PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER
Table  7.7 shows how Home Depot’s equity value is estimated by first determining 
the firm’s total operating value, adding the value of nonoperating assets, and subtract­
ing the value of all nonequity claims. The nonoperating assets in this example include 

TABLE 7.7  Determining Home Depot’s Equity Value Using the Enterprise Method
History
Projections
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
ASSUMPTIONS
Net sales growth rate (%)
−0.078
−0.072
−0.040
0.010
0.020
0.040
0.050
0.050
0.040
0.040
0.035
0.030
Operating profit margin (%)
0.061
0.073
0.070
0.065
0.068
0.070
0.072
0.075
0.075
0.078
0.080
0.080
Depreciation expenditure 
(% of sales)
0.026
0.025
0.025
0.025
0.025
0.025
0.025
0.025
0.025
0.025
0.025
0.025
Effective tax rate (%)
0.356
0.342
0.340
0.340
0.340
0.340
0.340
0.340
0.340
0.340
0.340
0.340
Marginal tax rate (%)
0.400
0.400
0.400
0.400
0.400
0.400
0.400
0.400
0.400
0.400
Working capital (% of sales)
0.048
0.057
0.060
0.060
0.060
0.060
0.060
0.060
0.060
0.060
0.060
0.060
Gross P&E (% of sales)
0.049
0.026
0.035
0.035
0.035
0.035
0.035
0.035
0.035
0.035
0.035
0.035
WACC (2010–19) (%a )
0.073
WACC terminal period (%)
0.070
Terminal period growth rate (%)
0.030
VALUATION ($ MILLION)
Net sales
71,288
66,176
63,529
64,164
65,448
68,065
71,469
75,042
78,044
81,166
84,006
86,527
Operating income (EBIT)
4,359
4,803
4,447
4,171
4,450
4,765
5,146
5,628
5,853
6,331
6,721
6,922
Plus: operating-lease expense
802
717
640
584
535
535
535
535
535
535
Less: operating lease 
depreciation
258
258
258
258
258
258
258
258
258
258
Equals: adjusted EBIT
4,991
4,630
4,832
5,091
5,423
5,905
6,130
6,608
6,998
7,199
Adjusted EBIT(1 − t)
3,294
3,056
3,189
3,360
3,579
3,897
4,046
4,361
4,618
4,751
Plus: depreciation and 
amortization
1,785
1,707
1,906
1,925
1,963
2,042
2,144
2,251
2,341
2,435
2,520
2,596
Minus: ∆net working capitalb
1,328
275
38
77
157
204
214
180
187
170
151
Minus: gross P&E expenditure
1,847
966
2,224
2,246
2,291
2,382
2,501
2,626
2,732
2,841
2,940
3,028
Equals: enterprise cash flowc
2,702
2,697
2,785
2,862
3,017
3,308
3,476
3,768
4,028
4,168
(Continued)

History
Projections
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
PV (2010–19)
22,048
Terminal value
47,638
Total operating value
69,686
Plus
Excess cashd
0
Other long-term assetse
256
Equals: enterprise value
69,942
Less
Market value of debtf
9,469
Capitalized operating leases
6,450
PV net noncurrent DTLsg
1,102
Stock options
158
Equals: equity value
52,763
Number of shares (million)
1,683
Equity value per share
$31.35
aWACC calculation: ke = 0.0265 + 1.10(0.055) = 8.43%, where 2.65% is the 10-year Treasury bond rate on September 5, 2010, and 1.21 is the firm’s β provided Yahoo! Finance/Capital IQ. 
i = 6.85%, pretax cost of debt estimated as the yield to maturity on BBB+ rated debt per Yahoo! Finance on 9/5/2010. Weights for debt and equity of 31 and 69%, respectively, are based on firm’s 
current debt-to-capital ratio held constant throughout the forecast period. WACC = 8.70 × 0.69 + 6.85(1 − 0.4) × 0.31 = 7.28. WACC for terminal period equal to average for comparable retail 
companies per Yahoo! Finance.
bWorking Capital $3537, 3812, 3850, 3927, 4084, 4288, 4503, 4683, 4870, 5040, 5192.
cTerminal-period enterprise cash flow recalculated using 40% marginal tax rate.
dExcess cash is zero, since minimum balances estimated using Exhibit 7.8 method exceed actual year-end 2009 cash balances.
eExcludes goodwill but includes $33 million in notes receivable.
TABLE 7.7  Determining Home Depot’s Equity Value Using the Enterprise Method (cont.)

fMarket Value of Home Depot Debt:
Coupon
Maturity date
Face value (000)
Percent of par value 
(9/5/10)
Market value
5.20%
March 2011
$1,000,000 × 1.02630
1,026,300
6.19%
March 2012
$40,000 × 1.03366
$41,346
6.74%
May 2013
$14,285 × 1.03650
$14,806
5.25%
December 2013
$1,258,000 × 1.02630
$1,291,085
5.88%
December 2036
$2,960,000 × 1.10650
$3,275,240
5.40%
March 2016
$3,040,000 × 1.12250
$3,412,400
Capitalized leases (payments vary from 2010 to 2056)
$408,000
Total Long-Term Debt
$9,469,177
gPV of Net Noncurrent DTLs (Net Deferred Tax Assets − Deferred Tax Liabilities) Calculation:
Future value as of 2019 = $3570	
Adds current net deferred tax liability to the sum of the projected EBIT times the difference between marginal and effective tax rates
Present value = $1102	
2019 net deferred tax liability paid off in equal amounts during following decade
EBIT, Earnings before interest and taxes; PV, present value; WACC, weighted average cost of capital.

270	
7.  Mergers and Acquisitions Cash Flow Valuation Basics
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
excess cash balances and other long-term assets, while the nonequity claims include the 
market value of long-term debt, capitalized operating leases, net deferred tax liabilities, 
and employee stock options. The exhibit is divided into three panels. The top panel dis­
plays the primary assumptions underlying the valuation. The second panel shows how the 
total value of the firm is determined. The bottom panel—“Explanatory Notes”—provides 
details on how various line items in the exhibit were calculated. Cash flow is projected 
for 10 years, reflecting the anticipated slow recovery of the firm’s free cash flow from the 
2008–09 recession. The Excel-based model underlying this exhibit is provided in an Excel 
file entitled “Determining Home Depot’s Equity Value Using the Enterprise Method” on 
the companion site to this book.
SOME THINGS TO REMEMBER
DCF methods are widely used to estimate the firm value. To do so, GAAP cash flows are 
adjusted to create enterprise and equity cash flow for valuation purposes. A common way of 
estimating equity value is to deduct the market value of nonequity claims from its enterprise 
value and to add the market value of nonoperating assets.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
7.1	 What is the significance of the WACC? How is it calculated? Do the weights reflect the 
firm’s actual or target debt-to-total capital ratio? Explain your answer.
7.2	 What does a firm’s β measure? What is the difference between an unlevered and a 
levered β?
7.3	 Under what circumstances is it important to adjust the CAPM model for firm size? 
Why?
7.4	 What are the primary differences between FCFE and FCFF?
7.5	 Explain the conditions under which it makes the most sense to use the zero-growth 
and constant-growth DCF models. Be specific.
7.6	 Which DCF valuation methods require the estimation of a terminal value? Why?
7.7	 Do small changes in the assumptions pertaining to the estimation of the terminal value 
have a significant impact on the calculation of the total value of the target firm? If so, 
why?
7.8	 How would you estimate the equity value of a firm if you knew its enterprise value 
and the PV of all nonoperating assets, nonoperating liabilities, and long-term debt?
7.9	 Why is it important to distinguish between operating and nonoperating assets and li­
abilities when valuing a firm? Be specific.
7.10	 Explain how you would value a patent under the following situations: a patent with 
no current application, a patent linked to an existing product, and a patent portfolio.
Answers to these Chapter Discussion Questions are available in the Online Instructor’s Manual for 
instructors using this book (https://textbooks.elsevier.com/web/Manuals.aspx?isbn=9780128016091).

	
Practice Problems and Answers	
271
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
PRACTICE PROBLEMS AND ANSWERS
7.11	 ABC Incorporated shares are currently trading for $32 per share. The firm has 1.13 bil­
lion shares outstanding. In addition, the market value of the firm’s outstanding debt 
is $2 billion. The 10-year Treasury bond rate is 6.25%. ABC has an outstanding credit 
record and has earned a AAA rating from the major credit-rating agencies. The current 
interest rate on AAA corporate bonds is 6.45%. The historical risk premium over the 
risk-free rate of return is 5.5%. The firm’s β is estimated to be 1.1, and its marginal tax 
rate, including federal, state, and local taxes, is 40%.
a.	 What is the cost of equity? Answer: 12.3%.
b.	What is the after-tax cost of debt? Answer: 3.9%.
c.	 What is the WACC? Answer: 11.9%.
7.12	 HiFlyer Corporation currently has no debt. Its tax rate is 0.4, and its unlevered β is esti­
mated by examining comparable companies to be 2.0. The 10-year bond rate is 6.25%, 
and the historical risk premium over the risk-free rate is 5.5%. Next year, HiFlyer 
expects to borrow up to 75% of its equity value to fund future growth.
a.	 Calculate the firm’s current cost of equity. Answer: 17.25%.
b.	Estimate the firm’s cost of equity after the firm increases its leverage to 75% of eq­
uity. Answer: 22.2%.
7.13	 Abbreviated financial statements for Fletcher Corporation are given in Table 7.8.
	
Year-end w-orking capital in 2009 was $160 million, and the firm’s marginal tax rate 
was 40% in both 2010 and 2011. Estimate the following for 2010 and 2011:
a.	 FCFE. Answer: $16.4 million in 2010 and −$26.8 million in 2011.
b.	FCFF. Answer: $44.4 million in 2010 and $1.2 million in 2011.
TABLE 7.8  Abbreviated Financial Statements for Fletcher Corporation 
(in $ Million)
2010
2011
Revenues
$600
$690
Operating expenses
520
600
Depreciation
16
18
Earnings before interest and taxes
64
72
Less interest expense
5
5
Less taxes
23.6
26.8
Equals: net income
35.4
40.2
ADDENDUM
Year-end working capital
150
200
Principal repayment
25
25
Capital expenditures
20
10

272	
7.  Mergers and Acquisitions Cash Flow Valuation Basics
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
7.14	 In 2011, No Growth Inc. had operating income before interest and taxes of $220 mil­
lion. The firm was expected to generate this level of operating income indefinitely. The 
firm had depreciation expense of $10 million that year. Capital spending totaled $20 
million during 2011. At the end of 2010 and 2011, working capital totaled $70 and 80 
million, respectively. The firm’s combined marginal state, local, and federal tax rate 
was 40%, and its outstanding debt had a market value of $1.2 billion. The 10-year Trea­
sury bond rate is 5%, and the borrowing rate for companies exhibiting levels of credit­
worthiness similar to No Growth is 7%. The historical risk premium for stocks over the 
risk-free rate of return is 5.5%. No Growth’s β was estimated to be 1.0. The firm had 
2.5 million common shares outstanding at the end of 2011. No Growth’s target debt-to-
total capital ratio is 30%.
a.	 Estimate FCFF in 2011. Answer: $112 million.
b.	Estimate the firm’s WACC. Answer: 8.61%.
c.	 Estimate the enterprise value of the firm at the end of 2011, assuming that it 
will generate the value of free cash flow estimated in (a) indefinitely. Answer: 
$1300.8 million.
d.	Estimate the value of the equity of the firm at the end of 2011. Answer: 
$100.8 million.
e.	 Estimate the value per share at the end of 2011. Answer: $40.33.
7.15	 Carlisle Enterprises, a specialty pharmaceutical manufacturer, has been losing market 
share for 3 years because several key patents have expired. FCFF is expected to decline 
rapidly as more competitive generic drugs enter the market. Projected cash flows for 
the next 5 years are $8.5, 7, 5, 2, and 0.5 million. Cash flow after the fifth year is expect­
ed to be negligible. The firm’s board has decided to sell the firm to a larger pharma­
ceutical company that is interested in using Carlisle’s product offering to fill gaps in its 
own product offering until it can develop similar drugs. Carlisle’s WACC is 15%. What 
purchase price must Carlisle obtain to earn its cost of capital?
	
	
Answer: $17.4 million.
7.16	 Ergo Unlimited’s current year’s FCFE is $10 million. It is projected to grow at 20% per year 
for the next 5 years. It is expected to grow at a more modest 5% beyond the fifth year. The 
firm estimates that its cost of equity is 12% during the next 5 years and will drop to 10% 
beyond the fifth year as the business matures. Estimate the firm’s current market value.
	
	
Answer: $358.3 million.
7.17	 In the year in which it intends to go public, a firm has revenues of $20 million and net in­
come after taxes of $2 million. The firm has no debt, and revenue is expected to grow at 
20% annually for the next 5 years and 5% annually thereafter. Net profit margins are ex­
pected to remain constant throughout. Annual capital expenditures equal depreciation, 
and the change in working capital requirements is minimal. The average β of a publicly 
traded company in this industry is 1.50, and the average debt-to-equity ratio is 20%. The 
firm is managed conservatively and will not borrow through the foreseeable future. The 
Treasury bond rate is 6%, and the marginal tax rate is 40%. The normal spread between 
the return on stocks and the risk-free rate of return is believed to be 5.5%. Reflecting the 
slower growth rate in the sixth year and beyond, the discount rate is expected to decline 
to the industry average cost of capital of 10.4%. Estimate the value of the firm’s equity.
	
Answer: $63.41 million.

	
Practice Problems and Answers	
273
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
7.18	 The information in Table 7.9 is available for two different common stocks: Company A 
and Company B.
a.	 Estimate the cost of equity for each firm. Answer: Company A = 15.45%; Company 
B = 12.2%.
b.	Assume that the companies’ growth will continue at the same rates indefinitely. 
Estimate the per-share value of each company’s common stock. Answer: Company 
A = $13.42; Company B = $61.00.
7.19	 You have been asked to estimate the β of a high-technology firm that has three divi­
sions with the characteristics shown in Table 7.10.
a.	 What is the β of the equity of the firm? Answer: 1.52.
b.	If the risk-free return is 5% and the spread between the return on all stocks is 5.5%, 
estimate the cost of equity for the software division. Answer: 16%.
c.	 What is the cost of equity for the entire firm? Answer: 13.4%.
d.	FCFE investors in the current year for the entire firm is $7.4 million and for the software 
division is $3.1 million. If the total firm and the software division are expected to grow at 
the same 8% rate into the foreseeable future, estimate the market value of the firm and of 
the software division. Answer: PV (total firm) = $147.96; PV (software division) = $41.88.
7.20	 Financial Corporation wants to acquire Great Western Inc. Financial has estimated the 
enterprise value of Great Western at $104 million. The market value of Great Western’s 
long-term debt is $15 million, and cash balances in excess of the firm’s normal working 
capital requirements are $3 million. Financial estimates the PV of certain licenses that 
Great Western is not currently using to be $4 million. Great Western is the defendant 
in several outstanding lawsuits. Financial Corporation’s legal department estimates 
the potential future cost of this litigation to be $3 million, with an estimated PV of $2.5 
million. Great Western has 2 million common shares outstanding. What is the adjusted 
equity value of Great Western per common share?
Answer: $46.75/share.
Solutions to these Practice Problems are available in the Online Instructor’s Manual for instructors 
using this book (https://textbooks.elsevier.com/web/Manuals.aspx?isbn=9780128016091).
TABLE 7.9  Common Stocks in Problem 7.18
Company A
Company B
Free cash flow per share in the current year ($)
1.00
5.00
Growth rate in cash flow per share (%)
8
4
β
1.3
0.8
Risk-free return (%)
7
7
Expected return on all stocks (%)
13.5
13.5
TABLE 7.10  High-Technology Company in Problem 7.19
Division
β
Market value ($ million)
Personal computers
1.60
100
Software
2.00
150
Computer mainframes
1.20
250

274	
7.  Mergers and Acquisitions Cash Flow Valuation Basics
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
END OF CHAPTER CASE STUDY: COURT RULES DELL 
UNDERPAID PUBLIC SHAREHOLDERS HIGHLIGHTING 
LEGAL DISTINCTION BETWEEN FAIR VALUE AND FAIR 
MARKET VALUE
Case Study Objectives: To Illustrate
•	 When “f air value” can trump “fair market value”
•	 The subjectivity inherent in determining “fair value”
•	 How appraisal rights’ legal rulings could impact future deal negotiations
Financial theory postulates that the value of a firm is determined by discounting projected net cash 
flows at an appropriate discount rate. In practice, buyers and sellers estimate the value of a firm using an 
array of valuation methodologies discussed in this chapter and Chapter 8. The actual price paid by the 
buyer to selling firm shareholders is determined when the parties to the negotiation reach an agreement 
on what is a mutually acceptable price. Assuming neither party was under duress to accept the price, the 
price paid by the buyer and accepted by the seller is said to represent the “fair market value” of the firm.
Despite investment banking “fairness opinions,” some target firm shareholders will argue the price 
offered for their shares is inadequate, contest it in court, and choose to have their shares valued by an 
independent appraiser, state statutes permitting. Historically, judges in so-called “appraisal rights” hear­
ings have relied on experts whose opinions rely on conventional valuation methodologies. In recent 
years, judges frustrated by the often contradictory opinions expressed by experts have deferred to the 
merger price or actual price paid for target firm shares as long as the process used to determine the price 
was deemed fair. As such “fair market value” and “fair value” are the same, under these circumstances.53
The concept of “fair value” is applied when no active market exists for a business, accurate cash 
flow projections are problematic, or it is not possible to identify the value of similar firms. “Fair 
value” differs from “fair market value,” which is the cash or cash-equivalent price that a willing 
buyer and a willing seller would accept for a business. “Fair value” is, by necessity, more subjective 
because it represents the dollar value of a business based on an independent appraisal of the net 
asset value (assets less liabilities) of a firm. What follows is a discussion of a court ruling in which a 
judge concluded that the actual price paid (or “fair market value”) to selling shareholders for their 
shares did not represent “fair value.” The judge determined what was fair (rather than the market) 
despite finding nothing unfair with the process employed by the parties to the negotiation. Was 
this an example of judicial overreach (i.e., a judge in effect changing the statute rather than simply 
applying existing law to the facts of the case) or an illustration of protecting shareholder rights? As 
you will see, the answer is not straightforward.
Vice Chancellor Travis Laster of the Delaware Court of Chancery exercised his legal right to de­
termine what is fair on June 16, 2016, in ruling that public shareholders were undercompensated for 
their shares in the $24.9-billion management buyout of Dell Corporation in 2013. The judge ruled 
that the price paid to such shareholders was undervalued by 22% and should have been $17.62 
per share, even though he found no wrongdoing with the process Dell management and Silver 
Lake Partners employed in buying out public shareholders. With interest, investors who sought 
appraisal will collect about $20.84 per share.
53See the case study at the beginning of this chapter for a more detailed discussion of this point.

	
Practice Problems and Answers	
275
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
While finding the process fair, Vice Chancellor Laster viewed it as incomplete as he argued that 
the Dell board of directors did not pay sufficient attention to all bidders (both private equity and 
strategic buyers). The judge also argued that the purchase price was based on a leveraged buyout 
(LBO) model valuation that he argued was not an actual market-determined price.
In an LBO model valuation,54 a buyer’s offer is based on its desired return that is often higher than 
what a strategic buyer would require due to the amount of financial leverage involved in financing the 
LBO. The judge claimed that the purchase price in the Dell deal reflected only what a private equity firm 
would pay and not a true market price. The latter he reasoned would be higher because strategic buyers 
often pay higher prices than private equity firms because they can exploit synergy opportunities. Con­
cluding the buyout price was not reflective of “fair value,” the judge used the DCF analyses provided 
by the experts to compute a “fair value” of $17.65 for each share held by Dell’s public investors.
The judge’s conclusion ignored the absence of strategic bidders showing an interest in buying Dell. 
Thus, the auction process included only private equity firms. The deal was widely contested in public by 
the likes of such activist investors as Carl Icahn who argued relentlessly that the price offered by Michael 
Dell and Silver Lake Partners undervalued the stock held by public shareholders. If the judge’s conclu­
sion was correct, Dell’s public shareholders acting rationally should have chosen to vote against the deal, 
as they did have access to Icahn’s arguments. Instead, they voted for the transaction in large numbers.
While the ruling applied to 5.5 million Dell shares (out of the more than 40 million purchased by 
Dell) costing the firm an additional $36 million, the potential impact could have been much greater. 
A number of shareholders including T. Rowe Price were excluded from the appraisal case because 
they had voted for the deal. To qualify for having shares appraised in most states, a shareholder 
must have voted against a deal. Consequently, had other shareholders been included as plaintiffs, 
the ruling could have cost Dell hundreds of millions of dollars.
Will the ruling accelerate the trend toward “appraisal arbitrage” in which hedge funds buy a 
firm’s shares after takeover announcements intent upon suing the bidder claiming the price was too 
low? The number of appraisal rights petitions has indeed increased from a trickle of cases in early 
2000s to over 20 a year in recent years, or close to one-quarter of all transactions where appraisal 
rights were available to target firm shareholders.55 Also, will deals be more difficult to negotiate be­
cause of the additional uncertainty posed by the potential adverse impact from appraisal arbitrage?
Critics of the Delaware Court of Chancery’s decision expressed concern over the broad implica­
tions for the future of corporate takeovers, arguing that the judge’s ruling exceeded a reasonable 
interpretation of the law. Critics also argued that seller shareholders could be hurt in the future 
because fewer private equity firms might participate in auctions for fear the price agreed to by the 
buyer and seller can be increased postmerger by hedge funds encouraged to profit from activist 
judges presiding over appraisal rights hearings. The decision means that companies, critics contend, 
do not simply have a fiduciary duty to find a buyer willing to pay the highest price, but that a judge 
may ultimately deem what the price should be. Buyers may insist on an appraisal cap in buyout 
agreements allowing them to walk away if, as a result of appraisal litigation, the ­agreed-upon price 
55Jiang (2016).
54A LBO valuation model analyzes the contribution of alternative sources of funds to the determination of financial 
returns to equity investors (i.e., so-called financial buyers). The use of large amounts of debt to finance the acquisi­
tion of a target firm improves significantly the return to equity investors, although excessive amounts of debt add 
to the risk of the deal.

276	
7.  Mergers and Acquisitions Cash Flow Valuation Basics
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
A D D I T I O N A L  C A S E  S T U D Y  R E C O M M E N D AT I O N S 
( S E A R C H  H AVA R D  B U S I N E S S  S C H O O L 
P U B L I S H I N G  S I T E  B Y  N A M E :  h b s p . h a r v a r d . e d u )
Mercury Athletic: Valuing the Opportunity, 
Revision Date June 20, 2011, Timothy A. 
Luehrman, Joel L. Heilprin, Source: Harvard 
Business Publishing, Product Number 
4050-PDF-ENG, http://hbsp.harvard.edu/.
Subjects Covered: Mergers & 
Acquisitions, Sensitivity analysis, Valuation.
Raffles Holdings Limited-Valuation of a 
Divestiture, Siriwan Chutikamoltham, 
Wilfred Chua, Product Number: NTU042-
PDF-ENG, July 29, 2013, Source: ABCC at 
Nanyang University Tech University, hbsp.
harvard.edu.
Subjects Covered: Valuing Tangible and 
Intangible Assets.
Valuation of AirThread Connections, Erik 
Stafford, Joel L. Heilprin, Revision Date: 
April 27, 2012, Product Number: 4263-PDF-
ENG, Source: HBS Brief Cases, hbsp.
harvard.edu.
Subjects Covered: Valuation, Capital 
Structure, Synergy.
is increased above the cap by a court ruling. Selling company boards might find such caps onerous, 
making closing deals that much more difficult.
Supporters of the judge’s ruling argue it is a victory for shareholder rights particularly in man­
agement buyouts that often are rife with conflicts of interest. They argue that the ruling is unlikely 
to discourage bidders and contribute to an increase in appraisal litigation because it is likely to be 
applied primarily to management buyouts that are relatively rare. Also, the number of shareholders 
affected by this specific ruling was small, even though the impact could have been much greater as 
explained earlier. In addition, the ruling occurred during an appraisal rights hearing. Shareholder 
appraisal rights statutes differ by state and how they are worded tends to be nebulous. This means 
that “fair market value” and “fair value” can have different meanings from state to state and that 
what is considered “fair value” is not necessarily the price actually paid for a business. Consequent­
ly, judicial rulings in appraisal rights cases could vary widely and result in significantly different 
outcomes. As with many things, whether Chancellor Laster’s ruling is an example of judicial over­
reach or of protecting shareholder rights depends on one’s perspective.
Discussion Questions
1.	 What’s the appropriate way to determine a takeover price? [Consider the application of 
conventional valuation methodology, the negotiating process in which the parties involved are 
not subject to duress, and an impartial arbiter’s (i.e., a judge) determination].
2.	 Do you believe this court ruling is appropriate considering the facts of the case? Explain your answer.
3.	 Should a freely negotiated purchase price always be used as the appropriate valuation of a 
target firm’s shares assuming the process was fair? Explain your answer.
4.	 How does this case illustrate the shortcomings of DCF (and other methodologies) in valuing a 
business?

C H A P T E R
277
Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring Activities. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-801609-1.00008-7
Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
8
Relative, Asset-Oriented, and Real 
Option Valuation Basics
O U T L I N E
Inside Mergers and Acquisitions: 
Managing Coke’s Natural Drink 
Business Portfolio	
278
Chapter Overview	
279
Relative Valuation Methods	
279
The Comparable Companies Method	
280
Recent Comparable Transactions 
Method	
282
Same or Comparable Industries Method	
282
Enterprise-Value-to-EBITDA Method	
282
Adjusting Relative Valuation Methods 
for Firm Growth Rates	
284
Value-Driver–Based Valuation	
287
Asset-Oriented Methods	
288
Tangible Book Value (Shareholders’ 
Equity Less Goodwill) Method	
289
Breakup Value	
289
Liquidation Value	
290
The Replacement Cost Method	
292
The Weighted Average Valuation 
Method	
293
Adjusting Valuation Estimates for 
Purchase Price Premiums	
293
Real Options Analysis	
294
Identifying Real Options Embedded 
or Implied in M&A Decisions	
295
Valuing Real Options for Mergers 
and Acquisitions	
295
Valuing Real Options Using a Decision 
Tree Framework	
295
Valuing Real Options Using the 
Black–Scholes Model	
297
Determining When to Use the 
Different Approaches to Valuation	
303
What do Valuation Professionals 
do in Practice?	
303
Some Things to Remember	
305
Discussion Questions	
305
Practice Problems and Answers	
305
Case Study: Investors Question Abbott 
Labs’ Valuation Of St. Jude Medical	
309
Case Study Objectives	
309
Discussion Questions	
310
Additional Case Study 
Recommendations 	
311

278	
8.  Relative, Asset-Oriented, and Real Option Valuation Basics
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
Happiness is a personal choice. We can be angry about the things we do not have or happy about the 
things we do. —Nick Vujicic
INSIDE MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS: MANAGING COKE’S 
NATURAL DRINK BUSINESS PORTFOLIO
KEY POINTS
•	 Discounted cash flow (DCF) and relative valuation methods suggest implicitly that once an 
investment decision has been made, there is little opportunity for management to change the 
outcome.
•	 In practice, management often has considerable flexibility to accelerate, delay, or abandon the 
original investment as new information is obtained.
•	 Recognizing the need for flexibility in decision making, partial takeovers often include a 
mechanism (so-called “real options”) for expanding or exiting an investment.
Faced with a maturing soda market, Coca-Cola (Coke) has sought to broaden its brand of­
fering portfolio. To this end, the firm has taken ownership stakes varying in amount in a vari­
ety of companies whose brands offer greater growth potential than its core product line. The 
firm’s strategy is to find promising new brands and then test the firm’s potential by making 
a minority ownership investment. Coke has previously invested in Monster Beverage Corp., 
the energy drink company, and Keurig Green Mountain Inc., which sells single-serving coffee 
pods. Coke already owns Odwalla, Honest Tea, and Zico Coconut Water.
In an investment consistent with this strategy, Coke announced on August 19, 2015, that 
it had invested $90 million for a 30% ownership position in Suja Life LLC (Suja) along with 
Goldman Sach’s (Goldman) merchant banking subsidiary that had invested $60 million for a 
slightly smaller stake in Suja. The combined $150-million investment gives the two investors 
slightly less than 50% ownership of Suja’s outstanding equity. The deal also gives Coke an 
option to require the remainder of the company at a predetermined price within 3 years. As 
part of the deal, Coke will expand Suja’s distribution and provide funds to build a new fac­
tory. The deal will help boost the number of locations that sell Suja by 50% by late 2016. Coke 
also will use its procurement network to buy raw materials at a lower cost.
Health drink brand, Suja, whose juices include combinations such as strawberry and flax­
seed, has posted rapid revenue growth since its start-up in early 2012, with its sales doubling 
each year since then to more than $43 million in 2014. New juice brands are benefitting from 
consumers turning away from sugary brands of soda. For Suja, the deal has been highly con­
troversial as many of its customers are concerned that Coke will cause the firm to stray from 
what makes it unique and socially responsible. Suja avoids using genetically modified organ­
isms (GMOs), and donates a portion of its sales to environmental causes. Some customers 
stopped purchasing the product in protest.
The risk to Coke and Goldman Sachs is clear: Does Suja’s meteoric revenue growth rate 
have staying power? Currently, Suja’s products are a niche market and as many such prod­
ucts could be destined to fade as fickle consumers lose interest. Moreover, the association 

	
Relative Valuation Methods	
279
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
with Coke could cause the current unrest among Suja customers to grow. These factors could 
substantially reduce Suja’s value. Given these uncertainties, what future options do Coke and 
Goldman have?
In practice, Coke’s management could accelerate investment in Suja if revenue and profit 
growth rates justify it by exercising its option to buy the 50% of the shares it and Goldman do 
not currently own. Goldman could participate by providing a portion of the additional funds 
needed to buy out the remaining Suja shareholders. If the firm’s growth slows appreciably, 
the option could be allowed to expire. Finally, Coke and Goldman could abandon their in­
vestment by spinning off or divesting their minority positions. While expensive potentially, 
the latter option allows the investors to limit future losses.
CHAPTER OVERVIEW
This chapter addresses commonly used alternatives to DCF merger and acquisition (M&A) 
valuation methods. These include relative valuation (i.e., market-based) methods, asset-ori­
ented methods, real options analysis, and replacement cost. The chapter concludes with a 
summary of the strengths and weaknesses of the alternative valuation methods (including 
DCF) and when it is appropriate to apply each methodology. A review of this chapter is 
available in the file folder entitled “Student Study Guide” on the companion site to this book 
(https://www.elsevier.com/books-and-journals/book-companion/9780128016091).
RELATIVE VALUATION METHODS
Relative valuation involves valuing assets based on how similar assets are valued in the 
marketplace. Such methods assume a firm’s market value can be approximated by a value 
indicator for comparable companies, comparable transactions, or comparable industry aver­
ages. Value indicators could include the firm’s earnings, operating cash flow, earnings be­
fore interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization (EBITDA), sales, and book value. This 
approach often is described as market based, since it reflects the amounts investors are will­
ing to pay for each dollar of earnings, cash flow, sales, or book value at a moment in time. As 
such, it reflects theoretically the collective wisdom of investors in the marketplace. Because 
of the requirement for positive current- or near-term earnings or cash flow, this approach is 
meaningful only for companies with a positive, stable earnings or cash flow stream.
If comparable companies are available, the market value of a target firm, MVT, can be esti­
mated by solving the following equation:
MV
MV
VI
VI
T
C
C
T
=
×
	
(8.1)
where MVC, market value of comparable company C; VIC, value indicator for comparable 
company C; VIT, value indicator for firm T; and (MVC/VIC), market value multiple for the 
comparable company.
For example, if the price-to-earnings (P/E) ratio or multiple for the comparable firm is 
10 (i.e., MVC/VIC) and after-tax earnings of the target firm are $2 million (VIT), the market 

280	
8.  Relative, Asset-Oriented, and Real Option Valuation Basics
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
value of the target firm at that moment in time is $20 million (MVT). Relative-value methods 
are used for three reasons. First, they are simple to calculate and require far fewer assump­
tions than DCF techniques. Second, relative valuation is easier to explain than DCF methods. 
Finally, the use of market-based techniques is more likely to reflect current market demand 
and supply conditions. The relationship expressed in Eq. (8.1) can be used to estimate the 
value of the target firm in all the relative valuation and asset-oriented methods discussed in 
this chapter, except the replacement cost method.
The analyst must follow certain guidelines in applying relative valuation methods. First, 
when using multiples (e.g., MVC/VIC), it is critical to ensure that the multiple is defined in the 
same way for all comparable firms. For example, in using a P/E ratio, earnings may be de­
fined as trailing (i.e., prior), current, or projected. The definition must be applied consistently 
to all firms in the sample. Also, the numerator and the denominator of the multiple must be 
defined in the same way. If the numerator in the P/E ratio is defined as price per share, the 
denominator must be calculated as earnings per share. Second, the analyst must examine 
the distribution of the multiples of the firms being compared and eliminate outliers, those 
whose values are substantially different from others in the sample.
The Comparable Companies Method
Applying this approach requires that the analyst identify companies that are substantially 
similar to the target firm. Generally speaking, a comparable firm is one whose profitability, 
potential growth rate in earnings or cash flows, and perceived risk are similar to those of the 
firm to be valued. By defining comparable companies broadly, it is possible to utilize firms in 
other industries. As such, a computer hardware manufacturer can be compared to a telecom 
firm as long as they are comparable in terms of profitability, growth, and risk. Consequently, 
if the firm to be valued has a 15% return on equity (i.e., profitability), expected earnings or 
cash flow growth rates of 10% annually (i.e., growth), and a β of 1.3 or debt-to-equity ratio of 1 
(i.e., risk), the analyst must find a firm with similar characteristics in either the same industry 
or another industry. In practice, analysts often look for comparable firms in the same industry 
and that are similar in terms of such things as markets served, product offering, degree of 
leverage, and size.1
To determine if the firms you have selected are truly comparable, estimate the correlation 
between the operating income or revenue of the target firm and that of the comparable firms. 
If the correlation is positive and high, the firms are comparable.2 Even when companies ap­
pear to be substantially similar, there are likely to be significant differences in valuation at 
any moment in time. For example, the announcement of a pending acquisition may boost the 
share prices of competitors as investors anticipate takeover bids for these firms. The impact 
of such events abates with the passage of time. Consequently, comparisons made at different 
times can provide distinctly different results. By taking an average of multiples over 6 months 
1Smaller firms, other things being equal, are more prone to default than larger firms, which generally have a larger 
asset base and a larger and more diversified revenue stream than smaller firms. Consequently, the analyst should 
take care not to compare firms that are substantially different in size.
2Similarly, if the firm has multiple product lines, collect comparable firms for each product line and estimate the 
correlation coefficient.

	
Relative Valuation Methods	
281
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
or 1 year, these differences may be minimized. Note that valuations derived using the compa­
rable companies method do not include a purchase price premium.
Table  8.1 illustrates how to apply the comparable companies method to value French 
oil and gas company Total SA. Total is a geographically diversified integrated oil and gas 
company; as such, it has economic and political risks and growth characteristics similar to 
other globally diversified integrated oil and gas companies. The estimated value of Total 
based on the average of the comparable companies estimates calculated using the 4 different 
market multiples is $160.36 billion, versus its actual March 14, 2014, market capitalization of 
$144.59 billion.
The analyst needs to be mindful of changes in fundamentals that can affect multiples. 
These fundamentals include a firm’s ability to generate and grow earnings and cash flow 
through reinvestment in the firm’s operations as well as the risk associated with the firm’s 
earnings and cash flows. Since multiples are affected by each of these variables, changes in 
the variables affect multiples. Firms with lower earnings and cash flow generation potential, 
lower growth prospects, and higher risk should trade at multiples less than firms with higher 
earnings and cash flow generation capability, higher growth prospects, and less risk. There­
fore, the analyst needs to understand why one firm’s multiple is less than a comparable firm’s 
before concluding that it is undervalued or overvalued. For example, a firm with a P/E of 10 
may not be more expensive than a comparable firm with a P/E of 8 if the former’s growth 
TABLE 8.1  Valuing Total SA Using Comparable Integrated Oil Companies
Comparable company
Target valuation based on following multiples (MVC/VIC)
Trailing P/Ea, 
Col. 1
Forward P/Eb, 
Col. 2
Price/sales, 
Col. 3
Price/book, 
Col. 4
Average, 
Cols. 1–4
Exxon Mobil Corp. (XOM)
168.56
9.12
4.64
6.97
British Petroleum (BP)
207.69
9.55
4.45
8.87
Chevron Corp. (CVX)
136.30
9.01
5.79
7.49
Royal Dutch Shell (RDS-B)
194.23
8.22
3.22
5.19
ConocoPhillips (COP)
9.02
11.71
1.43
1.50
Eni SpA (E)
12.90
14.01
.57
1.12
PetroChina Co. (PTR)
9.21
8.20
.50
1.04
Oil & Natural Gas Corp. (ONGC)
11.40
7.11
1.71
1.82
Average multiple (MVC/VIC)
93.66
9.62
2.79
4.25
Total SA value indicators (dollars per 
share, VIT)
1.77
8.93
76.60
41.45
Equals estimated market value of 
target ($ billion)c
165.78
85.87
213.62
176.16
160.36
P/E, Price-to-earnings.
aTrailing 52-week averages.
bProjected 52-week averages.
cBillions of dollars. Average multiple (MVC/VIC) × Total SA value indicator expressed in dollars per share (VIT). For example, using the 
price-to-trailing earnings multiple times Total SA trailing earnings per share = 93.66 × $1.77 = $165.78 billion.

282	
8.  Relative, Asset-Oriented, and Real Option Valuation Basics
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
prospects, profitability, and the rate at which profits are reinvested in the firm are higher than 
the latter firm’s growth, profitability, and reinvestment rate.
In the current (as of this writing) artificially low-interest-rate environment, P/E multiples 
tend to be overstated. Why? Abnormally low interest rates drive investors to search for high­
er financial returns in risky assets such as stocks. Consequently, investors bid up the price of 
stocks relative to their earnings. To avoid overvaluation, an analyst may choose to use a his­
torical average P/E multiple over several decades to incorporate several interest rate cycles.
Recent Comparable Transactions Method
Also referred to as the precedent transactions method, the multiples used to estimate the 
value of the target are based on purchase prices of comparable companies that were recently 
acquired. P/E, sales, cash flow, EBITDA, and book-value ratios are calculated using the pur­
chase price for the recent comparable transaction. Earnings, sales, cash flow, EBITDA, and 
book value for the target are subsequently multiplied by these ratios to obtain an estimate of 
the market value of the target company. The estimated value of the target firm obtained using 
recent comparable transactions already reflects a purchase price premium, unlike the com­
parable companies approach to valuation. The obvious limitation to the comparable transac­
tions method is the difficulty in finding truly comparable, recent transactions. Recent transac­
tions can be found in other industries as long as they are similar to the target firm in terms 
of profitability, expected earnings and cash flow growth, and perceived risk. Table 8.1 could 
be used to illustrate how the recent transaction valuation method may be applied simply 
by replacing the data in the column headed “Comparable Company” with data for “Recent 
Comparable Transactions.”
Same or Comparable Industries Method
Using this approach, the target company’s net income, revenue, cash flow, EBITDA, and 
book value are multiplied by the ratio of the market value of shareholders’ equity to net in­
come, revenue, cash flow, EBITDA, or book value for the average company in the target firm’s 
industry or a comparable industry (Exhibit 8.1). Such information can be obtained from Stan­
dard & Poor’s, Value Line, Moody’s, Dun & Bradstreet, and Wall Street analysts. The primary 
advantage of this technique is the ease of use. Disadvantages include the presumption that 
industry multiples are actually comparable. The use of the industry average may overlook 
the fact that companies, even in the same industry, can have drastically different expected 
growth rates, returns on invested capital, and debt-to-total capital ratios.
Enterprise-Value-to-EBITDA Method
In recent years, analysts have increasingly valued firms by multiplying the enterprise-
value (EV)-to-EBITDA multiple based on comparable companies or recent transactions by 
the target firm’s EBITDA. That is, if the EV/EBITDA multiple for a sample of comparable 
firms or recent transactions is 8 and the target’s EBITDA is $10 million, the value of the target 
is $80 million.

	
Relative Valuation Methods	
283
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
In this chapter, EV is viewed from the perspective of the liability, or “right-hand,” side 
of the balance sheet.3 As such, the EV consists of the sum of the market values of long-term 
debt (MVD), preferred equity (MVPF), common equity (MVFCFE), and noncontrolling interest 
excluding cash. Other long-term liabilities often are ignored, and cash is assumed to be equal 
to cash and short-term marketable securities on the balance sheet.4 Cash and short-term mar­
ketable securities are deducted from the firm’s EV, since interest income from such cash is 
not counted in the calculation of EBITDA. The inclusion of cash would overstate the EV-to-
EBITDA multiple. Furthermore, cash is a nonoperating asset whose value is implicitly in­
cluded in the market value of equity since it is owned by the shareholders. The EV-to-EBITDA 
multiple is commonly expressed as follows:
=
+
+
−
EV
EBITDA
MV
MV
(MV
Cash)
EBITDA
D
FCFE
PF
	
(8.2)
where (MVD − Cash) is often referred to as net debt.
Many consider the EV a more accurate representation of firm value than equity value because 
it reflects the obligation of the acquirer to pay off assumed liabilities, such as long-term debt.
The EV-to-EBITDA valuation method is useful because more firms are likely to have nega­
tive earnings rather than negative EBITDA. Consequently, relative valuation methods are more 
often applicable when EBITDA is used as the value indicator. Furthermore, net or operating 
3In Chapter 7, EV was discussed from the perspective of the asset, or “left-hand,” side of the balance sheet as the 
PV of cash flows from operating assets and liabilities available for lenders and common and preferred sharehold­
ers [i.e., free cash flow to the firm (FCFF)]. Thus defined, EV was adjusted for the value of nonoperating assets and 
liabilities to estimate the value of common equity.
4Ignoring the firm’s pension and healthcare obligations makes sense only if they are fully funded.
EXHIBIT 8.1  VALU ING A TARGET COMPANY USING 
THE SAME OR COMPARABLE INDUSTRIES METHOD
As of March 17, 2014, Applied Materials Inc. (AMAT), a producer of semiconductor manufactur­
ing equipment and materials, had projected earnings per share for the coming year of $1.07.a The 
industry average forward price-to-earnings ratio for 51 companies was 24.05.b Estimate the firm’s 
intrinsic price per share [Eq. (8.1)].
MV
MV
VI
VI
24.05
$1.07
$25.73 per share(3/17/2014 actual price
$18.98)
T
T
IND
IND
=
×
=
×
=
=
where MVT, market value per share of the target company; MVIND/VIIND, market value per share of 
the average firm in the industry divided by a value indicator for that average firm in the industry 
(e.g., industry average forward price-to-earnings ratio); and VIT, value indicator for the target firm 
(e.g., projected earnings per share).
aThomson Reuters I/B/E/S Consensus Estimates Report for 2014 based on a survey of industry analysts taken on 
March 3, 2014.
bSource: http://people.stern.nyu.edu/adamodar/New_Home_Page/datafile/pedata.html.

284	
8.  Relative, Asset-Oriented, and Real Option Valuation Basics
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
income can be significantly affected by the way the firm chooses to calculate depreciation (e.g., 
straight line vs. accelerated). Such problems do not arise with EBITDA, which is estimated be­
fore deducting depreciation and amortization expense. Finally, the multiple can be compared 
more readily among firms exhibiting different levels of leverage than for other measures of 
earnings, since the numerator represents the total value of the firm irrespective of its distribu­
tion between debt and equity and the denominator measures earnings before interest.
A shortcoming of EBITDA as a value indicator is that it provides a good estimate of the 
firm’s assets already in place but ignores the impact of new investment on future cash flows. 
This is not a problem as long as the firm is not growing. Despite this limitation, EBITDA is 
more often used than a multiple based on FCFF, since FCFF is frequently negative due to in­
creases in working capital and capital spending in excess of depreciation. EBITDA multiples 
are most often used for mature businesses, for which most of the value comes from the firm’s 
existing assets. Exhibit 8.2 illustrates how to construct EV/EBITDA multiples.
Adjusting Relative Valuation Methods for Firm Growth Rates
Assume that Firm A and Firm B are direct competitors and have P/E ratios of 20 and 15, re­
spectively. Which is the cheaper firm? It is not possible to answer this question without know­
ing how fast the earnings of the two firms are growing and what rate of return can be earned 
on reinvested funds. While not a complete solution because reinvestment rates of return are 
not considered, relative valuation methods may be adjusted for differences in growth rates 
among firms. Due to its simplicity, the most common adjustment is the PEG ratio, calculated 
by dividing the firm’s P/E ratio by the expected growth rate in earnings. The comparison of 
a firm’s P/E ratio to its projected earnings is helpful in identifying stocks of firms that are 
undervalued or overvalued. Firms with P/E ratios less than their projected growth rates may 
be considered undervalued, while those with P/E ratios greater than their projected growth 
rates may be viewed as overvalued. Note that growth rates do not increase multiples unless 
financial returns improve. Investors are willing to pay more for each dollar of future earnings 
only if they expect to earn a higher future rate of return.5
The PEG ratio can be helpful in selecting the most attractive acquisition target from among 
a number of potential targets. Attractiveness is defined as that target that is most underval­
ued. Undervaluation is the extent to which a firm’s current share price exceeds the firm’s 
intrinsic share price estimated using the PEG ratio. While the PEG ratio uses P/E ratios, other 
ratios may be employed, such as price to cash flow, EBITDA, revenue, and the like.
Eq. (8.3) gives an estimate of the implied market value per share for a target firm (MVT) 
based on the PEG ratio for comparable companies:
A
MV /VI
VI
C
C
CGR
=
and
=
×
×
A
MV
VI
VI
T
T
TGR
	
(8.3)
5Investors may be willing to pay considerably more for a stock whose PEG ratio is greater than 1 if they believe the 
future increase in earnings will result in future financial returns that significantly exceed the firm’s cost of equity.

	
Relative Valuation Methods	
285
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
EXHIBIT 8.2  CALCULATING ENTERPRISE-
VALUE-TO-EBITDA MULTIPLES
AT&T Inc. and Verizon Communications Inc. are United States–based leading telecommunications 
companies. As of December 31, 2013, the market value of AT&T’s common equity was $171.4 billion, 
and Verizon’s was $193.2 billion. Neither firm had preferred stock outstanding. Per investment re­
search firm Morningstar Inc., the weighted average maturity date is 16 years for AT&T’s debt and 
14 years for Verizon’s. Market rates of interest for AT&T (rated A− by S&P) was 3.87% and Verizon 
(rated BBB+ by S&P) 4.45% for debt with those approximate maturity dates at that time. AT&T’s and 
Verizon’s 2013 income, balance sheet, and cash flow statements are shown in the following table:
Financial statements
Income statement (2013)
AT&T ($ billion)
Verizon ($ billion)
Revenue
128.7
120.6
Cost of sales
51.5
44.9
Other expenses
46.8
43.7
Earnings before interest and taxes
30.4
32.0
Net interest expense
3.9
2.7
Earnings before taxes
26.5
29.3
Taxes
9.2
5.7
Minority interest
12.0
Net income
17.3
11.6
Balance Sheet (12/31/2013)
Cash
9.3
54.1
Other current assets
19.8
16.9
Long-term assets
254.6
203.1
Total Assets
283.7
274.1
Current liabilities
35.0
27.1
Long-term debt
69.2
89.7
Other long-term liabilities
88.6
118.5
Total Liabilities
192.8
235.3
Shareholders’ equity
90.9
38.8
Equity + Total Liabilities
283.7
113.20
Cash flow (2013)
Net income
17.3
11.6
Depreciation
18.4
16.6
Change in working capital
−2.2
10.7
Investments
−23.1
−14.8
Financing
−13.2
26.5
Change in cash balances
−2.8
50.6
Source: Edgar Online.
Which firm has the higher enterprise-value-to-EBITDA ratio? [Hint: Use Eq. (8.2).]
Answer: AT&T.

286	
8.  Relative, Asset-Oriented, and Real Option Valuation Basics
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
where A, PEG ratio—that is, market price–to–value indicator ratio (MVC/VIC) for comparable 
firms relative to the growth rate of the value indicator (VICGR) for comparable firms; VIT, value 
indicator for the target firm; and VITGR, projected growth rate of the value indicator for the 
target firm. Because this method uses an equity multiple (e.g., price per share/net income per 
share), consistency suggests that the growth rate in the value indicator should be expressed 
on a per-share basis. Therefore, if the value indicator is net income per share, then the growth 
in the value indicator should be the growth rate for net income per share and not net income.
PEG ratios are useful for comparing firms whose expected growth rates are positive and 
different. This method implies a zero value for firms that are not growing and a negative val­
ue for those whose growth rates are negative. The practical implications are that firms that are 
not growing are not likely to increase in market value, while those exhibiting negative growth 
are apt to experience declining firm values.6 Exhibit 8.3 illustrates how to apply the PEG ratio.
6As a means of selecting attractive takeover targets, the PEG ratio can be calculated for each firm and the firms 
ranked from lowest (most undervalued) to highest (most overvalued) in terms of their PEG ratios. While helpful 
in determining the most attractive acquisition targets (i.e., most undervalued), this ranking does not indicate the 
extent to which a firm is undervalued or overvalued as compared to its current share price.
Market Value of Existing Debt
PV (PV of AT & T Long-Term Debt)
$3.9
1
1/(1.0387)
0.0387
$69.2
(1.0387)
$3.9
11.76
$37.69
$83.55 billion
D
a
16
16
=
×
−
+
=
×
+
=
PV (PV of Verizon Long-Term Debt)
$2.7
1
1/(1.0445)
0.0445
$89.7
(1.0445)
$2.7
10.26
$48.76
$76.46 billion
D
b
14
14
=
×
−
+
=
×
+
=
Enterprise-to-EBITDA Ratio
Market value of equity
Market Value of Debt
Cash
EBIT
Depreciation
:
AT & T :
$171.40
$83.55
$9.30
$30.40
$18.40
5.03
Verizon:
$193.20
$76.46
$54.10
$32.00
$16.60
4.44
c
+
−
+
+
−
+
=
+
−
+
=
a The present value of AT&T’s debt is calculated using the PV of an annuity formula for 16 years and a 3.87% market 
rate of interest plus the PV of the principal repayment of $69.2 billion at the end of 16 years. Note that only annual 
interest expense of $3.9 billion is used in the calculation of the PV of the annuity payment because the debt is treated 
as a balloon note.
b The present value of Verizon’s debt is calculated using the PV of an annuity formula for 14 years and a 4.45% market inter­
est rate plus the PV of the principal repayment of $89.7 billion at the end of 14 years. Annual interest expense is $2.7 billion.
c A firm’s financial statements frequently include depreciation in the cost of sales. Therefore, EBITDA may be calculated 
by adding EBIT from the income statement and depreciation shown on the cash flow statement.

	
Relative Valuation Methods	
287
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
Value-Driver–Based Valuation
In the absence of earnings, factors that drive firm value may be used for valuation pur­
poses and commonly are used to value start-up companies and initial public offerings (IPOs), 
which often have little or no earnings history. Measures of profitability and cash flow are 
manifestations of these value drivers. Value drivers exist for each major function within the 
firm, including sales, marketing, and distribution; customer service; operations and manufac­
turing; and purchasing.
EXHIBIT 8.3  APPLYING THE PEG RATIO
An analyst is asked to determine whether Johnson and Johnson Inc. (JNJ) or Pfizer Inc. (PFE) is a 
more attractive takeover target. Both firms are multinational pharmaceutical companies headquar­
tered in the United States. One measure of their relative attractiveness is to compare their current 
valuation to their projected earnings growth. A convenient means of making this comparison is to 
apply the PEG ratio methodology. JNJ and PFE have projected annual earnings-per-share growth 
rates of 7.9 and 4.8%, respectively. JNJ’s and PFE’s current earnings per share for 2014 are $5.32 and 
3.34, respectively. The share prices as of March 19, 2014, were $90.95 and 29.70 for JNJ and PFE, 
respectively. The industry average price-to-earnings ratio and projected 5-year growth rate at that 
time were 19.7 and 11.6%, respectively. Based on this information and the PEG methodology, which 
firm is a more attractive takeover target as of the point in time the firms are being compared? [Hint: 
Use Eq. (8.3).] The PEG ratio focuses on P/E ratios and earnings growth rates. What other factors if 
known might change your answer to the previous question?
Industry average PEG ratio: 19.7/11.6 = 1.6983a
JNJ: Implied intrinsic share price = 1.6983 × 7.9 × $5.32 = $71.38
PFE: Implied intrinsic share price = 1.6983 × 4.8 × $3.34 = $27.23
Answer: Both firms according to their respective PEG ratio estimates of their intrinsic values 
compared to their actual prices are overvalued at a moment in time. The percentage difference 
between the actual share price and implied intrinsic share prices for JNJ and PFE is 27.4% [i.e., 
($90.95 − $71.38)/$71.38] and 9.1% [i.e., ($29.70 − $27.23)/$27.23], respectively. JNJ is much more 
overvalued than PFE according to this methodology. Because PEG ratios do not explicitly account 
for the risk associated with future earnings and the rate at which they can be reinvested, the extent 
of the overvaluation may be misleading. In practice, the PEG ratio estimate simply provides an ad­
ditional data point in any evaluation of the overall attractiveness of a potential target firm.
Data Sources:
Industry earnings growth rates and price-to-earnings ratios: http://pages.stern.nyu.
edu/∼adamodar/New_Home_Page/datafile/pedata.html.
Individual firm data: Thomson Reuters I/B/E/S Consensus Estimates Report for 2014 based on a 
survey of industry analysts taken on March 3, 2014.
a Solving MVT = A × VITGR × VIT using the target’s PEG ratio, where MVT is the market value of the target firm, VIT is the tar­
get’s value indicator, and VITGR is VIT’s growth rate, provides the firm’s share price in period T, since this formula is an iden­
tity. An industry average PEG ratio may be used to estimate the firm’s intrinsic value, assuming that the target firm and 
the average firm in the industry exhibit the same relationship between price-to-earnings ratios and earnings growth rates.

288	
8.  Relative, Asset-Oriented, and Real Option Valuation Basics
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
There are both microvalue drivers and macrovalue drivers. Microvalue drivers are those that 
influence specific functions within the firm directly. Microvalue drivers for sales, marketing, 
and distribution could include product quality measures, such as part defects per 100,000 units 
sold, on-time delivery, the number of multiyear subscribers, and the ratio of product price 
to some measure of perceived quality. Customer service drivers could include average wait­
ing time on the telephone, the number of billing errors as a percent of total invoices, and the 
time required to correct such errors. Operational value drivers include the average collection 
period, inventory turnover, and the number of units produced per manufacturing employee 
hour. Purchasing value drivers include average payment period, on-time vendor delivery, and 
the quality of purchased materials and services. Macrovalue drivers are more encompassing 
than microvalue drivers by affecting all aspects of the firm. Examples of macrovalue drivers 
include market share, overall customer satisfaction as measured by survey results, total asset 
turns (i.e., sales to total assets), revenue per employee, and “same-store sales” in retailing.
Using value drivers to value businesses is straightforward. First, the analyst identifies the key 
drivers of firm value. Second, the market value for comparable companies is divided by the val­
ue driver selected for the target to calculate the dollars of market value per unit of value driver. 
Third, this figure is multiplied by the same value driver for the target company. Assume that the 
key macrovalue driver in an industry is market share. How investors value market share can be 
estimated by dividing the market leader’s market value by its market share. If the market leader 
has a market value and market share of $300 million and 30%, respectively, the market is valuing 
each percentage point of market share at $10 million [i.e., the market multiple based on points of 
market share as an indicator of value (MVC/VIC) is $300 million/30]. If the target company in the 
same industry has a 20% market share, an estimate of the market value of the target company 
(MVT) is $200 million [i.e., MVT = (MVC/VIC) × VIT = $10 million × 20 points of market share].
Similarly, the market value of comparable companies could be divided by other known val­
ue drivers. Examples include the number of visitors or page views per month for an Internet 
content provider, the number of subscribers to a magazine, cost per hotel room for a hotel chain, 
and the number of households with TVs in a specific geographic area for a cable TV company. 
AT&T’s acquisitions of the cable companies TCI and Media One in the late 1990s would appear 
to have been a “bargain,” since it spent an average of $5000 per household (the price paid for 
each company divided by the number of customer households acquired) in purchasing these 
companies’ customers. In contrast, Deutsche Telekom and Mannesmann spent $6000 and 7000 
per customer, respectively, in buying mobile phone companies One 2 One and Orange PLC.
The major advantage of this approach is its simplicity. Its major disadvantage is the im­
plied assumption that a single value driver or factor is representative of the total value of the 
business. The bankruptcy of many dot-com firms between 2000 and 2002 illustrates how this 
valuation technique can be misused. Many of these firms had never shown any earnings, yet 
they exhibited huge market valuations as investors justified these lofty values by using page 
views and registered users of comparable firms to value any firm associated with the Internet.
ASSET-ORIENTED METHODS
Such methods typically value firms based on tangible book, breakup, and liquidation val­
ues. These are discussed in detail next.

	
Asset-Oriented Methods	
289
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
Tangible Book Value (Shareholders’ Equity Less Goodwill) Method
Book value is a much-maligned value indicator because book asset values rarely reflect ac­
tual market values. The value of land frequently is understated on the balance sheet, whereas 
inventory often is overstated if it is old or obsolete. Moreover, book value may be higher for 
highly acquisitive firms than for other firms in the same industry that choose not to grow 
through acquisition. Because of the way acquisitions are recorded for financial reporting 
purposes (see Chapter 12), takeovers often result in the creation of such intangible assets 
as goodwill. Goodwill reflects the value of intangible factors such as a strong brand name, 
patents and other proprietary technologies, and synergy anticipated by the buyer when the 
acquisition was completed. Because acquirers may overpay, the book value of goodwill may 
overstate its actual value to the firm in generating future operating profits and cash flow. For 
these reasons, it is important to estimate tangible book value (TBV; i.e., book value less good­
will) in estimating an industry average multiple based on book value.7
Although book values generally do not mirror actual market values for manufacturing 
companies, they may be more accurate for distribution companies, whose assets are largely 
composed of inventory exhibiting high inventory turnover rates. Examples of such compa­
nies include pharmaceutical distributor Bergen Brunswick and personal computer distribu­
tor Ingram Micro. Book value is also widely used for valuing financial services companies, 
where TBV consists mostly of liquid assets.
Exhibit 8.4 provides an estimate of Ingram Micro’s intrinsic share price on March 20, 2014, 
based on the market-to-TBV for comparable firms multiplied by Ingram’s TBV as the firm’s 
indicator of value. The selection of firms believed to be most comparable to Ingram was 
based on their similarity to Ingram in terms of risk (measured by β), expected growth, and 
profitability.
Breakup Value
Breakup value is the price of the firm’s assets sold separately less its liabilities and ex­
penses incurred in dividing up the firm. Diversified companies often are valued by inves­
tors as if broken up and sold as discrete units, as well as their going concern or synergistic 
value as a consolidated operation. If the breakup value exceeds the going concern value, 
shareholder value may be maximized by splitting up the firm. In mid-2012, News Corpora­
tion, a media conglomerate, announced its decision to divide the firm into two independent 
units: entertainment and publishing. Estimated after-tax earnings for the entertainment unit 
and publishing unit for the fiscal year ending June 2012 were $3.1 and 0.5 billion, respec­
tively. If valued at Disney Corporation’s P/E ratio of 17, the entertainment businesses were 
worth $52.7 billion at that time; if valued at newspaper conglomerate Gannett Inc.’s 7.3 P/E, 
the publishing businesses were worth $3.7 billion. The resulting estimated breakup value of 
$56.4 billion versus its market value on July 7, 2012, of $50.4 billion suggested the firm was 
undervalued by about 12%.
7The importance of this adjustment is evident in comparing highly diversified businesses with more focused com­
petitors. When goodwill is deducted from the more acquisitive firms, market-to-book ratios tend to be similar to 
other firms in the same industry (Custodio, 2014).

290	
8.  Relative, Asset-Oriented, and Real Option Valuation Basics
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
Exhibit 8.5 illustrates the estimation of the breakup value of JPMorgan Chase. Value is de­
termined for each of the firm’s lines of business by multiplying its 2011 reported net income 
by the average June 2012 P/E multiple for the industry in which the business competes and 
then summing each operation’s value to determine the firm’s total equity value. The implicit 
assumption is that the interdependencies among the firm’s business units are limited, such 
that they can be sold separately without reducing significantly the value of any individual 
unit. Reflecting the impact of highly publicized trading losses, global turmoil, and an in­
creasingly restrictive regulatory environment, the firm’s July 6, 2012, market capitalization of 
$129.4 billion suggested that it was undervalued by as much as 48%.
Liquidation Value
The terms liquidation and breakup value often are used interchangeably. However, there are 
subtle distinctions. Liquidation may be involuntary, as a result of bankruptcy, or voluntary, if 
a firm is viewed by its owners as worth more in liquidation than as a going concern. Liquida­
tion and breakup strategies are explored further in Chapters 16 and 17.
Analysts may estimate the liquidation value of a target company to determine the min­
imum value of the company in the worst-case scenario of liquidation. It is particularly 
EXHIBIT 8.4  VALU ING COMPANIES USING TANGIBLE BOOK 
VALUE
Ingram Micro Inc. and its subsidiaries distribute information technology products worldwide. 
The firm’s market price per share on March 20, 2014, was $29.83. Ingram’s projected 5-year average 
annual net income growth rate is 11.2%, its β is 0.90, and after-tax profit margin is 1.03%. The firm’s 
shareholders’ equity as of December 31, 2013, was $3.95 billion and goodwill was $0.89 billion. 
Ingram has 155 million (0.155 billion) shares outstanding. The following firms represent Ingram’s 
primary competitors:
Market value/
tangible book value
β
Projected 5-year net 
income growth rate (%)
Net profit 
margin (%)
Tech Data
2.10
0.99
11.15
1.44
United Stationers 
Inc.
2.70
1.36
13.11
2.42
PC Connections
1.72
0.82
18.75
1.61
Ingram’s tangible book value per share (VIT) = ($3.95 − $0.89)/0.155 = $19.74.
The industry average ratio (MVIND/VIIND) = (2.10 + 2.70 + 1.72)/3 = 2.17.
Ingram’s implied value per share = MVT = (MVIND/VIIND) × VIT = 2.17 × $19.74 = $42.84.
Based on the implied intrinsic value per share, Ingram was undervalued on March 20, 2014, 
when its share price was $29.83.
Data Source: Yahoo! Finance.

	
Asset-Oriented Methods	
291
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
EXHIBIT 8.5  CALCULATING THE BREAKUP VALUE 
OF JPMORGAN CHASE
Line of 
business
Services 
provided 
by line of 
business
Industry 
market 
multiple
After-tax 
earnings 
($ billion)
Fair 
market 
value of 
equity 
($ billion)
Average June 2012 
price-to-earnings 
ratio for large
Investment 
bank
Advisory, 
underwriting, 
and market 
making
13.3×
6.8
90.4
Investment banks 
(e.g., Goldman 
Sachs)
Retail 
financial 
services
Consumer and 
residential 
mortgage 
lending
13.2×
1.7
22.4
Diversified financial 
services firms (e.g., 
American Express)
Card 
services and 
auto
Credit card, 
auto, and 
student loans
13.2×
4.5
59.4
Diversified financial 
services firms (e.g., 
American Express)
Commercial 
banking
Middle-market 
lending, term 
lending, and 
corporate client 
banking
11.1×
2.4
26.6
Money center banks, 
excluding JPMorgan 
Chase (e.g., 
Citigroup Inc.)
Treasury and 
securities 
services
Global 
corporate cash 
management 
services
11.1×
1.2
13.3
Money center banks, 
excluding JPMorgan 
Chase (e.g. Citigroup 
Inc.)
Asset 
management
Private 
­banking, 
retail and 
institutional 
investment 
management
17.2×
1.6
27.5
Mutual funds (e.g., T. 
Rowe Price)
Private 
equity
Corporate 
overhead and 
private equity 
activities
13.2×
.6
7.9
Private equity firms 
(e.g., KKR)
Total fair market value
247.5
Sources: JPMorgan Chase 2011 10K and Yahoo Finance.

292	
8.  Relative, Asset-Oriented, and Real Option Valuation Basics
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
appropriate for financially distressed firms. Analysts often assume the assets can be sold in 
an orderly fashion, often defined as 9–12 months. Under these circumstances, high-quality 
receivables often can be sold for 80%–90% of their book value. Inventories might realize 80%–
90% of their book value, depending on the condition and the degree of obsolescence. The 
value of inventory may also vary, depending on whether it consists of finished, intermediate, 
or raw materials. More rapid liquidation might reduce the value of inventories to 60%–65% 
of their book value. The liquidation value of equipment varies widely, depending on the age 
and condition.
Inventories need to be reviewed in terms of obsolescence, receivables in terms of the ease 
with which they may be collected, equipment in terms of age and effectiveness, and real es­
tate in terms of current market value. Equipment, such as lathes and computers, with a zero 
book value may have a significant economic value (i.e., useful life). Land can be a hidden 
source of value because it frequently is undervalued on GAAP balance sheets. Prepaid assets, 
such as insurance premiums, sometimes can be liquidated, with a portion of the premium 
recovered. The liquidation value is reduced dramatically if the assets have to be liquidated in 
“fire sale” conditions, under which assets are sold to the first bidder rather than the highest 
bidder (Exhibit 8.6).
The Replacement Cost Method
Replacement cost is the cost to replace a firm’s assets at current market prices. Equity 
value is determined by deducting the present value (PV) of the firm’s liabilities. Valuing the 
assets separately in terms of what it would cost to replace them may seriously understate the 
firm’s true value, since synergies created when the assets are used in combination are not 
EXHIBIT 8.6  CALCULATING LIQU IDATION VALUE
Limited Options Corporation has declared bankruptcy, and the firm’s creditors have asked the 
trustee to estimate its liquidation value assuming orderly sale conditions. Note that this example 
does not take into account legal fees, taxes, management fees, and contractually required employee 
severance expenses. These expenses can comprise a substantial percentage of the proceeds from 
liquidation.
Balance sheet item
Book value ($ million)
Orderly sale value ($ million)
Cash
100
100
Receivables
500
450
Inventory
800
720
Equipment (after depreciation)
200
60
Land
200
300
Total assets
1800
1630
Total liabilities
1600
1600
Shareholders’ equity
200
30

	
Adjusting Valuation Estimates for Purchase Price Premiums 	
293
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
considered. For example, the value of an automotive company that assembles cars on an as­
sembly line consisting of a series of robotic machines reflects the value of the final product of 
the assembly line (i.e., assembled cars) rather than the sum of the replacement cost of each of 
the machines. This approach should not be used if the firm has significant intangible assets 
due to the difficulty in valuing such assets.
THE WEIGHTED AVERAGE VALUATION METHOD
No valuation method is universally accepted as the best measure of a firm’s value, al­
though some may be more appropriate in certain situations. When to use the various valua­
tion methodologies discussed in this book is explained in Table 8.3.
Unless there is a compelling reason to apply a certain methodology, the weighted av­
erage method of valuation represents a compromise position.8 This approach involves 
calculating the expected value (EXPV) or weighted average of a range of potential out­
comes. The weights, which must sum to 1, reflect the analyst’s relative confidence in the 
various methodologies employed to value a business. Assuming that an analyst is equally 
confident in the accuracy of both methods, the EXPV of a target firm valued at $12 million 
using DCF and $15 million using the comparable companies method can be written as 
follows:
=
×
+
×
=
EXPV
0.5
$12
0.5
$15
$13.5 million
Neither valuation method includes a purchase price premium. Thus, a premium will have 
to be added to the EXPV to obtain a reasonable purchase price for the target firm.
ADJUSTING VALUATION ESTIMATES FOR PURCHASE 
PRICE PREMIUMS
With the exception of the recent transactions method, the individual valuation estimates 
comprising the weighted average estimate do not reflect a purchase premium. The premium 
generally reflects those paid on recent acquisitions of similar firms, the percentage of synergy 
provided by the target firm, and the relative leverage of the two parties.9 Exhibit 8.7 illustrates 
a practical way of calculating the EXPV of the target firm, including a purchase premium, us­
ing estimates from multiple valuation methods. In the example, the purchase price premium 
associated with the estimate provided by the recent comparable transactions method is ap­
plied to estimates provided by the other valuation methodologies.
8Liu et al. provide empirical support for using multiple valuation methods to estimate firm value.
9An analyst should be careful not to add an acquisition premium mechanically to the target’s estimated value based 
on the comparable companies method if there is evidence that the market values of “comparable firms” already 
reflect acquisition activity elsewhere in the industry. Rival firms’ share prices will rise in response to the announced 
acquisition of a competitor (Song et al., 2013). Akhigbe et al. (2000) find that the increase in rivals’ share prices may 
be even greater if the acquisition attempt is unsuccessful because investors believe that the bidder will attempt to 
acquire other firms in the same industry.

294	
8.  Relative, Asset-Oriented, and Real Option Valuation Basics
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
REAL OPTIONS ANALYSIS
An option is the right, but not the obligation, to buy, sell, or use property for a period of 
time in exchange for a specific amount of money. Those traded on financial exchanges, such 
as puts and calls, are called financial options. Options that involve real assets, such as licenses, 
copyrights, trademarks, and patents, are called real options. Other examples of real options 
include the right to buy land, commercial property, and equipment. Such assets can be valued 
as call options if their current value exceeds the difference between the asset’s current value 
and some preset level. For example, if a business has an option to lease office space at a pre­
determined price, the value of that option increases as lease rates for this type of office space 
increase. The asset can be valued as a put option if its value increases as the value of the under­
lying asset falls below a predetermined level. To illustrate, if a business has an option to sell an 
office building at a preset price, its value increases as the value of the office building declines.
Real options reflect management’s ability to adopt and later revise corporate investment 
decisions. They can impact substantially the value of an investment in a single project and 
should be considered when valuing such investments. However, real options can be costly to 
obtain (e.g., the right to extend a lease or purchase property), complex to value, and depen­
dent on problematic assumptions. As such, they should not be pursued unless the firm has the 
resources to exploit the option and they add significantly to the value of the firm. According 
EXHIBIT 8.7  WEIGHTED AVERAGE VALUATION 
OF ALTERNATIVE METHODOLOGIS
An analyst has estimated the value of a company using multiple valuation methodologies. The 
discounted cash flow value is $220 million, the comparable transactions value is $234 million, the 
P/E-based value is $224 million, and the firm’s breakup value is $200 million. The breakup value 
was estimated using DCF methodology. The analyst has greater confidence in certain methodolo­
gies than others. The purchase price paid for the recent comparable transaction represented a 20% 
premium over the value of the firm at the time of the takeover announcement. Estimate the weight­
ed average value of the firm using all valuation methodologies and the weights or relative impor­
tance the analyst assigns to each methodology.
Estimated 
value 
($ million), 
Col. 1
Estimated value including 
20% premium ($ million), 
Col. 2
Relative weight (as 
determined by analyst), 
Col. 3
Weighted 
average 
($ million), 
Col. 2 × Col. 3
220
264.0
30
79.2
234
234.0a
40
93.6
224
268.8
20
53.8
200
240.0
10
24.0
1.00
250.6
a Note that the comparable recent transactions estimate already contains a 20% purchase price premium.

	
Real Options Analysis	
295
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
to a recent survey, real options are used relatively infrequently by corporate chief financial 
officers (CFOs) but tend to be more common in the energy and biotech industries.10 In these 
industries, investments tend to be large, long-lived, and subject to a wide range of outcomes.
Identifying Real Options Embedded or Implied in M&A Decisions
Investment decisions, including M&As, often contain certain “embedded or implied op­
tions,” such as the ability to accelerate growth by adding to the initial investment (i.e., ex­
pand), delay the timing of the initial investment (i.e., delay), or walk away from the project 
(i.e., abandon). Pharmaceutical firms seeking to acquire the next “blockbuster” drug fre­
quently employ an option to expand strategy as part of their M&A deals. British drug maker 
AstraZeneca acquired a 55% stake in Acerta Pharma for $4 billion in 2016 with the option to 
buy the remainder of Acerta for $3 billion. The buyout of the balance of Acerta was contingent 
on receipt of regulatory approval in the United States and Europe for certain drugs and the 
achievement of specified sales targets establishing the commercial value of the new drugs.
Valuing Real Options for Mergers and Acquisitions
Three ways to value real options are discussed in this book. The first is to use DCF, relative 
valuation, or asset-oriented methods and ignore alternative real options by assuming that 
their value is zero. The second is to value the real options in the context of a decision tree, an 
expanded timeline that branches into alternative paths whenever an event can have multiple 
outcomes. The decision tree branches at points called nodes and is most useful whenever the 
investment is subject to a relatively small number of probable outcomes and can be made in 
stages. The third method involves the valuation of the real option as a put or call, assuming 
that the underlying asset has the characteristics of a financial option. A widely used method 
for valuing a financial option is the Black–Scholes model, which is typically applied to “Euro­
pean options,” those that can be exercised only at the expiration date of the option.11
Valuing Real Options Using a Decision Tree Framework
Table 8.2 shows how real options may affect the net present value (NPV) of an acquisition 
in which management has identified two cash flow scenarios (i.e., a successful and an unsuc­
cessful acquisition). Each pair of cash flow scenarios is associated with different options: the 
option to immediately acquire, delay, or abandon the acquisition. Each outcome is shown as 
a “branch” on a tree. Each branch shows the cash flows and probabilities of each scenario dis­
played as a timeline. The probability of realizing the “successful” cash flow projections is as­
sumed to be 60% and that of realizing the “unsuccessful” one is 40%. The expected enterprise 
cash flow of the target firm is the sum of the future cash flows of the “successful” and “unsuc­
cessful” scenarios multiplied by the estimated probability associated with each scenario. The 
target firm is assumed to have been acquired for $300 million, and the NPV is estimated using 
10Horn et al. (2015).
11A more flexible method is the binomial valuation model used to value so-called American options, which may be 
exercised at any time before expiration. While the binomial model allows for changing key assumptions over time, 
it requires many inputs, making it far more complex and problematic than the Black–Scholes approach.

296	
8.  Relative, Asset-Oriented, and Real Option Valuation Basics
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
TABLE 8.2  The Impact of Real Options on Valuing Mergers and Acquisitions
Projected target firm cash flows
Year 0
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
Year 4
Year 5
Year 6
Year 7
Year 8
Year 9
FIRST BRANCH: OPTION FOR IMMEDIATE INVESTMENT/ACQUISITION
Enterprise cash flows
  Successful case
−300
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
  Unsuccessful case
−300
−5
−5
−5
−5
−5
−5
−5
−5
Weighted cash flows
  Successful case (60%)
0
18
21
24
27
30
33
36
39
Unsuccessful case (40%)
0
−2
−2
−2
−2
−2
−2
−2
−2
Expected enterprise cash flow
−300
16
19
22
25
28
31
34
37
Expected NPV years 1–8 at 15%
−166
Expected terminal value at 13%; sustainable growth rate = 5%
159
Expected total NPV
−7
SECOND BRANCH: OPTION TO ABANDON (DIVEST OR LIQUIDATE)
Enterprise cash flows
  Successful case
−300
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
  Unsuccessful case
−300
−5
−5
−5
–5
−5
−5
−5
−5
Weighted cash flows
  Successful case (60%)
0
18
21
24
27
30
33
36
39
  Unsuccessful case (40%)
0
−2
−2
150
0
0
0
0
0
Expected enterprise cash flow
–300
16
19
174
27
30
33
36
39
Expected NPV years 1–6 at 15%
−75
Expected terminal value at 13%; sustainable growth rate = 5%
167
Expected total NPV
92
THIRD BRANCH: OPTION TO DELAY INVESTMENT/ACQUISITION
Enterprise cash flows
  Successful case
0
−300
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
  Unsuccessful case
0
−300
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Weighted cash flows
  Successful case (60%)
0
0
21
24
27
30
33
36
39
42
  Unsuccessful case (40%)
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Expected enterprise cash flow
0
−300
21
24
27
30
33
36
39
42
Expected NPV at 15%
−146
Expected terminal value at 13%; sustainable growth rate = 5%
180
Expected total NPV
34
NPV, Net present value. Note: The NPV for the delay option is discounted at the end of year 1, while the other options are 
discounted from year 0 (i.e., the present).

	
Real Options Analysis	
297
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
a 15% discount rate. The terminal value assumes a 5% growth rate. With an NPV of −$7 mil­
lion, the immediate investment option suggests that the acquisition should not be undertaken.
Recognizing that the target could be sold or liquidated, the expected NPV is $92 million, 
implying the acquisition should be undertaken. This assumes the target is sold or liquidated 
at the end of the third year following its acquisition for $152 million. Note that the cash 
flow in year 3 is $150 million, reflecting the difference between $152 and the −2 million in 
operating cash flow during the third year. The expected NPV with the option to delay is 
estimated at $34 million. Note that the investment is made after a 1-year delay only if the po­
tential acquirer feels confident that competitive market conditions will support the projected 
“successful” scenario cash flows. Consequently, the “unsuccessful” scenario’s cash flows are 
zero. Fig. 8.1 summarizes the results provided in Table 8.2 in a decision tree framework. Of 
the three options considered, valuing the target (including the value of the cash flows) with 
the option to abandon appears to be the most attractive investment strategy based on NPV. 
The values of the abandon and delay options are estimated as the difference between each of 
their NPVs and the NPV for the “immediate investment or acquisition” case.
Valuing Real Options Using the Black–Scholes Model
Options to assets whose cash flows have large variances and a long time before they ex­
pire are typically more valuable than those with smaller variances and less time remaining. 
The greater variance and time to expiration increases the chance that the factors affecting 
cash flows will change a project from one with a negative NPV to one with a positive NPV. If 
the values of certain variables are known, we can use the Black–Scholes model to establish a 
theoretical price for an option. The limitations of the Black–Scholes model are the difficulty in 
FIGURE 8.1  Real options decision tree. NPV, Net present value.

298	
8.  Relative, Asset-Oriented, and Real Option Valuation Basics
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
estimating key assumptions (particularly risk) and its assumptions that interest rates and risk 
are constant, that it can be exercised only on the expiration date, and that taxes and transac­
tions costs are minimal. The basic Black–Scholes formula for valuing a call option is as follows:
=
−
−
C
SN d
E
N d
(
)
e
(
)
Rt
1
2
	
(8.4)
where C, theoretical call option value; d
S E
R
t
t
ln( / )
[
(1/2)
]
1
2
σ
σ
=
+
+
; 
σ
=
−
d
d
t
2
1
; S, stock 
price or underlying asset price; E, exercise or strike price; R, risk-free interest rate correspond­
ing to the life of the option; σ2, variance (a measure of risk) of the stock’s or underlying asset’s 
return; t, time to expiration of the option; and N(d1) and N(d2), cumulative normal probability 
values of d1 and d2.
The term Ee−Rt is the PV of the exercise price when continuous discounting is used. The 
terms N(d1) and N(d2), which involve the cumulative probability function, are the terms that 
take risk into account. N(d1) and N(d2) measure the probability that the value of the call option 
will pay off and the probability that the option will be exercised, respectively. These two values 
are Z-scores from the normal probability function, and they can be found in cumulative normal 
distribution function tables for the standard normal random variable in many statistics books.
The variance (i.e., risk) to be used in the Black–Scholes model can be estimated in a number 
of ways. First, risk could be estimated as the variance in the stock prices of similar firms or the 
associated cash flows. The average variance in the share prices of US oil services companies 
could be used as the variance in valuing a real option associated with the potential purchase 
of an oil services firm.12 Second, the variance of cash flows from similar prior investments can 
be used. A pharmaceutical company may use the variance associated with the cash flows of 
previously developed comparable drugs in valuing an option to invest in a new drug. A third 
method is to use commonly available software to conduct Monte Carlo simulation analyses.13
Assuming that the necessary inputs (e.g., risk) can be estimated, a real option can be val­
ued as a put or call option. The NPV of an investment can be adjusted for the value of the real 
option as follows:
=
−
+
Total NPV
Present Value
Investment
Option Value
	
(8.5)
Option to Expand
To value a firm with an option to expand, the analyst must define the potential value of the 
option. For example, suppose a firm has an opportunity to enter a new market. The analyst 
must project cash flows that accrue to the firm if it enters the market. The cost of entering the 
market becomes the option’s exercise price, and the PV of the expected cash flows resulting 
from entering the market becomes the value of the firm or underlying asset. The PV is likely 
to be less than the initial entry costs, or the firm would already have entered the market. The 
12In another example, if an acquirer of an oil company recognizes that, in buying the target, it would have a call op­
tion (real option to expand) to develop the firm’s oil reserves at a later date, it could choose to value separately the 
target as a stand-alone entity and the option to develop the firm’s reserves at some time in the future. The variance 
in world oil prices may be used as a proxy for the risk associated with an option to develop the reserves.
13A Monte Carlo simulation is a technique used to approximate the probability of certain outcomes by running 
multiple trial runs (i.e., simulations) using random variables, those whose possible numerical values are the result 
of random or indeterminate factors.

	
Real Options Analysis	
299
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
variance of the firm’s value can be estimated by using the variances of the market values of 
publicly traded firms that currently participate in that market. The option’s life is the length 
of time during which the firm expects to achieve a competitive advantage by entering the 
market now. Exhibit 8.8 illustrates how to value an option to expand.
Option to Delay
The underlying asset is the project to which the firm has exclusive rights. The current value 
is the PV of expected cash flows from undertaking the project now. The variance of cash flows 
from similar past projects or acquisitions can be used to estimate the variance for the project 
under consideration. A firm exercises an option to delay when it decides to postpone invest­
ing in a project. The option’s exercise price is the cost of making the initial investment.
The option to delay expires whenever the exclusive rights to the project end. Since the op­
tion eventually expires, excess profits associated with having the option disappear as other 
competitors emerge to exploit the opportunity. This opportunity cost associated with delay­
ing implementation of an investment is similar to an adjustment made to the Black–Scholes 
model for stocks that pay dividends. The payment of a dividend is equivalent to reducing the 
value of the stock, since such funds are not reinvested in the firm to support future growth. 
Consequently, for a project whose expected cash flows are spread evenly throughout the op­
tion period, each year the project is delayed, the firm will lose 1 year of profits that it could 
have earned. Therefore, the annual cost of delay is 1/n, where n is the time period for which 
the option is valid. If cash flows are not spread evenly, the cost of delay may be estimated as 
the projected cash flow for the next period as a percent of the current PV (Exhibit 8.9). Eq. (8.4) 
may be modified to reflect these considerations:
=
−
−
−
C
d
E
N d
SN(
)e
e
(
)
t
Rt
1
DY
2
	
(8.6)
where 
σ
σ
σ
=
+
−
+
=
−
d
S
E
R
DY
t
t
d
d
t
ln( / )
[
(1/ 2)
]
1
2
2
1
; 
and DY, dividend yield or opportunity cost.
Option to Abandon
For a project with a remaining life of n years, the value of continuing the project should be 
compared to its value in liquidation or sale (i.e., abandonment). The project should be contin­
ued if its value exceeds the liquidation value or sale value. Otherwise, the project should be 
abandoned. The option to abandon is equivalent to a put option (i.e., the right to sell an asset 
for a predetermined price at or before a stipulated time). The Black–Scholes formula for valu­
ing a call option can be rewritten to value a put option (P) as follows [Eq. (8.4)]:
=
−
−
−
−
−
P
S
N d
E
N d
{1
(
)}e
{1
(
)}e
Rt
t
2
1
DY
	
(8.7)
where P, theoretical put option value; d
S E
R
t
t
ln( / )
[
DY
(1/2)
]
1
2
σ
σ
=
+
−
+
; and 
σ
=
−
d
d
t
2
1
.
Exhibit 8.10 illustrates how the abandonment or put option can be applied.

300	
8.  Relative, Asset-Oriented, and Real Option Valuation Basics
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
EXHIBIT 8.8  VALU ING AN OPTION TO EXPAND USING 
THE BLACK–SCHOLES MODEL
AJAX Inc. is negotiating to acquire Comet Inc. to broaden its product offering. Based on its projec­
tions of Comet’s cash flows as a stand-alone business, AJAX cannot justify paying more than $150 
million for Comet. However, Comet is insisting on a price of $160 million. Following additional due 
diligence, AJAX believes that if it applies its technology, Comet’s product growth rate could be acceler­
ated significantly. By buying Comet, AJAX is buying an option to expand in a market in which it is not 
participating currently by retooling Comet’s manufacturing operations. The cost of retooling to utilize 
AJAX’s technology fully requires an initial investment of $100 million. The present value of the expect­
ed cash flows from making this investment today is $80 million. Consequently, based on this informa­
tion, paying the higher purchase price cannot be justified by making the investment in retooling now.
However, if Comet (employing AJAX’s new technology) could be first to market with the new 
product offering, it could achieve a dominant market share. While the new product would be ex­
pensive to produce in small quantities, the cost of production is expected to fall as larger volumes 
are sold, making Comet the low-cost manufacturer. Moreover, because of patent protection, AJAX 
believes that it is unlikely that competitors will be able to develop a superior technology for at least 
10 years. An analysis of similar investments in the past suggests that the variance of the projected 
cash flows is 20%. The option is expected to expire in 10 years, reflecting the time remaining on 
AJAX’s patent. The current 10-year Treasury bond rate (corresponding to the expected term of the 
option) is 6%. Is the value of the option to expand, expressed as a call option, sufficient to justify 
paying Comet’s asking price of $160 million [Eq. (8.4)]?
Solution
Value of the asset (PV of cash flows from retooling Comet’s operations)
= $80 million
Exercise price (PV of the cost of retooling Comet’s operations)
= $100 million
Variance of the cash flows
= 0.20
Time to expiration
= 10 years
Risk-free interest rate
= 0.06
d
ln($80/$100)
[0.06
(1/2)0.2]10
0.2
10
0.2231
1.600
0.4472
3.1623
1.3769
1.4142
0.9736
1 =
+
+
= −
+
×
= −
=
d
0.9736
1.4142
0.4406
2 =
−
= −
C
$80(0.8340)
$100(2.7183)
(0.3300)
$66.72
$18.11
$48.61 (value of the call option)
0.06 10
=
−
=
−
=
−
×
The NPV of the investment in retooling Comet’s operations, including the value of the call op­
tion, is $28.61 million [i.e., $80 − ($100 + $48.61)]. Including the value of the option, AJAX could 
pay Comet up to $178.61 million (i.e., $150 million + $28.61 million). Therefore, it does make sense 
for AJAX to exercise its option to retool Comet’s operations, and AJAX can justify paying Comet its 
$160-million asking price.
Note: Z-values for d1 and d2 were obtained from a cumulative standardized normal distribution 
N(d) table in Levine et al. (1999, pp. E6–E7).

	
Real Options Analysis	
301
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
EXHIBIT 8.9  VALU ING AN OPTION TO DELAY USING 
THE BLACK–SCHOLES MODEL
Aztec Corp. has an opportunity to acquire Pharmaceuticals Unlimited, which has a new can­
cer-fighting drug recently approved by the Food and Drug Administration. While current market 
studies indicate that the new drug’s market acceptance will be slow due to competing drugs, it is 
believed that the drug will have meteoric growth potential in the long term as new applications are 
identified. The R&D and commercialization costs associated with exploiting new applications are 
expected to require an upfront investment of $60 million. However, Aztec can delay making this 
investment until it is more confident of the new drug’s actual growth potential.
It is believed that Pharmaceuticals Unlimited’s research and development efforts give it a 5-year 
time period before competitors will have similar drugs on the market to exploit these new ap­
plications. However, if the higher growth for the new drug and its related applications does not 
materialize, Aztec estimates the NPV for Pharmaceuticals Unlimited to be $(30). That is, if the new 
cancer-fighting drug does not realize its potential, it makes no sense for Aztec to acquire Pharma­
ceuticals Unlimited. Cash flows from previous drug introductions have exhibited a variance equal 
to 50% of the present value of the cash flows. Simulating alternative growth scenarios for this new 
drug provides an expected value of $40 million. The 5-year Treasury bond rate (corresponding to 
the expected term of the option) is 6%. Despite the negative NPV associated with the acquisition, 
does the existence of the option to delay, valued as a call option, justify Aztec’s acquiring Pharma­
ceuticals Unlimited [Eq. (8.6)]?
Solution
Value of the asset (PV of projected cash flows for the new drug)
= $40 million
Exercise price (investment required to develop the new drug fully)
= $60 million
Variance of the cash flows
= 0.5
Time to expiration (t)
= 5 years
Risk-free interest rate
= 0.06
Dividend yield or opportunity cost (cost of delay = 1/5)
= 0.2
d
ln($40/$60)
[0.06
0.2
(1/2)0.5]5
0.5
5
0.4055
0.5500
0.7071
2.2361
0.1445
1.5811
0.0914
1 =
+
−
+
= −
+
×
=
=
d
0.0914
1.5811
1.4897
2 =
−
= −
C
$40(0.5359)2.7183
$60(0.0681)(2.7183)
$40(0.5359)0.3679
$60(0.0681)0.7408
7.89
3.03
$4.86 million(value of the call option)
0.2 5
0.06 5
=
−
=
−
=
−
=
−
×
−
×
The modest $4.86 million value of the call option is insufficient to offset the negative NPV of $30 
million associated with the acquisition. Consequently, Aztec should not acquire Pharmaceuticals 
Unlimited.
Note: Z-values for d1 and d2 were obtained from a cumulative standardized normal distribution 
N(d) table in Levine et al. (1999, pp. E6–E7).

302	
8.  Relative, Asset-Oriented, and Real Option Valuation Basics
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
EXHIBIT 8.10  VALU ING AN OPTION TO ABANDON USING 
THE BLACK–SCHOLES MODEL
BETA Inc. has agreed to acquire a 30% ownership stake in Bernard Mining for $225 million to fi­
nance the development of new mining operations. The mines are expected to have an economically 
useful life of 35 years. BETA estimates that the PV of its share of the cash flows would be $210 mil­
lion, resulting in a negative NPV of $15 million (i.e., $210 million  − $225 million). To induce BETA 
to make the investment, Bernard Mining has given BETA a put option enabling it to sell its share 
(i.e., abandon its investment) to Bernard at any point during the next 5 years for $175 million. The 
put option limits the downside risk to BETA.
In evaluating the terms of the deal, BETA needs to value the put option, whose present value will 
vary depending on when it is exercised. BETA estimates the average variance in the present values 
of future cash flows to be 20%, based on the variance of the share prices of publicly traded similar 
mining companies. Since the value of the mines will diminish over time as the reserves are depleted, 
the present value of the investment will diminish over time because there will be fewer years of cash 
flows remaining. The dividend yield or opportunity cost is estimated to be 1 divided by the number 
of years of profitable reserves remaining. The risk-free rate of return is 4%. Is the value of the put op­
tion sufficient to justify making the investment despite the negative NPV of the investment without 
the inclusion of the option value [Eq. (8.7)]?
Solution
Present or expected value of BETA’s 30% share of Bernard SA
= $210 million
Exercise price of put option
= $175 million
Time to expiration of put option
= 5
Variance
= 20%
Dividend yield (1/35)
= 0.029
d
ln($210/$175)
[0.04
0.029
(1/2)0.2]5
0.2
5
0.1823
0.5550
0.4472
2.2361
0.7373
1.0
0.7373
1 =
+
−
+
=
+
×
=
=
d
0.7373
1.000
0.2627
2 =
−
= −
P
$210
(1
0.6026)
2.7183
$175
(1
0.7673)
2.7183
$210
0.3974
0.8187
$175
0.2327
0.8650
$33.10
0.04 5
0.029 5
=
×
−
×
−
×
−
×
=
×
×
−
×
×
=
−
×
−
×
The value of the put option represents the additional value created by reducing risk associated 
with the investment. This additional value justifies the investment, because the sum of the NPV of 
$(15) million and the put option of $33.10 million gives a total NPV of $18.10 million.
Note: Z-scores for d1 and d2 were obtained from a cumulative standardized normal distribution 
N(d) table in Levine et al. (1999, pp. E6–E7).

	
What do Valuation Professionals do in Practice?	
303
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
DETERMINING WHEN TO USE THE DIFFERENT 
APPROACHES TO VALUATION
Table 8.3 summarizes when it is most appropriate to use each valuation method, includ­
ing DCF discussed in detail in Chapter 7, as well as the relative valuation, asset-oriented, 
replacement cost, and real options methods discussed in this chapter. If a controlling interest 
is desired, a control premium must be added to the estimated firm value to determine the 
purchase price. Recall that the comparable recent transactions method already contains a 
premium.
WHAT DO VALUATION PROFESSIONALS DO IN PRACTICE?
The capital budgeting process is the cornerstone of corporate finance literature. This prac­
tice describes how firms determine which projects to undertake based on various investment 
rules. The primary decision rule is the ranking of projects by their NPVs. The basis for NPV 
analysis is the projection of cash flows generated by the investment and converted to a PV by 
discounting these future cash flows using a discount rate based on the capital asset pricing 
model (CAPM). The finance literature argues that this approach results in better investment 
decisions when compared to alternative methodologies such as internal rate of return (IRR) 
or payback analysis.
Indeed, past survey results suggest corporate CFOs are equally likely to use NPV tech­
niques as they are IRR analyses. Large-company CFOs rely heavily on the CAPM to estimate 
their cost of capital. Investment bankers also are likely to use NPV methods and CAPM cal­
culations in estimating the weighted average cost of capital (WACC) as illustrated in their 
fairness opinion documents for M&As.14
A recent survey of private equity firms shows that such practitioners often diverge from 
mainstream academic finance in how they value businesses. Private equity investors rely 
primarily on IRR and exit multiples (i.e., what they hope to sell the business for at the end 
of the forecast period) derived from comparable company analyses to evaluate investments. 
Moreover, private equity investors tend not to calculate a WACC but rather to develop their 
own target financial rate of return (often in the 20%–25% range) that exceeds the standard 
WACC calculation. The target rate is set above the WACC rate because private equity buyout 
firms subtract their fees from these target rates so they must be high enough that limited 
partners can still earn their desired rate of return after fees have been deducted. Private eq­
uity investors tend to use a 5-year forecast horizon (consistent with their expected holding 
period) in their IRR calculations. In the fifth year, a terminal or exit value is calculated based 
on the comparable companies or recent transactions methods. Their main criteria for choos­
ing the comparable firms are industry and firm size followed by growth, profit margins, and 
geography in importance.15
14Graham and Harvey (2001).
15Gompers et al. (2016).

304	
8.  Relative, Asset-Oriented, and Real Option Valuation Basics
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
TABLE 8.3  When to Use Various Valuation Methodologies
Methodology
Use this methodology when
Discounted cash flow
•	The firm is publicly traded or private with identifiable cash flows
•	A start-up has some history to facilitate cash flow forecasts
•	An analyst has a long time horizon
•	An analyst has confidence in forecasting the firm’s cash flows
•	Current- or near-term earnings or cash flows are negative but are expected 
to turn positive in the future
•	A firm’s competitive advantage is expected to be sustainable
•	The magnitude and timing of cash flows vary significantly
Comparable companies
•	There are many firms exhibiting similar growth, return, and risk 
characteristics
•	An analyst has a short-term time horizon
•	Prior, current-, or near-term earnings or cash flows are positive
•	An analyst has confidence that the markets are, on average, right
•	Sufficient information to predict cash flows is lacking
•	Firms are cyclical. For P/E ratios, use normalized earnings (i.e., earnings 
averaged throughout the business cycle)
•	Growth rate differences among firms are large. Use the PEG ratio.
Comparable transactions
•	Recent transactions of similar firms exist
•	An analyst has a short-term time horizon
•	An analyst has confidence the markets are, on average, right
•	Sufficient information to predict cash flows is lacking
Same or comparable industry
•	Firms within an industry or a comparable industry are substantially 
similar in terms of profitability, growth, and risk
•	An analyst has confidence the markets are, on average, right
•	Sufficient information to predict cash flows is lacking
Replacement cost approach
•	An analyst wants to know the current cost of replicating a firm’s assets
•	The firm’s assets are easily identifiable, tangible, and separable
•	The firm’s earnings or cash flows are negative
Tangible book value
•	The firms’ assets are highly liquid
•	The firm is a financial services or product distribution business
•	The firm’s earnings and cash flows are negative
Breakup value
•	The sum of the value of the businesses or product lines comprising a firm 
are believed to exceed its value as a going concern
Liquidation value
•	An analyst wants to know asset values if they were liquidated today
•	Assets are separable, tangible, and marketable
•	Firms are bankrupt or subject to substantial financial distress
•	An orderly liquidation is possible
Real options (contingent 
claims)
•	Additional value can be created if management has a viable option to 
expand, delay, or abandon an investment
•	Assets not currently generating cash flows have the potential to do so
•	The markets have not valued the management decision-making flexibility 
associated with the option
•	Assets have characteristics most resembling financial options
•	The asset owner has some degree of exclusivity (e.g., a patent)
P/E, Price-to-earnings.

	
Practice Problems and Answers	
305
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
SOME THINGS TO REMEMBER
Relative valuation and asset-oriented techniques offer alternatives to DCF estimates. Since 
no single valuation approach ensures accuracy, analysts often choose to use a weighted aver­
age of several valuation methods to increase their level of confidence in the final estimate. 
Real options refer to management’s ability to revise corporate investment decisions after they 
have been made.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
8.1	 Does the application of the comparable companies valuation method require the addi­
tion of an acquisition premium? Why or why not?
8.2	 Which is generally considered more accurate: the comparable companies method or 
the recent transactions method? Explain your answer.
8.3	 What key assumptions are implicit in using the comparable companies valuation 
method? The recent comparable transactions method?
8.4	 Explain the primary differences between the income (DCF), market-based, and asset-
oriented valuation methods.
8.5	 Under what circumstances might it be more appropriate to use relative valuation 
methods rather than the DCF approach? Be specific.
8.6	 PEG ratios allow for the adjustment of relative valuation methods for the expected 
growth of the firm. How might this be helpful in selecting potential acquisition tar­
gets? Be specific.
8.7	 How is the liquidation value of a firm calculated? Why is the assumption of orderly 
liquidation important?
8.8	 What are real options, and how are they applied in valuing acquisitions?
8.9	 Give examples of preclosing and postclosing real options. Be specific.
8.10	 Conventional DCF analysis does not incorporate the effects of real options into the 
valuation of an asset. How might an analyst incorporate the potential impact of real 
options into conventional DCF valuation methods?
Answers to these Chapter Discussion Questions are available in the Online Instructor’s Manual for 
instructors using this book (https://textbooks.elsevier.com/web/Manuals.aspx?isbn=9780128016091).
PRACTICE PROBLEMS AND ANSWERS
8.11	 BigCo’s CFO is trying to determine a fair value for PrivCo, a nonpublicly traded firm 
that BigCo is considering acquiring. Several of PrivCo’s competitors, Ion International 
and Zenon, are publicly traded. Ion and Zenon have P/E ratios of 20 and 15, respec­
tively. Moreover, Ion and Zenon’s shares trade at a multiple of earnings EBITDA of 
10 and 8, respectively. BigCo estimates that next year PrivCo will achieve net income 

306	
8.  Relative, Asset-Oriented, and Real Option Valuation Basics
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
and EBITDA of $4 and 8 million, respectively. To gain a controlling interest in the firm, 
BigCo expects to have to pay at least a 30% premium to the firm’s market value. What 
should BigCo expect to pay for PrivCo?
a.	 Based on P/E ratios? Answer: $91 million.
b.	Based on EBITDA? Answer: $93.6 million.
8.12	 LAFCO Industries believes that its two primary product lines, automotive and com­
mercial aircraft valves, are becoming obsolete rapidly. Its free cash flow is diminishing 
quickly as it loses market share to new firms entering its industry. LAFCO has $200 
million in debt outstanding. Senior management expects the automotive and commer­
cial aircraft valve product lines to generate $25 and 15 million, respectively, in earnings 
EBITDA next year. The operating liabilities associated with these two product lines 
are minimal. Senior management also believes that it will not be able to upgrade these 
product lines because of declining cash flow and excessive current leverage. A com­
petitor to its automotive valve business last year sold for 10 times EBITDA. Moreover, 
a company similar to its commercial aircraft valve product line sold last month for 
12 times EBITDA. Estimate LAFCO’s breakup value before taxes.
Answer: $230 million.
8.13	 Siebel Incorporated, a nonpublicly traded company, has 2009 after-tax earnings of 
$20 million, which are expected to grow at 5% annually into the foreseeable future. 
The firm is debt free, capital spending equals the firm’s rate of depreciation, and the 
annual change in working capital is expected to be minimal. The firm’s β is esti­
mated to be 2.0, the 10-year Treasury bond is 5%, and the historical risk premium 
of stocks over the risk-free rate is 5.5%. Publicly traded Rand Technology, a direct 
competitor of Siebel’s, was sold recently at a purchase price of 11 times its 2009 after-
tax earnings, which included a 20% premium over its current market price. Aware 
of the premium paid for the purchase of Rand, Siebel’s equity owners would like to 
determine what it might be worth if they were to attempt to sell the firm in the near 
future. They chose to value the firm using the DCF and comparable recent transac­
tions methods. They believe that either method provides an equally valid estimate of 
the firm’s value.
a.	 What is the value of Siebel using the DCF method? Answer: $229.1 million.
b.	What is the value using the comparable recent transactions method? Answer: 
$220 million.
c.	 What would be the value of the firm if we combine the results of both methods? 
Answer: $224.5 million.
8.14	 Titanic Corporation reached an agreement with its creditors to voluntarily liquidate 
its assets and use the proceeds to pay off as much of its liabilities as possible. The firm 
anticipates that it will be able to sell off its assets in an orderly fashion, realizing as 
much as 70% of the book value of its receivables, 40% of its inventory, and 25% of its 
net fixed assets (excluding land). However, the firm believes that the land on which 
it is located can be sold for 120% of book value. The firm has legal and professional 
expenses associated with the liquidation process of $2.9 million. The firm has only 
common stock outstanding. Using Table 8.4, estimate the amount of cash that would 
remain for the firm’s common shareholders once all assets have been liquidated. 
Answer: $1.3 million.

	
Practice Problems and Answers	
307
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
8.15	 Best’s Foods is seeking to acquire the Heinz Baking Company, whose shareholders’ 
equity and goodwill are $41 and 7 million, respectively. A comparable bakery was 
recently acquired for $400 million, 30% more than its TBV. What was the TBV of the 
recently acquired bakery? How much should Best’s Foods expect to have to pay for 
the Heinz Baking Company? Show your work.
Answer: The TBV of the recently acquired bakery = $307.7 million, and the likely 
purchase price of Heinz = $44.2 million.
8.16	 Delhi Automotive Inc. is the leading supplier of specialty fasteners for passenger cars 
in the US market, with an estimated 25% share of this $5-billion market. Delhi’s rapid 
growth in recent years has been fueled by high levels of reinvestment in the firm. 
While this has resulted in the firm having “state-of-the-art” plants, it also has resulted 
in the firm showing limited profitability and positive cash flow. Delhi is privately 
owned and has announced that it is going to undertake an IPO in the near future. 
Investors know that economies of scale are important in this high-fixed-cost industry 
and understand that market share is an important determinant of future profitability. 
Thornton Auto Inc., a publicly traded firm and the leader in this market, has an esti­
mated market share of 38% and an $800-million market value. How should investors 
value the Delhi IPO? Show your work.
Answer: $526.3 million.
8.17	 Photon Inc. is considering acquiring one of its competitors. Photon’s management 
wants to buy a firm it believes is most undervalued. The firm’s three major competi­
tors, AJAX, BABO, and COMET, have current market values of $375, 310, and 265 
million, respectively. AJAX’s FCFE is expected to grow at 10% annually, while BABO’s 
and COMET’s FCFEs are projected to grow by 12 and 14% per year, respectively. 
AJAX, BABO, and COMET’s current year FCFE are $24, 22, and 17 million, respec­
tively. The industry average price-to-FCFE ratio and growth rate are 10 and 8%, re­
spectively. Estimate the market value of each of the three potential acquisition targets 
based on the information provided. Which firm is the most undervalued? Which firm 
is the most overvalued? Show your work.
Answer: AJAX is the most overvalued, and Comet is the most undervalued.
TABLE 8.4  Titanic Corporation Balance Sheet
Balance sheet item
Book value of assets ($)
Liquidation value
Cash
10
Accounts receivable
20
Inventory
15
Net fixed assets excluding land
8
Land
6
Total assets
59
Total liabilities
35
Shareholders’ equity
24

308	
8.  Relative, Asset-Oriented, and Real Option Valuation Basics
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
8.18	 Acquirer Incorporated’s management believes that the most reliable way to value a 
potential target firm is by averaging multiple valuation methods, since all methods 
have their shortcomings. Consequently, Acquirer’s CFO estimates that the value of 
Target Inc. could range, before an acquisition premium is added, from a high of $650 
million using DCF analysis to a low of $500 million using the comparable companies 
relative valuation method. A valuation based on a recent comparable transaction is 
$672 million. The CFO anticipates that Target Inc.’s management and shareholders 
would be willing to sell for a 20% acquisition premium, based on the premium paid 
for the recent comparable transaction. The CEO asks the CFO to provide a single esti­
mate of the value of Target Inc. based on the three estimates. In calculating a weighted 
average of the three estimates, she gives a value of 0.5 to the recent transactions 
method, 0.3 to the DCF estimate, and 0.2 to the comparable companies estimate. What 
is the weighted average estimate she gives to the CEO? Show your work.
Answer: $690 million.
8.19	 An investor group has the opportunity to purchase a firm whose primary asset is 
ownership of the exclusive rights to develop a parcel of undeveloped land sometime 
during the next 5 years. Without considering the value of the option to develop the 
property, the investor group believes the NPV of the firm is $(10) million. However, 
to convert the property to commercial use (i.e., exercise the option), the investors 
have to invest $60 million immediately in infrastructure improvements. The primary 
uncertainty associated with the property is how rapidly the surrounding area will 
grow. Based on their experience with similar properties, the investors estimate that the 
variance of the projected cash flows is 5% of NPV, which is $55 million. Assume the 
risk-free rate of return is 4%. What is the value of the call option the investor group 
would obtain by buying the firm? Is it sufficient to justify the acquisition of the firm? 
Show your work.
Answer: The value of the option is $13.47 million. The investor group should buy the 
firm, since the value of the option more than offsets the $(10)-million NPV of the firm 
if the call option were not exercised.
8.20	 Acquirer Company’s management believes that there is a 60% chance that Target Com­
pany’s FCFF will grow at 20% per year during the next 5 years from this year’s level of 
$5 million. Sustainable growth beyond the fifth year is estimated at 4% per year. How­
ever, they also believe that there is a 40% chance that cash flow will grow at half that 
annual rate during the next 5 years and then at a 4% rate thereafter. The discount rate 
is estimated to be 15% during the high-growth period and 12% during the sustainable-
growth period. What is the EXPV of Target Company?
Answer: $94.93 million.
Solutions to these Practice Problems are available in the Online Instructor’s Manual for instructors 
using this book (https://textbooks.elsevier.com/web/Manuals.aspx?isbn=9780128016091).

	
Practice Problems and Answers	
309
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
END OF CHAPTER CASE STUDY: INVESTORS QUESTION 
ABBOTT LABS’ VALUATION OF ST. JUDE MEDICAL
Case Study Objectives: To Illustrate
•	 The application of relative valuation methods
•	 The limitations of such methods
•	 How to approximate the value of synergy
•	 The role key assumptions play in establishing the credibility of any valuation
Abbott Lab’s market value plunged more than $5 billion or 6% in a single day following the an­
nouncement of the firm’s acquisition of St. Jude Medical (St. Jude) on April 26, 2016, as investors 
expressed their disapproval. Their concern was that Abbot was overpaying and would be unable to 
earn financial returns demanded by investors. The $25-billion deal included a $6.5-billion premium, 
37% above St. Jude’s closing price on April 25, 2016. St. Jude’s shares soared by more than 27% 
boosting the firm’s market capitalization to $24.1 billion from its level of $17.59 billion the prior day.
In announcing the transaction, Abbott said the primary motive for the takeover was to expand its 
heart device business. Abbott, the industry leader in manufacturing coronary stents and heart valves, 
wanted to combine with St. Jude, a maker of pacemakers and other devices for failing hearts. The aging 
population makes the “failing heart” market likely to show considerable growth in the coming years.
Medical equipment makers are under pressure to offer a wider portfolio of products to their 
hospital customers, which have been through a wave of mergers that have increased their power to 
negotiate pricing. With combined revenue of $8.7 billion, Abbott said its deal would help it compete 
more effectively against larger rivals Medtronic Plc, Boston Scientific Corp., and Edward Life Sci­
ences. The combination of Abbott and St. Jude creates a medical device manufacturer with leading 
positions in high-growth cardiovascular markets, including atrial fibrillation, structural heart, and 
heart failure, as well as a leading position in the high-growth neuromodulation market. The new 
firm also will have the largest pipeline (products in development) to deliver a steady stream of new 
medical devices to these high-growth markets.
The definitive agreement reached by Abbott and St. Jude called for St. Jude shareholders to re­
ceive $46.75 in cash and 0.8708 share of Abbott common stock. This represented a total consider­
ation of $85 per share. Abbott expects the deal would be accretive to earnings per share and that 
the combined firm will earn double-digit financial returns within 5 years. Management expects 
annual pretax cost savings of $500 million to begin within 5 years following closing. For the firm to 
earn the returns promised by management, it must be able to realize expected annual pretax cost 
savings beginning in 2020. Failure to realize these expected savings in a timely manner can impact 
significantly synergy value. Also, it is unclear if the full cost of realizing these synergies has been 
deducted from the projected savings.
One way of determining if Abbott is overpaying is to estimate St. Jude’s stand-alone value plus 
the PV of anticipated synergy. This estimate represents the upper limit (maximum) for the amount 
Abbott should pay for St. Jude and still be able to earn its cost of capital. Any payment in excess of 
the maximum purchase price means that Abbott is destroying shareholder value by in effect trans­
ferring more value than would be created to the target firm shareholders.
Table 8.5 provides data enabling an analyst to value St. Jude on a stand-alone basis using the 
comparable company method. Note that the table contains valuation multiples for St. Jude’s three 

310	
8.  Relative, Asset-Oriented, and Real Option Valuation Basics
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
primary competitors as well as earnings, revenue, book value, and enterprise value per share for St. 
Jude. The choice of valuation multiples is subjective in that it is unclear which best mirror the stand-
alone value of St. Jude’s. Abnormally low interest rates at the time of the merger announcement 
could have resulted in artificially high valuation multiples. Also, the competitors selected are larger 
and more diversified than St. Jude’s and their growth rates and profitability tend to be greater while 
the riskiness of their cash flows tends to be less.
Discussion Questions
1.	 Based on the information provided in Table 8.5, what do you believe is a reasonable stand-
alone value for St. Jude Medical? (Hint: Use the comparable company valuation method to 
derive a single point estimate of stand-alone value.) Show your work.
2.	 Does your answer to question (1) include a purchase price premium? Explain your answer.
3.	 What are the key limitations of the comparable companies valuation methodology? Be specific.
4.	 In estimating the value of anticipated cost savings, should an analyst use St. Jude’s marginal 
tax rate of 40% or its effective tax rate of 22%? Explain your answer.
5.	 What is the PV of the $500-million pretax annual cost savings expected to start in 2020? Assume the 
appropriate cost of capital is 10% and that the savings will continue in perpetuity. Show your work.
6.	 What are the key valuation assumptions underlying the valuation of St. Jude Medical? Include 
both the valuation of St. Jude as a stand-alone business and synergy value. Be specific.
7.	 What is the maximum amount Abbott Labs could have paid for St. Jude Medical and still 
earned its cost of capital? Did Abbott overpay for St. Jude based on the information given in the 
case? Explain your answer. [Hint: Use your answers to questions (1) and (5).]
Solutions to these questions are provided in the Online Instructor’s Guide accompanying this manual 
(https://textbooks.elsevier.com/web/Manuals.aspx?isbn=9780128016091).
TABLE 8.5  St. Jude Medical Valuation Data
Forward P/Ea, 
Col. 1
Price/revenueb, 
Col. 2
Price/bookc, 
Col. 3
Enterprise 
value to 
EBITDA, 
Col. 4
Enterprise 
value to 
revenue, 
Col. 5
Primary competitors
  Medtronic (ratio)
16.14
4.17
2.32
15.19
4.69
  Boston Scientific (ratio)
18.04
4.10
4.82
18.41
4.70
  Edward Life Sciences 
(ratio)
29.28
4.87
9.13
26.77
4.99
  St. Jude Medical 
(dollars per share)
Earnings 
per share, 
$1.06
Annual 
revenue/
share, $5.54
Book 
value/
share, $4.04
Enterprise 
value/
share, $1.12
Annual 
revenue/
share, $5.54
EBITDA, Earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization; P/E, price-to-earnings.
aS&P Capital IQ report consensus estimate (4/26/16).
bTrailing 52-week average from S&P Capital IQ for period ending March 31, 2016.
cMost recent quarter (April 2, 2016).

	
Practice Problems and Answers	
311
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
A D D I T I O N A L  C A S E  S T U D Y  R E C O M M E N D AT I O N S 
( S E A R C H  H A RVA R D  B U S I N E S S  S C H O O L 
P U B L I S H I N G  S I T E  B Y  N A M E  O F  C A S E :  
h b s p . h a r v a r d . e d u )
Methods of Valuation for Mergers and 
­Acquisitions, Michael J. Schill, Paul 
Dohety, Revision Date: February 24, 2009, 
Product Number: UV0112-PDF-ENG, 
Source: Darden School of Business, hbsp.
harvard.edu.
Subjects Covered: Discounted Cash Flow, 
Book Value, Liquidation Value, Replacement 
Cost, Market Value, Trading Multiples of 
Peer Firms, and Comparable Transaction 
Multiples.
Valuation of AirThread Connections, Erik 
Stafford, Joel L. Heilprin, Revision Date: 
April 27, 2012, Product Number: 4263-PDF-
ENG, Source: HBS Brief Cases, hbsp.
harvard.edu.
Subjects Covered: Valuation, Capital 
Structure, Synergy.


C H A P T E R
313
Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring Activities. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-801609-1.00009-9
Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
9
Financial Modeling Basics
There are two kinds of forecasters: the ones who don’t know and the ones who don’t know they don’t 
know. —John Kenneth Galbraith
O U T L I N E
Inside M&A: The Unrelenting Allure 
of the “Transformative” Acquisition—
Microsoft Buys LinkedIn in its 
Biggest Deal in History	
314
Chapter Overview	
315
What Is Financial Modeling?	
316
Financial Modeling Data Requirements	
316
Generally Accepted Accounting 
Principles and International 
Standards	
316
GAAP Financial Statements	
317
Pro Forma Accounting	
317
Common Financial Model Linkages	
319
Key Steps in the Valuation Process	
321
Step 1: Analyze Recent Financial 
Statements	
321
Step 2: Project Pro Forma Financial 
Statements	
326
Step 3: Estimate the Present Value 
of the Projected Pro Forma Cash 
Flows	
327
Model Balancing Mechanism	
334
Data Sources	
335
Income Statement	
335
Balance Sheet	
336
Cash Flow Statement	
337
Risk Measures: β and Credit Ratios	
339
Managing the Model	
340
Addressing Valuation Issues in a 
Near-Zero Interest Rate Environment	
341
Some Things to Remember	
341
Discussion Questions	
341
Practice Problems and Answers	
342
Case Study: Life Technologies 
Undertakes a Strategic Review	
343
Case Study Objectives	
343
Background	
343
The Life Sciences Industry	
344
Conclusions	
349
Discussion Questions	
349
Additional Case Study 
Recommendations	
352

314	
9.  FINANCIAL MODELING BASICS
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
INSIDE M&A: THE UNRELENTING ALLURE OF THE 
“TRANSFORMATIVE” ACQUISITION—MICROSOFT BUYS LINKEDIN 
IN ITS BIGGEST DEAL IN HISTORY
KEY POINTS: FINANCIAL MODELS
•	 Enable the rapid consideration of alternative scenarios by changing key assumptions 
underlying valuation, deal structuring, and financing issues.
•	 Help define the range of risks associated with an investment.
•	 Sometimes aid and abet managers in crossing the fine line between “reimagining” how their 
business can compete and hyperbole.
The good news, bad news about financial models is that they can be used to evaluate a 
wide range of alternatives. Generally, this capability is highly useful because it gives senior 
management a look into the future without having to commit substantial resources to a bet 
on a highly uncertain outcome. But it is critical to remember that financial models are in effect 
sophisticated high-speed calculators that can lull management into a false sense of security. If 
given a set of optimistic assumptions, we should not be surprised that we get a rosy outlook. 
This can be especially seductive when management is frustrated with their inability to im­
prove their firm’s current operating performance and boost its share price.
Enter the “transformational deal”: those intended to enable a company to fundamentally 
change the way it does business. Often highly risky, they push the acquirer into new areas 
with which it is largely unfamiliar, requiring the acquirer to climb rapidly a steep learning 
curve. In the tech sector, “transformational deals” often are precedent setting, with little his­
torical comparisons to assess likely future performance. They require management to place 
a bet on new products still in the concept stage to be sold in markets that are often poorly 
understood or largely undefined and requiring execution skills seldom found in large bu­
reaucratic firms.
These concerns notwithstanding, Microsoft made its most ambitious move in years when 
it announced on June 13, 2016, that it would acquire LinkedIn in an all-cash deal valued at 
$26.2 billion, almost 9 times LinkedIn $2.9 billion annual revenue. By far the largest in the 
firm’s history, the takeover combines Microsoft, a leading maker of software, and LinkedIn, 
the world’s largest business-oriented social networking site. While dwarfed by Facebook, 
the largest and most profitable of social networks, LinkedIn is the most widely used site for 
people to promote their professional skills and accomplishments.
Arguably the deal was about gaining access to LinkedIn’s data and user base. Using this 
metric for valuing businesses without significant earnings but with significant user growth 
rests on the premise that sustained user growth will eventually result in future earnings. 
Facebook acquired WhatsApp (the popular messaging service) for $21.8 billion in late 2014. It 
paid about $48 per existing user ($21.8 billion/0.45 billion users) for WhatsApp versus about 
$33 per user ($1 billion/0.30 billion users) for its earlier acquisition of Instagram. While these 
deals were eye-popping at the time, Microsoft’s acquisition of LinkedIn topped these trans­
actions by paying almost $61 dollar per user for LinkedIn ($26.2 billion/0.433 billion users). 
To be fair, Microsoft believed it was playing catch-up as the digital world moves away from 

	
Chapter Overview	
315
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
the firm’s traditional software business to cloud computing in which users rent software ac­
cessible via the internet. Management may have viewed the price paid as justifiable as this 
acquisition could ultimately “save” the firm.
The common thread between Microsoft and LinkedIn, Microsoft argues, is that both make 
most of their money selling to professionals. Microsoft sees the deal conceptually as all about 
bringing together the professional cloud and the professional network. It sees the acquisition 
as providing new revenue streams to shore up its aging Windows operating system and Of­
fice software businesses by combining their capabilities with LinkedIn’s user-supplied data.
While the potential may be large, any payoff requires skillful execution by Microsoft in 
implementing a coherent strategy. Given what the firm paid for LinkedIn, the challenges to 
earning the firm’s cost of capital are daunting. Paying a 50% premium for a money-losing 
business like LinkedIn should raise red flags. LinkedIn has struggled to sustain its growth. 
Less than 1 year ago, its stock was trading 30% higher than the $196 per share offered by 
Microsoft.
With large acquisitions, Microsoft’s execution skills are problematic. In 2014 it paid 
$9.4 billion for Nokia’s smartphone business and $6 billion in 2007 for internet advertis­
ing firm, aQuantitive. Both acquisitions have since then been totally written off. What entry 
barriers the LinkedIn acquisition may create are likely to be brief. The social networking 
behemoth, Facebook, could get into business networking where both employers and em­
ployees connect given its massive financial resources, huge user base, ubiquitous brand, and 
increasingly integrated databases.
While models can be indispensable in addressing valuation, deal structuring, and financing 
issues, they cannot be divorced from pressure on management to transform businesses per­
forming below investor expectations. Model output driven by management input will reflect 
their convictions. Senior managers can (sometimes unknowingly) get the model to deliver the 
output management wants by making overly optimistic assumptions. In the final analysis, 
models are an important tool supplementing but not replacing executive judgment. Models 
work best when history is available to evaluate the reasonableness of growth, profitability, and 
risk assumptions, but they can fall short with new, still unproven businesses like LinkedIn.
CHAPTER OVERVIEW
Financial models are widely used in a variety of business applications from financial re­
porting to capital budgeting to valuing and structuring mergers and acquisitions (M&As). 
The purpose of this chapter is to discuss the basics of applying financial modeling methods 
to firm valuation and to assist the reader in understanding the power (and limitations) of 
models in analyzing real-world situations. The model discussed in this chapter is relatively 
simple consisting of four Microsoft Excel worksheets and is applied to the valuation of a sin­
gle firm. Building upon the basics of financial modeling outlined in this chapter, Chapter 14 
will discuss the important role such models play in valuing and structuring M&As using a 
substantially more complex, interactive model.
The chapter begins with an overview of what financial modeling entails, why it is impor­
tant, the data requirements of such models, and common financial model linkages. It then 
illustrates a simplified methodology for using a financial model to value a firm and discusses 

316	
9.  FINANCIAL MODELING BASICS
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
where to find data required by the model. The case study at the end of the chapter entitled 
“Life Technologies Undertakes a Strategic Review” illustrates how financial models can be 
used to estimate firm value, identify the key determinants of firm value, and simulate alterna­
tive outcomes to facilitate management decision making.
The spreadsheets and formulas for the model described in this chapter are available in 
a Microsoft Excel file entitled “Target Firm Valuation Model” on the companion site to this 
book (https://www.elsevier.com/books-and-journals/book-companion/9780128016091). A 
review of this chapter is available in the file folder entitled “Student Study Guide” on the 
companion site to this book.
WHAT IS FINANCIAL MODELING?
Financial modeling refers to the creation of a mathematical representation or model of the 
financial and operational characteristics of a business. Applications involving financial mod­
eling include business valuation, management decision making, capital budgeting, financial 
statement analysis, and determining the firm’s cost of capital. Such models are at best a sim­
plistic illustration of how the firm actually creates value for its shareholders. Their real value 
comes from forcing the model builder to think about the important relationships among the 
firm’s financial statements and to focus on the key determinants of value creation and the as­
sumptions underlying forecasts. Often referred to as “simulation,” financial models provide 
a useful means of assessing alternative options and associated risks and of identifying how 
firm value is affected by different economic events.
To estimate firm value, financial modeling requires that the analyst forecast cash flow. How 
this may be done and the accompanying challenges are addressed next.
FINANCIAL MODELING DATA REQUIREMENTS
The quality of a model’s output is dependent on the reliability of data (i.e., audited by 
a trusted party) used to build the model and the credibility of the assumptions underlying 
cash flow projections. Consequently, analysts must understand on what basis numbers are 
collected and reported. That is, are they based on generally accepted accounting principles 
(GAAP) or pro forma financial statements?
Generally Accepted Accounting Principles and International Standards
US public companies prepare their financial statements in accordance with GAAP. GAAP 
financial statements are those prepared in agreement with guidelines established by the Fi­
nancial Accounting Standards Board (FASB). GAAP is a rules-based system, giving explicit 
instructions for every situation that the FASB has anticipated. In contrast, international ac­
counting standards (IAS) are a principles-based system, with more generalized standards. 
GAAP and IAS currently exhibit significant differences. When and the extent to which GAAP 
and IAS systems converge are open questions. Consequently, while we recognize that the 
way financial data is recorded often differs by country, we utilize GAAP-based financial re­
porting throughout this book.

	
Financial Modeling Data Requirements	
317
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
In early 2017, the US Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) announced that it was in­
vestigating allowing public companies to supplement their GAAP financial statements with 
information prepared according to IAS. Among other things, the supplemental information is 
used by US companies seeking to purchase foreign firms to see what the firms’ consolidated 
financial statements might look like if the two firms were to merge.
GAAP Financial Statements
A firm’s financial statements typically consist of an income statement, balance sheet, and 
cash flow statement. The income statement measures a firm’s financial performance over a 
specific time period: month, quarter, or year. The statement displays revenue and expenses 
generated from both operating and nonoperating activities. Operating revenues and expens­
es are derived from the firm’s normal operations; nonoperating revenues and expenses result 
from activities such as the sale of assets or employee termination expenses associated with a 
facility closure. Such events are not a regular part of a firm’s normal operations.
The balance sheet provides data on what a firm owns (i.e., its assets), what it owes (i.e., its 
liabilities), and its value to its shareholders (i.e., shareholders’ equity) at a moment in time. 
Assets are resources that generate future cash flows for shareholders. Liabilities are obliga­
tions to parties outside of the firm. Shareholders’ equity is the value of the business to its 
owners after all obligations to external parties have been satisfied.
A cash flow statement summarizes the firm’s cash inflows and outflows from operating, 
investing, and financing activities during a specific time period. Cash flows from operations 
represent those arising from the firm’s normal operations such as revenues and actual cash 
expenses after taxes. Cash from investing activities arises from the acquisition or disposition 
of current or fixed assets. Finally, cash inflows from financing activities include the issuance 
of additional shares or new borrowing; cash outflows include share repurchases, principal 
repayments, and dividend payouts.
Pro Forma Accounting
Pro forma financial statements (also referred to as adjusted financial statements) present fi­
nancial data in a way that may describe more accurately a firm’s current or projected per­
formance. Because there are no accepted standards, pro forma statements may deviate sub­
stantially from GAAP statements. In 2015, 5.7% of US Standard & Poor’s companies reported 
their financial statements using GAAP accounting standards exclusively.1 Most public firms 
supplement their GAAP statements with pro forma statements that are “adjusted” to reflect 
factors that firms will argue more accurately represent their business.
Pro forma statements show what an acquirer’s and target’s combined financial perfor­
mance would look like if they were merged. Although public firms still are required to file 
their financial statements with the SEC in accordance with GAAP, companies often argue that 
pro forma statements provide investors with a more realistic view of a company’s true per­
formance than GAAP reporting. Although pro forma statements serve a useful purpose, such 
1Shumsky and Francis (2016).

318	
9.  FINANCIAL MODELING BASICS
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
liberal accounting can easily hide a company’s poor performance. Exhibit 9.1 suggests some 
ways in which an analyst can tell if a firm is engaging in inappropriate accounting practices.
The failure to adequately review a firm’s financial statements can have disastrous results 
for acquiring firm shareholders. Target firms may manipulate earnings upward prior to a bid 
in an effort to get a higher offer price.2 Earnings manipulation tends to occur more commonly 
with respect to overstating net sales rather than mishandling accruals, since the latter may be 
more easily detected during acquirer due diligence.3 In late 2012, the failure to catch alleged 
major accounting improprieties in its acquisition of British software maker Autonomy Corpo­
ration for $10.3 billion forced Hewlett-Packard to take a $5.0-billion reduction in the value of 
the 2011 acquisition. The accounting changes reflected an 81% reduction in Autonomy’s op­
erating profit and a 54% reduction in reported revenue. Valeant Pharmaceutical International 
Inc., a Canada-based company, found itself at the center of a firestorm generated by alleged 
2According to Mao and Renneboog (2015), in management buyouts, the firm’s managers may manipulate earnings 
downward so that they may be able to take the firm private at a lower offer price.
3Campo and Hgbaba (2016).
EXHIBIT 9.1  ACCOUNTING DISCREPANCY RED FLAGS
1.	 The source of the revenue is questionable. Examples include revenue from selling to an 
affiliated party or selling something to a customer in exchange for something other than cash.
2.	 Income is inflated by nonrecurring gains. Gains on the sale of assets may be inflated by an 
artificially low book value of the assets sold.
3.	 Deferred revenue shows a large increase. It increases as a firm collects money from customers 
in advance of delivering its products and is reduced as the products are delivered. A jump in 
this item could mean the firm is having trouble delivering its products.
4.	 Reserves for bad debt are declining as a percentage of revenue. This implies the firm may be 
boosting revenue by not reserving enough to cover losses from uncollectable accounts.
5.	 Growth in accounts receivable exceeds substantially the increase in revenue or inventory. 
This may mean that a firm is having difficulty in selling its products (i.e., inventories are 
accumulating) or that it is having difficulty collecting what it is owed.
6.	 The growth in net income is much different from the growth in cash from operations. Because 
it is more difficult to “manage” cash flow than net income (often distorted due to improper 
revenue recognition), this could indicate that net income is being misstated.
7.	 An increasing gap between a firm’s income reported on its financial statements and its taxable 
income. In general, the relationship between book and tax accounting is likely to remain 
constant over time, unless there are changes in tax rules or accounting standards.
8.	 Unexpected large asset write-offs. This may reflect management inertia in incorporating 
changing business circumstances into its accounting estimates.
9.	 Extensive use of related party transactions. Such transactions may not be subject to the same 
discipline and high standards of integrity as unrelated party transactions.
10.	 Changes in auditing firms that are not well justified. The firm may be seeking a firm that will 
accept its aggressive accounting positions.

	
Common Financial Model Linkages	
319
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
accounting irregularities. In late 2016, the firm was accused of understating its normal oper­
ating expenses by burying a portion of such expenses among one-time acquisition-related 
write-offs and inflating sales by “channel stuffing.”4 The firm publishes both a GAAP-based 
earnings per share (EPS) and pro forma (adjusted) cash flow–based EPS. The latter made its 
performance look much better than the standard method of calculating EPS.
COMMON FINANCIAL MODEL LINKAGES
A financial model creates a set of projections about the future of a business in terms of 
the businesses’ income statement, balance sheet, and cash flow statement. Each statement 
is linked in such a way that changing assumptions about one factor can result in changes in 
other financial statements. Let us examine these linkages in more detail.
The income statement, balance sheet, and cash flow statements are interrelated (Fig. 9.1). 
All items on the income statement from revenue to taxes affect the calculation of net income 
that measures how well the assets and liabilities listed on the balance sheet were used. Net in­
come flows from the income statement to retained earnings (i.e., cumulative income or losses 
4Channel stuffing refers to recording as sales product shipments to a distributor that have not been ordered. The 
distributor may then return the products to the manufacturer or hold them in inventory. In either case Valeant 
would not receive payment for the products. Valeant was accused of “selling” its products through Philidor, a 
specialty pharmacy, which sells drugs directly to consumers by mail.
FIGURE 9.1  Interrelationships between a firm’s financial statements. aNew equity issues less repurchases. 
bNew borrowing less debt repayment. cSum of cash from operating, investing, and financing activities. dCash avail­
able to repay outstanding revolving credit balance in excess of the firm’s desired minimum cash balance. ePayment 
made to reduce outstanding revolving credit balance in excess of the firm’s desired minimum cash balance.

320	
9.  FINANCIAL MODELING BASICS
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
since the firm’s inception) on the balance sheet and also is shown as the first line of the cash 
flow statement. The cash flow statement shows cash from operating, investing, and financ­
ing activities. It describes the source of cash inflows and the uses for cash outflows and the 
amount of cash the firm reports on its balance sheet at the end of an accounting period. That 
is, the cash flow statement begins with net income from the income statement and concludes 
with the firm’s ending cash balance, which is also shown at the top of the asset side of the 
firm’s balance sheet.
Firms attempt to maintain minimum cash balances to meet short-term working capital 
needs such as payroll. Any cash from operating and investing activities in excess of that re­
quired to maintain the firm’s desired minimum cash balance may be used to repay any out­
standing debt. Consequently, the firm’s year-ending debt balance is reduced by the amount 
of excess cash used to repay debt.
In building financial models, the previously described linkages among the financial state­
ments introduce circular logic known as circular references in spreadsheet software pro­
grams. Circular references are a series of cell references in which the last cell reference refers 
to the first resulting in a closed loop. For example, increases in interest expense reduce net 
income, which decreases cash flow to repay borrowing resulting in higher debt outstanding 
and higher interest expense. Fig. 9.2 illustrates this circularity.
Such circular references could result in the financial model becoming unstable with Micro­
soft’s Excel software showing any of the following error messages: REF!, #Value, or Div/0!. 
To resolve circular references using Microsoft’s Excel, turn on the iteration command for Win­
dows 7, 8, or 10 as follows:
•	 On the ribbon bar, click on File ⋙ Options ⋙ Formulas.
•	 Set workbook calculation to Automatic and enable Iterative Calculation.
•	 Set maximum number of iterations to 100 and the maximum amount of change to 0.001.
An alternative means of resolving circular references is to use “toggle buttons” that indi­
cate a state such as yes/no or on/off. “Toggle buttons” are used in the models accompanying 
this textbook on the income statement (interest income and expense rows) and debt repay­
ment (revolving credit facility row) worksheets. Such buttons are triggered by switching the 
interest income/expense or revolving credit “toggle button” on and off and on (i.e., from 1 to 
0 to 1 and may be expressed as 1 ≫ enter 0 ≫ enter 1). This often restores model stability just 
FIGURE 9.2  Financial model circularity.

	
Key Steps in the Valuation Process	
321
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
as turning a wireless modem on and off and on can restore an internet connection. “Toggle 
buttons” are displayed on the worksheets as follows:
1
0 = circ off
1 = circ on
KEY STEPS IN THE VALUATION PROCESS
The financial modeling process used to value a firm consists of a series of steps. First, ana­
lyze the target firm’s historical statements to identify the primary determinants of cash flow. 
Second, project 3–5 years (or more) of annual pro forma financial statements. This period is 
called the planning period. Third, estimate the present value (PV) of the projected pro forma 
cash flows, including the terminal value. These steps are discussed in detail in the following 
sections.
Step 1: Analyze Recent Financial Statements
Understanding how a firm made money historically is helpful in determining how it may 
do so in the future. Once the firm’s historical financial data has been collected,5 the analyst 
should look for relationships or correlation between line items on financial statements and 
the firm’s free cash flows. Variables exhibiting strong historical correlation with operating 
cash flows and in turn firm value often are referred to as value drivers. Value drivers are 
variables that exert the greatest impact on firm value. For nonfinancial firms, they gener­
ally include the rate of growth in sales, the cost of sales as a percent of sales, selling, general, 
and administrative expenses (SG&A) as a percent of sales, weighted average cost of capital 
(WACC) assumed during the annual cash flow growth period, and the WACC and sustain­
able cash flow growth rate assumed during the terminal period.6
Equal to the difference between sales and cost of sales as a percent of sales, gross margin 
per dollar of sales is a widely used means of summarizing a firm’s ability to create value. A 
simple diagram plot of a firm’s gross margin over at least one full business cycle (5–7 years) 
provides useful insight into how the firm was able to create value historically. An increase 
in the ratio over time indicates that the firm has been able to reduce its costs compared to 
sales, raise prices on each item sold, or a combination of the two. A declining ratio reflects 
deterioration in the firm’s ability to control costs, raise prices, or both. However, gross margin 
may show considerable variation from one year to the next. How we deal with this issue is 
addressed next.
5Common sources of data for publicly traded firms include the firm’s annual report and 10K filing with the SEC, 
available at sec.gov/edgarshtml or via the firm’s website (see Investor Relations). Other sources of information in­
clude subscription-based services such as Standard and Poor’s Compustat service (www.compustatresources.com/
support/index.html), Morningstar.com, and free sources including finance.yahoo.com or finance.google.com.
6Value drivers differ by type of firm. For marketing-oriented businesses such as Nike, SG&A as a percent of sales is 
likely to be a key determinant of firm value; for pharmaceuticals such as Pfizer, research and development (R&D) is 
an important value driver.

322	
9.  FINANCIAL MODELING BASICS
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
Normalize Historical Data
To ensure that these historical relationships can be accurately defined, it is necessary to nor­
malize the data by removing nonrecurring changes and questionable accounting practices in 
order to identify longer-term trends in the data. Such data often is easily recognized because 
it represents an outlier in the data series. Cash flow may be adjusted by adding back large 
increases in reserves7 or deducting large decreases in reserves from free cash flow to the firm. 
Similar adjustments can be made for significant nonrecurring gains on the sale of assets or 
losses due to nonrecurring expenses, such as those associated with the settlement of a lawsuit 
or warranty claim. Monthly revenue may be aggregated into quarterly or even annual data to 
minimize period-to-period distortions in earnings or cash flow resulting from inappropriate 
accounting practices.8
Common-size financial statements are used to uncover data irregularities. These statements 
may be constructed by calculating the percentage each line item of the income statement, 
balance sheet, and cash flow statement is of annual sales for each quarter or year for which 
historical data are available. Common-size financial statements are useful for comparing 
businesses of different sizes in the same industry at a specific moment in time. Called cross-
sectional comparisons, such analyses may indicate that the ratio of capital spending to sales for 
the target firm is much less than for other firms in the industry. This discrepancy may simply 
reflect “catch-up” spending at the target’s competitors, or it may suggest the target is defer­
ring necessary plant and equipment spending. To determine which is true, it is necessary to 
calculate common-size financial statements for the target firm and its primary competitors 
over a number of consecutive periods. Called a multiperiod comparison, these analyses help 
confirm whether the target simply has completed a large portion of capital spending that oth­
ers in the industry are undertaking currently or is behind in making necessary expenditures.9
Financial ratio analysis is the calculation of performance ratios from data in a firm’s finan­
cial statements to identify the firm’s financial strengths and weaknesses. Such analysis helps 
identify potential problems requiring further examination during due diligence. Ratios al­
low the analyst to compare firms of different sizes. For example, assume we are comparing 
operating profits [earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT)] of two firms. EBIT for Firm A 
is $20 million and $6 million for Firm B. It is inappropriate to conclude that Firm A is bet­
ter managed than Firm B. Firm A may have a larger dollar value of profits only because it is 
larger. The firms’ profitability should be compared in terms of their margins (i.e., the amount 
of profit per dollar of sales each firm can keep). If Firm A has sales of $100 million and Firm B 
has sales of $30 million, the two firms are equally profitable (when measured in this manner) 
with each earning 20% of each dollar of sales.
7Reserves are charges taken on the income statement against current earnings in anticipation of future expenses. 
Such reserves also are entered on the firm’s balance sheet as a liability item to reflect pending obligations.
8While public companies are required to provide financial data for only the current and 2 prior years, it is highly 
desirable to use data spanning at least one business cycle (i.e., about 5–7 years) to identify trends.
9Even if it is not possible to collect sufficient data to undertake cross-sectional and multiperiod comparisons of both 
the target firm and its direct competitors, constructing common-size statements for the target firm only can provide 
useful insights. Abnormally large increases or decreases in these ratios from one period to the next highlight the 
need for further examination to explain why these fluctuations occurred.

	
Key Steps in the Valuation Process	
323
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
Because ratios adjust for firm size, they enable the analyst to compare a firm’s ratios with 
industry averages to discover if the company is out of line with competitors. A successful 
competitor’s performance ratios may be used if industry average data10 are not available. 
Once the historical data have been normalized or smoothed, we need to understand the pri­
mary factors that affected changes in gross margin historically. That is, what are the primary 
determinants of sales growth and profit margins?
Understand Determinants of Revenue Growth and Profit Margins
A firm’s revenue growth and profitability are determined by a combination of industry-
specific and firm-specific factors. A suggested approach to understanding the determinants 
of a firm’s revenue growth and profit margins is to evaluate the industry’s attractiveness in 
terms of the intensity of competition within the industry and in turn potential profitability 
and the firm’s competitive position within the industry.
A convenient means of evaluating industry attractiveness is to apply the Porter Five Forces 
Model described in Chapter 4. The Porter Model identifies a series of factors that collectively 
help determine the potential competitiveness and in turn profitability of an industry. Highly 
competitive industries tend to offer lower potential profitability than less competitive ones. 
These factors include the following: the threat of new entrants, bargaining power of suppli­
ers, bargaining power of customers, threat of substitute products, and the degree of competi­
tive rivalry within the industry. Bargaining power refers to the ability of a firm’s customers 
to influence the prices of the products and services it sells and suppliers to set the prices 
the firm pays for materials and services that it buys. This influence can extend well beyond 
price and include transaction payment and delivery terms. Table 9.1 summarizes the factors 
that determine the significance of each “force” and its implication for potential profitability. 
These forces can be augmented to include other considerations such as the role of regulation, 
unions, and government as needed.
Table 9.2 generalizes the results of the Porter Five Forces Model by summarizing the char­
acteristics of high-profit versus low-profit industries. In general, highly profitable industries 
are subject to less competition than lower-profit industries. Highly competitive industries 
tend to experience so-called normal profits, that is, a level of profits that compensates firms 
for the risk they have assumed. Less competitive industries often result in firms earning ab­
normal profits (i.e., those in excess of the risk assumed). An example of a high-profit industry 
would be soft drinks and a low-profit industry would be airlines. The terms weak and strong 
refer to the bargaining power of suppliers and customers relative to the firm being analyzed.
Once factors affecting industry profitability are understood, the analyst can turn to analyz­
ing firm-specific factors determining profit margins: sales and cost of sales.
Sales are the product of price per unit times the number of units sold. The growth in the 
firm’s sales thus reflects the ability of the firm to raise prices (i.e., pricing power), the firm’s 
ability to gain market share, and the growth in product demand in the industry. The firm’s 
capacity to raise prices is a measure of its pricing power. Pricing power tends to be less in 
highly competitive markets than in less competitive ones. According to the Porter Five Forces 
10Industry data are found in such publications as The Almanac of Business and Industrial Financial Ratios (Prentice 
Hall), Annual Statement Studies (Robert Morris Associates), Dun’s Review (Dun and Bradstreet), Industry Norms and 
Key Business Ratios (Dun and Bradstreet), and Value Line Investment Survey for Company and Industry Ratios.

324	
9.  FINANCIAL MODELING BASICS
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
model discussed in detail in Chapter 4, the degree of competitiveness in a market and in turn 
pricing power (i.e., the ability to influence pricing) is affected by the ease with which new 
firms can enter a market, the availability of close substitutes for products or services cur­
rently offered in the market, the degree of industry concentration, and the amount of excess 
capacity. Fig. 9.3 provides a framework (the Pricing Power Continuum) for assessing a firm’s 
pricing power within its served market. The continuum should be read as follows. Firms in 
an industry have significant pricing power when barriers to entry are high, there are few 
close substitutes for its product or service offering, there is little excess capacity, the firm’s 
market share is high relative to current competitors, and government regulation and over­
sight is limited. An analyst can describe subjectively the degree of a firm’s pricing power by 
TABLE 9.1  Porter Five Forces Model Summary
Force
Implication for profit margins
Threat of new entrants into a market: stronger when
•	Entry barriers are low such as
–	 Low capital requirements
–	 Absence of strong brands
–	 Access to distribution channels
•	Competitors use a common technology
New entrants may:
•	Intensify rivalry/competitive environment
•	Compete for market share by reducing selling 
prices
•	Add to costs by stimulating innovation boosting 
advertising and marketing expenses
Bargaining power of suppliers: stronger when
•	Resource supplied is scarce
•	Switching costs high
•	Customer small relative to supplier
•	Few substitutes
Suppliers having substantial bargaining power can:
•	Boost prices paid for inputs used by current 
customers
•	Impose less favorable terms such as longer delivery 
schedules
Bargaining power of customers: bargaining power 
stronger when 
•	They are few in number relative to sellers
•	A customer purchases a large portion of a seller’s 
output
•	They possess a credible backward integration threat 
(i.e., ability to enter the supplier’s business)
•	Switching costs are low
Customers having substantial bargaining power can:
•	Force selling prices down and squeeze supplier 
profit margins
•	Extract more favorable terms such as longer 
payment periods
Threat of substitute products: impact on reducing 
demand for current competitor products greater when
•	Substitutes are close to existing products
•	Switching costs are low
•	Customers willing to switch
Many substitutes (i.e., those meeting the same 
customer need) can:
•	Limit prices that can be charged
•	Reduce demand for product and service offerings 
of current industry competitors
Degree of competitive rivalry: intensity greater when
•	Competitors are comparable in size and few in 
number (oligopoly)
•	Market size and growth prospects are limited 
(stagnant markets breed more intense competition)
•	Product differentiation and brand loyalty is low
•	Exit barriers are high
•	Capacity utilization is low
•	Fixed costs as a percent of total costs are high
Intense rivalry may:
•	Breed competitive price reductions, innovation and 
investment in new products
•	Intensify sales promotions and advertising 
campaigns
•	Reduce current competitor profit margins

	
Key Steps in the Valuation Process	
325
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
its relative position on the continuum. The further to the right the firm is placed, the greater 
is its perceived pricing power.
The other major component of revenue growth, unit sales, is driven by the growth in in­
dustry product demand and by gains in market share. Industry product demand often is cor­
related with one or two key variables. The determinants of unit sales will differ by industry. 
For example, beer, beverage, and personal care products (e.g., shampoo) are heavily influ­
enced by demographics such as population growth and changes in the age composition of 
the population. Sporting goods sales are directly related to advertising and marketing expen­
ditures. Automotive sales are driven by a combination of changes in consumer real income 
(i.e., purchasing power), consumer confidence, and borrowing costs. Pharmaceutical product 
sales are impacted by R&D spending and the aging of the population. The demand for smart­
phone apps is correlated with the growth in handset sales.
Once the analyst feels that they understand what has determined pricing power and unit 
sales growth historically, it is necessary to analyze the primary determinants of the cost of 
FIGURE 9.3  Pricing power continuum.
TABLE 9.2  Characteristics of High-Profit Versus Low-Profit Industries
High industry profits are associated with
Low industry profits are associated with
Weak suppliers
Strong suppliers
Weak customers
Strong customers
High entry barriers
Low entry barriers
Few substitutes
Many substitutes
Little rivalry/competition
Intense rivalry/competition

326	
9.  FINANCIAL MODELING BASICS
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
sales. Depending on the industry, the two largest components of the cost of sales are usually 
direct labor costs and purchased materials and services. Direct labor costs are those directly 
attributable to the production of goods and services. Indirect labor costs such as those af­
fecting distribution, marketing, and sales are excluded from the calculation of cost of sales. 
Factors affecting direct labor cost often include the availability of labor having the requisite 
skills, the degree of unionization, government regulation, and productivity (i.e., output per 
worker per hour).
Purchased material and service costs are likely to correlate with the size of purchase (i.e., pur­
chase discounts are larger for larger quantities purchased), the number of suppliers, product 
uniqueness, and available substitutes. In addition to labor and capital costs, raw material costs are 
frequently impacted by external factors such as geopolitical supply disruptions and the weather.
Since current sales can be satisfied from current production or from inventory, cost of sales 
is affected by how a firm values its inventory. The current cost of sales is reduced by units pro­
duced currently but not sold and placed in inventory and increased by current sales that are 
satisfied by reducing inventory. The two most common ways to value inventory are first in, 
first out (FIFO) and last in, last out (LIFO). FIFO uses inventory that is purchased earliest in 
the production process, resulting in lower-priced inventory used to satisfy sales in the current 
period. Items placed in inventory that are purchased at earlier dates are generally considered 
to have been purchased at a lower price due to inflation. Thus, FIFO has the effect of reducing 
the cost of sales. In contrast, LIFO uses the most recently purchased inventory items resulting 
in higher-cost inventory items, which adds to the cost of sales.
Step 2: Project Pro Forma Financial Statements
If the factors affecting sales, profit, and cash flow historically are expected to exert the 
same influence in the future, a firm’s financial statements may be projected by extrapolating 
historical growth rates in key variables such as revenue, with other line items on the financial 
statement projected as a percent of sales. If the factors affecting sales growth are expected to 
change due to the introduction of new products, total revenue growth may accelerate from its 
historical trend. In contrast, the emergence of additional competitors in the future may limit 
revenue growth by eroding the firm’s market share and selling prices.
Financial statements should be projected for at least 3–5 years and possibly more until 
the firm’s cash flows turn positive or the growth rate slows to what is believed to be a sus­
tainable pace. Some firms may show profit growth in excess of the industry average. Since 
above-average profit growth is not sustainable, cash flows for such firms should be projected 
until they are expected to slow to the industry average. This usually happens when new 
competitors are expected to enter the industry. Projections should reflect the best information 
about product demand growth, future pricing, technological changes, new competitors, new 
product and service offerings from current competitors, potential supply disruptions, raw 
material and labor cost increases, and possible new product or service substitutes.
Because accuracy diminishes rapidly the further the analyst projects detailed financial 
statements into the future, projections are typically made over two forecast periods: the plan­
ning period and the terminal period. The planning period represents the period of annual 
projections, while the terminal period approximates the PV of all cash flows beyond the last 
year of the planning period.

	
Key Steps in the Valuation Process	
327
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
The planning period forecast begins with an estimate of the firm’s revenue using either 
the top-down or bottom-up approaches. The top-down approach projects the size of the firm’s 
target market using macro (e.g., personal income, interest rates) or market-level data (e.g., the 
number of customers) and then applying an estimated market share for the firm. That is, if the 
market is projected to grow to $800 million next year and the firm’s market share is expected 
to be 10%, then the firm’s revenue next year is expected to be $80 million. The bottom-up ap­
proach involves summing up forecasts made by the firm’s sales force by product line and by 
customer. Alternatively, the analyst could simply extend present trends into the future using 
historical growth rates or multiple regression techniques. This approach implicitly assumes 
the factors affecting growth in the past will do so in the same way in the future.
Tables 9.3–9.7 illustrate the output of the Microsoft Excel spreadsheet model entitled Tar­
get Valuation Model found on the website accompanying this text. The cells denoted in each 
worksheet in yellow represent input cells. Cells in black contain formulas. Entries into in­
put cells change automatically the subsequent years to reflect the new data in the input cell. 
Changes to the model are made primarily by making changes in the worksheet labeled Target 
Assumptions (Table 9.3), which contains the assumptions underlying the projected income 
statement, balance sheet, and cash flow statement. The analyst should input cell values one 
at a time using only small changes in such values in order to assess accurately the outcome 
of each change on valuation. In doing so, it will become evident which variables represent 
key value drivers in the model. The cell highlighted in yellow containing the year 2011 can be 
changed to change the years denoted in each successive period. That is, if the value of the cell 
is changed to 2012, each successive year will increase by one.
Note that the Target Valuation Model already contains input and output data and an esti­
mated valuation for the firm. For our purposes, consider this projection the “base case” valu­
ation. To simulate the impact of an assumption change, change the value in the appropriate 
input cell. For example, to assess the impact on valuation of an increase of 1 percentage point 
in the Target’s revenue growth rate, change the Target’s revenue growth rate assumption 
on the Target’s Assumptions Worksheet by 1 percentage point during the planning period 
(2014–18) from 5.5 to 6.5% in the yellow input cell on the Sales Growth line for the year 2014. 
The model will increase automatically the growth rate annually from 2014 to 2018 by 1 per­
centage point. The model also accommodates a variable growth rate forecast. For example, 
if the growth rate in 2015 is expected to increase by an additional 1 percentage point and to 
continue at that higher rate in subsequent years, the analyst simply increases the growth rate 
from 5.5 to 6.5% in 2014 and to 7.5% in 2015.
Worksheets labeled Target Income Statement (Table 9.4) and Target Balance Sheet (Table 9.5) 
provide the input for the worksheet labeled Target Cash Flow (Table 9.6) and reflect the as­
sumptions provided in the Target Assumptions Worksheet. Note the red cells at the bottom 
of the Target Balance Sheet worksheet. If the balance sheet is balancing properly, the values 
in these cells should be zero, as they represent the difference between total assets and total 
liabilities plus shareholders’ equity.
Step 3: Estimate the Present Value of the Projected Pro Forma Cash Flows
This step requires the analyst to estimate the sum of the PV of the cash flows during the 
planning period (in this instance, 2014–18) and the PV of the cash flows beyond the planning 

328	
9.  FINANCIAL MODELING BASICS
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
period. The PV of the cash flows beyond the planning period is commonly referred to as the 
terminal value that is estimated using the constant growth valuation method (see Chapter 7).
Calculating Enterprise and Equity Values
Table 9.7 illustrates the calculation of the enterprise and equity values of the firm. The for­
mer represents the value of the firm to all those supplying funds to the firm, while the equity 
value represents the value of firm to common shareholders only. Target’s enterprise value is 
estimated on the model’s Valuations Worksheet using inputs from the Target Assumptions 
Worksheet. Enterprise value often is defined as the sum of the market value of a firm’s eq­
uity, preferred shares, debt, and noncontrolling interest less total cash and cash equivalents. 
TABLE 9.3  Target Firm Planning Period Assumptions
Actual
Projections for the period ending December 31
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
INCOME STATEMENT
  Sales growth
NA
5.2%
4.8%
7.5%
7.5%
7.5%
7.5%
7.5%
  COGS as a percent of sales
41.3
44.1
42.0
41.0
41.0
41.0
41.0
41.0
  SG&A percent annual 
increase (decrease)
NA
(1.4)
4.5
4.0
4.0
4.0
4.0
4.0
  Other operating expense as 
a percent of sales
13.1
12.0
10.5
11.0
11.0
11.0
11.0
11.0
  EBITDA growth (%)
NA
5.8
27.4
−14.6
11.6
11.3
11.0
10.8
  EBITDA margin (%)
17.1
17.2
20.8
−22.2
23.1
23.9
24.7
25.4
BALANCE SHEET
  Receivable days
59.8
61.6
64.3
49.0
49.0
49.0
49.0
49.0
  Inventory days
79.6
82.8
88.5
74.0
74.0
74.0
74.0
74.0
  Other current assets percent 
of sales
7.8
5.2
6.3
5.5
5.5
5.5
5.5
5.5
  Accounts payable days
43.0
39.1
40.9
40.0
40.0
40.0
40.0
40.0
  Other current liabilities 
percent of COGS
65.6
79.1
60.4
68.0
68.0
68.0
68.0
68.0
  Working capital/sales 
(excluding cash and debt) (%)
1.3
(7.5)
4.0
−(5.1)
(5.1)
(5.1)
(5.1)
(5.1)
CASH FLOW
  Capital expenditures
26.7
13.8
10.3
17.0
18.3
19.7
21.1
22.7
  Capex as a percent of sales
0.7
0.4
0.3
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
  Depreciation
123.0
123.6
126.0
136.2
146.4
157.4
169.2
181.9
  Depreciation as a percent 
of sales
3.4
3.3
3.2
3.2
3.2
3.2
3.2
3.2
EBITDA, Earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization; SG&A, selling, general, and administrative expenses.

	
Key Steps in the Valuation Process	
329
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
Cash is commonly deducted since the amount in excess of what is needed to satisfy working 
capital requirements is a nonoperating asset whose value is implicitly included in the market 
value of equity since it is owned by the shareholders. Unimportant to the ongoing operation 
of the business, it can be used by an acquirer to finance the deal.11 Once the enterprise value 
has been estimated, the market value of equity is then calculated by adding cash to and de­
ducting long-term debt and noncontrolling interests from the enterprise value.
While this definition may reasonably approximate the takeover value of a company, it does 
not encompass all of the significant nonequity claims on cash flow such as operating leases, 
unfunded pension and healthcare obligations, and loan guarantees. Thus, the common defi­
nition of enterprise value may omit significant obligations that must be paid by Acquirer and 
whose PV should be included in estimating Target’s purchase price. When calculating the 
11It is often useful to deduct other assets not germane to the ongoing operation of the combined businesses from the 
enterprise value if they can be easily sold for cash and subsequently used to finance the transaction.
TABLE 9.4  Target Firm Planning Period Income Statement
Actual
Projections for the period ending December 31
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
Sales ($)
3588.1
3775.7
3958.5
4255.4
4574.5
4917.6
5286.5
5682.9
  Cost of goods sold
1482.0
1665.7
1664.1
1744.7
1875.6
2016.2
2167.4
2330.0
Gross profit
2106.1
2110.0
2294.4
2510.7
2699.0
2901.4
3119.0
3352.9
  SG&A
1023.2
1009.0
1054.6
1096.8
1140.7
1186.3
1233.7
1283.1
  Other operating expense
470.7
453.2
414.6
468.1
503.2
540.9
581.5
625.1
  Depreciation
123.0
123.6
126.0
136.2
146.4
157.4
169.2
181.9
  Amortization
299.6
313.9
302.9
300.0
300.0
300.0
300.0
300.0
EBIT
189.6
210.3
396.3
509.6
608.7
716.8
834.6
962.9
  Unusual (gain) loss
(37.2)
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
  (Income) from affiliates
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
  Other expense (income)
60.0
10.9
11.9
—
—
—
—
—
  Interest (income)
(4.3)
(3.9)
(2.4)
—
—
—
—
—
  Interest expense
152.3
162.1
123.9
95.5
80.5
65.5
50.5
35.5
Earnings before taxes
18.8
41.2
262.9
414.1
528.2
651.3
784.1
927.3
  Noncontrolling interest
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
  Taxes
63.7
100.9
101.4
165.6
211.3
260.5
313.6
370.9
Net income before extra items
(44.9)
(59.7)
161.5
248.5
316.9
390.8
470.4
556.4
  Extraordinary items
0.6
0.7
0.4
—
—
—
—
—
Net income after extra items ($)
(44.3)
(59.0)
161.9
248.5
316.9
390.8
470.4
556.4
EBIT, Earnings before interest and taxes; SG&A, selling, general, and administrative expenses.

330	
9.  FINANCIAL MODELING BASICS
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
TABLE 9.5  Target Firm Planning Period Balance Sheet
Actual
Projections for the period ending December 31
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
Cash ($)
854.9
882.1
276.3
1019.0
1480.4
2026.4
2663.8
3399.7
Accounts receivable
587.5
637.0
697.3
571.3
614.1
660.2
709.7
762.9
Inventory
323.1
377.9
403.5
353.7
380.3
408.8
439.4
472.4
Other
281.0
196.6
248.1
234.0
251.6
270.5
290.8
312.6
  Current assets
2046.5
2093.6
1625.2
2178.0
2726.3
3365.9
4103.7
4947.6
Property, plant, 
and equipment
870.4
858.7
871.4
888.4
906.7
926.4
947.5
970.3
Accumulated depreciation
—
—
—
(136.2)
(282.6)
(439.9)
(609.1)
(790.9)
  Net property, plant, 
and equipment
870.4
858.7
871.4
752.2
624.2
486.5
338.4
179.3
Goodwill
4372.1
4366.7
4503.4
4503.4
4503.4
4503.4
4503.4
4503.4
Intangible assets
2040.2
1746.6
1525.8
1225.8
925.8
625.8
325.8
25.8
Deferred taxes
26.8
28.8
23.0
23.0
23.0
23.0
23.0
23.0
Other
130.2
93.6
89.2
89.2
89.2
89.2
89.2
89.2
Total assets ($)
9486.2
9188.0
8638.0
8771.7
8891.9
9093.7
9383.6
9768.3
Accounts payable
174.4
178.4
186.6
191.2
205.5
221.0
237.5
255.3
Other
972.0
1317.9
1005.8
1186.4
1275.4
1371.0
1473.9
1584.4
  Current liabilities
1146.4
1496.3
1192.4
1377.6
1480.9
1592.0
1711.4
1839.7
Revolving credit facility
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
Senior debt
2727.6
2297.7
2060.9
1760.9
1460.9
1160.9
860.9
560.9
Subordinated debt
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
  Total
2727.6
2297.7
2060.9
1760.9
1460.9
1160.9
860.9
560.9
Deferred taxes
558.0
410.6
287.4
287.4
287.4
287.4
287.4
287.4
Other
616.1
384.1
443.9
443.9
443.9
443.9
443.9
443.9
Total liabilities
5048.1
4588.7
3984.6
3869.8
3673.1
3484.2
3303.6
3131.9
Common stock
5225.0
5443.2
5733.7
5733.7
5733.7
5733.7
5733.7
5733.7
Preferred equity
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
Retained earnings
532.5
911.0
1341.8
1590.3
1907.2
2297.9
2768.4
3324.8
Treasury stock
(1420.0)
(1820.0)
(2482.0)
(2482.0)
(2482.0)
(2482.0)
(2482.0)
(2482.0)
Other adjustments
96.6
65.1
59.1
59.1
59.1
59.1
59.1
59.1
Noncontrolling interest
4.0
—
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
Total stockholders’ equity
4438.1
4599.3
4653.4
4901.9
5218.8
5609.5
6080.0
6636.4
Total liabilities 
and equity ($)
9486.2
9188.0
8638.0
8771.7
8891.9
9093.7
9383.6
9768.3
Reconciliation
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

	
Key Steps in the Valuation Process	
331
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
ratio of enterprise to earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization (EBIT­
DA) as a valuation multiple, the analyst needs to add back leasing and pension expenses to 
EBITDA in order to compare the ratio for a firm with substantial amounts of such long-term 
obligations with other companies.
Chapter 7 discusses alternative ways of estimating the market value of a firm’s long-term 
debt. Commonly used methods for modeling purposes by practitioners involve either valu­
ing the book value of a firm’s long-term debt at its current market value if it is publicly traded 
TABLE 9.6  Target Planning Period Cash Flow Statement
Actual
Projections for the period ending December 31
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
Net income ($)
(59.0)
161.9
248.5
316.9
390.8
470.4
556.4
Depreciation and amortization
437.5
428.9
436.2
446.4
457.4
469.2
481.9
Change in
  Accounts receivable
(49.5)
(60.3)
126.0
(42.8)
(46.1)
(49.5)
(53.2)
  Inventory
(54.8)
(25.6)
49.8
(26.5)
(28.5)
(30.7)
(33.0)
  Accounts payable
4.0
8.2
4.6
14.3
15.4
16.6
17.8
Deferred taxes
(149.4) (117.4) —
—
—
—
—
Other liabilities
(232.0) 59.8
—
—
—
—
—
Cash flow from operating activities
359.7
97.1
1059.7
779.7
865.7
958.5
1058.6
Capital expenditures
(13.8)
(10.3)
(17.0)
(18.3)
(19.7)
(21.1)
(22.7)
Acquisitions
(0.1)
(149.0) —
—
—
—
—
Sale of assets
3.4
25.5
—
—
—
—
—
Cash flow from investing activities
(10.5)
(133.8) (17.0)
(18.3)
(19.7)
(21.1)
(22.7)
Net change in equity
(213.3) (377.5) —
—
—
—
—
Net change in debt
(429.9) (236.8) (300.0)
(300.0)
(300.0)
(300.0)
(300.0)
Dividends paid
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
Cash flow from financing activities
(643.2) (614.3) (300.0)
(300.0)
(300.0)
(300.0)
(300.0)
Net change in cash
(294.0) (651.0) 742.7
461.4
546.1
637.4
735.9
Beginning cash balance
854.9
882.1
276.3
1019.0
1480.4
2026.4
2663.8
Cash available for revolving credit ($)
560.9
231.1
1019.0
1480.4
2026.4
2663.8
3399.7
Beginning revolver
—
—
—
—
—
Total repayment
—
—
—
—
—
Ending revolving credit facility
—
—
—
—
—
Ending cash
1019.0
1480.4
2026.4
2663.8
3399.7
Note: In the Target Valuation Model accompanying this text, the components of working capital are calculated according to 
whether they represent a source or use of cash. Consequently, increasing annual accounts receivable would be shown as negative 
representing a use of funds as the firm’s revenues grow.

III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
TABLE 9.7  Target Firm Valuation
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
Free cash flow
  EBIT
509.6
608.7
716.8
834.6
962.9
  Taxes
(203.9)
(243.5)
(286.7)
(333.8)
(385.1)
Depreciation and amortization
436.2
446.4
457.4
469.2
481.9
Gross Capex
(17.0)
(18.3)
(19.7)
(21.1)
(22.7)
∆NWC
180.4
(55.0)
(59.2)
(63.6)
(68.4)
Free cash flow
905.3
738.3
808.6
885.2
968.5a
Periodb
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
Midyear conventionc
0.50
1.50
2.50
3.50
4.50
Discount factord
0.96
0.88
0.80
0.73
0.67
PV FCFF ($)
866.0
646.3
647.7
648.8
649.5
PV (years 1–5)
3,458.3
PV (terminal value)
10,453.5
  Enterprise value
13,911.8
Plus cash
276.3
Less debt and minimum interest
2,061.7
  Equity value
12,126.4
  Equity value per share ($)
69.49
Assumptions
  WACC (%)
9.3
  Target D/E (%)
75.0
  Target D/TC (%)
42.9
  Marginal tax rate (%)
40.0
    ke (%)
14.0
    Rf (%)
2.5
    Rf − Rm (%)
5.5
    β
2.09
Terminal value
FCF 2020
968.5
Terminal growth rate (%)
3.0
Terminal period WACC (%)
9.4
aFree cash flow in the last year of the planning period is recalculated at the marginal tax rate of 40% rather than the lower effective tax rate used 
during the planning period, and then used to estimate the terminal value using the constant growth model.
bPeriod reflects months of actual data available for first forecast year, that is, if 9 months of actual data is available, period one equals 0.25; if one-half year of 
data is available, period one is 0.5; if 3 months of data is available, period one equals 0.75. If the data available is less than a full year, it must be annualized.
cDCF valuation assumes that cash flows occur in a lump sum at the end of the year. What is more likely is that they occur throughout the year. 
With the midyear convention, cash flows are assumed to occur in the middle of the year. Consequently, those cash flows are discounted half a year 
instead of a whole year.
dA factor that when multiplied by the period cash flow converts it into a present value.
D/E, Debt-to-equity ratio; DCF, discounted cash flow; EBIT, earnings before interest and taxes; FCFF, free cash flow to the firm; 
NWC, net working capital; PV, present value; WACC, weighted average cost of capital.

	
Key Steps in the Valuation Process	
333
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
or book value if it is not. Alternatively, the market value of similar debt at a firm exhibiting a 
comparable credit rating can be used to value a target firm’s debt. For example, assume the 
book value of Target’s debt with 10 years remaining to maturity is $478 million and its current 
market value or the market value of comparable publicly traded debt is 1.024 per $1000 of face 
value. The market value of the firm’s debt can be estimated as $489.5 million (i.e., 1.024 × $478).
The market value of noncontrolling interests can be estimated by multiplying the book 
value of such interests by the price-to-earnings ratio for comparable firms. That is, if the book 
value of the noncontrolling interests in the firm is $25 million and the price-to-earnings ratio 
for comparable firms is 15, the market value of noncontrolling interests would be $375 million 
(i.e., 15 × $25 million).
Calculating the Weighted Average Cost of Capital
Converting projected pro forma cash flows to a PV requires the estimation of the WACC 
during the planning period and the terminal period. The data, with the exception of borrow­
ing costs, used in estimating Eqs. (9.1) and (9.2) comes from Table 9.7. From Chapter 7, the 
WACC assumed during the planning period can be expressed as follows:
D
D
E
T
i
E
D
E
k
WACC
(1
)
e
=
+
×
−
× +
+
×
	
(9.1)
where D, debt; E, equity; T, corporate marginal tax rate (i.e., 40%); Rf, risk-free rate approxi­
mated by the 10-year US treasury bond rate = 2.5%; Rm, return on a broad based stock index; 
Rm − Rf, equity risk premium = 5.5%; βl, levered β (from finance.yahoo.com) = 2.09; i, weight­
ed average cost of borrowing12 = 5%; ke, cost of equity (estimated using the Capital Asset 
Pricing Model) = Rf + βl(Rm − Rf) = 2.5 + 2.09(5.5) = 14%; D/E, desired future (or target) debt-
to-equity ratio set by the firm = 75%; D/(D + E), target debt-to-total capital ratio = (D/E)/
(1 + D/E) = 0.75/(1 + 0.75) = 0.429; and E/(D + E) = 1 − [D/(D + E)] = 1 − 0.429 = 0.571.
The WACC is estimated as follows:
WACC
0.429 [(1
0.4)
5] 0.571 14
1.29
7.99
9.28%
=
×
−
×
+
×
=
+
=
Calculating the Terminal Value
The terminal value represents the PV of all cash flows beyond the planning period 
(i.e., 2014–18). Recall from Chapter  7 that the WACC used during the terminal period, 
WACCTV, is assumed to equal the current industry average WACC. The terminal value, PTV, is 
calculated using the constant growth valuation method (see Chapter 7)13:
=
×
+
−






×
P
g
g
FCFF
(1
)
(WACC
)
discount factor
n
TV
TV
TV
TV
	
(9.2)
12The weighted average borrowing cost is displayed on the Target Assumptions Worksheet but not shown on 
Table 9.2 due to space limitations. See Target Assumptions Worksheet in the model on the companion site to this 
text.
13Recall that the discount factor equals [1/(1 + WACC)N], where N is the number of time periods.

334	
9.  FINANCIAL MODELING BASICS
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
where FCFF2018, free cash flow to the firm (FCFF) in year 2018 (i.e., the last year of the planning 
period), must be recalculated if the marginal and effective tax rates differ)14 = $968.5; WACCTV, 
cost of capital assumed beyond year n (2018) and is assumed to equal the current industry av­
erage WACC of 9.4%; and gTV, assumed growth rate during the terminal period = 3%.
Discount factor uses the midyear convention = 0.66 (Table 9.8).
The PV of the terminal value is calculated as follows:
P
$968.5
(1
0.03)
0.094
0.03
0.66
$997.56
0.064
0.67
$10.4 billion
TV =
×
+
−
×
=
×
=
MODEL BALANCING MECHANISM
Financial models are said to be in balance when total assets equal total liabilities plus share­
holders’ equity on the balance sheet. This may be done manually by inserting a value equal 
to the difference between the two sides of the balance sheet or automatically by building in a 
mechanism for forcing this equality. The latter has the enormous advantage of allowing the 
user of the model to simulate multiple scenarios over many future years without having to 
stop the forecast each year to manually force the balance sheet to balance.
The mechanism in the model illustrated in this chapter for forcing automatic balance is the 
use of a revolving loan facility or line of credit. Such arrangements allow a firm to borrow 
up to a specific amount. To maintain the ability to borrow to meet unanticipated needs, firms 
have an incentive to pay off the loan as quickly as possible. Once the maximum has been 
reached, the firm can no longer borrow. If total assets exceed total liabilities plus equity, the 
model borrows (the “revolver” shows a positive balance). If total liabilities plus shareholders’ 
equity exceed total assets, the model first pays off any outstanding “revolver” balances and 
uses the remaining excess cash flow to add to cash and short-term investments on the balance 
sheet.
14The effective tax rate is the tax rate actually paid by the firm during the planning period. In this illustration, free 
cash flow in 2018 used in the calculation of the terminal value is the same as the last year of the 5-year planning 
period because the effective and marginal tax rates, at 40%, are the same.
TABLE 9.8  Calculating the Discount Factor Using the Midyear Conventiona
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
Discount 
factor
1/(1 + 0.093)1−0.5
=1/(1 + 0.093)0.5
=0.96
1/(1 + 0.093)2−0.5
=1/(1 + 0.093)1.5
=0.88
1/(1 + 0.093)3−0.5
=1/(1 + 0.093)2.5
=0.80
1/(1 + 0.093)4−0.5
=1/(1 + 0.093)3.5
=0.73
1/(1 + 0.093)5−0.5
=1/(1 + 0.093)4.5
=0.67
aUsing the midyear convention will result in a larger discounted cash flow valuation than using full year discounting, because it 
results in a larger discount factor. For example, assume cash flow in 2014 is $100 million; using the midyear convention, its present 
value would be $95 million {i.e., [1/(1 + 0.098)0.5 = 0.95] × $100 million}, but using full year discounting, it would be $91 million 
{i.e., [1/(1 + 0.098)1 = 0.911] × $100 million}.

	
Data Sources	
335
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
How does the model determine the firm’s ending cash balances? Ending cash balances will 
always equal minimum cash if available cash is less than the loan balance. Why? Because only 
that portion of the loan balance greater than the minimum balance will be used to repay the 
loan. Conversely, if available cash exceeds the loan balance, the ending cash balance equals 
the difference between available cash and the loan payment, since the total loan balance will 
not be repaid unless there is sufficient cash available to cover the minimum balance. See 
Chapter 14 for a numerical example illustrating how the model automatically balances when 
input values are changed.
DATA SOURCES
Financial models often require substantial amounts of historical data inputs to operate. 
The process of collecting the data can be laborious and time consuming. For publicly traded 
firms, most of the financial statement data is available in the firm’s annual 10K submitted to 
the US SEC. The 10K contains detailed income, balance sheet, and cash flow statements as 
well as numerous footnotes explaining these financial statements. The annual 10K provides 
the current year and 2 historical years. Firms often make 10Ks available for many years. Con­
sequently, by downloading past 10Ks, the analyst can create a historical time series for analy­
sis. However, in doing so, the analyst should check for revisions to the data to ensure that 
the historical information is recorded properly. Morningstar is also a good source of selected 
historical data on public firms.
While the SEC mandates that all publicly traded firms submit certain types of informa­
tion, it does not require that each firm’s 10K be formatted in precisely the same way due to 
the differing circumstances for each firm. For example, one firm may have extraordinary 
or nonrecurring events that need to be displayed, while others do not. Consequently, fi­
nancial information may be displayed differently from one firm to the next depending on 
their circumstances. Explanations of specific line item detail are available in the Notes to 
the Consolidated Financial Statements. Additional data required by financial models such 
as industry credit ratios and firm β often are available for free through various sources of 
publicly available information accessible via the internet. What follows is a discussion of 
the sources of data for each financial statement and for other data inputs required by the 
model.
Income Statement
Typically, sales, cost of sales, gross profit, SG&A, other operating expenses, extraordinary 
(nonrecurring) expenses, and the provision for taxes are shown in a firm’s annual 10K. How­
ever, depreciation and amortization expense often are not shown as separate line items as 
they are frequently included in the cost of sales or in some instances such as for retailing busi­
nesses in sales, general, and administrative expenses. These data usually are broken out sepa­
rately on the firm’s cash flow statement. Note that it is not necessary to separate amortization 
expense from depreciation if they are included as one line item. It is only important that 

336	
9.  FINANCIAL MODELING BASICS
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
we add noncash expenses back to net income in the calculation of cash flow. EPS and fully 
diluted EPS also are commonly displayed. When we include depreciation and amortization 
expense as a separate line item on the model’s income statement, it is important to deduct 
such expenses from the cost of sales or SG&A, if these line items taken from the firm’s 10k 
include depreciation and amortization expense. Failure to do so will lead to double counting 
these expense items when they are input into the model.
Table 9.9 identifies the income statement information usually available (Column 1) in 
a firm’s 10K and shows how this information corresponds to the input data requirements 
(Column 2) of the financial model discussed in this chapter. Column 3 indicates where data 
not available on the income statement may be found in the “Notes to the Consolidated 
Financial Statements.” Brackets in Column 1 indicate that multiple line items of the firm’s 
10k are included in a single line item in the M&A Model. Similarly, brackets in Column 
2 indicate that multiple line items in the model are included in a single line item on the 
firm’s 10k financial statements and that the detail is found in the Notes to the Financial 
Statements.
Balance Sheet
Current asset items such as cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments, accounts 
receivable, inventories, the current portion of deferred tax assets, and other current assets 
are readily available on 10Ks. Long-term asset categories provided on 10Ks often include net 
property, plant, and equipment (i.e., gross property, plant, and equipment less accumulated 
depreciation), other assets, and goodwill (Table 9.10).
Current liabilities usually displayed on 10Ks include short-term obligations and current 
maturities of long-term obligations (i.e., the current portion of long-term debt), accounts pay­
able, accrued payroll and employee benefits, deferred revenue, and other accrued expenses. 
Long-term liabilities contain deferred income taxes (i.e., taxes owed but not paid because 
of timing differences), other long-term liabilities, and long-term obligations (i.e., long-term 
debt).
The components of shareholders’ equity shown in the 10K balance sheet include pre­
ferred stock (par value and the number of shares authorized and the number issued) and 
common stock (par value and the number of such shares authorized and the number is­
sued). Authorized shares have been approved by shareholders and the SEC but have not 
yet been issued by the firm. Capital in excess of par value (also called “additional paid in 
capital”) shows the value of the issued shares when issued in excess of their par value when 
authorized. The remaining shareholders’ equity items include retained earnings (i.e., accu­
mulated historical net income after preferred dividends), treasury stock, and accumulated 
“other comprehensive items” (e.g., corrections made due to prior accounting errors and 
restatements).
The Note on Debt and Long-term Obligations describes the types of debt outstanding, 
maturity dates, and associated interest rates, and usually gives a 5-year projection of a total 
annual debt repayment schedule. Principal repayments beyond the fifth year are shown as an 
aggregate figure. Interest expense and principal usually can be estimated by using a weight­
ed average of each type of debt (i.e., senior, subordinate, etc.) and applying the applicable 

	
Data Sources	
337
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
amortization rate (i.e., annual principal repayment) for the largest amount of debt outstand­
ing in each category.
Cash Flow Statement
The firm’s cash flow statement (Table 9.11) typically shows the key cash inflows and out­
flows from operating, investing, and financing activities. This financial statement determines 
ending cash balances for the firm that is also reported on the firm’s balance sheet.
TABLE 9.9  Historical Income Statement
Column 1: typical 10K income 
statement
Column 2: financial model income 
statement input requirements
Column 3: notes to 
financial statements
Revenue/sales (consolidated and by 
major business segment)
Sales
See note on business 
segment data
Cost of product/service sales 
(consolidated and by major business 
segment). May include depreciation 
and amortization expense
Cost of goods sold
See note on business 
segment data
SG&A (consolidated and by major 
business segment)
SG&A
See note on business 
segment data
Research and development expenses
Restructuring and other costs, net 
Other operating expenses
Depreciation
See 10K’s cash flow 
statement
Amortization
See 10K’s cash flow 
statement
Operating income
EBIT
Total other expense, net
  Unusual (gain) loss
  Income from affiliates
  Interest (income)
  Interest expense
 Unusual (gain) loss
(Income) from affiliates
Other expense (income)
Interest (income)
Interest expense
See note on other expense, 
net for detail on interest 
income and interest 
expense
Income from continuing operations 
before income taxes
Earnings before taxes
Taxes
Taxes
Net income (loss) before extraordinary 
items
Net income before extraordinary 
items
Loss (income) from discontinued 
operations after tax
Loss (gain) from disposal of 
discontinued operations after tax 
Extraordinary items
Net income after extraordinary items
Net income after extraordinary items
EBIT, Earnings before interest and taxes; SG&A, selling, general, and administrative expenses.

338	
9.  FINANCIAL MODELING BASICS
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
TABLE 9.10  Historical Balance Sheet
Column 1: typical 10k balance sheet
Column 2: financial model balance 
sheet input requirements
Column 3: notes to 
financial statements
Assets
  Current assets
    Cash and cash equivalents
    Short-term investments 
Cash (includes short-term 
investments)
    Accounts receivable (net of reserves)
Accounts receivable (net of reserves)
    Inventory
Inventory
    Deferred tax assets (current portion)
    Other current assets 
Other
See note on income taxes 
for details
  Long-term assets
    Net property, plant, and equipment
Property, plant, and equipment
Less accumulated depreciation = net 
property, plant, and equipment
See note on property, 
plant, and equipment 
for accumulated 
depreciation
    Other assets
Intangible assets
Deferred taxes
Other
    Goodwill
Goodwill
Liabilities and shareholders’ equity
  Current liabilities
    Accounts payable
Accounts payable
    Short-term obligations
    Accrued payroll and employee 
benefits
    Deferred revenue
    Other accrued expenses 
Other
  Long-term liabilities
    Deferred income taxes
Deferred taxes (long-term portion)
See note on income taxes 
for details
Other long-term liabilities
See note on pensions
Long-term obligations
Revolving credit facility
Senior debt
Subordinated debt
Shareholders’ equity
See consolidated 
statement of 
shareholders’ equity
Preferred stock, par value, shares autho­
rized and issued
Preferred stock
Common stock, par value, shares 
authorized and issued
Common stock
Retained earnings
Retained earnings

	
Data Sources	
339
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
Risk Measures: β and Credit Ratios
Historical β for public firms and industry credit ratios are available from a number of 
sources: Yahoo Finance, Google  Finance, Morningstar, Value Line Research Center, Standard 
& Poor’s Net Advantage, One Source, and Thomson One Banker. Go to the Yahoo.com/fi­
nance website and search in the “look up” block for the company in which you are interested. 
The firm’s β is located below the day’s closing price in the table of daily trading activity. Al­
ternatively, go to google.com/finance and search for your company; the firm’s β will be at the 
top of the page among the daily trading data.
TABLE 9.10  Historical Balance Sheet (cont.)
Column 1: typical 10k balance sheet
Column 2: financial model balance 
sheet input requirements
Column 3: notes to 
financial statements
Treasury stock (at cost)
Treasury stock
Capital in excess of par
Accumulated other comprehensive items 
Other adjustments
Noncontrolling interest (if any)
Noncontrolling interests
  Total shareholders’ equity
Total stockholders’ equity
Liabilities and shareholders’ equity
Liabilities and shareholders’ equity
TABLE 9.11  Historical Cash Flow Statement
Column 1: typical 10k cash flow statement
Column 2: financial model cash 
flow statement input requirements
Column 3: notes to 
financial statements
OPERATING ACTIVITIES
  Net income
  Loss (income) from discontinued 
operations
  Loss (gain) on disposal of discontinued 
operations
  Income from continuing operations 
Net income
  Depreciation and amortization
Depreciation and amortization
  Change in deferred income taxes
Deferred taxes (current portion)
See note on income taxes
  Changes in assets and liabilities
    Accounts receivable
Accounts receivable
    Inventories
Inventory
    Other assets
    Accounts payable
Accounts payable
    Other liabilities
Other liabilities
      Net cash from operating activities
Cash flow from operating activities
(Continued)

340	
9.  FINANCIAL MODELING BASICS
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
MANAGING THE MODEL
Following certain protocols will help simplify the process of applying the model to analyze 
different situations. Save the model once historical data and forecast assumptions have been 
entered into the model. Make additional changes to copies of the saved model. If errors arise 
and cannot be resolved, it is helpful to return to an earlier version of the model. This obviates 
the need to reload historical and forecast information. Make sure the model’s balance sheet 
“balances” as denoted by the red cells at the bottom of the balance sheet worksheet equal to 
zero (i.e., total assets equal total liabilities plus shareholders’ equity). Do not be concerned 
about “fine-tuning” the model’s forecast until the model “balances.” Adjusting the model’s 
forecast should start with a focus on making small changes to model value drivers one at a 
Column 1: typical 10k cash flow statement
Column 2: financial model cash 
flow statement input requirements
Column 3: notes to 
financial statements
INVESTING ACTIVITIES
  Acquisitions, net of cash acquired
Acquisition
See note on acquisitions
  Purchases of property, plant, and 
equipment
Capital expenditures
  Proceeds from sale of property, plant, 
and equipment
  Proceeds from sale of investments
  Proceeds from sale of businesses
  Other investing activities, net 
Sale of assets
    Net cash from investing activities
Cash flow from investing activities
FINANCING ACTIVITIES
  Net proceeds from issuance 
of long-term debt
  Redemptions and repayments of 
long-term debt 
Net change in debt
  Purchases of company common stock
  Net proceeds from issuance of common 
stock 
Net change in equity
  Dividends paid
Dividends paid
  Other financing activities, net
    Net ash from financing activities
Cash flow from financing activities
  (Decrease) increase in cash and cash 
equivalents
Net change in cash
  Cash and cash equivalents at beginning 
of period
Beginning cash balance
  Cash and cash equivalents at end of 
period
Ending cash balance
TABLE 9.11  Historical Cash Flow Statement (cont.)

	
Discussion Questions	
341
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
time. To test the reasonableness of the model’s output, check key output variables such as 
net PV and the trend in EPS, outstanding debt, and cash balance. Avoid making too many 
changes to the model before saving its output.
ADDRESSING VALUATION ISSUES IN A NEAR-ZERO INTEREST 
RATE ENVIRONMENT
Chapter 7 discussed the challenges of valuation in a sustained artificially low interest rate 
environment. While adjustments can be made in an attempt to offset potential underestima­
tion in the calculation of the cost of capital and the resulting overvaluation of a target firm, 
they tend to be highly subjective and therefore problematic. Financial models can be used to 
address this problem by providing a range of valuation estimates enabling senior manage­
ment to have a reasonable understanding of potential outcomes.
A model can be used to define alternative scenarios that can be as basic as three outcomes: 
optimistic, pessimistic, and most likely. This approach has the advantage of simplicity and 
ease of understanding. Alternatively, more sophisticated statistical methods can be used to 
estimate the most probable outcome. One method is Monte Carlo simulation.
The primary advantage of a Monte Carlo simulation (which involves the random sam­
pling of model inputs to simulate a range of outcomes and their likelihood of occurring) 
is its ability to allow the user to vary assumptions such as the cost of capital. This is also 
its foremost disadvantage since the outcomes are only as good as the quality of the inputs. 
Another major disadvantage is that Monte Carlo simulations tend to underestimate the 
likelihood of extreme events (so-called “black swan events”) such as the 2008–09 financial 
market crisis.
SOME THINGS TO REMEMBER
Financial modeling helps the analyst understand the determinants of value creation, pro­
vides a useful means of assessing alternative options and risks, and identifies how firm value 
is affected by different economic events. The estimation of firm value involves a three-step 
procedure: (1) analyze the target firm’s historical statements to determine the primary deter­
minants of cash flow; (2) project 3–5 years of annual pro forma financial statements (i.e., the 
planning period); and (3) estimate the PV of the projected pro forma cash flows, including the 
terminal value.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
9.1	 What is financial modeling? How is it helpful in analyzing a firm’s financial statements?
9.2	 How is financial modeling applied to M&As?
9.3	 What are the differences between GAAP-based and Pro Forma financial statements?
9.4	 What are value drivers and why are they important?
9.5	 What does it mean to normalize historical financial data and why is this an important 

342	
9.  FINANCIAL MODELING BASICS
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
part of the financial model building process?
9.6	 What are common-size financial statements and how might they impact the financial 
model building process?
9.7	 A firm’s financial statements are tightly linked such that an increase in a key variable 
on one statement will impact the other financial statements. Assuming a firm’s gross 
margin (i.e., sales less cost of sales) is positive and constant, describe how an increase 
in revenue will impact net income and in turn the other financial statements. Assume 
the firm does not pay preferred dividends.
9.8	 What is the appropriate number of years to project a firm’s financial statement?
9.9	 What is the difference between a firm’s enterprise and equity values?
9.10	 Financial models normally are said to be in balance when total assets equal total li­
abilities plus shareholders’ equity on the balance sheet. How are financial models often 
forced to balance automatically?
Answers to these Chapter Discussion Questions are available in the Online Instructor’s Manual for 
instructors using this book (https://textbooks.elsevier.com/web/Manuals.aspx?isbn=9780128016091).
PRACTICE PROBLEMS AND ANSWERS
9.11 The purpose of this practice exercise is to illustrate how a change in an input cell im­
pacts variables on other financial statements. Using the Excel spreadsheet model in the file 
entitled Target Firm Valuation Model on the companion website accompanying this book (see 
the section “Chapter Overview” for the website address), note the values for 2018 of Target’s 
net income (Target IS Worksheet), cash balance and shareholders’ equity (Target’s BS Work­
sheet), and enterprise value and equity value (Target Valuation Worksheet).
Change the Target’s revenue growth rate assumption by 1 percentage point in 2014. On 
the Target’s Assumptions Worksheet, increase the growth rate from 7.5 to 8.5% in the yellow 
input cell on the Sales Growth line for the year 2014. What are the new values in 2018 for net 
income, cash balance, shareholders’ equity, enterprise value, and equity value following the 
increase in the growth rate assumption in the base case by 1 percentage point? Explain why 
these variables increased? (Hint: See Fig. 9.1.)
Click the undo command or close the model but do not save the output to restore the base 
case model results. The numerical solution is given in Table 9.12.
9.12 The purpose of this practice exercise is to underscore how small changes in terminal 
value assumptions result in disproportionately large changes in firm value. Using the Excel 
spreadsheet model in the file folder entitled Target Valuation Model found on the companion 
website to this book, locate the PV of the Target’s enterprise and equity values on the Valua­
tion Worksheet and write them down. Increase the terminal value growth rate assumption by 
1 percentage point and reduce the discount rate by 1 percentage point. How does this impact 
the firm’s enterprise and equity value? Explain how this might happen. (Hint: Consider the 
definition of the constant growth valuation model.) Click the undo command to eliminate 
changes to the base case model or close model but do not save the results.
Solutions to these Practice Problems are available in the Online Instructor’s Manual for instructors 
using this book (https://textbooks.elsevier.com/web/Manuals.aspx?isbn=9780128016091).

	
Practice Problems and Answers	
343
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
END OF CHAPTER CASE STUDY: LIFE TECHNOLOGIES 
UNDERTAKES A STRATEGIC REVIEW
Case Study Objectives: To Illustrate How Financial Models
•	 Can be used to estimate firm value
•	 Allow simulation of alternative scenarios to facilitate management decision making
•	 Help identify the key drivers of firm value
•	 Focus attention on key assumptions underlying financial projections and valuation
•	 Facilitate executive decision making
Background
Life Technologies (Life Tech), a leading global life sciences firm, had rewarded its shareholders 
by almost doubling the firm’s share price from its 2009 low of $26 per share to $51 by mid-2012. 
Despite this stellar performance, Gregory T. Lucier, Life Tech’s Chairman of the Board and Chief 
Executive Officer since 2008, felt uneasy about the firm’s future financial performance.
The life sciences industry is facing major challenges. Foremost is the increasing pressure on profit 
margins stemming from the escalating cost of health care due to the growth in chronic diseases, an 
aging population, and new medical therapies. Efforts to control healthcare costs are resulting in a 
reduction in the reimbursement rate for healthcare providers such as hospitals, testing laborato­
ries, and physicians. Furthermore, pressure to reduce runaway government deficits is reducing the 
funding of scientific research.
These developments are driving consolidation among Life Tech’s customers. Such consolidation 
reduces the number of potential new accounts and enables customers to increase their negotiat­
ing leverage with vendors such as Life Tech. There is also a growing trend for customers to re­
duce the total number of vendors they use. Customer consolidation is driving consolidation among 
life science companies in an effort to realize economies of scale, scope, and purchasing. Underway 
for several years, consolidation among Life Tech’s competitors is expected to continue as compa­
nies attempt to strengthen or hold their market positions. Increased concentration within the life 
TABLE 9.12  Impact of an Increase in Revenue Growth Rate Assumption on Selected Financial Variables 
($ Million)
Variable name
2018 (prior to assumption change)
2018 (after assumption change)
Net income
556.4
6,288.0
Cash balance
3,399.7
3,630.9
Shareholders’ equity
6,636.4
6,833.2
Enterprise value
13,911.8
14,771.4
Equity value
12,126.4
12,986.0

344	
9.  FINANCIAL MODELING BASICS
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
sciences industry is expected to result in stronger competitors that are better able to compete as 
sole-source vendors for customers.
The combination of customer and competitor consolidation could put significant downward 
pressure on Life Tech’s profit margins. Mr. Lucier and the Life Tech board faced a dilemma: whether 
to continue to pursue the firm’s strategy of growing market share through customer-focused in­
novation or to consider alternative ways to maximize shareholder value such as selling the firm or 
aggressively growing the firm.
Founded in 1987, Life Tech had established itself as a leading innovator of life science products 
and services that improve the effectiveness and efficiency of professionals in the pharmaceutical, 
biotechnology, agricultural, clinical, government, and academic scientific communities. The com­
pany’s products also are used in forensics, food and water safety, animal health testing, and other 
industrial applications. Life Tech produces lab analytical and testing instruments; robotic systems 
to automate labor intensive research, research consumables including glassware, plastic ware, vials, 
tubes, and syringes; equipment from centrifuges to microscopes; lab furniture; and lab information 
management and testing systems.
On January 18, 2013, Life Tech announced that it had hired several investment banks Deutsche 
Bank and Moelis & Co. to explore strategic options for the firm as part of the board’s annual stra­
tegic review. Mr. Lucier offered additional details in a subsequent earnings-related telephone con­
ference call to investors and Wall Street analysts saying that the review has begun in the summer 
of 2012 and that “all ideas were on the table.” Sensing the possibility of a sale, investors drove the 
share price up by 10% to $58 by the end of February.
Mr. Lucier and the board’s decision would be based on a continued analysis of current and 
expected industry trends and the firm’s overall competitive position. Mr. Lucier directed his ac­
counting and finance department to assess the impact of the results of this analysis on the value of 
the firm under different sets of assumptions. What follows is a discussion of these considerations.
The Life Sciences Industry
The life sciences comprise fields of science involving the study of living organisms such as plants, 
animals, and humans. While biology remains the centerpiece of the life sciences, technological ad­
vances in molecular biology and biotechnology have led to a burgeoning of specializations and 
new interdisciplinary fields. Because of the extremely high R&D costs coupled with little revenue 
in the initial years of development, many life sciences firms partner with larger firms to complete 
product development. However, the industry tends to be dominated by handful of big companies. 
Table 9.13 lists the major market segments of the industry.
In general, the ratio of R&D spending to revenue drives new products in this industry. The key to suc­
cessful companies is achieving a proper balance between R&D spending and expense control. Because 
of the long R&D phase, during which there is very little revenue being generated, projecting earnings 
requires looking at a firm’s products both under development and in production. For firms already sell­
ing products, looking at sales trends makes projecting revenue growth rates easier. Firm value in this in­
dustry is largely driven by their intellectual property and the ability to derive commercial products from 
their proprietary knowledge to generate future profits and cash flows. Because life sciences firms require 
substantial amounts of capital, they are prone to maintaining substantial amounts of cash on hand. 
Table 9.14 provides an overview of the factors contributing to the intensity of industry competition.

	
Practice Problems and Answers	
345
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
TABLE 9.13  Major Life Science Market Segments
Healthcare: Drugs, vaccines, gene therapy, 
and tissue replacements
Research: Understanding the human genome 
and better disease detection
Agriculture: Improved foods and food 
production, pest control, and plant and animal 
disease control
Industry: Oil and mineral recovery, environmental 
protection, waste reduction; improved detergents, 
chemicals, stronger textiles
TABLE 9.14  Assessing the Intensity of Life Science Industry Competition
Factor
Implications
Threat of new 
entrants
Limited by high barriers to entry
•	Substantial funding requirements are needed to finance R&D budgets
•	Specialized knowledge
•	Existing patents
•	Limited access to distribution channels
Power of suppliers
Limited by
•	Firms not generally reliant on a single supplier
•	Forward integration by suppliers unlikely because of the highly specialized 
nature of computers, testing equipment, and materials
Power of buyers
Substantial for firms
•	Selling to governments, hospitals, and universities
•	Many firms small relative to their customers
Availability of 
substitutes
Depends on time horizon
•	Limited by existing patents
•	Generics emerge as patent protection expires
Competitive rivalry
Intense
•	Industry concentration high. While hundreds of firms compete in this industry, 
about 1% account for most of the revenue
•	Industry growth to slow. While the degree of rivalry varies by segment, industry 
size and growth prospects clouded by potential cutbacks in government funding 
of research and healthcare reimbursement rates
•	Market share gains important to realize economies of scale, scope, and 
purchasing
Conclusions:
•	Downward pressure on selling prices
•	Decelerating future unit sales growth rate during 2014–18 planning period
•	Moderate increases in human resource costs due to modest inflation outlook and sluggish job market
Downward pressure on gross operating margins for life science firms
R&D, Research and development.

346	
9.  FINANCIAL MODELING BASICS
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
For firms to succeed in this industry they must be able to innovate cost effectively. Furthermore, 
to minimize product distribution costs and to gain access to needed R&D capabilities, firms need to 
be able to work collaboratively with product distributers, universities, and government agencies. 
Finally, because of the long lead time in developing new products and services, firms must have 
continuing access to financing. These three so-called success factors ultimately drive future cash 
flow and firm value in this industry.
Life Technology’s Business Overview
Life Tech’s business is described in terms of its targeted markets; products, services, and after-
sale support; R&D activities; license agreements; and suppliers. These factors (in italics) are dis­
cussed next.
Life Tech’s targeted markets include life sciences, applied sciences, and medical sciences. Cus­
tomers within the life sciences segment consist of laboratories generally associated with univer­
sities, medical research centers, government institutions, and other research institutions as well 
as biotechnology, pharmaceutical, and chemical companies. Researchers at these institutions 
use Life Tech products to conduct research and clinical trials, and to improve the efficacy of 
drugs. The applied sciences segment serves a diverse range of industries, with a focus on the 
areas of forensic analysis, quality and safety testing, animal health testing, and the commercial 
production of genetically engineered products. The medical services segment includes custom­
ers in clinical labs and medical institutions who use commercial technology for clinical and 
diagnostic purposes, and medical researchers who use Life Tech’s research-related technologies 
to search for new discoveries. Approximately 20% of the Life Tech’s revenues are derived from 
federal, university, and/or research institutions funded either entirely or partially by the US 
government.
Life Tech’s services and support activities provide limited warranties on equipment it sells for 
periods of up to 2 years from the date of the sale. The firm also offers service contracts to customers 
that are generally 1–5 years in duration after the original warranty period. Life Tech provides both 
repair services and routine maintenance services under these arrangements, and it also offers repair 
and maintenance services on a time and material basis to customers without service contracts.
Life Tech’s continued growth in market share is heavily dependent on R&D. Its core R&D skills 
include expertise ranging from biology to chemistry to engineering. The Company invested $341.9, 
377.9, and 375.5 million in R&D for the years ended December 31, 2012, 2011, and 2010, respectively. 
These expenditures comprise about 10.5% of annual revenue, slightly above the industry average. 
As of December 31, 2012, the Company had approximately 1200 employees engaged in R&D activi­
ties in the United States, Singapore, India, Germany, Norway, France, and the Netherlands.
Life Tech’s sales and marketing activities include a direct sales force of 3700 employees and a pres­
ence in more than 180 countries. The company also has over 1000 supply centers worldwide based 
in close proximity to customers’ laboratories to provide convenient access and an e-commerce web­
site to provide easy online ordering of Life Tech products.
The firm manufactures and sells some of its existing products under the terms of license agree­
ments that require it to pay royalties to the licensor based on the sales of products containing the 
licensed materials or technology. Although the company emphasizes its own R&D, its ability to 
license new technology from third parties is, and will continue to be, critical to Life Tech’s ability to 
offer competitive new products.

III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
The firm buys materials from many suppliers and has contracts with many third parties for the 
manufacturing of various products sold under the firm’s brand. The firm is not dependent on 
any one supplier or group of suppliers as raw materials are generally available from a number of 
suppliers.
Life Technologies Competitor Profile
Competitor profiling consists of subjectively ranking a firm against its primary competitors in 
terms of critical success factors (i.e., those factors most responsible for determining success in an 
industry). A common technique is to create detailed profiles on each of major competitors. These 
profiles give an in-depth description of the competitor’s background, finances, products, markets, 
facilities, personnel, and strategies.
Table 9.15 provides a ranking of Life Tech compared to its primary competitors by those factors 
critical for success in the life sciences industry. These include the ability to innovate, collaborate 
with research and distribution partners, and finance ongoing R&D spending. The critical success 
factors are weighted by their presumed importance and sum to one. Each competitor is ranked on 
a scale of 1–10 with respect to each success factor. These scores are then totaled to create a competi­
tor ranking in terms of the success factors. The primary competitors were selected from among 20 
competitors each of which had a market value at year-end 2012 of $2.4 billion or more (Table 9.16). 
Of those 20 firms, only those having a market value of greater than $9 billion were included in the 
comparison of Life Tech and its competitors. Unlike the other firms listed as competitors, Thermo 
Fisher Scientific, Agilent Technologies, Quest Diagnostics, and Laboratory Corporation of America 
share many products and services in common with Life Technologies. Based on this subjective rank­
ing, Life Tech has a slight competitive edge over Thermo Fisher Scientific and Agilent Technologies, 
its largest competitors in terms of size.
Life Technologies’ Historical Financial Performance
Life Tech’s historical performance in terms of its gross profit margin has been remarkably stable 
over time at approximately 56% (Table 9.17). This table displays simple averages over different time 
periods as well as that estimated using regression analysis. The historical resiliency of the firm’s 
gross margin caused Mr. Lucier to use the historical gross margin in valuing the firm, despite an­
ticipated future pricing pressures. The firm’s revenue growth rate has averaged a 6.5% compound 
	
PRACTICE PROBLEMS AND ANSWERS	
347
TABLE 9.15  Life Technologies and Primary Competitors Ranked by Critical Success Factors
Key industry 
success factors
Weight
Life 
Technologies
Thermo 
Fisher 
Scientific
Agilent 
Technologies
Quest 
Diagnostics
Laboratory 
Corporation 
of America
1—ability to 
innovate
0.4
8
8
7
4
3
2—effective 
collaboration
0.3
8
7
6
6
5
3—access to 
capital
0.3
8
7
7
4
2
Total
1.0
24
22
20
14
10

348	
9.  FINANCIAL MODELING BASICS
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
TABLE 9.16  Life Technologies Versus Peers: Financial Metrics
Market 
cap 
($ million)
Net 
income 
($ million)
P/S
P/B
P/E
Dividend 
yield (%)
5-Year 
rev 
CAGR 
(%)
Net 
operating 
margin 
(%)
Interest 
coverage
D/E
Thermo Fisher 
Scientific Inc.
34,749
1,307
2.7
2.1
26.5
0.6
5.1
11.4
6.3
0.4
Agilent 
Technologies 
Inc.
16,556
938
2.6
3.5
18.7
0.9
4.8
13.3
11.3
0.6
Life 
Technologies 
Corp.
13.064
476
3.5
2.6
27.9
—
24.3
17.1
5.3
0.4
Quest 
Diagnostics Inc.
9,263
762
1.4
2.4
11.8
1.9
1.9
16.9
7.5
0.8
Laboratory 
Corporation 
of America 
Holdings
9,118
567
1.7
3.6
17.2
—
6.9
18.7
11.0
1.0
Waters 
Corporation
8,381
484
4.6
5.2
17.7
—
4.6
27.4
18.4
0.7
Mettler-Toledo 
International, 
Inc.
7,336
298
3.3
9.0
25.6
—
5.5
15.1
17.8
0.5
Quintiles 
Transnational 
Holdings Inc.
5,679
188
1.1
−8.0
29.1
—
—
8.2
3.0
—
Idexx 
Laboratories
5,633
187
4.4
10.5
31.6
—
7.0
18.5
68.7
0.0
Qiagen NV
5,298
47
4.2
2.0
114.9
—
14.1
16.3
7.2
0.3
Covance, Inc.
4,809
167
1.9
3.2
28.8
—
7.7
8.1
20.0
—
Lonza Group 
AG
4,693
139
1.2
2.0
31.0
2.3
6.5
9.7
3.4
1.2
PerkinElmer 
Inc.
4,092
84
1.9
2.1
49.8
0.8
3.4
7.9
2.1
0.5
Eurofins 
Scientific 
Group S.A.
3,556
69
2.5
7.3
40.5
—
16.0
7.2
5.6
1.2
Cepheid
2,767
−2
7.2
10.1
—
—
20.7
−6.4
−144.1
0.0
Alere Inc.
2,721
−130
0.9
1.8
—
—
27.4
3.9
0.5
2.6
Swedish Orphan 
Biovitrum AB
2,670
−211
8.7
3.6
—
—
8.9
−2.8
−0.7
0.2
Icon PLC
2,484
80
1.5
3.1
31.2
—
19.0
7.3
35.5
—
Industry Average
7,357
277
2.3
3.2
26.9
0.4
8.9
11.3
25.4
0.7
D/E, Debt-to-equity ratio.

	
Practice Problems and Answers	
349
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
annual average growth rate since 2008 when the firm completed an acquisition that nearly doubled 
the size of the company. Mr. Lucier directed his financial staff to evaluate the impact of different 
revenue growth rate, cost reduction, and asset utilization assumptions, as well as increasing Life 
Tech’s leverage, to assess the impact of alternative strategies on the firm’s market value.
The firm’s historical performance has exceeded major financial benchmarks. Life Tech’s price to 
earnings, cash flow, and sales ratios exceeded both the life sciences industry average and the S&P 
500 average as of the end of 2012 (Table 9.18). Table 9.19 shows Life Tech’s historical data for selected 
financial metrics.
Conclusions
The Life Tech CEO, Greg Lucier, and the Life Tech Board were at a crossroads. The ongoing trend 
toward customer consolidation would require increased consolidation among life science compa­
nies. The strategic options available to the firm were clear: continue the firm’s current strategy; ac­
quire a sizeable competitor to achieve economies of scale, scope, and purchasing; or sell the firm to 
a competitor. The firm lacked the financial resources to acquire a major competitor. Therefore, that 
option was dismissed. Of the remaining two options, maintaining the current strategy or selling 
the firm, which would maximize shareholder value? In April 2013, the firm announced that it had 
agreed to merge with the industry leader in terms of revenue, Thermo Fisher Scientific, itself the 
product of a number of acquisitions. The merger was completed in 2014. This merger is discussed 
in detail in the case study at the end of Chapter 14.
Discussion Questions
Use the Microsoft Excel model entitled Target Firm Valuation Model Case Study Final Ver­
sion on the companion site to this book to answer the following questions. Please see the section 
TABLE 9.17  Historical Gross Profit Margin
Average 1998–2012 (%)
56.46
Average 2003–12 (%)
56.38
Average 2008–12 (%)
56.83
Regression 1998–2012 (%)
56.73
TABLE 9.18  Life Technology Valuation Ratios (as of Year-End 2012)
Life Technologies
Life sciences 
industry average
S&P 500
Life Technologies 
5-year average
Price/earnings
27.9
26.9
17.1
42.7
Price/book
2.6
3.2
2.5
1.7
Price/sales
3.5
2.3
1.6
2.3
Price/cash flow
16.1
10.4
10.7
11.5
Note: Price/cash flow = 3-year average.

350	
9.  FINANCIAL MODELING BASICS
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
“Chapter Overview” for the site’s internet address. The model already contains data and an esti­
mate of Life Tech’s enterprise and equity valuations based on this data and a set of assumptions 
about the planning period spanning 2014–18, as well as the years beyond. In answering the fol­
lowing questions, assume the valuation provided in this model represents the firm’s base case and 
reflects what the firm could do if it continued the business strategy in effect in 2012.
1.	 Note the enterprise and equity valuations for Life Technology in the Excel spreadsheet 
model entitled Life Tech Undertakes Strategic Review Financial Model on the companion website 
accompanying this book. View this as the base case. The CEO Greg Lucier asks his chief 
financial officer (CFO) to determine the impact of plausible assumption changes on the firm’s 
valuation. The CFO asks you as a financial analyst to estimate the impact of a change in the 
firm’s revenue growth rate and cost of sales as a percent of sales. On the Target Assumptions 
Worksheet, make the following changes and note their impact on Life Tech’s enterprise and 
equity values on the Valuation Worksheet:
a.	 Increase the sales growth rate in 2014 by 2 percentage points.
TABLE 9.19  Life Technologies Corp. (12 Months Ending December)
2003–
12
2004–
12
2005–
12
2006–
12
2007–
12
2008–
12
2009–
12
2010–
12
2011–
12
2012–
12
TTM
Revenue 
($ millions)
778
1024
1198
1263
1282
1620
3280
3588
3776
3799
3842
Gross 
margin (%)
60.3
59.4
58.7
59.5
55.9
58.1
55.6
58.7
55.9
56.2
57.9
Operating 
income 
($ millions)
89
136
127
−158
178
167
386
612
648
665
683
Operating 
margin (%)
11.5
13.3
10.6
−12.5
13.9
10.3
11.8
17.1
17.2
17.5
17.8
Net income 
($ millions)
60
89
132
−191
143
31
145
378
378
431
476
Earnings per 
share ($)
0.59
0.82
1.17
−1.86
1.48
0.30
0.80
1.99
2.05
2.40
2.71
Shares 
(millions)
103
121
120
103
97
104
181
191
186
179
175
Book value per 
share ($)
16.64
18.67
19.32
16.95
18.96
37.43
22.36
24.33
25.76
27.17
28.79
Operating 
cash flow 
(US$ million)
168
253
309
235
324
366
714
739
809
778
826
Cap spending 
($ million)
−32
−39
−726
−70
−78
−82
−181
−131
−108
−136
−142
Free cash flow 
($ millions)
136
214
−417
165
245
284
534
608
701
642
684

III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
b.	 Retaining the assumption change made in (a), decrease the cost of sales as a percent of sales 
by 2 percentage points in 2014.
	
What is Life Tech’s enterprise and equity value resulting from these changes? How do they 
compare to the base case? Briefly explain why each of these changes affects firm value. Do 
not undo the results of your changes to the model’s base case.
2.	 Using the model results from question 1, the CFO believes that in addition to an increase in 
the sales growth rate and an improving cost position, Life Tech could employ its assets more 
effectively by better managing its receivables and inventory. Specifically, the CFO directs you 
as a financial analyst to make the following changes to days’ sales in receivables and days in 
inventory. On the Target Assumptions Worksheet, make the following changes and note their 
impact on Life Tech’s enterprise and equity values on the Valuation Worksheet:
a.	 Reduce receivables days by 10 days starting in 2014.
b.	 Reduce inventory days by 10 days starting in 2014.
	
What is Life Tech’s enterprise and equity value resulting from these changes? How do they 
compare to the results in question 1? Briefly explain why each of these changes affects firm 
value. Do not undo the changes to the model you have made.
3.	 Given the results of the model from questions 1 and 2, assume Mr. Lucier and the Life Tech 
board raised their target debt to equity ratio from 30 to 60% to reduce their WACC. Such a 
reduction would make projects that would not have been undertaken at a higher cost of capital 
attractive. Recalculate the firm’s WACC assuming that none of the assumptions about the cost 
of capital made in the base case have changed, with the exception of the levered β. (Hint: The 
levered β needs to be unlevered and then relevered to reflect the new debt to equity ratio.) 
Without undoing the assumption changes made in questions 1 and 2, use your new estimate 
of the firm’s WACC during the planning period to calculate Life Tech’s enterprise and equity 
values given on the Valuation Worksheet. Briefly explain why the change in the debt to equity 
ratio affected firm value.
4.	 Based on your answers to questions 1–3, what do you believe are the most important value 
drivers for Life Tech based on their impact on the firm’s enterprise and equity values? Which 
are the least important? (Hint: Calculate the percentage increase in enterprise and equity values 
over the base case due to each assumption change.)
5.	 The base case valuation reflects a constant 57% gross margin throughout the planning period. 
Based on the information given in the case study, do you believe that this is realistic? Why? 
Why not? How might this assumption have biased the estimates of enterprise and equity 
valuation in your answers to questions 1–4? If they were biased, what would be the direction of 
the bias?
Solutions to these case study discussion questions are available in the Online Instructor’s Manual for 
instructors using this book (https://textbooks.elsevier.com/web/Manuals.aspx?isbn=9780128016091).
	
PRACTICE PROBLEMS AND ANSWERS	
351

352	
9.  FINANCIAL MODELING BASICS
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
A D D I T I O N A L  C A S E  S T U D Y  R E C O M M E N D AT I O N S 
( S E A R C H  H A RVA R D  B U S I N E S S  S C H O O L 
P U B L I S H I N G  S I T E  B Y  N A M E  O F  C A S E : 
h b s p . h a r v a r d . e d u )
Finance Simulation: M&A in Wine Country, 
Timothy A. Luerhman, W. Carl Kester, Revi-
sion Date: June 23, 2011, Harvard Business 
Publishing, Product Number: 329-HTM-
ENG, hbsp.harvard.edu.
	
Subjects Covered: Mergers and 
Acquisitions, Negotiation, Valuation, Value 
Creation.
The Toys “R” Us LBO, David P. Stowell, 
Matthew Raino, Publication Date: January 
1, 2007, Product Number: Kel168-PDF-ENG, 
Source: Kellogg School of Business, hbsp.
harvard.edu.
	
Subjects Covered: Model Simulation, 
LBOs, Restructuring, Financing.

C H A P T E R
353
Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring Activities. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-801609-1.00010-5
Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
10
Analysis and Valuation of Privately 
Held Firms
O U T L I N E
Inside M&A: Owner’s Decision to Retire 
Forces Sale of Bortz Health Care	
354
Chapter Overview	
355
Challenges of Valuing Privately Held 
Companies	
357
Lack of Externally Generated 
Information	
357
Lack of Internal Controls and 
Inadequate Reporting Systems	
357
Firm-Specific Problems	
357
Common Forms of Manipulating 
Reported Income	
357
Process for Valuing Privately 
Held Businesses	
358
Step 1: Adjusting Financial 
Statements	
358
Making Informed Adjustments	
359
Areas That Are Commonly 
Understated	
362
Areas That Are Commonly 
Overlooked	
362
Explaining Adjustments to Financial 
Statements	
362
Step 2: Applying Valuation Methodologies 
to Privately Held Companies	
364
Defining Value	
364
Selecting the Appropriate Valuation 
Methodology	
364
Step 3: Developing Discount Rates	
366
Estimating a Private Firm’s β and 
Cost of Equity	
366
Estimating the Cost of Private-Firm 
Debt	
368
Determining the Appropriate 
Tax Rate	
369
Estimating the Cost of Capital	
369
Step 4: Applying Control Premiums, 
Liquidity, and Minority Discounts	
371
Liquidity Discounts	
372
Purchase Price Premiums, Control 
Premiums, and Minority Discounts	
372
The Relationship Between Liquidity 
Discounts and Control Premiums	
373
Estimating Liquidity Discounts, Control 
Premiums, and Minority Discounts	
374
Taking Private Companies Public	
378
Reverse Mergers	
379
Wealth Effects: Reverse Mergers 
Versus IPOs and Sellouts	
379

354	
10.  Analysis and Valuation of Privately Held Firms
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
Financing Reverse Mergers	
380
Special-Purpose Acquisition Corporations	 380
Using Leveraged Employee Stock 
Ownership Plans to Buy Private 
Companies	
381
Empirical Studies of Shareholder 
Returns	
382
Some Things to Remember	
383
Discussion Questions	
384
Practice Problems and Answers	
384
Case Study: Catalyst Acquires 
Targacept in Reverse Merger	
385
Case Study Objectives	
385
Discussion Questions	
388
Additional Case Study 
Recommendations	
388
Maier’s Law: If the facts do not conform to the theory, they must be disposed of.
INSIDE M&A: OWNER’S DECISION TO RETIRE FORCES 
SALE OF BORTZ HEALTH CARE
KEY POINTS
•	 Succession planning and insufficient capital are leading factors forcing the sale of privately 
held or family-owned businesses.
•	 Small businesses often are unable to adapt to rapid changes in the markets in which they compete.
•	 For many deals to take place, sellers must feel comfortable that prospective buyers share their 
operating philosophy.
After being honorably discharged from the US Navy in 1946, Donald Bortz, Jr. went to 
work for his father in the used car business. By 1957, his father wanted a greater challenge 
and together they bought a nursing home in Orchard Lake, MI. This would be the first of 
many nursing homes to be acquired by the father and son management team. They devel­
oped a reputation of buying poorly run facilities, some in bankruptcy and some in financial 
distress, and rapidly improving their operations. The growing chain of nursing facilities was 
named Bortz Health Care with the slogan “We Care” a prominent part of the firm’s culture.
Fast forward 58 years to 2015, Don Bortz found himself at a crossroads. At 89, he and his 
wife, Valerie, with the reluctant consent of his three adult children all employees of the firm, 
decided to sell the family-owned firm. When he and his father started in the business almost 
six decades ago, there were few regulations governing nursing home operations other than a 
promise to patients that they would be cared for in their old age. But times had changed and 
the business was having difficulty adapting. Don and his wife knew that the firm’s available 
cash flow was insufficient to keep the business competitive and did not want to burden their 
children with a business that was likely to lose value over time.
Bortz was not alone in selling, as a number of long-standing nursing facility owners in 
Michigan have sold their businesses in recent years. While some retired, major changes in 
healthcare reimbursement and regulations are accelerating the change in the industry. Unlike 
hospitals and physicians who are partially reimbursed by the federal government, skilled 
nursing facilities have to bear the brunt of rising operating costs and expenditures to meet 

	
Chapter Overview	
355
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
government-mandated technology such as electronic record keeping. Small nursing home 
chains are having difficulty flourishing. Larger and better capitalized chains are necessary to 
diversify revenue sources into rehabilitation and physical therapy and their own laboratories 
to generate sufficient profit to remain in business. Patients are living longer and are sicker 
requiring more acute care. Fee for service reimbursement is ending and other reimbursement 
models such as risk-based managed care contracts and quality incentive withholds are being 
evaluated.1 Time will tell whether these new reimbursement methods will lower patient costs 
while keeping the skilled nursing facilities financially viable.
Bortz Healthcare in 2014 recorded $95 million in revenue and operated 11 nursing homes and 
assisted living facilities: 10 in Michigan and 1 in Florida. In 2013, the firm had sold two other nurs­
ing homes located in Michigan. The well-managed operation was highly attractive to a number 
of larger nursing home chains hoping to increase the scale of their operations through acquisition.
In mid-2015, the business was sold to Villa Healthcare, a Skokie, IL–based nursing home 
chain operating 10 long-term care and assisted living homes in Illinois, Wisconsin, and Min­
nesota. According to Don Bortz, Villa was selected from among 12–14 bids received over the 
past several years because they shared his philosophy and vision for the business. While 
Villa has not committed contractually to retaining Bortz’s 1500 employees, they recognized 
the high quality of the staff and were likely to retain most of the employees. All of the Bortz 
children have been given 1-year retention contracts to remain with the firm after closing. This 
would ease transition of the facilities now under new ownership. Villa also has said that it 
will be spending several million dollars to update Bortz facilities and healthcare information 
technology, and to expand rehabilitation services.
Like many things in life timing often is everything. Don and Valarie Bortz were ready to 
retire and saw in Villa’s owners a willingness to manage Bortz Health Care the way they 
would have wanted to had they retained the business. With the cost of operating skilled nurs­
ing facilities likely to continue to escalate, they knew that they could not make the investment 
necessary to meet the changing industry environment. They reasoned that it was better to sell 
now when the value of the business was likely to be highest.
CHAPTER OVERVIEW
Privately owned businesses are those whose securities are not registered with state or fed­
eral regulators and, as such, cannot be traded on public markets.2 Such firms account for 
about 86% of all US corporations3 and more than three-fourths of US acquisitions.4 The lack 
1Risk-based managed care involves the payment of a fixed fee per insured to managed care providers with the 
provider at risk if their patient care costs exceed the reimbursement rates. Under quality incentive withholds 
government agencies retain a portion of reimbursement for services provided by healthcare providers until certain 
performance-based measures have been satisfied. These measures involve predetermined quantitative improve­
ments in patient care and outcomes in such areas as prevention and screening and patient access.
2Privately owned corporations should not be confused with closely held corporations whose shares are sometimes 
traded publicly. According to the US Internal Revenue Service (IRS) more than one-half of the value of closely held 
corporations is held by five or fewer individuals.
3Asker et al. (2015).
4Capron and Shen (2007).

356	
10.  Analysis and Valuation of Privately Held Firms
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
of “tradeable” markets makes valuing these businesses challenging. Nonetheless, the need to 
value such businesses may arise for a variety of reasons. Investors and small business own­
ers may need a valuation as part of a merger or acquisition, for settling an estate, or because 
employees wish to exercise their stock options. Employee stock ownership plans (ESOPs) 
also may require periodic valuations. In other instances, shareholder disputes, court cases, 
divorce, or the payment of gift or estate taxes may necessitate a valuation.
Most privately owned firms are owned (or controlled) by members of the same family.5 
Ownership tends to be more concentrated in family-owned firms with a few large sharehold­
ers than in more widely held publicly traded companies. Challenges facing family-owned 
firms include management succession, limited access to financing, informal management 
structure, poorly trained management, and a potential preference for ownership over growth.
Family-controlled acquirers generate more positive total merger and acquisition (M&A) 
gains than more widely held acquirers6 and tend to achieve greater profitability during the 
3 years following closing than firms in which ownership is less concentrated.7 This may reflect 
more active monitoring by large shareholders of manager performance, a longer-term view 
for the firm, and a greater commitment to making value-enhancing investments than in public 
firms where CEOs may engage in empire building. Family-owned firm CEOs are less likely to 
pursue empire building or excessive pay packages as is often the case with nonfamily-owned 
firms because they are closely monitored by family members.8 However, excessive ownership 
concentration can hurt performance as family members dominate decision making, alienat­
ing minority shareholders and nonfamily managers who do not see advancement opportuni­
ties within the firm.9 Highly concentrated ownership also can enable large shareholders to 
exploit smaller shareholders by buying products and services at above market prices from 
firms owned by the large shareholders. Furthermore, family-controlled firms tend to focus 
acquisitions in a single industry; however, as their control increases significantly, such firms 
often diversify by making unrelated acquisitions. This may reflect an effort to reduce risk by 
making investments whose cash flows are uncorrelated with the firm’s primary business.10
This chapter discusses how the analyst deals with problems uncommon to public firms. Since 
issues concerning making initial contact and negotiating with the owners of private businesses 
were addressed in Chapter 5, this chapter focuses on the difficulties of valuing such firms and ad­
justing firm value for control premiums, minority discounts, and liquidity discounts. This chapter 
also includes a discussion of how corporate shells, created through reverse mergers, and lever­
aged ESOPs are used to acquire privately owned companies and how so-called private invest­
ment in public equity (PIPE) financing may be used to fund their ongoing operations. A review of 
this chapter is available in the file folder entitled “Student Study Guide” on the companion site to 
this book (https://www.elsevier.com/books-and-journals/book-companion/9780128016091).
5All family-owned firms are not small, since families control the operating policies at many large, publicly traded 
companies. In such firms, family influence is exercised by family members holding senior management positions 
or board seats and through holding supervoting stock. Examples of large publicly traded family businesses include 
Walmart, Ford Motor, Loew’s, and Bechtel Group, each of which has annual revenues of more than $20 billion.
6Craninckx and Huyghebaert (2015).
7Adhikari and Sutton (2016).
8DeCesari et al. (2016).
9De Massis et al. (2013).
10DeFrancq et al. (2016).

	
Challenges of Valuing Privately Held Companies	
357
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
CHALLENGES OF VALUING PRIVATELY HELD COMPANIES
The anonymity of many privately held firms, the potential for data manipulation, prob­
lems specific to small firms, and the tendency of owners of private firms to manage in a way 
to minimize tax liabilities create a number of significant valuation issues.
Lack of Externally Generated Information
There is generally a lack of analyses of private firms generated by sources outside of the 
company. Private firms provide little incentive for outside analysts to cover them because of 
the absence of a public market for their securities. As such, there are few forecasts of their 
performance other than those provided by the firm’s management. Press coverage is usually 
quite limited, and what is available is often based on information provided by the firm’s man­
agement. Even companies (e.g., Dun & Bradstreet) purporting to offer demographic and fi­
nancial information on small privately held firms use largely infrequent telephone interviews 
with the management of such firms as their primary source of such information.
Lack of Internal Controls and Inadequate Reporting Systems
Private firms generally do not have the same level of controls and reporting systems as 
public firms, which are required to prepare audited financial statements and are subject to 
Sarbanes–Oxley. The lack of formal controls, such as systems to monitor how money is spent, 
invites fraud and misuse of private-firm resources. With intellectual property being a sub­
stantial portion of the value of many private firms, the lack of documentation also constitutes 
a key valuation issue. Often only a few individuals within the firm know how to reproduce 
valuable intangible assets such as software, chemical formulas, and recipes; the loss of such 
individuals can destroy a firm. Moreover, customer lists and the terms and conditions as­
sociated with key customer relationships also may be undocumented, creating the basis for 
customer disputes when a change in ownership occurs.
Firm-Specific Problems
Private firms may lack product, industry, and geographic diversification. There may be in­
sufficient management talent to allow a firm to develop new products for its current markets 
or expand into new markets. Small size may restrict its influence with regulators and unions, 
and limit its access to distribution channels and leverage with suppliers and customers. Fi­
nally, the company may have little brand recognition.
Common Forms of Manipulating Reported Income
Revenue and operating expenses may be misstated. How this may occur is explained next.
Misstating Revenue
Revenue may be overstated or understated, depending on the owner’s objectives. If the 
intent is tax minimization, businesses operating on a cash basis may opt to report less revenue 
because of the difficulty outside parties have in tracking transactions. Private-business owners 

358	
10.  Analysis and Valuation of Privately Held Firms
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
intending to sell a business may be inclined to inflate revenue if the firm is to be sold. Com­
mon examples include manufacturers, which rely on others to distribute their products. These 
manufacturers can inflate revenue in the current accounting period by booking as revenue 
products shipped to resellers without adequately adjusting for probable returns. Membership 
or subscription businesses, such as health clubs and magazine publishers, may inflate revenue 
by booking the full value of multiyear contracts in the current period rather than prorating the 
payment received at the beginning of the contract period over the life of the contract.11
Manipulation of Operating Expenses
Owners of private businesses attempting to minimize taxes may give themselves and fam­
ily members higher-than-normal salaries, benefits, and bonuses. Other examples of cost ma­
nipulation include expenses that are really other forms of compensation for the owner, his or 
her family, and key employees, including the rent on the owner’s summer home or hunting 
lodge and salaries for the pilot and captain of the owner’s airplane. Current or potential 
customers sometimes are allowed to use these assets. Owners frequently argue that these 
expenses are necessary to maintain customer relationships or close large contracts and are 
therefore legitimate business expenses. Other areas commonly abused include travel and en­
tertainment (T&E), insurance, and excessive payments to vendors supplying services to the 
firm. Due diligence frequently uncovers situations in which the owner or a family member is 
either an investor in or an owner of the vendor supplying the products or services.
Alternatively, if the business owner’s objective is to maximize the firm’s selling price, salaries, 
benefits, and other operating costs may be understated significantly. An examination of the his­
torical trend in the firm’s profitability may reveal that profits are being manipulated. If operating 
profits in the year in which the business is being offered for sale unexpectedly improve, this may 
suggest that expenses have historically been overstated, revenues understated, or both.
PROCESS FOR VALUING PRIVATELY HELD BUSINESSES
To address the challenges presented by privately owned firms, an analyst should adopt a 
four-step procedure. Step 1 requires adjustment of the target firm’s financial data to reflect 
true profitability and cash flow in the current period. Step 2 entails determining the appropri­
ate valuation methodology. Step 3 requires estimating the proper discount rate. Finally, in the 
fourth step, firm value is adjusted for a control premium (if appropriate), a liquidity discount, 
and a minority discount (if an investor takes a less-than-controlling ownership stake in a firm).
STEP 1: ADJUSTING FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
The purpose of adjusting the income statement is to provide an accurate estimate of the 
current year’s net or pretax income, earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT), or earnings 
before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization (EBITDA). The various measures of in­
come should reflect all costs actually incurred in generating the level of revenue, adjusted 
11Such booking activity boosts current profitability because not all the costs associated with multiyear contracts, 
such as customer service, are incurred in the period in which the full amount of revenue is booked.

	
Step 1: Adjusting Financial Statements	
359
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
for doubtful accounts the firm booked in the current period. They also should reflect other 
expenditures (e.g., training and advertising) that must be incurred in the current period to 
sustain the anticipated growth in revenue. The importance of establishing accurate current or 
base-year data is evident when we consider how businesses—particularly small businesses—
are often valued. If the current year’s profit data are incorrect, future projections of the dollar 
value would be inaccurate, even if the projected growth rate is accurate. Furthermore, valua­
tions based on relative valuation methods such as price-to-current year earnings ratios would 
be biased to the extent estimates of the target’s current income are inaccurate.
EBITDA is a popular measure of value for privately held firms. The use of this measure 
facilitates the comparison of firms because it eliminates the potential distortion in earnings 
performance due to differences in depreciation methods and financial leverage among firms. 
Furthermore, this indicator is often more readily applicable in relative valuation methods 
than other measures of profitability, since firms are more likely to display positive EBITDA 
than EBIT or net income figures. Despite its convenience, the analyst needs to be mindful that 
EBITDA is only one component of cash flow and ignores the impact on cash flow of changes 
in net working capital, investing, and financing activities.
Making Informed Adjustments
While finding reliable current information on privately held firms is challenging, informa­
tion is available. The first step for the analyst is to search the Internet for references to the 
target firm. This search should unearth a number of sources of information on the target firm. 
Table 10.1 provides a partial list of websites containing information on private firms.
TABLE 10.1  Sources of Information on Private Firms
Source/web address
Content
RESEARCH FIRMS
Washington Researchers: www.washingtonresearchers.
com
Fuld & Company: www.fuld.com
Provide listing of sources such as local government 
officials, local chambers of commerce, state govern­
ment regulatory bodies, credit-reporting agencies, and 
local citizen groups
DATABASES
Dun & Bradstreet: smallbusiness.dnb.com
Hoover: www.hoovers.com
Standard & Poor’s NetAdvantage: www.netadvantage.
standardandpoors.com
InfoUSA: www.infousa.com
Forbes: www.forbes.com/list
Inc.: www.inc.com/inc500
Information on firms’ payment histories and limited 
financial data
Data on 40,000 international and domestic firms, IPOs, 
not-for-profits, trade associations, and small business­
es, and limited data on 18 million other companies
Financial data and management and directors’ bibli­
ographies on 125,000 firms
Industry benchmarking and company-specific data
Provides list of top privately held firms annually
Provides list of 500 of fastest-growing firms annually
IPO, Initial public offering.

360	
10.  Analysis and Valuation of Privately Held Firms
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
Salaries and Benefits
Before drawing any conclusions, the analyst should determine the actual work performed 
by all key employees and the compensation received for performing a similar job in the same 
industry. Comparative salary data can be obtained by employing the services of a compensa­
tion consultant familiar with the industry or simply by scanning “employee wanted” adver­
tisements in the industry trade press and magazines and the “help wanted” pages of the local 
newspaper. Depending on the industry, benefits can range from 14 to 50% of an employee’s 
base salary. Certain employee benefits, such as Social Security and Medicare taxes, are man­
dated by law and, therefore, an uncontrollable cost of doing business. Other types of benefits 
may be more controllable and include items such as pension contributions and life insurance 
coverage, which are calculated as a percentage of base salary. Efforts by the buyer to trim 
salaries that appear to be excessive also reduce these types of benefits. However, benefit re­
ductions often contribute to higher operating costs in the short run due to higher employee 
turnover, the need to retrain replacements, and the potential negative impact on the produc­
tivity of those who remain.
Travel, Meals, and Entertainment
T&E expenditures tend to be one of the first cost categories cut when a potential buyer 
attempts to value a target company. What may look excessive to one who is relatively unfamil­
iar with the industry may in fact be necessary for retaining current customers and acquiring 
new customers. Establishing, building, and maintaining relationships is particularly impor­
tant for personal and business services companies, such as consulting and law firms. Account 
management may require consultative selling at the customer’s site. A complex product like 
software may require on-site training. Indiscriminant reduction in the T&E budget could lead 
to a loss of customers following a change in ownership.12
Auto Expenses and Personal Life Insurance
Ask if such expenses represent a key component of the overall compensation required to 
attract and retain key employees. This can be determined by comparing total compensation 
paid to employees of the target firm with compensation packages offered to employees in 
similar positions in the same industry in the same region. A similar review should be under­
taken with respect to the composition of benefits packages.
Family Members
Similar questions need to be asked about family members on the payroll. Frequently, 
they perform real services and tend to be highly motivated because of their close affinity 
with the business. If the business has been in existence for many years, the loss of key family 
members who built relationships with customers over the years may result in a subsequent 
loss of key accounts. Moreover, family members may be those who possess proprietary 
knowledge.
12Recent changes in tax laws have made the impact of inflated meals and entertainment expenses more burden­
some. For tax purposes, only one-half of entertainment and meals, in certain circumstances, are deductible 
expenses.

	
Step 1: Adjusting Financial Statements	
361
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
Rent or Lease Payments in Excess of Fair Market Value
Check who owns the buildings housing the business or the equipment used by the busi­
ness. This is a common method of transferring company funds to the business owner, who 
also owns the building, in excess of their stated salary and benefits.
Professional Services Fees
Professional services could include legal, accounting, personnel, and actuarial services. 
Once again, check for any nonbusiness relationship between the business owner and the firm 
providing the service. Always consider any special circumstances that may justify unusually 
high fees. An industry that is subject to continuing regulation and review may incur what ap­
pear to be abnormally high legal and accounting expenses.
Depreciation Expense
Accelerated depreciation methodologies may make sense for tax purposes, but they 
may seriously understate current earnings. For financial reporting purposes, it may be ap­
propriate to convert depreciation schedules from accelerated to straight-line depreciation 
if this results in a better matching of when expenses actually are incurred and revenue 
actually is received.
Reserves
Current reserves may be inadequate to reflect future events. An increase in reserves 
lowers taxable income, whereas a decrease in reserves raises taxable income. Collection 
problems may be uncovered following an analysis of accounts receivable. It may be nec­
essary to add to reserves for doubtful accounts. Similarly, the target firm may not have 
adequately reserved for future obligations to employees under existing pension and 
healthcare plans. Reserves also may have to be increased to reflect known environmental 
and litigation exposures.
Accounting for Inventory
During periods of inflation, businesses frequently use the last-in, first-out (LIFO) meth­
od to account for inventories. This approach results in an increase in the cost of sales that 
reflects the most recent and presumably highest-cost inventory; therefore, it reduces gross 
profit and taxable income. The use of LIFO during inflationary periods tends to lower 
the value of inventory on the balance sheet as items in inventory are valued at the lower 
cost of production associated with earlier time periods. In contrast, the use of first-in, first-
out (FIFO) accounting for inventory assumes that inventory is sold in the chronological 
order in which it was purchased. When prices are increasing, the FIFO method produces 
a higher ending inventory, a lower cost of goods sold, and higher gross profit. Although 
it may make sense for tax purposes to use LIFO, the buyer’s objective for valuation pur­
poses should be to obtain a realistic estimate of actual earnings in the current period. FIFO 
accounting appears to be most logical for products that are perishable or subject to rapid 
obsolescence and, therefore, are most likely to be sold in chronological order. LIFO makes 
sense when inflation is expected to remain high.

362	
10.  Analysis and Valuation of Privately Held Firms
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
Areas That Are Commonly Understated
Projected sales increases normally require more aggressive marketing efforts, more effec­
tive customer service support, and better employee training. Nonetheless, it is common to see 
the ratio of annual advertising and training expenses to annual sales decline during the pe­
riod of highest projected growth in forecasts developed by either the seller or the buyer. The 
seller wants to boost the purchase price. The buyer simply may be overly optimistic about 
how much more effectively they can manage the business or because they want a lender to 
finance the deal. Other areas that are commonly understated in projections but that can nev­
er really be escaped include the expense associated with environmental cleanup, employee 
safety, and pending litigation.
Areas That Are Commonly Overlooked
The value in a business often is more in its intangible than tangible assets. The best ex­
amples include the high valuations placed on many Internet-related and biotechnology com­
panies. Intangible assets may include customer lists, patents, licenses, distributorship agree­
ments, leases, regulatory approvals, noncompete agreements, and employment contracts. For 
these items to represent incremental value they must represent sources of revenue or cost 
reduction not already reflected in the target’s operating cash flows.
Explaining Adjustments to Financial Statements
Table 10.2 illustrates how historical and projected financial statements received from the 
target as part of the due diligence process could be restated to reflect what the buyer believes 
to be a more accurate description of revenue and costs. Adjusting the historical financials 
provides insight into what the firm could have done had it been managed differently. Ad­
justing the projected financials enables the analyst to use what he or she considers more 
realistic assumptions. Note that the cost of sales is divided into direct and indirect expenses. 
Direct cost of sales relates to costs incurred directly in the production process. Indirect costs 
are those incurred as a result of the various functions (e.g., senior management) supporting 
the production process. The actual historical costs are displayed above the “explanation of 
adjustments” line. Some adjustments represent “add backs” to profit, while others reduce 
profit. The adjusted EBITDA numbers at the bottom of the table represent what the buyer 
believes to be the most realistic estimate of the profitability of the business. Finally, by dis­
playing the data historically, the buyer can see trends that may be useful in projecting the 
firm’s profitability.
In this illustration, the buyer believes that because of the nature of the business, inventories 
are more accurately valued on a FIFO rather than LIFO basis. This change in inventory cost 
accounting results in a sizeable boost to the firm’s profitability. Due diligence also revealed 
that the firm was overstaffed and that it could be operated by eliminating the full-time posi­
tion held by the former owner (including fees received as a member of the firm’s board of di­
rectors) and a number of part-time positions held by the owner’s family members. Although 
some cost items are reduced, others are increased. Office space is reduced, thereby lowering 
rental expense as a result of the elimination of regional sales offices. However, the sales- and 

	
Step 1: Adjusting Financial Statements	
363
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
TABLE 10.2  Adjusting the Target Firm’s Financial Statements
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
Year 4
Year 5
Revenue ($ thousands)
8000.0
8400.0
8820.0
9261.0
9724.1
Less: direct cost of sales (COS), excluding 
depreciation and amortization
5440.0
5712.0
5997.6
6297.5
6612.4
Equals: gross profit
2560.0
2688.0
2822.4
2963.5
3111.7
Less: indirect cost of sales
  Salaries and benefits
1200.0
1260.0
1323.0
1389.2
1458.6
  Rent
320.0
336.0
352.8
370.4
389.0
  Insurance
160.0
168.0
176.4
185.2
194.5
  Advertising
80.0
84.0
88.2
92.6
97.2
  Travel and entertainment
240.0
252.0
264.6
277.8
291.7
  Director fees
50.0
50.0
50.0
50.0
50.0
  Training
10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
  All other indirect expenses
240.0
252.0
264.6
277.8
291.7
Equals: EBITDA
260.0
276.0
292.8
310.4
329.0
Explanation of adjustments
Add backs/(deductions)
LIFO direct COS is higher than FIFO cost; 
adjustment converts to FIFO costs
200.0
210.0
220.5
231.5
243.1
Eliminate part-time family members’ 
salaries and benefits
150.0
157.5
165.4
173.6
182.3
Eliminate owner’s salary, benefits, and 
director fees
125.0
131.3
137.8
144.7
151.9
Increase targeted advertising to sustain 
regional brand recognition
(50.0)
(52.5)
(55.1)
(57.9)
(60.8)
Increase T&E expense to support out-of-
state customer accounts
(75.0)
(78.8)
(82.7)
(86.8)
(91.2)
Reduce office space (rent) by closing 
regional sales offices
120.0
126.0
132.3
138.9
145.9
Increase training budget
(25.0)
(26.3)
(27.6)
(28.9)
(30.4)
Adjusted EBITDA
705.0
743.3
783.4
825.6
869.9
EBITDA, earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization; FIFO, first-in, first-out; LIFO, last-in, first-out; T&E, travel 
and entertainment.
marketing-related portion of the T&E budget is increased to accommodate the increased trav­
el necessary to service out-of-state customers. Likewise, advertising expenses will have to be 
increased to promote the firm’s products in those regions. The new buyer also believes the 
firm’s historical training budget to be inadequate to sustain the growth of the business and 
more than doubles spending in this category.

364	
10.  Analysis and Valuation of Privately Held Firms
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
STEP 2: APPLYING VALUATION METHODOLOGIES 
TO PRIVATELY HELD COMPANIES
Methods employed to value private firms are similar to those discussed elsewhere in this book. 
However, in the absence of public markets, alternative definitions of value often are employed, 
and the valuation methods are subject to adjustments not commonly applied to public firms.
Defining Value
Fair market value is the cash or cash-equivalent price that a willing buyer would propose 
and a willing seller would accept for a business if both parties have access to all relevant infor­
mation. It assumes that neither party is under any obligation to buy or sell. It is easier to ob­
tain the fair market value for a public company because of the existence of public markets in 
which stock in the company is actively traded. The concept may be applied to privately held 
firms if similar publicly traded companies exist. Because finding substantially similar com­
panies is difficult, valuation professionals have developed a related concept called fair value. 
Fair value is applied when no strong market exists for a business or it is not possible to identify 
the value of similar firms. Fair value is, by necessity, more subjective because it represents the 
dollar value of a business based on an appraisal of its tangible and intangible assets.13
Selecting the Appropriate Valuation Methodology
Appraisers, brokers, and investment bankers generally classify valuation methodologies 
into four approaches: income [discounted cash flow (DCF)], relative or market based, replace­
ment cost, and asset oriented. These are discussed next as they apply to private businesses.
The Income, or Discounted Cash Flow, Approach
Factors affecting this method include the definition of income or cash flow, the timing of 
those cash flows, and the selection of an appropriate discount or capitalization rate. The terms 
discount rate and capitalization rate often are used interchangeably. Capitalization rates may be 
converted to multiples for valuation purposes (Exhibit 10.1).
While more complex DCF methods are commonly used to value private firms, capital­
ization multiples may be used when owners lack sophistication in financial matters. Such 
multiples are easy to calculate and communicate to the parties involved and may facilitate 
completion of the deal. Also, there is little empirical evidence that more complex valuation 
methods necessarily result in more accurate valuation estimates. Although the DCF method 
13Fair value is the statutory standard applicable in cases of dissenting stockholders’ appraisal rights. Following a 
merger or corporate dissolution, shareholders in many states have the right to have their shares appraised and to 
receive fair value in cash. In states adopting the Uniform Business Corporation Act, fair value refers to the value of 
the shares immediately before the corporate decision to which the shareholder objects, excluding any appreciation 
or depreciation in anticipation of the corporate decision. In contrast, according to the Financial Accounting Stan­
dards Board Statement 157 effective November 15, 2007, fair value is the price determined in an orderly transaction 
between market participants (Pratt and Niculita, 2008).

	
Step 2: Applying Valuation Methodologies to Privately Held Companies	
365
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
is widely used, it is not used exclusively. Other valuation methodologies are used, depending 
on the facts and circumstances of the particular case.
The Relative Value (or Market-Based) Approach
This approach also may be used in valuing private firms by business brokers or apprais­
ers to establish a purchase price. The IRS and the US tax courts have encouraged the use 
of market-based valuation techniques. Therefore, in valuing private companies, it is always 
important to keep in mind what factors the IRS thinks are relevant to the process, because the 
IRS may contest any sale requiring the payment of estate, capital gains, or unearned-income 
taxes. The IRS’s positions on specific tax issues can be determined by reviewing revenue rul­
ings. A revenue ruling is an official interpretation by the IRS of the Internal Revenue Code, 
related statutes, tax treaties, and regulations. Revenue Ruling 59–60 describes the general 
factors that the IRS and tax courts consider relevant in valuing private businesses. These fac­
tors include general economic conditions, the specific conditions in the industry, the type of 
business, historical trends in the industry, the firm’s performance, and the firm’s book value. 
In addition, the IRS and tax courts consider the ability of the company to generate earnings 
and pay dividends, the amount of intangibles such as goodwill, recent sales of stock, and the 
stock prices of companies engaged in the “same or similar” line of business.
The Replacement Cost Approach
This approach states that the assets of a business are worth what it costs to replace them 
and is most applicable to businesses that have substantial amounts of tangible assets for 
which the actual cost to replace them can be determined. This method is often not useful in 
valuing a business whose assets are primarily intangible. Moreover, the replacement cost ap­
proach ignores the value created by operating the assets as a going concern.14
14The replacement cost approach sometimes is used to value intangible assets by examining the amount of histori­
cal investment associated with the asset. For example, the cumulative historical advertising spending targeted at 
developing a particular product brand or image may be a reasonable proxy for the intangible value of the brand 
name or image. However, changing consumer tastes may make this method misleading.
EXHIBIT 10.1  APPLYING CAPITALIZATION MULITIPLES
Assume Firm A’s and Firm B’s current-year cash flows are $1.5 million and the discount rate is 
8%. Firm A’s cash flows are not expected to grow, while Firm B’s cash flows are expected to grow at 
4% in perpetuity. What is the current market value of each firm?
Answer: Firm A is valued using the zero-growth method and Firm B the constant-growth DCF 
method (see Chapter 7).
Firm A: $1.5 million × (1/0.08) = $1.5 million × 12.5 = $18.75 million.
Firm B: $1.5 million × (1.04)/(0.08 − 0.04) = $1.5 million × 26 = $39 million.
The perpetuity and constant-growth capitalization multiples are 12.5 and 26, respectively, and 
imply that investors are willing to pay $12.5 and 26 for each dollar of cash flow.

366	
10.  Analysis and Valuation of Privately Held Firms
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
The Asset-Oriented Approach
Book value is an accounting concept and often is not considered a good measure of market 
value because book values usually reflect historical rather than current market values. How­
ever, as noted in Chapter 8, tangible book value (i.e., book value less intangible assets) may be 
a good proxy for the current market value for both financial services and product distribution 
companies. Breakup value is an estimate of what the value of a business would be if each of 
its primary assets were sold independently. Liquidation value is a reflection of the firm under 
duress. For a listing of when to use the various valuation methodologies, see Table 8.3.
STEP 3: DEVELOPING DISCOUNT RATES
While the discount or capitalization rate can be derived using a variety of methods, the 
focus in this chapter is on the weighted average cost of capital or the cost of equity. The capital 
asset pricing model (CAPM) provides an estimate of the acquiring firm’s cost of equity, which 
may be used as the discount or capitalization rate when the firm is debt free. However, there 
is evidence that CAPM tends to understate financial rates of return on private companies. 
What follows is a discussion of ways to adjust CAPM to improve its accuracy in estimating 
the cost of equity for small privately owned firms.
Estimating a Private Firm’s β and Cost of Equity
CAPM assumes the cost of equity is determined by the marginal or incremental investor. 
Although both public and private firms are subject to systematic risk, nonsystematic risk as­
sociated with publicly traded firms can be eliminated by such investors holding a properly 
diversified portfolio of securities. This often is not true for privately held firms.
Without properly adjusting for risk specific to privately held firms, the cost of equity can be 
significantly understated. For an unlevered private firm, the cost of equity exceeds the cost of 
equity for a comparable unlevered public firm by between 2 and 15%, depending on the riski­
ness of the firm’s operating cash flows and nondiversification of investors. When considering 
levered firms, the private firm’s cost of equity can be up to 33% higher than a comparably 
leveraged public firm.15
How is the cost of equity determined for private firms? For firms in which the owner is most 
often the only (or primary) investor, the marginal investor is the current owner because of the 
frequent difficultly in attracting new investors.16 Since the owner’s net worth is primarily his 
or her ownership stake in the business, the owner is not likely to be well diversified and their 
required rate of return (cost of equity) will be higher than for better diversified investors in 
public firms. Why? Because private business owner’s net worth is more exposed to the firm’s 
asset risk (i.e., the volatility of the firm’s operating cash flows). β for these firms understate 
the true exposure of these firms to risk, which would include both systematic and nonsys­
tematic risk. Thus, unlike investors in publicly traded firms, owners of private firms are con­
cerned about total risk and not just systematic risk.
15Abudy et al. (2016).
16The business owner may not want new investors because of a desire to retain control.

	
Step 3: Developing Discount Rates	
367
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
To approximate total risk for owners of closely held firms, the analyst may estimate the 
total β. The total β is calculated by dividing the CAPM market β for a security by the cor­
relation coefficient for comparable public firms with the overall stock market.17 Because the 
correlation with the overall market has been removed, the total β captures the security’s 
risk as a stand-alone asset rather than as part of a well-diversified portfolio. The correla­
tion coefficient may be estimated by taking the square root of the average coefficient of 
determination (R2) for comparable public companies, obtained from linear regressions of 
their share prices against the overall stock market. The total β (βtot) may be expressed as 
follows:
β
β
=
R
tot
2
	
(10.1)
The total β will provide a cost of equity for an investor who is completely invested in a sin­
gle business.18 When there is insufficient historical information to use regression analysis, the 
total β may be estimated using the “bottom-up” process discussed in Chapter 7 (Table 7.5).
An alternative to the total β to estimate the cost of equity is the buildup method, which 
represents the sum of the risks associated with a particular class of assets. This methodology 
assumes the firm’s market β is equal to 1 and adds to the CAPM’s estimate of a firm’s cost of 
equity an estimate of firm size, industry risk, and company-specific risk. These factors are an 
attempt to measure nonsystematic risk.
Firm-size adjustments reflect the assumption that on average larger firms are less likely 
to default than smaller firms; the industry adjustment reflects the observation that certain 
industries are more cyclical (and therefore riskier) than others. Examples of company-specific 
risks for small privately owned firms include a lack of professional management, excessive 
dependence on a single customer or supplier, lack of access to capital, and a narrow product 
focus. Reflecting these factors, the buildup method could be displayed as follows:
=
+
+
+
+
k
R
ERP
FSP
IND
CSR
e
f
	
(10.2)
where ke, cost of equity; Rf, risk-free return; ERP, equity risk premium (market return on 
stocks less the risk-free rate); FSP, firm-size premium; IND, industry-risk premium; and CSR, 
company-specific risk premium.
18It is incorrect to use the total β if a private company is being acquired by a public company or is going public, 
since the public firm’s shareholders or investors in the initial public offering (IPO) are assumed to be able to diver­
sify away company-specific risk. If a private company investor is partially diversified (such as a hedge fund having 
investments in multiple industries), the investor’s β would be higher than the market β but lower than the total β.
17Unlike the CAPM β, which measures a security’s volatility relative to the market and its correlation with the 
overall market, the total β measures only the volatility of the security compared to market volatility. In a linear re­
gression, β
σ
=
i m
Cov( ,
)/
m
2 and may be rewritten as (σi/σm)R, since σ
σ
σ
σ
σ
×
×
=
i m
i m
(
/
)
[Cov( ,
)/(
)]
Cov( ,
)/
i
m
i
m
m
2, 
where σi, the standard deviation (volatility) of an ith security; σm, the standard deviation of the overall stock 
market; and R, the correlation coefficient [Cov(i, m)/(σi × σm)] between the ith security and the overall stock 
market. By multiplying (σi/σm), a measure of systematic and nonsystematic risk, by R, which lies between 0 and 
1, the CAPM β provides an estimate of the systematic portion of total risk. Note that the total β will generally 
be larger than the CAPM β because the estimated correlation coefficient is between 0 and 1; the total β and the 
CAPM market β are equal only if R = 1.

368	
10.  Analysis and Valuation of Privately Held Firms
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
Assume the risk-free rate, equity risk premium, firm-size premium, industry-risk premi­
um, and company-specific risk premium are 3, 5.5, 3.5, 2, and 1.5%, respectively, for a small 
privately held firm. An estimate of the firm’s cost of equity using the buildup method would 
equal 15.5%, the sum or the risk-free rate and the risk premiums.
Data for firm-size and industry-risk premiums are available from Morningstar’s Ibbotson 
Stocks, Bonds, Bills & Inflation from 1926 to the present and Duff & Phelps Risk Premium Re­
port from 1963 to the present.19 Estimating company-specific risk premiums requires qualita­
tive analysis, usually consisting of management interviews and site visits. The magnitude 
of the company-specific risk premium could be adjusted up or down to reflect such factors 
as leverage, size, and earnings/cash flow volatility. Other subjective factors could include 
management depth and acumen, customer concentration, product substitutes, potential new 
entrants, and product diversification.20
While commonly used by practitioners, the buildup method also is problematic, because 
it assumes that the size and industry- and company-specific risk premiums are additive. If 
so, they would have to be independent or uncorrelated. It is likely that the factors captured 
by the size premium also are reflected in the industry- and company-specific risk premiums, 
potentially resulting in “double-counting” their impact in estimating the magnitude of the 
firm’s cost of equity. Furthermore, subjective adjustments made to the company-specific 
risk premium based on the experience and intuition of the appraiser could also result in 
significant bias.
Estimating the Cost of Private-Firm Debt
Private firms seldom can access public debt markets and are usually not rated by the cred­
it-rating agencies. Most debt is bank debt, and the interest expense on loans on the firm’s 
books that are more than a year old may not reflect what it actually would cost the firm to 
borrow currently. The common solution is to assume that private firms can borrow at the 
same rate as comparable publicly listed firms or to estimate an appropriate bond rating for 
the company based on financial ratios and to use the interest rate that public firms with 
similar ratings pay.
An analyst can identify publicly traded company bond ratings using the various Internet 
bond-screening services (e.g., finance.yahoo.com/bonds) to search for bonds with various cred­
it ratings. Royal Caribbean Cruise Lines Ltd. had a BBB rating and a 2.7 interest coverage ratio in 
2009 and would have to pay 7.0%–7.5% for bonds maturing in 7–10 years. Consequently, firms 
with similar interest coverage ratios could have similar credit ratings. If the private firm to be 
valued had a similar interest coverage ratio and wanted to borrow for a similar time period, it is 
19Morningstar’s Ibbotson provides equity-risk premiums for 10 size deciles based on companies’ market capitaliza­
tions. The 10th decile is further subdivided for firms with market caps from as low as $1.2 million. The firm also 
provides 500 industry-level risk premiums. Duff & Phelps provides equity-risk premiums by grouping companies 
into 25 size categories based on 8 different definitions of size. The definitions include market cap, book value, 
5-year average net income, market value of invested capital, 5-year average EBITDA, sales, number of employees, 
and total assets. Analysts can use these data to benchmark the subject company without having to estimate the 
market value of equity because they would use the Ibbotson data.
20For an excellent discussion of how business appraisers use the buildup method, see Miller (2010).

	
Step 3: Developing Discount Rates	
369
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
likely that it would have had to pay a comparable rate of interest.21 Other sources of information 
about the interest rates that firms of a certain credit rating pay often are available in major finan­
cial newspapers, such as the Wall Street Journal, Investors’ Business Daily, and Barron’s.22
Determining the Appropriate Tax Rate
Throughout this book, a corporate marginal tax rate of 40% has been used in calculating 
the after-tax cost of debt in valuing public firms. When the acquirer of a private firm is a pub­
lic firm, using the 40% corporate marginal tax rate is generally correct. However, for acquirers 
that are private firms or individuals, the choice of the tax rate to use depends on the nature 
of the buyer. The right marginal tax rate could be as high as 40% if a public company is the 
acquirer or as low as zero if the buyer is a nonprofit entity. The marginal tax rate should reflect 
the highest marginal personal income tax rate if the buyer(s) are individuals.
If the acquirer is a sole proprietorship where the business’ income is recorded on the own­
er’s tax return, the right tax rate would be the highest marginal personal income tax rate. For 
partnerships, limited liability companies, and subchapter S corporations, where all income is 
distributed to partners, members, and owners, respectively, the correct tax rate would be a 
weighted average of the owners’ marginal tax rates. The weights should reflect the owners’ 
respective ownership percentages.
Estimating the Cost of Capital
In the presence of debt, the cost-of-capital method should be used to estimate the discount 
or capitalization rate. This method involves calculating a weighted average of the cost of eq­
uity and the after-tax cost of debt. The weights should reflect market rather than book values.
Private firms represent a greater challenge than public firms, in that the market value of 
their equity and debt is not readily available. A common solution is to use what the firm’s 
management has set as its target debt-to-equity ratio in determining the weights to be used 
or to assume that the private firms will eventually adopt the industry average debt-to-equity 
ratio.23 When the growth period for the firm’s cash flow is expected to vary, the cost of capi­
tal estimated for the high-growth period can be expected to decline when the firm begins to 
grow at a more sustainable rate, often the industry average growth rate. At that point, the 
firm presumably begins to take on the risk and growth characteristics of the typical firm in the 
industry. Thus, the discount rate may be assumed to be the industry average cost of capital 
during the sustainable-growth period. Exhibit 10.2 illustrates how to calculate a private firm’s 
β, cost of equity, and cost of capital.
21If the maturity date, coupon rate, how frequently interest is paid, and the face value of a private firm’s outstand­
ing debt are known, the market value of such debt can be estimated using the yield to maturity on comparable debt 
that is currently traded for firms of similar risk.
22Unlike the estimation of the cost of equity for small privately held firms, it is unnecessary to adjust the cost of 
debt for specific business risk, since it is already reflected in the interest rate charged to firms of similar risk.
23The firm’s target D/E ratio should be consistent with the debt-to-total capital and equity-to-total capital weights 
used in the weighted average cost of capital. This consistency can be achieved simply by dividing the target 
D/E (or the industry D/E if that is what is used) by (1 + D/E) to estimate the implied debt-to-total capital ratio. 
Subtracting this ratio from 1 provides the implied equity-to-total capital ratio.

370	
10.  Analysis and Valuation of Privately Held Firms
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
EXHIBIT 10.2  VALU ING PRIVATE FIRMS
Acuity Lighting, a regional manufacturer and distributor of custom lighting fixtures, has rev­
enues of $10 million and an EBIT of $2 million in the current year (i.e., year 0). The book value of 
the firm’s debt is $5 million. The firm’s debt matures at the end of 5 years and has annual interest 
expense of $400,000. The firm’s marginal tax rate is 40%, the same as the industry average. Capital 
spending equals depreciation in year 0, and both are expected to grow at the same rate. As a result 
of excellent working capital management, the future change in working capital is expected to be es­
sentially zero. The firm’s revenue is expected to grow 15% annually for the next 5 years and 5% per 
year thereafter. The firm’s current operating profit margin is expected to remain constant through­
out the forecast period.
As a result of the deceleration of its growth rate to a more sustainable rate, Acuity Lighting is 
expected to assume the risk and growth characteristics of the average firm in the industry during 
the sustainable-growth period. Consequently, its discount rate during this period is expected to 
decline to the industry average cost of capital of 11%. The industry average β and debt-to-equity ratio 
are 2 and 0.4, respectively. The R2 associated with a linear regression of the share prices of comparable 
publicly traded companies with the overall stock market is 0.25. The 10-year US Treasury bond rate is 
4.5%, and the historical equity premium on all stocks is 5.5%. Acuity Lighting’s interest coverage 
ratio is 2.89, equivalent to a BBB credit rating. BBB-rated firms are currently paying a pretax cost of 
debt of 7.5%. Acuity Lighting’s management has established the firm’s target debt-to-equity ratio at 
0.5 based on the firm’s profitability and growth characteristics. Estimate the equity value of the firm.
Solution:
Calculate Acuity’s cost of equity using the methodology discussed in Chapter 7 (Table 7.5) and 
the weighted average cost of capital. This requires computing the average of comparable firms’ un­
levered β and relevering the average unlevered β using the target’s debt-to-equity ratio:
1.	 Unlevered β for publicly traded firms in the same industry = 2/(1 + 0.6 × 0.4) = 1.61, where 2 is 
the industry’s average levered β, 0.6 is (1 − tax rate), and 0.4 is the average debt-to-equity ratio 
for firms in this industry.
2.	 The total β [Eq. (10.1)] is 1.61/√.25 = 3.22. (Note: The total β reflects only operating and 
industry risk.)
3.	 Acuity’s levered β = 3.22 × (1 + 0.6 × 0.5) = 4.19, where 0.5 is the target debt-to-equity ratio 
established by Acuity’s management.
4.	 Acuity’s cost of equity = 4.5 + 4.19 × 5.5 = 27.6.
5.	 Acuity’s after-tax cost of debt = 7.5 × (1 − 0.4) = 4.5, where 7.5 is the pretax cost of debt.
6.	 Acuity’s WACC = (27.6 × 0.67) + (4.5 × 0.33) = 19.98, where the firm’s debt-to-total capital ratio 
(D/TC) is determined by dividing Acuity’s debt-to-equity target (D/E) by 1 + D/E. Therefore,
=
+
=
=
−
=
D
TC
0.5
1
0.5
0.33
and
Equity to total capital
1
0.33
0.67

	
Step 4: Applying Control Premiums, Liquidity, and Minority Discounts	
371
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
Value Acuity by means of the free cash flow to the firm (FCFF) DCF model using the data pro­
vided in Table 10.3:
=
+
+
+
+
=
+
+
+
+
=
Present Value of FCFF
$1, 380, 000
1.1998
$1, 587, 000
(1.1998)2
$1, 825, 050
(1.1998)3
$2, 098, 807
(1.1998)4
$2, 413,628
(1.1998)5
$1,150,192
$1,102, 451
$1, 056,692
$1, 012, 831
$970,792
$5, 292, 958
=
−
=
PV of Terminal value
$2, 534, 310/(0.11
0.05)
(1.1824)
$18, 276, 220
5
=
+
=
Total Present Value
$5, 292, 958
$18, 276, 220
$23, 569,178
=
×
−
+
=
+
=
Market Valueof Acuity'sDebt
$400, 000
(1
(1/(1.075)5)
0.075
$5, 000, 000
(1.075)5
$1,618,354 $3,482,793 $5,101,147
=
−
=
Value of Equity
$23, 569,178
$5,101,147
$18, 468, 031
TABLE 10.3  FCFF Model
Year
1
2
3
4
5
6
EBITa
$2,300,000
$2,645,000
$3,041,750
$3,498,012
$4,022,714
$4,223,850
EBIT (1 − tax rate)b
$1,380,000
$1,587,000
$1,825,050
$2,098,807
$2,413,628
$2,534,310
EBIT, Earnings before interest and taxes; FCFF, free cash flow to the firm.
a EBIT grows at 15% annually for the first 5 years and 5% thereafter.
b Capital spending equals depreciation in year 0, and both are expected to grow at the same rate. Moreover, the change in working capital is 
zero. Therefore, free cash flow equals after-tax EBIT.
STEP 4: APPLYING CONTROL PREMIUMS, LIQUIDITY, 
AND MINORITY DISCOUNTS
The maximum purchase price an acquirer should pay for a target firm (PVMAX) is defined 
as its current market or stand-alone value (i.e., the minimum price, or PVMIN) plus the value 
of anticipated net synergies (i.e., PVNS):
=
+
PV
PV
PV
MAX
MIN
NS
	
(10.3)
Since the acquirer must earn more than the premium it pays for the target firm when 
the firms are combined to realize its required cost of capital, the purchase price paid 
should be less than the maximum price. Otherwise, all value created by combining the 
firms would be transferred to the target firm’s shareholders. This is discussed in greater 
detail in Chapter 14.

372	
10.  Analysis and Valuation of Privately Held Firms
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
Eq. (10.3) is a reasonable representation of the maximum offer price for firms whose shares 
are traded in liquid markets and where no single shareholder (i.e., block shareholder)24 can 
direct the activities of the business. Examples of such firms could include Microsoft, IBM, 
and General Electric. However, when markets are illiquid and there are block shareholders 
with the ability to influence strategic decisions made by the firm, the maximum offer price 
for the firm needs to be adjusted for liquidity risk and the value of control. These concepts 
are explored next.
Liquidity Discounts
Liquidity is the ease with which investors can sell assets without a serious loss in the value 
of their investment. An investor in a private company may find it difficult to sell his or her 
shares quickly because of limited interest in the company. It may be necessary to sell at a sig­
nificant discount from what was paid for the shares. Liquidity or marketability risk may be 
expressed as a liquidity or marketability discount, which equals the reduction in the offer price 
for the target firm by an amount equal to the potential loss of value when sold.
Empirical studies of liquidity discounts demonstrate that they exist, but there is substantial 
disagreement over their magnitude. While pre-1992 studies found discounts as high as 50%,25 
studies since 1999 indicate more modest discounts, ranging from 5 to 35%, with an average 
discount of about 20%.26 The decline in the discount since 1990 reflects a reduction in the Rule 
144 holding period for restricted shares27 and improved market liquidity. The latter is due to 
better business governance practices, lower transaction costs, greater access to information 
via the Internet, and the emergence of markets for trading nonpublic stocks.28
Purchase Price Premiums, Control Premiums, and Minority Discounts
For many transactions, the purchase price premium includes both a premium for antici­
pated synergy and a premium for control. The value of control is different from the value 
of synergy, which represents revenue increases and cost savings that result from combining 
two firms. In contrast, the value of control provides the right to direct the activities of the 
target firm on an ongoing basis. While control is often assumed to require a greater-than-50% 
ownership stake, effective control can be achieved at less than 50% ownership if other share­
holders own relatively smaller stakes and do not vote as a block. An investor may be willing 
25Pratt and Niculita (2008).
26Loughran and Ritter (2002), Officer (2007), and Comment (2012).
27Restricted shares are those issued by public firms, with the caveat that they not be traded for a specific time 
period; as such, such shares can be sold only through a private placement under the provisions of the SEC’s Rule 
144, usually at a discount because of their lack of marketability. In 1997, the SEC reduced the holding period for 
restricted stock from 2 years to 1, making such shares more liquid.
28Examples of markets for nonpublic companies include secondmarket.com, sharespost.com, and peqx.com.
24Insider block shareholders tend to exert a negative influence on firm value as they may make decisions 
(e.g., making large acquisitions) that may not be in the best interests of shareholders in order to retain their 
senior management or board positions, increase compensation, or as an expression of hubris. Block shareholders 
who are not insiders tend to have a positive impact on firm value because of their aggressive monitoring of firm 
performance (Basu et al., 2016).

	
Step 4: Applying Control Premiums, Liquidity, and Minority Discounts	
373
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
to pay a significant premium to purchase a less-than-50% stake if the investor believes that 
effective control over key decisions can be achieved.
Control includes the ability to select management, determine compensation, set policy, 
acquire29 and liquidate assets, award contracts, make acquisitions, sell or recapitalize the 
company, and register the company’s stock for a public offering. The more control a block 
investor has, the less influence a minority investor has and the less valuable is the minority 
investor’s stock. Therefore, a control premium is the amount an investor is willing to pay to 
direct the activities of the firm. A minority discount is the reduction in the value of the invest­
ment because the minority owners have little control over the firm’s operations.
Purchase price premiums may reflect only control premiums when a buyer acquires a target 
firm and manages it as an independent operating subsidiary. The pure control premium is the 
value the acquirer believes can be created by replacing incompetent management, changing 
the strategic direction of the firm, gaining a foothold in a market not currently served, or 
achieving unrelated diversification.30 The empirical evidence available to measure the control 
premium is limited, resulting in considerable disagreement about its size. Country compari­
son studies indicate a huge variation in median control premiums from as little as 2%–5% in 
countries where corporate ownership often is widely dispersed and investor protections are 
effective to as much as 60%–65% in countries where ownership tends to be concentrated and 
governance practices are poor. Median estimates across countries are 10%–12%.31 A recent 
empirical study pegs the average premium paid by investors for a block of stock in the United 
States at 9.6%, based on 114 publicly disclosed US acquisitions of blocks of more than 35% but 
less than 90% of the shares of a company between 1990 and 2010.32
The Relationship Between Liquidity Discounts and Control Premiums
Market liquidity and the value of control tend to move in opposite directions—that is, 
whenever it is easy for shareholders to sell their shares, the benefits of control diminish. Why? 
Because shareholders who are dissatisfied with the decisions made by controlling sharehold­
ers may choose to sell their shares, thereby driving down the value of the controlling share­
holder’s interest. When it is difficult for shareholders to sell without incurring significant 
losses (i.e., the market is illiquid), investors place a greater value on control. Minority share­
holders have no easy way to dispose of their investment, since they cannot force the sale of 
the firm and the controlling shareholder has little incentive to acquire their shares, except at 
a steep discount. The controlling shareholder can continue to make decisions that may not 
29Elon Musk, controlling shareholder through his holdings of supervoting shares in both solar panel supplier Solar 
City and electric car and battery manufacturer Tesla Motors, proposed merging the two money losing firms in mid-
2016. He argued that the merger would lower the cost of sales for both firms by enabling the bundling of products 
and services (i.e., the installation of car charger, solar panels, and a battery pack could be heavily discounted from 
their cost if sold separately).
30Another example of a pure control premium is that paid for a firm going private through a leveraged buyout, in 
that the target firm generally is merged into a shell corporation, with no synergy being created, and managed for 
cash after having been recapitalized. While the firm’s management team may remain intact, the board of directors 
usually consists of representatives of the financial sponsor (i.e., equity or block investor).
31Weifeng et al. (2008), Massari et al. (2006), and Dyck and Zingales (2004).
32Albuquerque and Schroth (2015).

374	
10.  Analysis and Valuation of Privately Held Firms
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
be in the best interests of the minority shareholders, with minimal consequences. Therefore, 
the sizes of control premiums and liquidity discounts tend to be positively correlated, since 
the value of control increases as market liquidity decreases (i.e., liquidity discounts increase).
Eq. (10.3) can be rewritten to reflect the interdependent relationship between the control 
premium (CP) and the liquidity discount (LD) as follows:
=
+
+
−
=
+
−
+
−
×
=
+
−
+
−
PV
(PV
PV
)(1
CP%)(1
LD%)
(PV
PV
)(1
LD%
CP%
LD%
CP%)
(PV
PV
)[1
LD%
CP%(1
LD%)]
MIN
MAX
MIN
NS
MIN
NS
NS
	
(10.4)
where CP%, control premium expressed as a percentage of the maximum purchase price; 
and LD%, liquidity discount expressed as a percentage of the maximum purchase price.
The multiplicative form of Eq. (10.2) results in a term (i.e., LD% × CP%) that serves as an 
estimate of the interaction between the control premium and the liquidity discount.33 This 
interaction term reflects the potential reduction in the value of control [i.e., CP%(1 − LD%)] 
resulting from disaffected minority shareholders’ taking a more active role in monitoring 
the firm’s performance. This could result in proxy contests to change decisions made by the 
board and management or the composition of the board as well as litigation.34
Estimating Liquidity Discounts, Control Premiums, and Minority Discounts
There is no such thing as a standard liquidity discount or control premium because the 
size of the discount or premium should reflect firm-specific factors. These are discussed in 
the subsequent text.
Factors Affecting the Liquidity Discount
The median liquidity discount for empirical studies since the early 1990s is about 20%. 
Table 10.4 suggests a methodology for adjusting a private firm for liquidity risk, where an 
analyst starts with the median liquidity discount of 20% and adjusts for factors specific to the 
target firm. Such factors include firm size, liquid assets as a percent of total assets, financial 
returns, and cash flow growth and leverage as compared to the industry. While not intended 
to be an exhaustive list, these factors were selected based on the findings of empirical studies 
of restricted stocks.
The liquidity discount should be smaller for more highly liquid firms, since liquid as­
sets generally can be converted quickly to cash with minimal loss of value. Furthermore, 
firms whose financial returns exceed significantly the industry average have an easier time 
attracting investors and should be subject to a smaller liquidity discount than firms that are 
underperforming the industry. Likewise, firms with relatively low leverage and high cash 
33If control premiums and minority discounts and control premiums and liquidity discounts are positively cor­
related, minority discounts and liquidity discounts must be positively correlated.
34PVMAX may also be adjusted for illiquidity and value of control by adjusting the cost of equity (ke). Assume 
ke = k(1 + CP%)(1 − LD%), where k, the cost of equity, including the effects of illiquidity and the value of control; 
then k = ke/(1 + CP%)(1 − LD%). That is, k decreases with an increasing value of control (PVMAX increases) and 
increases with increasing illiquidity (PVMAX decreases).

	
Step 4: Applying Control Premiums, Liquidity, and Minority Discounts	
375
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
flow growth should be subject to a smaller liquidity discount than more leveraged firms with 
slower cash flow growth because they have a lower breakeven point and are less likely to 
default or become insolvent.
Factors Affecting the Control Premium
Factors affecting the size of the control premium include the perceived ability of the tar­
get’s current management, the extent to which operating expenses are discretionary, the value 
of nonoperating assets, and the net present value (NPV) of currently unexploited business 
opportunities. The value of replacing incompetent management is difficult to quantify, since 
it reflects the potential for better future decision making. The value of nonoperating assets 
and discretionary expenses are quantified by estimating the after-tax sale value of redundant 
assets and the pretax profit improvement from eliminating redundant personnel. While rela­
tively easy to measure, such actions may be impossible to implement without having control 
of the business.35
If the target business is to be run as currently managed, no control premium should be 
added to the purchase price. If the acquirer intends to take actions possible only if the ac­
quirer has control, the purchase price should include a control premium sufficient to gain a 
controlling interest. Table 10.5 provides a methodology for adjusting a control premium to be 
applied to a specific business. The 10% premium in the table is for illustrative purposes only 
and is intended to provide a starting point. The actual premium selected should reflect the 
analyst’s perception of what is appropriate given the country’s legal system and propensity 
to enforce laws and the extent to which the firm’s ownership tends to be concentrated or 
widely dispersed.
35This is true because such decisions could involve eliminating the positions of members of the family owning the 
business or selling an asset owned by the business but used primarily by the family owning the business.
TABLE 10.4  Estimating the Size of the Liquidity Discount
Factor
Guideline
Adjust 20% median discount 
as follows
Firm size
•	Large
•	Small
•	Reduce discount
•	Increase discount
Liquid assets as percent of total 
assets
•	>50%
•	<50%
•	Reduce discount
•	Increase discount
Financial returns
•	2 × industry mediana
•	0.5 × industry median
•	Reduce discount
•	Increase discount
Cash-flow growth rate
•	2 × industry median
•	0.5 × industry median
•	Reduce discount
•	Increase discount
Leverage
•	0.5 × industry median
•	2 × industry median
•	Reduce discount
•	Increase discount
Estimated firm-specific liquidity discount
=20% ± adjustments
a Industry median financial information often is available from industry trade associations, conference presentations, Wall Street analysts’ 
reports, Yahoo! Finance, Barron’s, Investor’s Business Daily, The Wall Street Journal, and similar publications and websites.

376	
10.  Analysis and Valuation of Privately Held Firms
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
The percentages applied to the discretionary expenses’ share of total expenses, nonop­
erating assets as a percent of total assets, and the NPV of alternative strategies reflect risks 
inherent in cutting costs, selling assets, and pursuing other investment opportunities. These 
risks include a decline in morale and productivity following layoffs, the management time 
involved in selling assets and the possible disruption of the business, and the potential for 
overestimating the NPV of other investments. In other words, the perceived benefits of these 
decisions should be large enough to offset the associated risks. Additional adjustments not 
shown in Table 10.5 may be necessary to reflect state statutes affecting the rights of controlling 
and minority shareholders.36
As a practical matter, business appraisers frequently rely on the Control Premium Study, 
published annually by FactSet Mergerstat. Another source is Duff & Phelps. The use of these 
data is problematic, since the control-premium estimates provided by these firms include the 
estimated value of synergy as well as the amount paid to gain control.
Factors Affecting the Minority Discount
Minority discounts reflect the loss of influence due to the power of a controlling-block 
investor. Intuitively, the magnitude of the discount should relate to the size of the control 
premium. The larger the control premium, the greater the perceived value of being able 
to direct the activities of the business and the value of special privileges that come at the 
36In more than one-half of the states, major corporate actions, such as a merger, sale, liquidation, or a recapitaliza­
tion of a firm, may be approved by a simple majority vote of the firm’s shareholders. Other states require at least 
a two-thirds majority to approve such decisions. A majority of the states have dissolution statutes that make it 
possible for minority shareholders to force dissolution of a corporation if they can show there is a deadlock in their 
negotiations with the controlling shareholders or that their rights are being violated.
TABLE 10.5  Estimating the Size of the Control Premium to Reflect the Value of Changing the Target’s 
Business Strategy and Operating Practices
Factor
Guideline
Adjust 10% median control 
premium as followsa
Target management
•	Retain
•	Replace
•	No change in premium
•	Increase premium
Discretionary 
expenses
•	Cut if potential savings >5% of total expenses
•	Do not cut if potential savings <5% of total expenses
•	Increase premium
•	No change in premium
Nonoperating assets
•	Sell if potential after-tax gain >10% of purchase priceb
•	Defer decision if potential after-tax gain <10% of 
purchase price
•	Increase premium
•	No change in premium
Alternative business 
opportunities
•	Pursue if NPV >20% of target’s stand-alone value
•	Do not pursue if NPV <20% of target’s stand-alone 
value
•	Increase premium
•	No change in premium
Estimated firm-specific control premium
=10% + adjustments
NPV, Net present value.
a The 10% premium represents the median estimate from the Nenova (2003) and Dyck and Zingales (2004) study for countries perceived to have 
relatively stronger investor protection and law enforcement.
b The purchase price refers to the price paid for the controlling interest in the target.

	
Step 4: Applying Control Premiums, Liquidity, and Minority Discounts	
377
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
expense of the minority investor. Reflecting the relationship between control premium and 
minority discounts, FactSet Mergerstat estimates minority discounts by using the following 
formula:
=
−
+
ImpliedMedian MinorityDiscount
1
1
1
median premium paid
	
(10.5)
Eq. (10.5) implies that an investor would pay a higher price for control of a company and 
a lesser amount for a minority stake (i.e., larger control premiums are associated with larger 
minority discounts). While Eq. (10.5) is used routinely by practitioners to estimate minority 
discounts, there is little empirical support for this largely intuitive relationship.37
Exhibit 10.3 shows what an investor should pay for a controlling interest and for a minor­
ity interest. The example assumes that 50.1% ownership is required for a controlling interest. 
In practice, control may be achieved with less than a majority ownership position if there are 
numerous other minority investors or the investor is buying supervoting shares. The reader 
should note how the 20% median liquidity discount rate (based on recent empirical studies) 
is adjusted for the specific risk and return characteristics of the target firm. Furthermore, the 
control premium is equal to what the acquirer believes is the minimum increase in value cre­
ated by achieving a controlling interest. Also, observe how the direct relationship between 
control premiums and minority discounts is used to estimate the size of the minority dis­
count. Finally, see how median estimates of liquidity discounts and control premiums can 
serve as guidelines in valuation analyses.
37Minority rights are protected in some states by requiring two-thirds voting approval of certain major corporate 
decisions, implying that minority ownership interests may be subject to a smaller discount in such states.
EXHIBIT 10.3  INCORPORATING LIQU IDITY RISK, CONTROL 
PREMIUMS, AND MINORITY DISCOUNTS IN VALU ING A 
PRIVATE BUSINESS
Lighting Group Incorporated (LGI), a holding company, wants to acquire a controlling interest 
in Acuity Lighting, whose estimated stand-alone equity value equals $18,468,031 (Exhibit 10.2). LGI 
believes that the present value of synergies due to cost savings is $2,250,000 (PVSYN) related to the 
potential for bulk purchase discounts and cost savings related to eliminating duplicate overhead and 
combining warehousing operations. LGI believes that the value of Acuity, including synergy, can be 
increased by at least 10% by applying professional management methods (and implicitly by mak­
ing better management decisions). To achieve these efficiencies, LGI must gain control of Acuity. 
LGI is willing to pay a control premium of as much as 10%. The minority discount is derived from 
Eq. (10.5). The factors used to adjust the 20% median liquidity discount are taken from Table 10.4. 
The magnitudes of the adjustments are the opinion of the analyst. LGI’s analysts have used Yahoo! 
Finance to obtain the industry data in Table 10.6 for the home furniture and fixtures industry.
What is the maximum purchase price LGI should pay for a 50.1% controlling interest in the busi­
ness? For a minority 20% interest in the business?
To adjust for presumed liquidity risk of the target due to lack of a liquid market, LGI discounts 
its offer to purchase 50.1% of the firm’s equity by 16%.

378	
10.  Analysis and Valuation of Privately Held Firms
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
TAKING PRIVATE COMPANIES PUBLIC
IPOs represent the traditional way of taking a private firm public and refer to the first 
time a private firm offers shares to the public. Usually an investment bank (underwriter) is 
hired by the firm wishing to sell the shares to determine the type and number of shares to 
be offered and at what price. The investment bank collects data for a registration statement 
to be filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). This statement provides de­
tailed information about the offering and company including financial statements, managers’ 
backgrounds, how the money raised is to be used, and who owns the firm’s stock before it 
goes public. Considerable time is spent verifying the accuracy of the information and that all 
relevant financial data has been disclosed.
Using Eq. (10.4), we get:
=
+
−
+
=
+
−
+
×
=
×
×
=
PV
(PV
PV
)(1
LD%)(1
CP%)
[($18, 468, 031
$2, 250, 000)(1
0.16)(1
0.10)]
0.501
$20,718, 031
0.924
0.501
$9, 590, 873 (maximum purchase price for 50.1%)
MAX
MIN
NS
If LGI were to acquire only a 20% stake in Acuity, it is unlikely that there would be any synergy, 
because LGI would lack the authority to implement potential cost-saving measures without the 
approval of the controlling shareholders. Because it is a minority investment, there is no control 
premium, but a minority discount for lack of control should be estimated. This is accomplished by 
using Eq. (10.5)—that is, 1 − [1/(1 + 0.10)] = 9.1.
=
×
−
−
×
=
PV
[$18, 468, 873
(1
0.16)(1
0.091)]
0.2
$2, 820, 419 (maximum purchase price for 20%)
MAX
TABLE 10.6  Industry Data
Industry data factor
Acuity 
lighting
Home furniture and 
fixtures industry
Adjustments to 20% 
median liquidity discount
Median liquidity discounta
NA
NA
20.0%
Firm size
Small
NA
+2.0
Liquid assets as percent of total assets
>50%
NA
−2.0
Return on equity
19.7%
9.7%
−2.0
Cash flow growth rate
15%
12.6%
0.0
Leverage (debt to equity)
0.22b
1.02
−2.0
Estimated liquidity discount for Acuity Lighting
16.0%
IPO, Initial public offering; NA, not available or not applicable.
a Median estimate of the liquidity discount of empirical studies (excluding pre-IPO studies) since 1992.
b From Exhibit 10.2: $5,101,147/$23,569,178 = 0.27.

	
Taking Private Companies Public	
379
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
Nontraditional ways of “going public” include reverse mergers and special-purpose ac­
quisition companies. These are discussed next.
Reverse Mergers
In a reverse merger, a private firm merges with a publicly traded target (often a corporate shell) 
in a statutory merger in which the public firm survives. Even though the private firm becomes 
a wholly owned subsidiary of the public shell firm, the former shareholders of the private firm 
have a majority ownership stake in the public company. This is the reverse of most mergers, in 
that shareholders of the surviving firm end up with a majority interest in the combined firms.
Merging with an existing corporate shell of a publicly traded company may be a reason­
able alternative for a firm wanting to go public that either is unable to provide the 2 years of 
audited financial statements required by the SEC or is unwilling to incur the costs of an IPO. 
After the private company acquires a majority of the shell’s stock and completes the reverse 
merger, it appoints new management and elects a new board of directors. The owners of the 
private firm receive most of the shares of the shell corporation, often more than 90%, and 
control the shell’s board of directors. The new firm must have a minimum of 300 shareholders 
to be listed on the NASDAQ Small Cap Market. Shell corporations usually are of two types. 
The first type is a failed public company whose shareholders want to sell what remains to re­
cover some of their losses. The second type is a shell that has been created for the sole purpose 
of being sold as a shell in a reverse merger. The latter type typically carries less risk of having 
unknown liabilities. See the case study at the end of this chapter for an example of a company 
taken public via a reverse merger.
Wealth Effects: Reverse Mergers Versus IPOs and Sellouts
Shareholders in privately held firms commonly exit their ownership positions by an IPO, 
sale of the firm to a public operating company (sometimes referred to as a sellout), or through 
a reverse merger. An exit through any one of these mechanisms does not necessarily mean 
that the shareholders in the privately held firm have completely cashed out their sharehold­
ings. Such shareholders may continue to own a portion of the firm’s equity following an 
IPO, sellout, or reverse merger. Of these exit strategies, which results in the greatest postexit 
wealth gain for privately held firm shareholders? The typical IPO generates significantly 
more wealth for its shareholders than the typical reverse merger or sellout.38 Why? Because 
firms that have less financial transparency and lower growth potential are more likely to 
choose reverse mergers than IPOs or sellouts. When information availability is the same for a 
reverse merger, IPO, or sellout, the wealth difference disappears.
Reverse mergers typically cost between $50,000 and 100,000, about one-quarter of the ex­
pense of an IPO, and can be completed in about 60 days, or one-third of the time to complete a 
typical IPO.39 Despite these advantages, reverse mergers may take as long as IPOs and are 
sometimes more complex. The acquiring company must still perform due diligence on the 
target and communicate information on the shell corporation to the exchange on which its 
39Sweeney (2005).
38Greene (2016).

380	
10.  Analysis and Valuation of Privately Held Firms
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
stock will be traded and prepare a prospectus. It can often take months to settle outstanding 
claims against the shell corporation. Public exchanges often require the same level of informa­
tion for companies going through reverse mergers as those undertaking IPOs. The principal 
concern is that the shell company may contain unseen liabilities, such as unpaid bills or pend­
ing litigation, which in some instances can make the reverse merger far more costly than an 
IPO. Indeed, private firms that have gone public through a reverse merger have been delisted 
from public exchanges because they could not meet the exchange’s listing requirements at a 
faster rate than those using an IPO.40
In recent years, reverse mergers have been subject to increasing abuse. In late 2011, the 
SEC moved to increase shareholder protections by prohibiting reverse-merger firms from ap­
plying to list on the NASDAQ, the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE), and NYSE Amex until 
they had completed a 1-year “seasoning period” by trading on the OTC Bulletin Board or on 
another regulated US or foreign exchange. The firm also must file all required reports with 
the SEC and maintain a minimum share price for at least 30 of the 60 trading days before its 
listing application can be submitted to an exchange and the exchange can approve the listing.
Financing Reverse Mergers
PIPE is a commonly used method of financing reverse mergers. In a PIPE offering, a firm 
with publicly traded shares sells, usually at a discount, newly issued but unregistered securi­
ties, typically stock or debt convertible into stock, directly to investors in a private transac­
tion. Hedge funds are common buyers of such issues. The issuing firm is required to file a 
shelf registration statement, Form S-3, with the SEC as quickly as possible (usually between 
10 and 45 days after issuance) and to use its “best efforts” to complete registration within 
30 days after filing. PIPEs often are used in conjunction with a reverse merger to provide 
companies with not just an alternative way to go public but also financing once they are listed 
on the public exchange. For example, assume a private company is merged into a publicly 
traded firm through a reverse merger. As the surviving entity, the public company raises 
funds through PIPE financing. The private firm is now a publicly traded company with the 
funds to finance future capital requirements.41
Special-Purpose Acquisition Corporations
Less common than reverse mergers, special-purpose acquisition corporations (SPACs) or 
so-called “blank check” companies represent another nontraditional means of taking a pri­
vate firm public. SPACs are shell corporations established to raise investor funds through an 
IPO for the purpose of acquiring privately owned firms. The money raised is placed in a trust 
fund until the SPAC identifies an investment opportunity. SPAC shares often are sold as units 
consisting of one share of SPAC common stock and a warrant providing the holder with the 
41To issuers, PIPEs offer the advantage of being able to be completed more quickly, cheaply, and confidentially 
than a public stock offering, which requires registration upfront and a more elaborate investor “road show” to sell 
the securities to public investors. Frequently sold as private placements, PIPEs are most suitable for raising small 
amounts of financing, typically in the range of $5–10 million.
40Cyree and Walker (2008).

	
Using Leveraged Employee Stock Ownership Plans to Buy Private Companies	
381
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
right to buy additional common shares at a preset price. SPACs usually have 24 months in 
which to complete an acquisition. Once an acquisition is completed, the SPAC is transformed 
from an investment into an operating company whose shares trade on a public exchange. 
If unsuccessful in making an acquisition in the allotted time, the SPAC is dissolved and the 
money raised is returned to investors.
As is true of reverse mergers, SPACs offer some advantages over IPOs for the firm seeking 
a public listing. SPACs have substantial cash on hand and as such are less dependent on stock 
market conditions than IPOs. SPACs also have the ability to offer target firm shareholders cash, 
stock, or a combination for their shares. Like reverse mergers, SPACs do not have to undergo 
the lengthy and costly process of SEC registration as the SPAC did this when it went public to 
raise funds. However, SPACs have significant disadvantages for private firms. When the num­
ber of SPAC shareholders is large, the private firm’s owners are faced with the possibility that 
the SPAC shareholders will not approve the deal. Firms going public through reverse mergers 
usually do not have this concern because the number of shareholders in the shell corporation 
often is few in number making approval more likely. With SPACs, private firm shareholders 
can see their ownership position diluted in deals in which they exchanged their shares for 
SPAC shares when SPAC shareholders exercise their warrants to buy more shares.
In the 1980s, instances of fraud made SPACs unpopular. New regulations in the early 2000s 
created a new generation of SPACs less opaque than earlier generations. Firms going public 
through IPOs often show long-term underperformance when compared to similar firms be­
cause of the excessive optimism shown by investors in bidding up the firm’s price on the first 
day. The extent of underperformance tends to be larger for those firms taken public by SPACs 
than for those choosing IPOs.42 Why? Higher-quality firms (i.e., those with significant growth 
opportunities and less leverage) tend to use IPOs while lower-quality firms (which tend to 
be smaller, have limited growth opportunities, and have more leverage) use SPACs. SPACs 
may also underperform the broad stock market indices, particularly if their acquisitions are 
made close to the 2-year holding period during which the SPAC sponsors are required to 
complete an acquisition.43 The time crush may cause them to make bad acquisition decisions. 
Reverse mergers may also underperform IPOs long-term because they frequently involve 
lower-quality firms.
USING LEVERAGED EMPLOYEE STOCK OWNERSHIP 
PLANS TO BUY PRIVATE COMPANIES
An ESOP is a trust established by an employer on behalf of its employees; its assets are 
allocated to employees and are not taxed until withdrawn by employees. ESOPs generally 
must invest at least 50% of their assets in employer stock. Employees frequently use lever­
aged ESOPs to buy out owners of private companies who have most of their net worth in the 
firm. For firms with ESOPs, the business owner sells at least 30% of their stock to the ESOP, 
which pays for the stock with borrowed funds. The owner may invest the proceeds and defer 
taxes if the investment is made within 12 months of the sale of the stock to the ESOP, the ESOP 
42Kolb and Tykvova (2016).
43Dimitrova (2017).

382	
10.  Analysis and Valuation of Privately Held Firms
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
owns at least 30% of the firm, and neither the owner nor his or her family participates in the 
ESOP. The firm makes tax-deductible contributions to the ESOP in an amount sufficient to 
repay interest and principal. Shares held by the ESOP, which serve as collateral for the loan, 
are distributed to employees as the loan is repaid. As the outstanding loan balance is reduced, 
the shares are allocated to employees, who eventually own the firm.44
EMPIRICAL STUDIES OF SHAREHOLDER RETURNS
As noted in Chapter 1, target shareholders of both public and private firms routinely ex­
perience abnormal positive returns when a bid is announced for the firm. In contrast, ac­
quirer shareholders may experience abnormal negative returns on the announcement date, 
particularly when using stock to purchase large publicly traded firms. However, substantial 
empirical evidence shows that public acquirers using their stock to buy unlisted firms (i.e., 
both privately held firms and subsidiaries of publicly traded firms) experience significant 
abnormal positive returns around the transaction announcement date. Other studies sug­
gest that acquirers of private firms often experience abnormal positive returns regardless of 
the form of payment. In general, acquirers tend to show better performance and have better 
growth opportunities over their corporate life cycle (i.e., high growth, stable growth, and de­
clining growth periods) when they acquire private (rather than publicly traded) firms.45 These 
studies are discussed next.
Public-company shareholders earn an average positive 2.6% abnormal return when using 
stock rather than cash to acquire privately held firms.46 Ownership of privately held companies 
tends to be highly concentrated, so an exchange of stock tends to create a few very large block 
stockholders. Close monitoring of management may contribute to these returns. These findings 
are consistent with studies conducted in Canada, the United Kingdom, and Western Europe.47
Firms acquiring private firms often earn excess returns regardless of the form of payment. 
Acquirers can also earn excess returns of as much as 2.1% when buying private firms or 
2.6% for subsidiaries of public companies.48 The abnormal returns may reflect the tendency 
of acquirers to pay less for nonpublicly traded companies, due to the relative difficulty in 
valuing private firms or subsidiaries of public companies.49 In both cases, shares are not pub­
licly traded and access to information is limited. Moreover, there may be fewer bidders for 
nonpublicly traded companies. Cash-starved or illiquid parents of public companies may be 
45Arikan and Stulz (2016).
46Chang (1998).
47(Ben-Amar and Andre, 2006; Bigelli and Mengoli, 2004; Draper and Paudyal, 2006; Dumontier and Pecherot, 2001). 
These results are consistent with studies of returns to companies that issue stock and convertible debt in private 
placements (Hertzel and Smith, 1993). In private placements, large shareholders are effective monitors of manage­
rial performance, thereby enhancing the prospects of the issuing firm (Demsetz and Lehn, 1996). Wruck and Yilin 
(2009) argue that relationships such as board representation developed between investors and issuers contribute to 
improved firm performance due to increased monitoring of performance and improved corporate governance.
48Fuller et al. (2002).
49Capron and Shen (2007) and Madura and Ngo (2012).
44Only C and S corporations generating pretax incomes of at least $100,000 annually are eligible to form ESOPs.

	
Some Things to Remember	
383
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
forced to sell to gain access to liquidity. For these reasons, private firm shareholders seeking 
to liquidate their shareholdings or parent firms seeking liquidity may be forced to sell at a 
discount from their true economic value due to their weak bargaining positions. This allows 
the acquirer to realize a larger share of the anticipated synergies, which is reflected in their 
positive abnormal announcement date returns.
Other factors that may contribute to these positive abnormal returns for acquirers of pri­
vate companies include the introduction of more professional management into the privately 
held firms and tax considerations. Public companies may introduce more professional man­
agement systems into the target firms, thereby enhancing the target’s value. The acquirer’s 
use of stock rather than cash may also induce the seller to accept a lower price, since it allows 
sellers to defer taxes on any gains until they decide to sell their shares.50
There is some evidence that premiums paid for family-owned firms may be higher than for 
nonfamily-owned private firms. Acquirers buying private firms controlled by non–family mem­
bers average announcement date returns of 1.6 versus 1.1% when the target is a family-owned 
firm.51 This is consistent with the notion that acquirers must pay more to get family members to 
surrender the benefits that accrue to ownership such as family pride, the opportunity to employ 
other family members, and the ability to set their own salaries and pay dividends.
While announcement date financial returns tend to be higher for acquirers of private than 
of public targets, there is little difference in their ongoing operating performance following 
closing.52 The higher announcement date returns may reflect the tendency for acquirers to 
pay smaller premia for private targets than are paid for public targets. For private target 
acquirers, postclosing performance improvements are greatest when they make relatively 
large acquisitions; for public target acquirers, performance improvement is greatest when 
they make relatively small acquisitions.
Despite the various studies attempting to explain why acquirers of unlisted firms achieve 
higher announcement date returns than acquirers of public targets, the true explanation for 
this differing performance around announcement date returns remains elusive. A recent 
study found little empirical support for unlisted firms selling at a discount from their true 
economic value due to their need for liquidity or because they were difficult to value.53 These 
results may reflect the use of different samples, time periods, and methodologies.
SOME THINGS TO REMEMBER
Valuing private firms is more challenging than valuing public firms, due to the absence of 
published share price data and the unique problems associated with private companies. When 
markets are illiquid and block shareholders exert control over the firm, the offer price for the 
target must be adjusted for liquidity risk and the value of control. In contrast to studies involv­
ing acquisitions of US public firms, buyers of private firms in the United States and abroad 
often realize significant abnormal positive returns, particularly in share-for-share deals.
50Poulsen and Stegemoller (2002).
51Gonenc et al. (2013).
52Shams and Gunasekarage (2016).
53Jaffe et al. (2015).

384	
10.  Analysis and Valuation of Privately Held Firms
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
10.1	 What is the capitalization rate?
10.2	 What are the common ways of estimating the capitalization rate?
10.3	 What is the liquidity discount, and what are common ways of estimating this discount?
10.4	 Give examples of private company costs that might be understated, and explain why.
10.5	 How can an analyst determine if the target’s costs and revenues are understated or 
overstated?
10.6	 Why might shell corporations have value?
10.7	 Why might succession planning be more challenging for a family firm?
10.8	 What are some of the reasons a family-owned or privately owned business may want to 
go public? What are some of the reasons that discourage such firms from going public?
10.9	 Why are family-owned firms often attractive to private equity investors?
10.10	 Rank from the highest to lowest the liquidity discount you would apply if you, as a 
business appraiser, had been asked to value the following businesses: (1) a local, prof­
itable hardware store; (2) a money-losing laundry; (3) a large privately owned firm 
with significant excess cash balances and other liquid short-term investments; and 
(4) a pool cleaning service whose primary tangible assets consist of a 2-year-old truck 
and miscellaneous equipment. Explain your ranking.
Answers to these Chapter Discussion Questions are available in the Online Instructor’s Manual for 
instructors using this book (https://textbooks.elsevier.com/web/Manuals.aspx?isbn=9780128016091).
PRACTICE PROBLEMS AND ANSWERS
10.11	 An analyst constructs a privately held firm’s cost of equity using the “buildup” 
method. The 10-year Treasury bond rate is 4% and the historical equity risk premium 
for the S&P 500 stock index is 5.5%. The risk premium associated with firms of this 
size is 3.8% and for firms within this industry is 2.4%. Based on due diligence, the 
analyst estimates the risk premium specific to this firm to be 2.5%. What is the firm’s 
cost of equity based on this information? Answer: 18.2%.
10.12	 An investor is interested in making a minority equity investment in a small pri­
vately held firm. Because of the nature of the business, she concludes that it would 
be difficult to sell her interest in the business quickly. She believes the discount for 
the lack of marketability to be 25%. She also estimates that if she were to acquire a 
controlling interest in the business, the control premium would be 15%. Based on this 
information, what should be the discount rate for making a minority investment in 
this firm? What should she pay for 20% of the business if she believes the value of the 
entire business to be $1 million? Answer: Discount rate = 9.78% and purchase price for 
a 20% interest = $180,440.
10.13	 Based on its growth prospects, a private investor values a local bakery at $750,000. She 
believes that cost savings having a PV of $50,000 can be achieved by changing staffing 
levels and store hours. She believes the appropriate liquidity discount is 20%. A recent 
transaction in the same city required the buyer to pay a 5% premium to the average 

	
Practice Problems and Answers	
385
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
price for similar businesses to gain a controlling interest in a bakery. What is the most 
she should be willing to pay for a 50.1% stake in the bakery? Answer: $336,672.
10.14	 You have been asked by an investor to value a restaurant. Last year, the restaurant 
earned pretax operating income of $300,000. Income has grown 4% annually dur­
ing the past 5 years, and it is expected to continue growing at that rate into the 
foreseeable future. The annual change in working capital is $20,000, and capital 
spending for maintenance exceeded depreciation in the prior year by $15,000. Both 
working capital and the excess of capital spending over depreciation are projected 
to grow at the same rate as operating income. By introducing modern management 
methods, you believe the pretax operating-income growth rate can be increased to 6% 
beyond the second year and sustained at that rate into the foreseeable future.
	
The 10-year Treasury bond rate is 5%, the equity-risk premium is 5.5%, and the 
marginal federal, state, and local tax rate is 40%. The β and debt-to-equity ratio 
for publicly traded firms in the restaurant industry are 2 and 1.5, respectively. The 
business’s target debt-to-equity ratio is 1, and its pretax cost of borrowing, based on 
its recent borrowing activities, is 7%. The business-specific risk premium for firms 
of this size is estimated to be 6%. The liquidity-risk premium is believed to be 15%, 
relatively low for firms of this type due to the excellent reputation of the restaurant. 
Since the current chef and the staff are expected to remain when the business is sold, 
the quality of the restaurant is expected to be maintained. The investor is willing to 
pay a 10% premium to reflect the value of control.
a.	 What is free cash flow to the firm in year 1? Answer: $150,800.
b.	What is free cash flow to the firm in year 2? Answer: $156,832.
c.	 What is the firm’s cost of equity? Answer: 20.2%.
d.	What is the firm’s after-tax cost of debt? Answer: 4.2%.
e.	 What is the firm’s target debt-to-total capital ratio? Answer: 0.5.
f.	 What is the weighted average cost of capital? Answer: 12.2%.
g.	What is the business worth? Answer: $2,226,448.
Solutions to these practice exercises and problems are available in the Online Instructor’s Manual for 
instructors using this book (https://textbooks.elsevier.com/web/Manuals.aspx?isbn=9780128016091).
END OF CHAPTER CASE STUDY: CATALYST ACQU IRES 
TARGACEPT IN REVERSE MERGER
Case Study Objectives: To Illustrate
•	 Motivations for “going public”
•	 The mechanics of reverse mergers
•	 Why reverse mergers may be preferred to IPOs for firms wanting to “go public”
Biotech companies often partner with major pharmaceutical firms to fund the development of 
new drugs. Biotech firms can attract talent and unlike big pharmaceutical firms have relatively 
little bureaucracy that often impedes research and development activities at bigger firms. Without 

386	
10.  Analysis and Valuation of Privately Held Firms
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
funding from the big drug companies, small biotech firms must find alternative sources of funds of­
ten by listing on a major stock exchange. This is commonly done by taking a private biotech compa­
ny public through an IPO or by merging with an existing public company through a reverse merger.
In the years following the 2008–09 recession, biotech firms have been able to successfully go 
public through IPOs due to the robust rise in stock prices and the desire for investors to achieve 
greater returns in the wake of record low interest rates. However, when the stock market stalled in 
2015, investors were less receptive to IPOs. Biotech firms, wanting to go public, have had to seek 
alternative means of doing so. Reverse mergers represented one such alternative.
Biotech firm Catalyst Biosciences (Catalyst) had early success in partnering with Pharmaceuti­
cal giant, Wyeth, having reached an agreement to license its drug designed to control bleeding in 
late 2009. But the results of the partnership in the ensuing years were modest. Catalyst had drugs 
in development (in the so-called pipeline) and other drugs that were at various stages of clinical 
testing. But the firm needed money and was unable to get financing from big pharmaceutical firms. 
By 2015, Catalyst went public in a reverse merger with publicly traded Targacept, the beleaguered 
biotech that had suffered a number of clinical trial failures in recent years. Targacept had little to 
attract investment from big drug companies and in late 2014 its partnership with AstreZeneca fell 
apart diminishing its royalty revenue stream. Targacept was left to search for a new role for itself in 
the biotech industry.
Targacept still had substantial cash on hand but few attractive investment opportunities. Its 
prospects were to continue to burn cash by going it alone, seek a partner, or merge with a firm hav­
ing significant growth opportunities. The firm projected that at the current rate of usage it would 
exhaust its cash on hand in 18–24 months and few parties seemed interested in investing in the 
foundering company. A merger seemed like the best hope. Targacept tried to conserve cash by cut­
ting back on its operations. But this would simply extend the day of reckoning. By the time it was 
able to find a merger partner, it had laid off most of its employees. By early 2015, Targacept had just 
18 full-time employees down from a peak of 144 in 2012.
In contrast to Targacept, Catalyst had a series of promising new drugs but was running short of 
cash. The long-lead time required to bring drugs to market means that many biotech firms experi­
ence an inability to finance aggressive R&D projects. To finance future research and development, 
it too had to partner with a large pharmaceutical firm, or to go public through an IPO or a reverse 
merger. Cutbacks at large drug companies made the likelihood of finding an investment partner 
slim and the lackluster stock market made an IPO impractical. Therefore, the firm decided it needed 
to merge with a cash-flush public firm that offered the opportunity to attract new R&D talent with 
the offer of stock options and the ability to raise cash through future equity issues.
Early in 2015, biotech firm Tobira Therapeutics tested the waters by going public through a re­
verse merger after its IPO fizzled. This successful reverse merger seemed to pave the way for Cata­
lyst to pursue this means of going public during the choppy 2015 stock market. The merger between 
Catalyst and Targacept was announced in May 2015 and represented the creation of a new company 
named Catalyst Biosciences. The new firm contained Catalyst’s protease therapeutics pipeline and 
financial resources came mostly from Targacept. It represented a well-funded firm hoping to de­
velop new treatment options for patients with bleeding disorders.
While conventional IPOs can take months to complete, reverse mergers can take only a few 
weeks. Moreover, as the reverse merger is solely a mechanism to convert a private company into 

	
Practice Problems and Answers	
387
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
a public entity, the process is less dependent on financial market conditions because the company 
often is not proposing to raise capital at the time it goes public.
At closing, the combined firms had a pipeline of protease therapeutics, four other promising drug 
candidates, and cash and cash equivalents of $40 million. Of the cash on hand, $35 million came 
from Targacept and the remaining $5 million came from Catalyst. Existing Targacept shareholders 
received a special dividend prior to closing of about $20 million distributed from Targacept’s cash 
on hand and redeemable convertible notes (convertible into Catalyst Biosciences common shares) 
totaling $37 million. The notes are guaranteed by the new firm Catalyst Biosciences. The Catalyst 
stockholders will initially own approximately 65% of the combined company, with Targacept share­
holders owning the remainder.
The notes will be convertible into the combined company’s common stock at any time within 
2 years following closing at the discretion of those holding the notes. The conversion price of the 
notes is equal to $1.31, which represents 130% of the negotiated per-share value of Targacept’s assets 
following the anticipated distribution of the dividend of approximately $20 and 37 million principal 
amount of the notes. The conversion price was determined along with the valuation of Targacept’s 
shares during preclosing negotiations.
The notes have implications for future investment capital for the firm and for the distribution of 
ownership. They represent potentially a future source of cash for the new company, which will con­
tribute from current cash flow money into an escrow fund in an amount sufficient for repayment of 
any notes that are not converted to stock during the 2-year conversion period. Catalyst has positive 
cash flow from royalty payments on drugs licensed to pharmaceutical firms prior to the merger. If 
the redeemable convertible notes are fully converted in common shares, an additional $37 million 
held in escrow would be made available to the new company within the first 2 years following clos­
ing. Targacept shareholders’ ownership would increase to 49 from 35% at closing if the notes are 
fully converted.
Fig. 10.1 illustrates how ownership is transferred in a typical reverse merger. Catalyst creates a 
wholly owned subsidiary shell corporation (Merger Sub) and exchanges the shares of the Merger 
Sub for $20 million in cash and redeemable notes with a face value of $37 million. Merger Sub is 
FIGURE 10.1  Reverse merger process.
Catalyst
Catalyst merger sub
Targacept
Cash and
redeemable
notes
Merger sub
shares
Cash and redeemable
notes exchanged for
targacept shares
Targacept becomes wholly
owned sub of catalyst

388	
10.  Analysis and Valuation of Privately Held Firms
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
merged with Targacept in a reverse triangular merger with Targacept surviving as a wholly owned 
subsidiary of Catalyst. The reverse triangular merger preserves valuable licenses, contracts, and 
intellectual property owned by Targacept. Targacept is then merged with Catalyst in a backend 
merger and the firm is renamed Catalyst Biosciences.
Shares of Targacept common stock were listed on the NASDAQ Global Select Market under 
the symbol “TRGT.” Prior to completion of the merger, Targacept filed an initial listing appli­
cation with the NASDAQ Global Select Market relating on behalf of the combined company, 
subject to NASDAQ “reverse merger” rules. After completion of the merger, Targacept was 
renamed “Catalyst Biosciences, Inc.” and trades on the NASDAQ Global Select Market under 
the symbol “CBIO.”
Both Catalyst and Targacept had needs that could be satisfied by combining their resources. 
Stock market volatility during much of 2015 made it difficult to price Catalyst shares that could be 
issued through an IPO. Targacept was burning through its cash on hand with few attractive invest­
ment opportunities. These complementary needs illustrate the conditions in which reverse mergers 
often take place. While providing access to capital, converting from a private to a public corporation 
represents a new array of challenges. While firms often have several options for going public, stock 
market conditions probably dictated the use of the reverse merger in this instance.
Discussion Questions
1.	 What is the purchase price of Targacept and how is it financed? How does this financing 
structure potentially help the combined firm Catalyst Biosciences fund future spending? How 
would Catalyst’s original shareholders be impacted by a conversion of the notes?
2.	 What are common reasons for a private firm to go public? What are the advantages and 
disadvantages or doing so? Be specific.
3.	 What are corporate shells, and how can they create value? Be specific.
4.	 Discuss the pros and cons of a reverse merger versus an IPO.
5.	 What is the purpose of private firm in listing of a major stock exchange such as NASDAQ?
Solutions to this case are provided in the Online Instructor’s Manual available for instructors using this 
book (https://textbooks.elsevier.com/web/Manuals.aspx?isbn=9780128016091).
A D D I T I O N A L  C A S E  S T U D Y  R E C O M M E N D AT I O N S 
( S E A R C H  H A RVA R D  B U S I N E S S  S C H O O L 
P U B L I S H I N G  S I T E  B Y  N A M E  O F  C A S E : 
h b s p . h a r v a r d . e d u )
National Logistics Management: Founder 
Decisions, Lynda M. Applegate, Elizabeth 
Collins, Revision Date: May 1, 2008, Product 
Number: 807125, Source: Harvard Business 
School, hbsp.harvard.edu.
Subjects Covered: Private Business Exit 
Strategies, Decision Making, Private Equity, 
Venture Capital.
OPK Capital Corporation: An Introduction 
to Search Funds, Stewart Thornhill, Tevya 

	
Practice Problems and Answers	
389
III.  Merger and Acquisition Valuation and Modeling
Rosenberg, Publication Date: January 7, 
2009, Product Number: 909MO6-PDF-ENG, 
Source: Ivey Publishing, hbsp.harvard.edu.
Subjects Covered: Special Purpose 
Acquisition Corporations, Financing.
Jim Sharpe: Extrusion Technology, Inc., 
H. Kent Bowen, Barbara Feinberg, Pub­
lication Date: December 3, 2012, Product 
Number: 697079, Source: Harvard Business 
School, hbsp.harvard.edu.
Subjects Covered: LBO, Small Business 
Management, Change Management, Value 
Creation.
Namaste Solar, Anne T. Lawrence, 
Anthony I. Matthews, Publication Date: June 
1, 2010, Product Number: 910M49-PDF-ENG, 
Source: Ivey Publishing, hbsp.harvard.edu.
Subjects Covered: Acquiring Small 
Businesses, Culture Issues, Financing Growth.
LightWorks Optics, Anne T. Lawrence, 
Anthony I. Mathews, Erik Noyes, Publi­
cation Date: December 12, 2008, Product 
Number: BAB144-PDF-ENG, Source: Babson 
College, hbsp.harvard.edu.
Subjects Covered: Exit Strategies for 
Small Business Owners, Selling to an ESOP 
trust, ESOPs.


P A R T IV
DEAL STRUCTURING AND 
FINANCING STRATEGIES
Source: Cartoonstock.com.

392	
VI.  DEAL STRUCTURING AND FINANCING STRATEGIES
﻿ ﻿﻿
In a complex leveraged buyout (LBO) structure, conglomerate Berkshire 
Hathaway (Berkshire) and 3G Capital Management (3G) acquired food giant 
H.J. Heinz (Heinz) in a deal including assumed debt valued at $28 billion. The 
deal structure called for the creation of a new corporation jointly owned by 
Berkshire and 3G and a merger subsidiary, which was merged into Heinz, with 
Heinz surviving. The deal was financed using a combination of $18.24 billion 
in cash provided by Berkshire and its partner 3G, with the remainder consist­
ing of bank financing. Most of Berkshire’s cash was provided in exchange for 
high-yielding preferred stock in the new firm. The debt financing involved a 
combination of dollar-denominated senior secured term loans, Euro/British 
pounds senior secured term loans, a senior secured revolving loan facility, and 
a second lien bridge loan facility.
Part IV describes how deal structuring and financing are inextricably linked 
and how consensus is reached during the deal-structuring, or bargaining, pro­
cess. The output of this process is an agreement or deal structure between two 
parties (the acquirer and the target firms) defining the rights and obligations of 
the parties involved. The chapters in this section also discuss the implications 
of various aspects of deal structuring in managing risk, the effects of risk on 
how deals are done, and the challenges of financing transactions, particularly 
those that are highly leveraged.
Chapter 11 outlines the major facets of the deal-structuring process, includ­
ing the acquisition vehicle and postclosing organization, the form of acquisi­
tion, the form of payment, and the legal form of selling entity and how changes 
in one area of the deal often impact significantly other parts of the agreement. 
Specific ways to bridge major differences on price also are discussed. Chapter 12 
addresses tax considerations, including alternative forms of taxable and non­
taxable structures, and how they impact reaching agreement, as well as new 
regulations impacting corporate tax inversions. This chapter also discusses 
how business combinations are recorded for financial-reporting purposes and 
the impact on reported earnings.
Chapter 13 focuses on the ways in which M&A transactions are financed, 
the impact of near-zero/negative interest rates on M&As, and the role played 
by private equity firms and hedge funds in financing highly leveraged deals. 
This chapter also discusses how LBOs are structured. How LBOs create value 
and key success factors also are discussed in detail. Chapter 14 concentrates on 
applying financial modeling to value and structure M&As in both stock and 
asset deals. The strengths and limitations of such models also are discussed, as 
well as how models can be used to estimate the impact on EPS and credit ratios 
of alternative deal and financing structures.

C H A P T E R
393
Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring Activities. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-801609-1.00011-7
Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
11
Structuring the Deal
Payment and Legal Considerations
O U T L I N E
Inside M&A: The Elusive Issue of Price	 394
Chapter Overview	
396
The Deal-Structuring Process	
397
Key Components of the Deal-Structuring 
Process	
397
Common Linkages	
398
Form of Acquisition Vehicle and 
Postclosing Organization	
400
Choosing the Appropriate Acquisition 
Vehicle	
400
Choosing the Appropriate Postclosing 
Organization	
400
Legal Form of the Selling Entity	
401
Form of Payment	
401
Cash	
402
Noncash	
403
Cash and Stock in Combination	
404
Convertible Securities	
405
Managing Risk and Reaching 
Consensus on Purchase Price	
405
Postclosing Balance-Sheet Price 
Adjustments and Escrow Accounts	
405
Earnouts and Other Contingent 
Payments	
406
Contingent Value Rights	
408
Rights, Royalties, and Fees	
409
Constructing Collar Arrangements	
411
Form of Acquisition	
413
Purchase of Assets	
414
Purchase of Stock	
417
Mergers	
418
Special Applications of Basic Structures	
422
Some Things to Remember	
423
Discussion Questions	
423
Case Study: Dow Chemical and DuPont 
Combine in a Merger of Equals	
424
Case Study Objectives	
424
Discussion Questions	
426
Additional Case Study 
Recommendations	
427

394	
11.  Structuring the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
If you can’t convince them, confuse them. —Harry S. Truman
INSIDE M&A: THE ELUSIVE ISSUE OF PRICE
KEY POINTS
•	 The acquirer’s cost often is more than what it pays target investors per share.
•	 Additional costs include liabilities assumed by the buyer.
•	 Assumed liabilities can be especially onerous if their future cost is difficult to estimate.
•	 Negotiators often focus on minimizing such risk.
The growth of cloud computing and the growing connectivity in our lives have pressured 
semiconductor1 makers to achieve greater economies of scale to drive down costs and to of­
fer a broader array of products ranging from commodity-like to highly complex chips. These 
market forces have resulted in an ongoing consolidation within the industry. A recent ex­
ample of such consolidation is Intel’s (the world’s largest chipmaker) acquisition of Altera, 
an integrated circuits manufacturer, for $16.7 billion. Intel’s interest centered on Altera’s pro­
grammable chips, a higher-margin product whose sales would help offset the declining per­
sonal computer market. Altera faced substantial capital expenditures to remain competitive 
and being acquired represented a reasonable way to maximize shareholder wealth.
What follows is a description of events that transpired between Altera and Intel beginning 
in late 2014 and ending in mid-2015 in a signed merger agreement. These events illustrate 
common negotiating tactics used by potential acquirers and target boards and senior manag­
ers to hammer out merger and acquisition (M&A) agreements.2
Given their long-standing business relationship dating back to the late 1980s, it was easy 
for Intel’s Chief Executive Officer (CEO), Brian M. Krazanich, to approach Altera’s CEO, John 
P. Daane, in late 2014 to discuss a commercial licensing deal. During the conversation, Mr. 
Krazanich expressed Intel’s interest in acquiring the firm but he refrained from discussing a 
price range. Aware of his fiduciary responsibility to shareholders, Mr. Daane said he would 
bring Intel’s expression of interest in buying Altera to the firm’s board of directors.
Discussions during the early phase of the negotiating process are often nuanced. Any ref­
erence to purchase price by the potential acquirer is usually verbal, vague, expressed in a 
range or formula (i.e., multiple of earnings), and conditioned on performing “adequate” due 
diligence. The start date, length, and intrusiveness of due diligence often becomes a means for 
both parties to leverage their positions. Sellers routinely move aggressively to get the buyer to 
state as high an offer price with as few caveats as possible before granting the buyer the right 
to examine detailed financial statements, operations, etc. Buyers use the absence of proprie­
tary information as a reason for giving a price estimate as a range or formula or subject to con­
ditions allowing for revision of the initial offer price based on the outcome of due diligence.
2The source for this information is found in Altera’s Definitive Proxy Statement (Schedule 14A) filed with the Secu­
rities and Exchange Commission (SEC) on August 24, 2015.
1Used in such products as computers, cell phones, appliances, and medical equipment, semiconductors (usually 
composed of silicon) conduct electricity more than an insulator but less than a pure conductor.

	
Inside M&A: The Elusive Issue of Price	
395
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
Three weeks had passed before the two CEOs talked again. In the interim, Altera’s board 
hired financial advisor Goldman Sachs. In mid-December the two met again with Mr. Kraza­
nich willing to indicate a price range of $14–15 billion or $45–48 per share, subject to Intel per­
forming due diligence. Mr. Daane stated that the price was too low and that the firm would 
not enter due diligence unless Intel revised its offer up by at least $1 billion.
The Altera board formed a committee consisting of independent board members called the 
Transaction Committee whose expressed purpose was to review Intel’s offer and to make rec­
ommendations to the full board. Such committees are formed to minimize the appearance of 
any improprieties. Goldman Sachs representatives discussed strategic options with the Altera 
board including contacting other potential bidders. After discussing the benefits and risks as­
sociated with a wider sale process, the Transaction Committee recommended to the full board 
that an Intel bid deserved further consideration and that Intel be told that their proposal was 
inadequate in an effort to get a higher offer price.
Informed in early January 2015 that Altera had rejected their $45–48 per share proposal, 
Intel raised its bid to $55 per share, again on the condition Altera would allow an appropri­
ate due diligence. The Altera CEO countered that at that price his firm would not allow due 
diligence to begin. The Intel CEO agreed to have his board reconsider their offer and would 
counter with a revised offer if his board felt comfortable with the potential synergies.
All previous offers made by Intel had been verbal. On January 27, 2015, Intel submitted 
to the Altera Board a legally nonbinding written proposal authorized by the Intel board to 
acquire Altera for $50 per share based on publicly available information about Altera. Frus­
trated by Altera’s unwillingness to provide proprietary information, Intel hardened its posi­
tion by reducing the offer price from $55 to $50 saying that this was the best they could do in 
the absence of due diligence. The proposal stated that the bid could be revised upward if a 
due diligence process were to validate anticipated merger benefits.
The Altera Board in discussing the proposal with its financial advisors expressed concern 
that Intel could make the bid public, undertake a hostile bid, or walk away, given that the 
talks had been underway for several months. The Altera board decided against a wider sale, 
since there were only a small number of potential buyers capable of paying the purchase 
price Altera demanded. They also believed that a wider sale process could result in rumors 
negatively impacting Altera’s relationships with customers, suppliers, business partners, and 
employees.
In mid-February, Altera’s Mr. Danne informed Intel’s Mr. Krazanich that the Altera Board 
was prepared to allow Intel to begin due diligence once Mr. Krazanich confirmed in writing 
that the Intel Board had authorized an acquisition of Altera for $58 per share. Mr. Daane also 
indicated that Altera wanted Intel to include wording in the contract that Intel would use 
reasonable best efforts to gain regulatory approval and that it would agree to a meaningful re­
verse termination fee (a fee paid by the buyer to the seller) if the deal could not get regulatory 
approval.3
The following week Mr. Krazanich emailed Mr. Daane a letter confirming that the Intel 
Board had approved an acquisition of Altera at $58 per share subject to completion of due 
diligence, negotiation of a definitive merger agreement, and final approval by the Intel Board. 
3Termination fees are those paid by the seller to the buyer if the seller chooses to accept a better offer. Reverse termi­
nation fees are paid by the buyer to the seller if the deal cannot be closed due to certain conditions not being satisfied.

396	
11.  Structuring the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
In the letter, Intel stated that its proposal contemplated no termination fees to be paid by Intel 
under any circumstances, but Intel would use reasonable efforts (rather than reasonable best 
efforts) to obtain regulatory approvals. In contracts, words matter.4 This was enough for the 
two firms to begin the negotiation of a draft merger agreement.
At the end of March, Altera submitted a draft merger agreement containing the restate­
ment of Altera’s proposal that Intel should agree to use reasonable best efforts to get regula­
tory approval and that Altera should be compensated if the deal was not completed over 
failure to get regulatory approval. At this point, the talks stalled and the media speculated 
that the deal might not happen.
On May 7, 2015, Intel sent a letter to the Altera Board containing a new acquisition propos­
al stating that, if Intel and Altera did not reach an agreement by June, Intel would abandon 
discussions. Intel’s proposal included a price of $50 per share compared to its earlier $58 price 
bid, arguing it was the best it could do having access only to public information. However, 
it did make other concessions Altera had demanded saying it would use reasonable best 
­efforts to obtain necessary regulatory approvals and would pay a reverse termination fee of 
$400 million if the acquisition could not be completed for antitrust or competition law rea­
sons. The letter indicated that this was Intel’s final offer.
The Altera board approved the terms of the Intel proposal but at a purchase price of $56 per 
share. Intel responded in writing saying that $54 per share was the highest it would go and 
that it would agree to a reverse termination fee of $500 million. On June 1, 2015, the two firms 
announced a joint communication indicating that Intel had reached an agreement to acquire 
Altera on the terms previously described. After receiving regulatory approval, the deal closed 
on January 28, 2016, more than 1 year after Intel’s CEO made first contact with Altera’s CEO.
CHAPTER OVERVIEW
Once management has determined that an acquisition is the best way to implement the 
firm’s business strategy, a target has been selected, and the preliminary financial analysis 
is satisfactory, it is time to consider how to structure the deal properly. A deal structure is an 
agreement between two parties (the acquirer and the target firms) defining their rights and 
obligations. The way in which this agreement is reached is called the deal-structuring process. 
In this chapter, this process is described in terms of seven interdependent components: acqui­
sition vehicle, the postclosing organization, the form of payment, the legal form of the selling 
entity, the form of acquisition, accounting considerations, and tax considerations.
The focus in this chapter is on the form of payment, the form of acquisition, and alternative 
forms of legal structures in which ownership is conveyed and how they interact to impact 
the overall deal. The implications of alternative tax structures, how deals are recorded for 
financial reporting purposes, and how they might affect the deal-structuring process are dis­
cussed in detail in Chapter 12. A review of this chapter is available in the file folder entitled 
4If a party promises “reasonable best efforts,” everything that can be done should be done, but not to the point of go­
ing bankrupt. It can also imply that Intel would have to “leave no stone unturned.” By contrast, “reasonable efforts” 
implies that what can be done should be done, in the context and purpose of the contract, but without requiring a 
party to leave “no stone unturned.” “Reasonable efforts” is a less onerous standard than “reasonable best efforts.”

	
The Deal-Structuring Process	
397
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
“Student Study Guide” on the companion website to this book (https://www.elsevier.com/
books-and-journals/book-companion/9780128016091).
THE DEAL-STRUCTURING PROCESS
The deal-structuring process involves satisfying as many of the primary acquirer and tar­
get objectives and determining how risk will be shared. Risk sharing refers to the extent to 
which the acquirer assumes the target’s liabilities. The appropriate deal structure is that which 
satisfies, subject to an acceptable level of risk, the primary objectives of the parties involved 
and clearly states their rights and obligations. The process may be highly complex, involving 
multiple parties, approvals, forms of payment, and sources of financing. Decisions made in 
one area often affect other areas of the deal. Containing risk associated with a complex deal is 
analogous to squeezing one end of a water balloon, which simply forces the contents to shift 
elsewhere.
Key Components of the Deal-Structuring Process
The process begins with addressing a set of key questions, shown on the left-hand side 
of Fig. 11.1. Answers to these questions help define initial negotiating positions, potential 
FIGURE 11.1  Mergers and acquisitions deal-structuring process. ESOP, Employee stock ownership plan.

398	
11.  Structuring the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
risks, options for managing risk, levels of tolerance for risk, and conditions under which 
either party will “walk away” from the negotiations. The key components of the process are 
discussed next.
The acquisition vehicle refers to the legal structure created to acquire the target company. 
The postclosing organization, or structure, is the organizational and legal framework used to 
manage the combined businesses following the consummation of the transaction. Common­
ly used structures for both the acquisition vehicle and the postclosing organization include 
the corporate, division, holding company, joint venture (JV), partnership, limited liability 
company (LLC), and employee stock ownership plan (ESOP) structures. Although the two 
structures are often the same before and after completion of the transaction, the postclosing 
organization may differ from the acquisition vehicle, depending on the acquirer’s strategic 
objectives for the combined firms.
The form of payment, or total consideration, may consist of cash, common stock, debt, or a 
combination of all three types. The payment may be fixed at a moment in time, contingent 
on the target’s future performance, or payable over time. The form of acquisition reflects what 
is being acquired (stock or assets) and how ownership is conveyed. Accounting considerations 
address the impact of financial reporting requirements on the future earnings of the com­
bined businesses. Tax considerations entail tax structures that determine whether a deal is tax­
able or nontaxable to the seller’s shareholders. The legal form of the selling entity also has tax 
implications.
Common Linkages
Fig. 11.1 explains through examples common interactions among various components of 
the deal structure. These are discussed in more detail later in this chapter and in Chapter 12.
Form of Payment (Fig. 11.1, Arrows 1 and 2) Affects Choice of Acquisition Vehicle 
and Postclosing Organization
The buyer may offer a purchase price contingent on the future performance of the target 
and choose to acquire and operate the target as a wholly owned subsidiary within a holding 
company during the term of the earnout (deferred payout). This facilitates monitoring the 
operation’s performance and minimizes possible postearnout litigation.
Effects of Form of Acquisition (Fig. 11.1, Arrows 3–6)
Choice of acquisition vehicle and postclosing organization: If the form of acquisition is a 
statutory merger, all liabilities transfer to the buyer, who may acquire and operate 
the target within a holding company to provide some protection from the target’s 
liabilities.
Form, timing, and amount of payment: The assumption of all seller liabilities in a merger or 
stock purchase may cause the buyer to alter the terms of the deal to include more debt or 
installment payments, to reduce the present value of the purchase price, or both.
Tax considerations: The transaction may be tax free to the seller if the acquirer uses its stock 
to acquire substantially all of the seller’s assets or stock.

	
The Deal-Structuring Process	
399
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
Effects of Tax Considerations (Fig. 11.1, Arrows 7 and 8)
Amount, timing, and composition of the purchase price: If the deal is taxable to the target 
shareholders, the purchase price often is increased to offset the target shareholders’ tax 
liability. The higher purchase price could alter the composition of the purchase price as 
the buyer defers a portion of the price or includes more debt to lower its present value.
Selection of postclosing organization: The desire to minimize taxes encourages the use of S 
corporations, LLCs, and partnerships to eliminate double taxation; tax benefits also pass 
through to LLC members and partners in partnerships. By 2011, 54% of business income 
was earned by pass-through firms, up from 21% in 1980.
Legal Form of Selling Entity (Fig. 11.1, Arrow 9) Affects Form of Payment
Because of the potential for deferring shareholder tax liabilities, target firms qualifying as 
C corporations often prefer to exchange their stock or assets for acquirer shares. Owners of S 
corporations, LLCs, and partnerships are largely indifferent to a deal’s tax status because the 
proceeds of the sale are taxed at the owners’ ordinary tax rate.
Accounting Considerations (Fig. 11.1, Arrow 10) Affect Form, Amount, 
and Timing of Payment
The requirement to adjust more frequently the fair value of contingent payments may 
make earnouts less attractive as a form of payment due to the potential increase in earn­
ings volatility. Equity as a form of payment may be less attractive due to the potential for 
changes in its value between the deal announcement date and closing date. The potential 
for future write-downs may discourage overpayment by acquirers due to the required pe­
riodic review of fair market versus book values. Table 11.1 provides a summary of these 
common linkages.
TABLE 11.1  Summary of Common Linkages Within the Deal-Structuring Process
Component of deal-structuring process
Influences choice of
Form, amount, and timing of payment
Acquisition vehicle
Postclosing organization
Accounting considerations
Tax structure (taxable or nontaxable)
Form of acquisition
Acquisition vehicle
Postclosing organization
Form, amount, and timing of payment
Tax structure (taxable or nontaxable)
Tax considerations
Form, amount, and timing of payment
Postclosing organization
Legal form of selling entity
Tax structure (taxable or nontaxable)

400	
11.  Structuring the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
FORM OF ACQUISITION VEHICLE AND POSTCLOSING 
ORGANIZATION
Choosing an acquisition vehicle or postclosing organization requires consideration of the 
cost and formality of organization, ease of transferring ownership, continuity of existence, 
management control, ease of financing, ease of integration, method of distribution of profits, 
extent of personal liability, and taxation. Each form of legal entity has different risk, financing, 
tax, and control implications for the acquirer.5 The selection of the appropriate entity can help 
to mitigate risk, maximize financing flexibility, and minimize the net cost of the acquisition.
Choosing the Appropriate Acquisition Vehicle
The corporate structure is the most commonly used acquisition vehicle, since it offers most of 
the features acquirers desire, including limited liability, financing flexibility, continuity of own­
ership, and deal flexibility (e.g., option to engage in a tax-free deal). For small privately owned 
firms, an ESOP structure may be a convenient vehicle for transferring the owner’s interest in the 
business to the employees while offering significant tax advantages. Non-US buyers intending 
to make additional acquisitions may prefer a holding company structure, enabling the buyer to 
control other companies by owning only a small portion of the company’s voting stock.
A partnership may be appropriate if it is important to share risk, to involve partners with 
special attributes, to avoid double taxation, or in special situations.6 In late 2016, General 
Electric (GE) reached an agreement with United States–based oil services firm Baker Hughes 
to create a partnership in which GE contributed its oil and gas operations plus $7.4 billion 
in cash and Baker Hughes contributed all of its operations. Baker Hughes’s shareholders 
received a special cash dividend of $7.4 billion paid by the partnership and a 37.5% stake in 
the partnership, with GE owning the remaining 62.5%. GE’s ownership percentage reflected 
its operating earnings for 2014–15 fiscal year of $2.5 and 1.5 billion (before nonrecurring ex­
penses) for Baker Hughes [i.e., $2.5/($2.5 + $1.5) = 62.5%].
Choosing the Appropriate Postclosing Organization
The postclosing organization can be the same as that chosen for the acquisition vehicle. 
Common postclosing structures include divisional7 and holding company arrangements. 
7A division is not a separate legal entity but rather an organizational unit, and it is distinguished from a legal sub­
sidiary in that it typically will not have its own stock or board of directors that meets regularly. Divisions may have 
managers with the same titles normally associated with separate legal entities, such as a president or chief operat­
ing officer. Because a division is not a separate legal entity, its liabilities are the responsibility of the parent.
5The various forms of potential acquisition vehicles and their specific advantages and disadvantages are discussed 
in considerable detail in Chapter 15.
6Certain situations often require specific types of partnership arrangements. For example, a master limited part­
nership (MLP) is used in industries where cash flow is relatively predictable, such as oil and gas extraction and 
distribution and real estate. As with other limited partnerships, it is not subject to double taxation, and its investors 
are subject to limited liability; unlike other partnerships, its units can be more easily bought and sold than those of 
private partnerships and privately owned corporations and often trade in the same manner as shares of common 
stock. MLPs are considered in default if all profits are not distributed.

	
Form of Payment	
401
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
While holding companies are often corporations, they also represent a distinct way of orga­
nizing and operating the firm. The choice of postclosing organization depends on the objec­
tives of the acquirer. The acquiring firm may choose a structure that facilitates postclosing in­
tegration, minimizes risk from the target’s known and unknown liabilities, minimizes taxes, 
passes through losses to shelter the owners’ tax liabilities, preserves unique target attributes, 
maintains target independence during the duration of an earnout, or preserves the tax-free 
status of the deal.
If the acquirer intends to integrate the target immediately after closing, the corporate or 
divisional structure often is preferred because it offers the greatest control. In JVs and part­
nerships, the dispersed ownership may render decision making slower or more contentious. 
Implementation is more likely to depend on close cooperation and consensus building, which 
may slow efforts at rapid integration of the acquired company. Realizing synergies may be 
more protracted than if management control is more centralized within the parent.
A holding company structure may be preferable when the target has significant liabilities, 
an earnout is involved, the target is a foreign firm, or the acquirer is a financial investor. The 
parent may be able to isolate target liabilities within the subsidiary, and the subsidiary could 
be forced into bankruptcy without jeopardizing the parent. When the target is a foreign firm, 
operating it separately from the rest of the acquirer’s operations may minimize disruption 
from cultural differences. Finally, a financial buyer may use a holding company structure 
because the buyer has no interest in operating the target firm for any length of time. A part­
nership or JV structure may be appropriate if the risk and the value of tax benefits are high. 
The total investment in the target is shared. The acquired firm may benefit because of the ex­
pertise that the different partners or owners might provide. A partnership or LLC eliminates 
double taxation and passes current operating losses, tax credits, and loss carryforwards and 
carrybacks to the owners.
LEGAL FORM OF THE SELLING ENTITY
Seller concerns about the form of the transaction may depend on whether it is an S corpo­
ration, a LLC, a partnership, or a C corporation. C corporations are subject to double taxation, 
whereas owners of S corporations, partnerships, and LLCs are not (Exhibit 11.1).
FORM OF PAYMENT
The fraction of all-stock deals peaked in the late 1990s at more than 60% before plunging 
in recent years to about 20%. In contrast, all-cash deals bottomed out at about 25% in the late 
1990s before rising to about 50% in recent years. Mixed payment deals (i.e., those involving 
both stock and cash) have risen from about 10% in the late 1990s to about 30% most recently.8 
This section addresses the different forms of payment used and the circumstances in which 
one form may be preferred over another.
8Boone et al. (2014).

402	
11.  Structuring the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
Cash
Acquirers may use cash if the firm has significant borrowing capacity, a high credit rating, 
and undervalued shares and wishes to maintain control. Surprisingly, there is little correlation 
between the size of an acquirer’s cash balances and the likelihood it would make a cash offer in 
a takeover. In fact, cash-rich acquirers are often more likely to make stock rather than cash of­
fers than acquirers with smaller cash holdings. This seeming anomaly may reflect the target’s 
preference for acquirer’s stock due to its perceived growth potential or for a tax-free deal.9 A 
cash purchase is more likely to be financed from borrowing if the firm has a high credit rating 
due to its comparatively low borrowing costs.10 Highly leveraged acquirers are less likely to 
offer all-cash deals and more likely to pay less cash in mixed payment offers consisting of cash 
and stock. Undervalued shares could result in substantial dilution of the acquirer’s current 
shareholders. A bidder may use cash rather than shares if the voting control of its dominant 
shareholder is threatened as a result of the issuance of voting stock to acquire the target.11
9Pinkowitz et al. (2013).
10Karampatsas et al. (2014).
11Faccio and Masulis (2005).
EXHIBIT 11.1  HOW SELLER’S LEGAL FORM AFFECTS FORM 
OF PAYMENT
Assume that a business owner starting with an initial investment of $100,000 sells her business 
for $1 million. Different legal structures have different tax impacts:
1.	 After-tax proceeds of a stock sale are ($1,000,000 − $100,000) × (1 − 0.15) = $765,000. The S 
corporation shareholder or LLC member holding shares for more than 1 year pays a maximum 
capital gains tax equal to 15% of the gain on the sale.a
2.	 After-tax proceeds from an asset sale are 
($1,000,000 − $100,000) × (1 − 0.4) × (1 − 0.15) = $900,000 × 0.51 = $459,000. A C corporation 
typically pays tax equal to 40% (i.e., 35% federal and 5% state and local), and the shareholder 
pays a maximum capital gains tax equal to 15%, resulting in double taxation of the gain on sale.
Implications
1.	 C corporation shareholders generally prefer acquirer’s stock for their stock or assets to avoid 
double taxation.
2.	 S corporation and LLC owners often are indifferent to an asset sale or stock sale because 100% 
of the corporation’s income passes through the corporation untaxed to the owners, who are 
subject to their own personal tax rates. The S corporation shareholders or LLC members still 
may prefer a share-for-share exchange if they are interested in deferring their tax liability or are 
attracted by the long-term growth potential of the acquirer’s stock.
aThe capital gains tax rate at the time of this writing is 15% if an individual’s taxable income falls in the 25, 28, 33, or 
35% marginal tax brackets.

	
Form of Payment	
403
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
The preference for using cash appears to be much higher in Western European countries, 
where ownership tends to be more heavily concentrated in publicly traded firms, than in the 
United States. In Europe, 63% of publicly traded firms have a single shareholder directly or 
indirectly controlling 20% or more of the voting shares; the US figure is 28%.12 The seller’s 
shareholders may prefer cash if they believe the acquirer’s shares have limited appreciation 
potential and have a high tax basis in their stock.13 The high basis implies lower capital gains 
and less need to defer the payment of taxes.
Noncash
The use of stock is more complicated than cash because of the need to comply with pre­
vailing securities laws. The acquirer may choose to use stock if it is believed to be overvalued 
and has limited borrowing capacity and excess cash balances. Acquirer’s stock also may be 
used as the primary form of payment when the integration of the target firm is expected to be 
lengthy in order to minimize the amount of indebtedness required to complete the takeover. 
By maintaining the ability to borrow, the acquirer is able to finance unanticipated cash out­
lays during the integration period and to pursue investment opportunities that might arise.14 
Firms whose actual leverage exceeds their desired leverage are more likely to use some form 
of payment other than cash in making acquisitions.15 Furthermore, acquirer’s stock may be 
a useful form of payment when valuing the target firm is difficult, such as when the target 
has hard-to-value intangible assets, new product entries, or large R&D outlays. In accepting 
acquirer’s stock, a seller may have less incentive to negotiate an overvalued purchase price if 
it wishes to participate in any appreciation of the stock it receives.16 Other forms of noncash 
payment include real property, rights to intellectual property, royalties, earnouts, and contin­
gent payments.
Overvalued stock has been shown to be an important predictor of the form of payment 
chosen by acquirers. The extent to which a firm’s share price is overvalued can be measured 
by the amount of short interest17 in the stock. Stock acquirers have significantly higher short 
interest in their shares prior to the announcement of a merger, up to 6 months prior to the 
merger, than do cash acquirers.18
Sellers often demand acquirer shares as the primary form of payment due to the ability 
to defer the payment of taxes. Acquirer shares might be especially attractive if their growth 
prospects are favorable.19 There is the ever-present danger to selling shareholders that the 
12Faccio and Lang (2002).
13Burch et al. (2012).
14Huang et al. (2011).
15Uysal (2011).
16(Officer, 2007). Note that simply accepting acquirer’s stock does not guarantee the seller will not attempt to negoti­
ate an overvalued purchase price if the seller intends to sell the acquirer shares immediately following closing.
17Short interest is the quantity of shares investors have sold short but not yet covered or closed out and is viewed as 
an indicator of whether investors believe a stock’s price is likely to fall. Short interest is calculated by dividing the 
number of shares sold short by the total number of outstanding shares. For example, 3% short interest means that 
3% of the outstanding shares are held short.
18Ben-David et al. (2015).
19Ismail and Krause (2010).

404	
11.  Structuring the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
acquirer shares may be overvalued and decline in value over time toward their true value.20 
Seller shareholders may find debt unattractive because of the acquirer’s perceived high risk 
of default. Debt or equity securities issued by nonpublic firms may also be illiquid because of 
the small size of the resale market for such securities.
Acquirers, such as small or emerging firms, may not have access to relatively inexpensive 
debt financing. Consequently, they may be inclined to finance their cash bids for targets by 
issuing equity. Because equity is a higher cost source of financing, its use to finance the cash 
bid can result in lower purchase price premiums. In contrast, acquirers having access to in­
expensive debt financing are prone to borrow to finance their cash bids and tend to overbid 
for target firms.21
Cash and Stock in Combination
Offering target shareholders multiple payment options may encourage more participation 
in tender offers. Some target shareholders may want a combination of acquirer’s stock and 
cash if they are unsure of the appreciation potential of the acquirer’s stock. Others may prefer 
a combination of cash and stock if they need the cash to pay taxes due on the sale of their 
shares. Also, acquirers, unable to borrow to finance an all-cash offer or unwilling to absorb 
the dilution in an all-stock offer, may choose to offer the target firm a combination of stock 
and cash.
Acquirers also may be motivated to offer their shares if they believe they are overvalued, 
since they are able to issue fewer shares. Overvaluation refers to the excess of the acquirer’s 
current share price over its intrinsic value. Target firm shareholders may be willing to accept 
overvalued acquirer shares because the overvaluation may not be obvious or the acquirer’s 
stock may reduce the degree of postmerger leverage of the combined firms.22 If investors 
believe the combined firms are less risky because of the reduction in leverage, the intrinsic 
value of the acquirer shares may rise reflecting the combined firm’s lower cost of capital. 
The resulting rise in their intrinsic value may reduce or eliminate the overvaluation of the 
acquirer shares.
The multiple-option bidding strategy creates uncertainty, since the amount of cash the 
acquirer ultimately will have to pay to target shareholders is unclear, because the number of 
shareholders choosing the all-cash or cash-and-stock option is not known prior to completion 
of the tender offer. Acquirers resolve this issue by including a proration clause in tender offers 
and merger agreements that allows them to fix—at the time the tender offer is initiated—the 
amount of cash they will ultimately have to pay out.23
20Higgins (2013).
21Vladimirov (2015).
22Vermaelen and Xu (2014).
23Assume the acquisition cost is $100 million, the acquirer wishes to limit cash paid to target firm shareholders to one-
half of that amount, and the acquirer offers the target firm’s shareholders a choice of stock or cash. If the amount paid 
to target shareholders who choose to receive cash exceeds $50 million, the proration clause enables the acquirer to pay 
all target firm shareholders tendering their shares one-half of the purchase price in cash and the remainder in stock.

	
Managing Risk and Reaching Consensus on Purchase Price	
405
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
Convertible Securities
An acquirer and a target often have inadequate information about the other, even after 
completing due diligence. The acquirer is anxious about overpaying, and target shareholders 
are concerned about whether the offer price reflects the fair value of their shares. The use of 
acquirer’s stock as the primary form of payment may mitigate some of this concern because 
target shareholders hoping to participate in any future appreciation are less likely to with­
hold important information. However, this does not address the issue of the fairness of the 
purchase price to target shareholders.
Convertible securities24 offer the potential of resolving the concerns of the acquirer and the 
target when both are lacking in critical information about the other. Bidders believing their 
shares are undervalued are reluctant to use stock, to avoid diluting their current shareholders. 
To communicate their belief, such bidders may offer convertible debt as a form of payment. 
Target shareholders may find such offers attractive, because they provide a floor equal to the 
value of the debt at maturity plus accumulated interest payments as well as the potential 
for participating in future share appreciation. In contrast, bidders believing their shares are 
overvalued are more inclined to offer stock rather than cash or convertible securities. If the 
convertible securities are unlikely to be converted due to the limited share price appreciation 
of the bidder’s stock, the securities will remain as debt and burden the firm with substantial 
leverage. There is empirical evidence that the use of convertible securities when both parties 
are lacking information can benefit both the bidder and the seller. Bidder and target abnormal 
announcement date returns for such deals are 1.86 and 6.89%, respectively.25
MANAGING RISK AND REACHING CONSENSUS 
ON PURCHASE PRICE
Balance-sheet adjustments and escrow accounts, earnouts, contingent value rights (CVRs), 
rights to intellectual property and licensing fees, and consulting agreements may be used to 
close the deal when the buyer and seller cannot reach agreement on price.
Postclosing Balance-Sheet Price Adjustments and Escrow Accounts
About four-fifths of M&As require some purchase price adjustment, resulting most often 
from a restatement of operating earnings or cash flow or working capital.26 Escrow or holdback 
accounts and adjustments to the target’s balance sheet are most often used in cash rather than 
stock-for-stock purchases (particularly when the number of target shareholders is large). They 
rely on an audit of the target firm to determine its “true or fair” value and are applicable only 
26RSM McGladrey, Inc., survey of 75 middle-market private equity investors (2011).
24Convertible bonds and preferred stock can be converted into a predetermined number of a firm’s common shares 
if the shares exceed the price per share at which a convertible security can be converted into common stock. These 
types of securities are explained in more detail in Chapter 14.
25Finnerty et al. (2012).

406	
11.  Structuring the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
when what is being acquired is clearly identifiable, such as in a purchase of tangible assets. The 
buyer and seller typically share the cost of the audit. With escrow accounts, the buyer retains a 
portion of the purchase price until completion of a postclosing audit of the target’s financial 
statements. Escrow accounts may also be used to cover continuing claims beyond closing.
Balance-sheet adjustments are used when the elapsed time between the agreement on price 
and the actual closing date is lengthy. The balance sheet may change significantly, so the pur­
chase price is adjusted up or down. Such adjustments can be used to guarantee the value of the 
target firm’s shareholder equity or, more narrowly, the value of working capital. With a share­
holder equity guarantee, both parties agree at signing to an estimate of the target’s equity val­
ue on the closing date. The purchase price is then increased or decreased to reflect any change 
in the book value of the target’s equity between the signing and closing dates due to net profit 
earned (or lost) during this period. Agreement may be reached more easily between the buyer 
and the seller with a working capital guarantee, which ensures against changes in the firm’s 
net current operating assets.27 As Table 11.2 indicates, the buyer reduces the total purchase 
price by an amount equal to the decrease in net working capital or shareholders’ equity of the 
target and increases the purchase price by any increase in these measures during this period.
Earnouts and Other Contingent Payments
Earnouts and warrants frequently are used whenever the buyer and the seller cannot agree 
on price or when the parties involved wish to participate in the upside potential of the busi­
ness. Earnout agreements may also be used to retain and motivate key target firm manag­
ers. An earnout agreement is a financial contract whereby a portion of the purchase price of a 
company is to be paid in the future, contingent on realizing the future earnings level or some 
other performance measure agreed on earlier. A subscription warrant, or simply warrant, is a 
type of security—often issued with a bond or preferred stock—that entitles the holder to pur­
chase an amount of common stock at a stipulated price. The exercise price is usually higher 
than the price at the time the warrant is issued. Warrants may be converted over a period of 
many months to many years.
27It is critical to define clearly what constitutes working capital and equity in the agreement of purchase and sale, 
since—similar to equity—what constitutes working capital may be ambiguous.
TABLE 11.2  Working Capital Guarantee Balance-Sheet Adjustments ($ Million)
Purchase price
At time of negotiation
At closing
Purchase price 
reduction
Purchase price 
increase
If working capital equals
110
100
10
If working capital equals
110
125
15

	
Managing Risk and Reaching Consensus on Purchase Price	
407
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
The earnout typically requires that the acquired business be operated as a wholly owned sub­
sidiary of the acquiring company under the management of the former owners or key execu­
tives.28 Earnouts differ substantially in terms of the performance measure on which the contingent 
payout is based, the period over which performance is measured, and the form of payment for 
the earnout.29 Some earnouts are payable only if a certain performance threshold is achieved; oth­
ers depend on average performance over several periods; and still others may involve periodic 
payments, depending on the achievement of interim performance measures rather than a single, 
lump-sum payment at the end of the earnout period. The value of the earnout is often capped. 
In some cases, the seller may have the option to repurchase the company at some predetermined 
percentage of the original purchase price if the buyer is unable to pay the earnout at maturity.
Earnouts consist of two parts: a payment up front and a deferred payment. The initial 
payment must be large enough to induce the target firm shareholders to enter into the agree­
ment and the deferred payment must be of sufficient size to keep them motivated to exceed 
agreed-upon performance measures. Relatively large deferred payments and longer earnout 
periods are associated with higher takeover premia paid at closing than the premia paid in 
comparable nonearnout deals. Why? Target firm shareholders in earnouts are compensated 
for sharing the postacquisition integration risk with the acquiring firm by receiving a higher 
premium than they would have received had they received the entire payment up front.30
Exhibit 11.2 illustrates how an earnout formula could be constructed reflecting these consid­
erations. The purchase price has two components. At closing, the seller receives a lump-sum 
payment of $100 million. The seller and the buyer agree to a baseline projection for a 3-year 
period and that the seller will receive a fixed multiple of the average annual performance 
of the acquired business in excess of the baseline projection. Thus, the earnout provides an 
incentive for the seller to operate the business as efficiently as possible.31 By multiplying the 
anticipated multiple investors will pay for operating cash flow at the end of the 3-year period 
by projected cash flow, it is possible to estimate the potential increase in shareholder value.32
Used in 3% of deals, earnouts are more common when the targets are small private firms 
or subsidiaries of larger firms rather than large publicly traded firms. Such contracts are more 
easily written and enforced when there are relatively few shareholders.33 Earnouts are most 
common in high-tech and service industries, when the acquirer and target firms are in dif­
ferent industries, when the target firm has a significant number of assets not recorded on the 
33Srikant et al. (2001).
28The calculation of such goals and the resulting payments should be kept simple to avoid disputes.
29Cain et al. (2014).
30Barbopoulos et al. (2016).
31The baseline projection often is what the buyer used to value the seller’s business. Shareholder value for the buyer 
is created whenever the acquired business’s actual performance exceeds the baseline projection and the multiple 
applied by investors at the end of the 3-year period exceeds the multiple used to calculate the earnout payment. 
This assumes that the baseline projection values the business accurately and that the buyer does not overpay.
32Earnouts may demotivate management if the acquired firm does not perform well enough to achieve any 
payout under the earnout formula or if the acquired firm exceeds the performance targets substantially, effectively 
guaranteeing the maximum payout under the plan. The management of the acquired firm may cut back on 
training expenses or make only those investments that improve short-term profits. To avoid such pitfalls, it may be 
appropriate to set multiple targets including revenue, income, and investment.

408	
11.  Structuring the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
balance sheet, when buyer access to information is limited, and when little integration will 
be attempted.
Earnouts on average account for 45% of the price paid for private firms and 33% for sub­
sidiary acquisitions, and target firm shareholders tend to realize about 62% of the poten­
tial earnout amount. In deals involving earnouts, acquirers earn abnormal returns, ranging 
from 1.5%34 to 5.4%,35 around the announcement date, much more than deals not involving 
earnouts. Positive abnormal returns to acquiring company shareholders may be a result of 
investor perception that, with an earnout, the buyer is less likely to overpay and more likely 
to retain key target firm talent.
Contingent Value Rights
CVR securities issued by the acquirer commit it to pay additional cash or securities to 
the holder of the CVR (i.e., the seller) if the acquirer’s share price (ASP) falls below a speci­
fied level at some future date. They can be traded on public exchanges. Their use suggests 
34Barbopoulos and Sudarsanam (2012) and Barbopoulos et al. (2016).
35Kohers and Ang (2000).
EXHIBIT 11.2  HYPOTHETICAL EARNOUT AS PART OF THE 
PURCHASE PRICE
Purchase Price
1.	 Lump-sum payment at closing: The seller receives $100 million.
2.	 Earnout payment: The seller receives four times the excess of the actual average annual net 
operating cash flow over the baseline projection after 3 years, not to exceed $35 million.
Base year (first full year of ownership)
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
Baseline projection (net cash flow) ($)
10
12
15
Actual performance (net cash flow) ($)
15
20
25
Earnout at the end of 3 yearsa:
−
+
−
+
−
×
=
($15
$10)
($20
$12)
($25
$15)
3
4
$30.67
Potential increase in shareholder valueb:
−
+
−
+
−
×


−
=
($15
$10)
($20
$12)
($25
$15)
3
10
$30.67
$46
aThe cash flow multiple of 4 applied to the earnout is a result of negotiation before closing.
bThe cash flow multiple of 10 applied to the potential increase in shareholder value for the buyer is the multiple the 
buyer anticipates that investors would apply to a 3-year average of actual operating cash flow at the end of the 3-year 
period.

	
Managing Risk and Reaching Consensus on Purchase Price	
409
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
that the acquirer believes that its shares are unlikely to fall below their current level. CVRs 
are sometimes granted when the buyer and the seller are far apart on the purchase price. A 
CVR is more suitable for a public company or a private firm with many shareholders than 
is an earnout, because it can be transferred to many investors. Earnouts are more often used 
with sales of private firms rather than for sales of public firms, since they are designed to 
motivate a firm’s managers who have a significant degree of control over the firm’s future 
performance.36
Drug companies frequently use CVRs as a portion of the payment made to acquire other 
drug companies whose products do not have a proven track record, to reduce the risk of 
overpaying. In 2016, Irish drug manufacturer paid US biotechnology firm Dyax Corporation 
shareholders $37.30 per share in cash at closing. Dyax shareholders would also receive an 
additional cash payment of $4 per share if the firm’s leading treatment drug for hereditary 
angioedema, DX-2930, received approval by the Federal Drug Administration by the end of 
2019.
In 2016, potential conflicts of interest associated with CVRs were highlighted in a share­
holder lawsuit against French Pharmaceutical firm, Sanofi, which acquired Genzyme, a 
United States–based biotech firm, in 2011 for $20 billion. Genzyme had been conducting 
clinical trials for a promising multiple sclerosis treatment called Lemtrada and estimated the 
value of each CVR at $5.58. The merger contract required Sanofi to make “diligent efforts” to 
guide Lemtrada through the US Federal Drug Administration regulatory process and to “ig­
nore any cost of potential CVR payments.” The merger agreement, however, did not address 
the potential conflict arising from Sanofi developing its own multiple sclerosis drug, Auba­
gio, which would compete with Lemtrada. The lawsuit alleges Sanofi focused on developing 
Aubagio to avoid making as much as $3.8 billion in payments to CVR holders. After 1 year 
on the market, Lemtrada generated sales of about $37 million, less than one-fifth of the ap­
proximate $180 million realized by Aubagio in its first year on the market. By the end of 2016, 
the CVRs traded at $0.14.
Rights, Royalties, and Fees
Intellectual property, royalties from licenses, and fee-based consulting or employment 
contracts are other forms of payment used to resolve price differences between the buyer 
and the seller. The right to use a proprietary process or technology for free or at a below-
market rate may interest former owners considering other business opportunities.37 Such 
arrangements should be coupled with agreements not to compete in the same industry as 
their former firm. Table 11.3 summarizes the advantages and disadvantages of these various 
forms of payment.
36Chatterjee and Yan (2008) document that acquirers issuing CVRs realize abnormal announcement date returns of 
5.4% because investors view their use as confirmation that the acquirer believes their shares are undervalued.
37Note that such an arrangement, if priced at below-market rates or free to the seller, would represent taxable 
income to the seller.

410	
11.  Structuring the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
TABLE 11.3  Evaluating Alternative Forms of Payment
Form of payment
Advantages
Disadvantages
Cash (including highly marketable 
securities)
Buyer: Simplicity
Buyer: Must rely solely on 
protections afforded in the contract 
to recover claims
Seller: Ensures payment if 
acquirer’s creditworthiness is 
questionable
Seller: Creates immediate tax 
liability
Stock
•	Common
•	Preferred
•	Convertible preferred
Buyer: High P/E relative to seller’s 
P/E may increase the value of the 
combined firms if investors apply 
higher P/E to combined firms’ 
earnings
Buyer: Adds complexity; potential 
EPS dilution
Seller: Defers taxes and provides 
potential price increase. Retains 
interest in the business
Seller: Potential decrease in 
purchase price if the value of 
equity received declines. May 
delay closing because of SEC 
registration requirements
Debt
•	Secured
•	Unsecured
•	Convertible
Buyer: Interest expense is tax 
deductible
Buyer: Adds complexity and 
increases leverage
Seller: Defers tax liability on the 
principal
Seller: Risk of default
Performance-related earnouts
Buyer: Shifts some portion of the 
risk to the seller
Buyer: May limit the integration of 
the businesses
Seller: Potential for a higher 
purchase price
Seller: Increases the uncertainty of 
the sales price
Purchase price adjustments
Buyer: Protection from eroding 
values of working capital before 
closing
Buyer: Audit expense
Seller: Protection from increasing 
values of working capital before 
closing
Seller: Audit expense. (Note that 
buyers and sellers often split the 
audit expense)
Real property
•	Real estate
•	Plant and equipment
•	Business or product line
Buyer: Minimizes use of cash
Buyer: Opportunity cost
Seller: May minimize tax liability
Seller: Real property may be 
illiquid
Rights to intellectual property
•	License
•	Franchise
Buyer: Minimizes cash use
Buyer: Potential for setting up a 
new competitor
Seller: Gains access to valuable 
rights, and spreads taxable income 
over time
Seller: Illiquid; income taxed at 
ordinary rates
Royalties from
•	Licenses
•	Franchises
Buyer: Minimizes cash use
Buyer: Opportunity cost
Seller: Spreads taxable income over 
time
Seller: Income taxed at ordinary 
rates

	
Constructing Collar Arrangements	
411
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
CONSTRUCTING COLLAR ARRANGEMENTS
Unlike all-cash deals, large fluctuations in the ASP can threaten to change the terms of the 
deal or lead to its termination in share-for-share exchanges. Fixed share-exchange agreements, 
which preclude any change in the number of acquirer shares exchanged for each target share, 
are commonly used in share exchanges because they involve both firms’ share prices, allow­
ing each party to share in the risk or benefit from fluctuating share prices. The acquirer’s risk 
is that its shares will appreciate between signing and closing, raising the cost of the deal. The 
seller’s risk is a potential drop in the value of the ASP, resulting in a lower-than-expected 
purchase price. While the buyer will know exactly how many shares will have to be issued to 
complete the deal, the acquirer and the target will be subject to significant uncertainty about 
the final value of the deal.
Alternatively, a fixed-value agreement fixes the value of the offer price per share by allowing 
the share-exchange ratio (SER) to vary or float. An increase in the value of the ASP results in 
fewer acquirer shares being issued, to keep the value of the deal unchanged, while a decrease 
would require that additional shares be issued.
Both fixed-value and fixed-share-exchange agreements sometimes include a collar ar­
rangement. For fixed-value agreements, the SER is allowed to vary within a narrow range; for 
fixed-share-exchange agreements, the offer price per share (deal value) is allowed to fluctuate 
within narrow limits.38 Collar arrangements can be constructed as follows:
38According to Factset MergerMetrics, about 15% of deals include some form of a collar. Merger contracts often 
contain “material adverse-effects clauses” allowing parties to the contract to withdraw from or renegotiate the deal. 
Officer (2004) argues that collars reduce the likelihood of renegotiation due to unanticipated changes in share prices.
TABLE 11.3  Evaluating Alternative Forms of Payment (cont.)
Form of payment
Advantages
Disadvantages
Fee-based
•	Consulting contract
•	Employment agreement
Buyer: Uses seller’s expertise 
and removes seller as a potential 
competitor
Buyer: May involve demotivated 
employees
Seller: Augments the purchase 
price and allows the seller to stay 
with the business
Seller: Limits ability to compete in 
the same business. Income taxed at 
ordinary rates
Contingent value rights
Buyer: Minimizes up-front 
payment
Buyer: Commits buyer to 
minimum payout
Seller: Provides for minimum 
payout guarantee
Seller: Buyer may ask for purchase 
price reduction
Staged or distributed payouts
Buyer: Reduces amount of up-front 
investment
Buyer: May result in underfunding 
of needed investments
Seller: Reduces buyer angst about 
certain future events
Seller: Lower present value of 
purchase price
SEC, Securities and Exchange Commission.

412	
11.  Structuring the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
=
×
= 

×
’
OfferPriceperShare
SER
ASP
OfferPriceperShare
ASP
Acquirer sShare
×
≤
≤
×
Collar Range:
SER
ASP
(lower limit)
Offer Price per Share
SER
ASP
(upper limit)
L
L
U
U
where ASPU > ASPL, SERU < SERL, and subscripts L and U refer to lower and upper limits.
Case Study 11.1 illustrates the use of both fixed-value and fixed-share-exchange agree­
ments. Within the first collar (fixed value), the purchase price is fixed by allowing the SER to 
vary, giving the seller some degree of certainty inside a narrow range within which the ASP 
floats; the second collar (fixed share exchange) allows the ASP (and therefore deal value) to 
vary within a specific range with both the buyer and seller sharing the risk. Finally, if the ASP 
rises above a certain level, the purchase price is capped; if it falls below a floor price, the seller 
can walk away. Table 11.4 illustrates the effect of a 1% increase or decrease in the acquirer’s 
(Flextronics) $11.73 share price on the $6.55 offer price for the target firm’s (International Dis­
playWorks) shares under various collar arrangements.
TABLE 11.4  Flextronics–IDW Fixed-Value and Fixed-Share-Exchange Agreements
Percent 
change
Offer price
Percent 
change
Offer price
($6.55/$11.73) × $11.73 = $6.55
($6.55/$11.73) × $11.73 = $6.55
Fixed value
1
($6.55/$11.85) × $11.85 = $6.55
(1)
($6.55/$11.61) × $11.61 = $6.55
2
($6.55/$11.96) × $11.96 = $6.55
(2)
($6.55/$11.50) × $11.50 = $6.55
3
($6.55/$12.08) × $12.08 = $6.55
(3)
($6.55/$11.38) × $11.38 = $6.55
4
($6.55/$12.20) × $12.20 = $6.55
(4)
($6.55/$11.26) × $11.26 = $6.55
5
($6.55/$12.32) × $12.32 = $6.55
(5)
($6.55/$11.14) × $11.14 = $6.55
6
($6.55/$12.43) × $12.43 = $6.55
(6)
($6.55/$11.03) × $11.03 = $6.55
7
($6.55/$12.55) × $12.55 = $6.55
(7)
($6.55/$10.91) × $10.91 = $6.55
8
($6.55/$12.67) × $12.67 = $6.55
(8)
($6.55/$10.79) × $10.79 = $6.55
9
($6.55/$12.79) × $12.79 = $6.55
(9)
($6.55/$10.67) × $10.67 = $6.55
Fixed SER
10
($6.55/$12.90) × $12.90 = $6.55
(10)
($6.55/$10.56) × $10.56 = $6.55
11
($6.55/$12.90) × $13.02 = $6.61
(11)
($6.55/$10.56) × $10.44 = $6.48
12
($6.55/$12.90) × $13.14 = $6.67
(12)
($6.55/$10.56) × $10.32 = $6.40
13
($6.55/$12.90) × $13.25 = $6.73
(13)
($6.55/$10.56) × $10.21 = $6.33
14
($6.55/$12.90) × $13.37 = $6.79
(14)
($6.55/$10.56) × $10.09 = $6.26
15
($6.55/$12.90) × $13.49 = $6.85
(15)
($6.55/$10.56) × $9.97 = $6.18
>15
SER floats based on fixed $6.85
>(15)
IDW may terminate agreement
All changes in offer price based on a 1% change from $11.73. IDW, International DisplayWorks; SER, share-exchange ratio.

	
Form of Acquisition	
413
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
FORM OF ACQUISITION
What acquirers purchase (target stock or assets) and how ownership is transferred from 
the target to the acquirer is called the form of acquisition. Each form affects the deal structure 
differently.39
39For more information on this topic, see DePamphilis (2010b, Chapter 11).
CASE STUDY 11.1  FLEXTRONICS ACQU IRES 
INTERNATIONAL DISPLAYWORKS USING MULTIPLE COLLAR 
ARRANGEMENTS
Key Points
•	 Collar arrangements may involve fixed-share-exchange and/or fixed-value agreements.
•	 Both buyers and sellers may benefit from such arrangements.
Flextronics, a camera modules producer, acquired International DisplayWorks (IDW), an LCD 
maker, in a share exchange valued at $300 million. The share-exchange ratio was calculated using 
the Flextronics average daily closing share price for the 20 trading days ending on the fifth trading 
day preceding the closing.a Transaction terms included the following three collars:
1.	 Fixed-Value Agreement: The offer price involved an exchange ratio floating inside a 10% collar above 
and below a Flextronics’ share price of $11.73 and a fixed purchase price of $6.55 for each share of 
IDW common stock. The range in which the exchange ratio floats can be expressed as followsb:
×
≤
×
≤
×
×
≤
×
≤
×
$655
$10.55
$10.55
$6.55
$11.73
$11.73
$6.55
$12.90
$12.90
0.6209
$10.55
0.5584
$11.73
0.5078
$12.90
	
If Flextronics’ stock price declines by as much as 10% to $10.55, 0.6209 share of Flextronics stock 
(i.e., $6.55/$10.55) is issued for each IDW share.
	
If Flextronics’ stock price increases by as much as 10% to $12.90, 0.5078 share of Flextronics’ 
stock (i.e., $6.55/$12.90) is issued for each IDW share.
2.	 Fixed-Share-Exchange Agreement: The offer price involved a fixed exchange ratio inside a collar 
11 and 15% above and below $11.73, resulting in a floating purchase price if the Flextronics’s 
stock increases or decreases between 11 and 15% from $11.73 per share.
3.	 IDW has the right to terminate the agreement if Flextronics’s share price falls by more than 15% 
below $11.73. If Flextronics’ share price increases by more than 15% above $11.73, the exchange 
ratio floats based on a fixed purchase price of $6.85 per share.c
aCalculating the acquirer share price as a 20-day average ending 5 days prior to closing reduces the chance of using an 
aberrant price per share and provides time to update the purchase agreement.
bThe share-exchange ratio varies within ±10% of the Flextronics’ $11.73 share price.
cIDW is protected against a “free fall” in the Flextronics’ share price, while the purchase price is capped at $6.85.

414	
11.  Structuring the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
An asset purchase involves the sale of all or a portion of the assets of the target to the buyer 
or its subsidiary in exchange for buyer’s stock, cash, debt, or some combination. The buyer 
may assume all, some, or none of the target’s liabilities. The purchase price is paid directly to 
the target firm. A stock purchase involves the sale of the outstanding stock of the target to the 
buyer or its subsidiary by the target’s shareholders. Unlike an asset purchase, the purchase 
price is paid to the target firm’s shareholders. This is the biggest difference between the two 
methods, and it has significant tax implications for the seller’s shareholders (see Chapter 12).
A statutory or direct merger involves the combination of the target with the buyer or a sub­
sidiary formed to complete the merger. One corporation survives the merger and the other 
disappears. The surviving corporation can be the buyer, the target, or the buyer’s subsidiary. 
Merger terminology usually refers to the bidder as the surviving corporation and to the target 
as the disappearing corporation. Knowing which company is to survive is critical under merger 
law because of successor liability. This legal principle states that the surviving corporation re­
ceives by operation of law all rights and liabilities of both the bidder company and the target 
company in accordance with the statutes of the state in which the combined businesses will 
be incorporated.40 Dissenting or minority shareholders are required to sell their shares, al­
though some state statutes grant them the right to be paid the appraised value of their shares. 
Stock-for-stock or stock-for-assets deals represent alternatives to a merger.
State statutes usually require shareholder approval by both the bidder and target firms in a 
merger. However, no acquirer shareholder vote is required if the form of payment is cash, the 
number of new acquirer shares issued is less than 20% of the firm’s outstanding shares, or the 
number of shares previously authorized is sufficient to complete the deal. These exceptions 
are discussed in more detail later in this chapter. The most important difference between a 
merger and a stock-for-stock purchase is that the latter does not require a target shareholder 
vote, since target shareholders are giving their assent by willingly selling their shares. By pur­
chasing all of the target’s stock for acquirer’s stock or at least a controlling interest, the target 
firm is left intact as a wholly owned (or at least controlled) subsidiary of the bidder. Table 11.5 
highlights the advantages and disadvantages of these alternative forms of acquisition.
Purchase of Assets
In an asset purchase, a buyer acquires all rights a seller has to an asset for cash, stock, or 
some combination. An asset purchase may be the most practical way to complete the transac­
tion when the acquirer is interested only in a product line or division of the parent firm with 
multiple product lines or divisions that are not organized as separate legal subsidiaries. The 
seller retains ownership of the shares of stock of the business. Only assets and liabilities iden­
tified in the agreement of purchase and sale are transferred to the buyer.
In a cash-for-assets acquisition, the acquirer pays cash for the seller’s assets and may choose 
to accept some or all of the seller’s liabilities.41 Seller shareholders must approve the transac­
tion whenever the seller’s board votes to sell all or “substantially all” of the firm’s assets and 
41In cases where the buyer purchases most of the assets of a target firm, courts have ruled that the buyer is also 
responsible for the target’s liabilities.
40Because of successor liability, the bidder can realize significant cost savings by not having to transfer individual 
target assets and liabilities separately that would have otherwise required the payment of transfer taxes. For the 
creditor, all of the assets of the surviving corporation are available to satisfy its liabilities due to successor liability.

	
Form of Acquisition	
415
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
(Continued)
TABLE 11.5  Advantages and Disadvantages of Alternative Forms of Acquisition
Alternative 
forms
Advantages
Disadvantages
Cash 
purchase of 
assets
Buyer
•	Allows targeted purchase of assets
•	Asset write-up
•	May renegotiate union and benefits 
agreements in the absence of a successor 
clausea in the labor agreement
•	May avoid the need for shareholder 
approval
•	No minority shareholders
Buyer
•	Loses NOLsb and tax credits
•	Loses rights to intellectual property
•	May require consents to assignment of 
contracts
•	Exposed to liabilities transferring with 
assets (e.g., warranty claims)
•	Subject to taxes on any gains resulting in 
asset write-up
•	Subject to lengthy documentation of assets 
in the contract
Seller
•	Maintains corporate existence and 
ownership of assets not acquired
•	Retains NOLs and tax credits
Seller
•	Potential double taxation if shell is 
liquidated
•	Subject to state transfer taxes
•	Necessity of disposing of unwanted 
residual assets
•	Requires shareholder approval if 
substantially all of the firm’s assets are 
sold
Cash 
purchase of 
stock
Buyer
•	Assets/liabilities transfer automatically
•	May avoid the need to get consents to 
assignment for contracts
•	Less documentation
•	NOLs and tax credits pass to buyer
•	No state transfer taxes
•	May insulate from target liabilities if kept as 
a subsidiary
•	No shareholder approval if funded by cash 
or debt
•	Enables circumvention of target’s board in 
hostile tender offer
Buyer
•	Responsible for known and unknown 
liabilities
•	No asset write-up unless 338 election is 
adopted by buyer and sellerc
•	Union and employee benefit agreements 
do not terminate
•	Potential for minority shareholdersd
Seller
•	Liabilities generally pass to the buyer
•	May receive favorable tax treatment if 
acquirer’s stock received in payment
Seller
•	Loss of NOLs and tax credits
•	Favorable tax treatment is lost if buyer and 
seller adopt 338 electionc
Statutory 
merger
Buyer
•	Flexible form of payment (stock, cash, or 
debt)
•	Assets and liabilities transfer automatically, 
without lengthy documentation
•	No state transfer taxes
•	No minority shareholders because 
shareholders are required to tender shares 
(minority freeze-out)
•	May avoid shareholder approval
Buyer
•	May have to pay dissenting shareholders’ 
appraised value of stock
•	May be time consuming because of the 
need for target shareholder and board 
approvals, which may delay closing

416	
11.  Structuring the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
the firm is liquidated. After paying for any liabilities not assumed by the buyer, the assets 
remaining with the seller and the cash received from the acquiring firm are transferred to 
the seller’s shareholders in a liquidating distribution.42 In a stock-for-assets transaction, once 
approved by the seller’s board and shareholders, the seller’s shareholders receive buyer’s 
stock in exchange for the seller’s assets and assumed liabilities. In a second stage, the seller 
dissolves the corporation following shareholder ratification of such a move, leaving its share­
holders with buyer’s stock.
Advantages and Disadvantages From the Buyer’s Perspective
Advantages to the buyer include being able to be selective as to which target assets to pur­
chase and not being responsible for the seller’s liabilities unless assumed under the contract. 
42Selling “substantially all” assets does not necessarily mean that most of the firm’s assets have been sold; rather, it 
could refer to a small percentage of the firm’s total assets that are critical to the ongoing operation of the business. 
Hence, the firm may be forced to liquidate if a sale of assets does not leave the firm with “significant continuing 
business activity”—that is, at least 25% of total pretransaction operating assets and 25% of pretransaction income or 
revenue. Unless required by the firm’s bylaws, the buyer’s shareholders do not vote to approve the transaction.
TABLE 11.5  Advantages and Disadvantages of Alternative Forms of Acquisition (cont.)
Alternative 
forms
Advantages
Disadvantages
Seller
•	Favorable tax treatment if the purchase price 
is primarily in acquirer’s stock
•	Allows for continuing interest in combined 
companies
•	Flexible form of payment
Seller
•	May be time consuming
•	Target firm often does not survive
•	May not qualify for favorable tax status
Stock-
for-stock 
transaction
Buyer
•	May operate target company as a subsidiary
•	See purchase of stock mentioned previously
Seller
See purchase of stock mentioned previously
Buyer
•	May postpone realization of synergies
•	See purchase of stock mentioned 
previously
Seller
See purchase of stock mentioned previously
Stock-
for-assets 
transaction
Buyer
•	See purchase of assets mentioned previously
Buyer
•	May dilute buyer’s ownership position
•	See purchase of assets mentioned previously
Seller
See purchase of assets mentioned previously
Seller
See purchase of assets mentioned previously
Staged 
transactions
•	Provides greater strategic flexibility
•	May postpone realization of synergies
aIf the employer and union negotiated a “successor clause” into their collective bargaining agreement covering the workforce in the target firm, 
the terms of the agreement may still apply to the workforce of the new business.
bNet operating loss carryforwards or carrybacks.
cIn Section 338 of the US tax code, the acquirer in a purchase of 80% or more of the stock of the target may elect to treat the acquisition as if it 
were an acquisition of the target’s assets. The seller must agree with the election.
dMinority shareholders in a subsidiary may be eliminated by a so-called “back-end” merger following the initial purchase of target stock. As a 
result of the merger, minority shareholders are required to abide by the majority vote of all shareholders and to sell their shares to the acquirer. If 
the acquirer owns more than 90% of the target’s shares, it may be able to use a short-form merger, which does not require any shareholder vote.

	
Form of Acquisition	
417
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
However, the buyer can be held responsible for certain liabilities, such as environmental 
claims, property taxes, and, in some states, substantial pension liabilities and product liability 
claims. To protect against such risks, buyers usually insist on indemnification that holds the 
seller responsible for payment of damages resulting from such claims.43 Another advantage 
is that asset purchases enable buyers to revalue acquired assets to market value under the 
purchase method of accounting (see Chapter 12). This increase in the tax basis of the acquired 
assets to fair market value provides for higher depreciation and amortization expense deduc­
tions for tax purposes. Absent successor clauses in the contract, the asset purchase results in 
the termination of union agreements if less than 50% of the workforce in the new firm is union­
ized, thereby providing an opportunity to renegotiate agreements viewed as too restrictive.
Among the disadvantages to a purchase of assets is that the buyer loses the seller’s net oper­
ating losses and tax credits, and rights to assets such as licenses, franchises, and patents can­
not be transferred, which are viewed as owned by the target shareholders. The buyer often 
must seek the consent of customers and vendors to transfer existing contracts to the buyer. 
The transaction often is more complex and costly, because acquired assets must be listed in 
appendices to the definitive agreement, the sale of and titles to each asset transferred must 
be recorded, and state title transfer taxes must be paid. Moreover, a lender’s consent may be 
required if the assets to be sold are being used as collateral for loans.
Advantages and Disadvantages From the Seller’s Perspective
Among the advantages, sellers are able to maintain their corporate existence and thus own­
ership of tangible assets not acquired by the buyer and of intangible assets such as licenses, 
franchises, and patents. The seller retains the right to use all tax credits and accumulated net 
operating losses to shelter future income from taxes. The disadvantages include the potential 
double taxation of the seller. If the tax basis in the assets is low, the seller may experience a 
sizeable gain on the sale; if the corporation subsequently is liquidated, the seller may be re­
sponsible for the recapture of taxes deferred as a result of the use of accelerated rather than 
straight-line depreciation. If the number of assets transferred is large, the amount of state 
transfer taxes may become onerous. Whether the seller or the buyer actually pays the transfer 
taxes or they are shared is negotiable.
Purchase of Stock
In cash-for-stock or stock-for-stock transactions, the buyer purchases the seller’s stock directly 
from the seller’s shareholders. For a public company, the acquirer would make a tender offer, 
because public-company shareholders are likely to be too numerous to deal with individually. 
A purchase of stock is the approach most often taken in hostile takeovers. If the buyer is un­
able to convince all of the seller’s shareholders to tender their shares, then a minority of seller 
shareholders remains outstanding. The target firm would then be viewed as a partially owned 
subsidiary of the acquiring company. No seller shareholder approval is required in such trans­
actions because the seller’s shareholders are expressing approval by tendering their shares.
43Note that in most purchase agreements, buyers and sellers agree to indemnify each other from claims for which 
they are directly responsible. Liability under such arrangements usually is subject to specific dollar limits and is in 
force only for a specific period.

418	
11.  Structuring the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
Advantages and Disadvantages From the Buyer’s Perspective
Advantages include the automatic transfer of all assets with the target’s stock, the avoid­
ance of state asset transfer taxes, and the transfer of net operating losses and tax credits to the 
buyer. The purchase of the seller’s stock provides for the continuity of contracts and corpo­
rate identity. However, the consent of some customers and vendors may be required before a 
contract is transferred if it is stipulated in the contract. While the acquirer’s board normally 
approves any major acquisition, approval by shareholders is not required if the purchase is 
financed with cash or debt. If stock that has not yet been authorized is used, shareholder ap­
proval is required.
Among the disadvantages, the buyer is liable for all unknown, undisclosed, or contingent 
liabilities. The seller’s tax basis is carried over to the buyer at historical cost44; therefore, there 
is no step-up in the cost basis of assets, and no tax shelter is created. Dissenting shareholders 
in many states have the right to have their shares appraised, with the option of being paid the 
appraised value of their shares or remaining minority shareholders. The purchase of stock 
does not terminate existing union agreements or employee benefit plans. The existence of 
minority shareholders creates significant administrative costs and practical concerns.45
Advantages and Disadvantages From the Seller’s Perspective
Sellers often prefer a stock purchase to an asset purchase because the seller is free of future 
obligations, because all liabilities transfer to the buyer, and the seller is able to defer paying 
taxes if the form of payment is mostly buyer’s stock. Disadvantages for the seller include the 
inability to retain certain assets and the loss of net operating losses, tax credits, and intellec­
tual property rights.
Mergers
In a merger, two or more firms combine, with only one surviving. Unlike purchases of 
target stock, mergers require approval of both the target’s and acquirer’s boards and are sub­
sequently submitted to both firms’ shareholders for approval. However, there are some ex­
ceptions for acquirers, which are addressed later in this chapter. Usually a simple majority of 
all the outstanding voting shares must ratify the proposal, which is then registered with the 
appropriate state authority. Such deal structures are sometimes called one-step or long-form 
mergers.
Statutory and Subsidiary Mergers
In a statutory merger, the acquiring company assumes the assets and liabilities of the target 
in accordance with the statutes of the state in which the combined firms will be incorporated. 
A subsidiary merger involves the target becoming a subsidiary of the parent. To the public, the 
target firm may be operated under its brand name but will be owned and controlled by the 
44This is true unless the seller consents to take a 338 tax code election, which can create a tax liability for the seller. 
See Chapter 12 for more details.
45The parent incurs significant additional expenses to submit annual reports, hold annual shareholder meetings, 
and conduct a formal board election process. Furthermore, implementing strategic business decisions may be 
inhibited by lawsuits initiated by disaffected minority shareholders.

	
Form of Acquisition	
419
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
acquirer. Most mergers are structured as subsidiary mergers in which the acquiring firm cre­
ates a new corporate subsidiary that merges with the target.
Statutory Consolidations
Technically not a merger, a statutory consolidation requires all legal entities to be consoli­
dated into a new company, usually with a new name, whereas in a merger either the acquirer 
or the target survives. The new corporate entity created as a result of consolidation assumes 
ownership of the assets and liabilities of the consolidated organizations. Stockholders in 
merged companies typically exchange their shares for shares in the new company.
Mergers of Equals
A merger of equals is a deal structure usually applied whenever the participants are compa­
rable in size, competitive position, profitability, and market capitalization—which can make 
it unclear whether one party is ceding control to the other and which party provides the 
greater synergy. Consequently, target firm shareholders rarely receive any significant premi­
um for their shares. The new firm often is managed by the former CEOs of the merged firms 
as coequals and for the new firm’s board to have equal representation from the boards of the 
merged firms.46 However, it is relatively uncommon for the ownership split to be equally di­
vided.47 In mergers of equals, each firm’s shareholders exchange their shares for new shares 
in the combined companies. The number of new company shares each shareholder receives 
depends on the desired pro forma ownership distribution in the new company after closing 
and the relative contribution to potential synergy contributed by each firm.
Actual mergers of equals are fairly rare. To reach agreement, one firm will acquire another 
and in the merger agreement stipulate the takeover as a merger of equals even when the tar­
get is in reality ceding control to the acquirer. Why the charade? Being taken over often has 
negative connotations. So making it appear that both firms are equal “partners” in the deal 
makes the transaction more acceptable to the target’s board and senior managers. From a 
legal perspective, no change of control has taken place.
Such deals are more likely to work if both parties to the deal are highly motivated by 
what they believe are substantial and realizable synergies. In late 2013, Office Depot, Inc. and 
­OfficeMax Inc. completed their $18-billion merger of equals, with the combined firms using 
the name Office Depot. Anticipated cost synergies could total $1–2 billion annually. Neil Aus­
trian, Chairman and CEO of Office Depot, and Ravi Saligram, President and CEO of Office­
Max, will serve as co-CEOs. In addition to Austrian and Saligram, the new firm’s board will 
consist of five independent directors from each of the Office Depot and OfficeMax boards. 
Such deals can, however, create impossible hurdles because of the lack of one party being 
clearly in control. Billed as a merger of equals, the $35-billion merger of United States–based 
Omnicom and France’s Publicis collapsed after a battle over how the firm would be orga­
nized destroyed plans to create the world’s largest advertising agency. Perhaps in a rush to 
sign an agreement, tactical issues were left to be resolved between signing and closing. As al­
ways, the devil is in the details. Ultimately, the two parties could not agree over a centralized 
46Research by Wulf (2004) suggests that target firm CEOs often negotiate to retain a significant degree of control in 
the merged firm for both their board and their management in exchange for a lower premium for their shareholders.
47According to Mallea (2008), only 14% have a 50/50 split.

420	
11.  Structuring the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
or decentralized management structure. In this instance, the anticipated synergy consisting 
largely of projected economies of scale appeared problematic. There is no termination fee, 
and merger-related costs incurred such as legal and advisory fees would be split equally.
Tender Offers
An alternative to a traditional one-step (or long-form) merger is the two-step merger. In the 
first step, the acquirer buys through a stock purchase the majority of the target’s outstanding 
stock from its shareholders in a tender offer; in the second step, a squeeze-out/freeze-out merger 
or back-end merger is approved by the acquirer as majority shareholder. Minority shareholders 
are required to sell their shares. The two-step merger usually is faster (if the buyer can get 
enough votes in the tender offer to qualify for a short-form merger) than the more traditional 
one-step merger that requires shareholder approval (with some exceptions) by both acquirer 
and target shareholders. The one-step merger process may take several months to close as a 
proxy statement must be prepared and reviewed by the SEC, mailed to shareholders, and a 
shareholder vote must be obtained. The length of the process creates deal uncertainty due to 
the potential for competing bids.
An important disadvantage of the two-step merger in the past has been the delay and 
cost of consummating the back-end merger necessary to acquire the shares that were not 
purchased in the initial tender offer. If the buyer failed to own 90% of the target’s stock after 
the tender, the buyer was not permitted to use a short-form merger that requires a target 
board but not shareholder approval. Instead the buyer had to prepare, file, and mail a proxy 
statement following SEC review and hold a stockholder meeting. This process could result 
in a two-step merger taking longer than a one-step merger. Buyers and sellers have utilized 
a number of negotiated contract provisions to limit the risk of a protracted back-end merger. 
These included the top-up option and dual track structure discussed in more detail later in 
this chapter.
In late 2013, Delaware General Corporation Law was amended to include Section 251(h) 
permitting back-end mergers under certain conditions to be completed following a tender of­
fer enabling the buyer to acquire at least enough target shares to approve the merger (but less 
than the 90% required to use a “short-form” merger). This means that back-end mergers can 
now be implemented without the lengthy and costly process described previously.
To qualify for the accelerated back-end Section 251(h) merger process, a number of condi­
tions must be satisfied. The target must be listed on a national public exchange with at least 
2000 shareholders and the buyer must be a corporation; the target’s certificate of incorpora­
tion must not require shareholder approval for mergers; and the merger agreement must 
have been signed after August 1, 2013, and stipulate a provision requiring a back-end merger 
as soon as practicable following the tender offer. In addition, following the tender offer, the 
buyer must own at least the number of target shares required to adopt the merger agreement, 
usually a simple majority; the consideration in the second step must be in the same amount 
and form (i.e., stock for stock or cash for stock) as paid to target shareholders in the first step; 
and no single target shareholder at the time the merger agreement is approved by the target’s 
board may own 15% or more of the target’s shares. That is, the buyer cannot own 15% or more 
of the target at the time of the transaction.
While Section 251(h) of Delaware General Corporate Law makes the two-step merger more 
attractive for M&A deals involving public companies, one-step (long-form) mergers may still 

	
Form of Acquisition	
421
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
make sense in other instances. Deals subject to extensive regulatory review and delay may 
benefit from the one-step process in which shareholder approval is obtained as soon as possi­
ble rather than allowing a tender offer to be subject to the receipt of regulatory approval. The 
shareholder approval eliminates the ability of the target’s board to accept a competing bid. 
With a tender offer contingent on receiving approval by regulators, the target’s board could 
accept competing bids. Other instances include the target’s charter requiring a shareholder 
vote on all merger deals and when the target’s shares are not publicly traded.
Shareholder Approvals
Target shareholders usually must give consent if all or “substantially all” of the firm’s as­
sets are being acquired.48 While no acquirer shareholder vote is mandatory when the form of 
payment is cash because there is no dilution of current shareholders, there are certain instanc­
es in which no vote is required by the acquirer’s shareholders in share-for-share exchanges. 
The first, the so-called small-scale merger exception, involves a transaction not considered mate­
rial.49 The second, a short-form merger or the parent-submerger exception, occurs when a subsid­
iary is being merged into the parent and the parent owns a substantial majority (over 90% in 
some states) of the subsidiary’s stock before the transaction. The third exception involves use 
of a triangular merger, in which the acquirer establishes a merger subsidiary in which it is the 
sole shareholder. The only approval required is that of the board of directors of the subsidiary, 
which may be the same as that of the parent or acquiring company.50 Finally, no shareholder 
approval is needed if the number of shares previously authorized under the firm’s articles of 
incorporation is sufficient to complete the deal.
Top-Up Options and Dual Track Deal Structures
Such options are granted by the target to the bidding firm, whose tender offer is short of 
the 90% threshold to qualify as a short-form merger, to buy up newly issued target shares to 
reach the threshold. Since the option ensures that the merger will be approved, the bidder 
benefits by avoiding the delay associated with back-end mergers requiring a shareholder vote 
if the acquirer is unable to get enough target shares to implement a short-form merger. The 
target firm benefits by eliminating potential changes in the value of the bidder’s shares that 
are offered in exchange for target shares that could occur between signing and closing.
Dual track deal structures include both a two-step tender offer and simultaneously file pre­
liminary proxy materials for a one-step merger. They have been utilized in an effort to hedge 
against the risk of a delayed back-end merger if the tender offer does not reach 90%. The dual 
48“Substantially all” refers to the sale of assets critical to the ongoing operation of the business. Target shareholders 
do not get approval rights in short-form mergers in which the parent owns over 90% of a subsidiary’s stock.
49Acquiring firm shareholders cannot vote unless their ownership in the acquiring firm is diluted by more than 
one-sixth, or 16.67% (i.e., acquirer owns at least 83.33% of the firm’s voting shares following closing). This effec­
tively limits the acquirer to issuing no more than 20% of its total shares outstanding. For example, if the acquirer 
has 80 million shares outstanding and issues 16 million new shares (i.e., 0.2 × 80 million), its current shareholders 
are not diluted by more than one-sixth [i.e., 16/(16 million + 80 million) equals one-sixth, or 16.67%]. Issuing more 
than 16 million new shares would violate the small-scale merger exception.
50The listing requirements of all major US stock exchanges may still force acquirer shareholder approval if the num­
ber of new shares issued to finance the transaction is greater than or equal to 20% of the acquirer’s common shares 
outstanding prior to the deal. Such deals are deemed to be material.

422	
11.  Structuring the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
track structure can be just as time consuming and expensive as using a tender offer in the first 
step and a long-form merger in the second step.
Special Applications of Basic Structures
While the one-step (long-form) merger deal structure is still an option, the two-step merger 
has become increasingly popular in leveraged buyouts (LBOs) due to the expectation that such 
deals can be closed faster. A financial sponsor (equity investor) or buyout firm creates a shell 
corporation funded by equity provided by the sponsor. After raising additional cash by bor­
rowing from banks and selling debt to institutional investors, the shell corporation buys at 
least 90% of the target’s stock for the deal to qualify as a short-form merger, squeezing out 
minority shareholders with a back-end merger.51 Following the 2013 changes in Delaware law 
described previously, the LBO buyout firm may qualify for an expedited back-end merger.
Single-firm recapitalizations are undertaken by controlling shareholders to squeeze out mi­
nority shareholders. To do so, a firm creates a wholly owned shell corporation and merges 
itself into the shell in a statutory merger. Stock in the original firm is cancelled, with the 
majority shareholders in the original firm receiving stock in the surviving firm and minority 
shareholders receiving cash or debt.52 In early 2014, the Delaware Supreme Court ruled in 
Kahn v. M&F Worldwide Corp. that a freeze-out merger between a controlling shareholder and 
its minority shareholders should be reviewed under the “business judgment rule” if certain 
procedures are followed with the burden of proving unfair treatment or valuation on minor­
ity shareholders.53 These procedures include the following: the controlling shareholder relies 
on the advice of a special committee of the board established to review such proposals and a 
fully informed and without duress vote of a majority of the minority shareholders. If neither 
procedure is followed, the legality of the squeeze-out merger will be subject to a more rigor­
ous standard than the business judgment rule: that is, the entire fairness standard, sometimes 
referred to as the unified fairness standard. Under this standard, the burden is on the con­
trolling shareholder to prove that the squeeze-out was undertaken for a legitimate business 
purpose, the price offered for minority shares is fair,54 and all dealings with minority share­
holders are fair.
Staged transactions involve an acquirer’s completing a takeover in stages spread over an 
extended period of time. They may be used to structure an earnout, enable the target to com­
plete the development of a technology or process, or await regulatory approval of a license 
or patent.
51Alternatively, the buyout firm could negotiate with the board of the target firm for a top-up option to be exercised 
if 90% of the target’s shares cannot be acquired in the first-step tender offer.
52Minority shareholders usually arise from an acquisition in which less than 100% of the target firm shareholders 
tendered their shares. Consequently, those not tendering their shares become minority shareholders in the com­
bined firms and continue to hold the target firm shares.
53Under the “business judgment rule,” the courts defer to managers’ and board members’ judgment in making 
decisions pertaining to the operations of a firm as long as they acted rationally. See Chapter 2 for more detail.
54According to Ouyang and Zhu (2016), minority shareholders in countries with stronger corporate governance are 
more likely to receive a greater premium and a cash payment when “squeezed out” by the majority shareholders.

	
Discussion Questions	
423
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
SOME THINGS TO REMEMBER
Deal structuring entails satisfying the key objectives of the parties involved and how risk 
will be shared. The process defines initial negotiating positions, risks, options for managing 
risk, levels of risk tolerance, and conditions under which the buyer or seller will “walk away” 
from the deal.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
11.1	 What are the advantages and disadvantages of a purchase of assets from the perspec­
tives of the buyer and the seller?
11.2	 What are the advantages and disadvantages of a purchase of stock from the perspec­
tives of the buyer and the seller?
11.3	 What are the advantages and disadvantages of a statutory merger?
11.4	 What are the reasons some acquirers choose to undertake a staged or multistep take­
over?
11.5	 What forms of acquisition represent common alternatives to a merger? Under what 
circumstances might these alternative structures be employed?
11.6	 Comment on the following statement: A premium offered by a bidder over a target’s 
share price is not necessarily a fair price; a fair price is not necessarily an adequate 
price.
11.7	 In a year marked by turmoil in the global credit markets, Mars Corporation was able 
to negotiate a reverse breakup fee structure in its acquisition of Wrigley Corporation. 
This structure allowed Mars to walk away from the transaction at any time by paying 
a $1-billion fee to Wrigley. Speculate as to the motivation behind Mars’ and Wrigley’s 
negotiating such a fee.
11.8	 Despite disturbing discoveries during due diligence, Mattel acquired The Learning 
Company, a leading developer of software for toys, in a stock exchange valued at 
$3.5 billion. Mattel had determined that TLC’s receivables were overstated because 
product returns from distributors were not deducted from receivables and its allow­
ance for bad debt was inadequate. Also, a $50-million licensing deal also had been 
prematurely put on the balance sheet. Nevertheless, driven by the appeal of becoming 
a big player in the children’s software market rapidly, Mattel closed on the transac­
tion, aware that TLC’s cash flows were overstated. Despite being aware of extensive 
problems, Mattel proceeded to acquire The Learning Company. Why? What could 
Mattel have done to protect its interests better? Be specific.
11.9	 Describe the conditions under which an earnout may be most appropriate.
11.10	 Deutsche Bank announced that it would buy the commercial banking assets (includ­
ing a number of branches) of the Netherlands’ ABN Amro for $1.13 billion. What 
liabilities, if any, would Deutsche Bank have to (or want to) assume? Explain your 
answer.
Solutions to these Chapter Discussion Questions are found in the Online Instructor’s Manual for 
instructors using this book (https://textbooks.elsevier.com/web/Manuals.aspx?isbn=9780128016091).

424	
11.  Structuring the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
END OF CHAPTER CASE STUDY: DOW CHEMICAL AND 
­DUPONT COMBINE IN A MERGER OF EQUALS
Case Study Objectives: To Illustrate
•	 Successful deal structures reflect the highest priority needs of the parties involved.
•	 Activist investors often play a key role in forcing boards and senior management to restructure 
their firms.
•	 Financial engineering often is used to restructure underperforming firms.
Two of the largest and oldest firms in the US chemical industry announced that they had reached 
an agreement to merge on December 11, 2015. The merger would result in the new firm having 
a combined market value of more than $130 billion. Postclosing, the new firm would be named 
DowDuPont. The all-stock deal was motivated by a combination of factors including the effects 
of slumping commodity prices, weak demand for agricultural chemicals, and headwinds from a 
stronger dollar.
DowDuPont would be the second largest chemical company in the world, behind BASF of Ger­
many, with more than $92 billion in annual revenue. In an unusual display of financial restructuring 
linked to the merger, the deal is to be followed by a breakup of the new company into three busi­
nesses: agricultural chemicals, specialty products, and materials. The split-up of the new firm into 
three publicly traded companies is expected to increase their focus on their served markets and in 
turn improve their competitiveness, sales growth, and profit margins due to expense reduction.
Both firms are among the best known brands in the chemicals industry: Dow for plastics and 
agricultural chemicals and DuPont for such technical innovations as Kevlar and Teflon. DuPont 
has suffered from intense competition in Agriculture from Monsanto, especially in its corn seed 
business. DuPont’s patents have kept a number of its products proprietary and profitable. In addi­
tion to agriculture, the firm’s business portfolio includes electronics and communication, complex 
materials, and safety and protection. Dow Chemical’s business portfolio is divided into two groups: 
specialty and basic chemicals. The firm has increased its focus on specialty chemicals that carry 
higher prices than the highly commoditized basic chemicals whose profitability is subject to the 
volatility of the energy markets.
The boards of both Dow and DuPont were under severe pressure by activist investors unhappy 
with the firms’ subpar financial performance to increase shareholder value. In 2014, Dow agreed 
to appoint four independent directors to resolve a dispute with Daniel S. Loeb, CEO of hedge fund 
Third Point. In 2015, DuPont successfully thwarted a challenge to their board’s composition by Nel­
son Peltz, CEO of Trian Fund Management. In both instances, Mr. Loeb and Mr. Peltz argued that 
the firms needed to trim costs and improve operating efficiency as well as to buy back shares and 
increase dividends. Win or lose, the activists had made their voices heard.
The combination of Dow and DuPont was billed as a merger of equals. Under the terms of the 
transaction, Dow shareholders are to receive a fixed exchange ratio of 1 share of DowDuPont for 
each Dow share, and DuPont shareholders would receive a fixed exchange ratio of 1.282 shares in 
DowDuPont for each DuPont share. At closing, Dow and DuPont shareholders would each own ap­
proximately 50% of the combined company. DuPont’s Chair and CEO Edward Breen would retain 
his title at the new firm, while Dow’s CEO Andrew N. Liveris would become Executive Chairman 

	
Discussion Questions	
425
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
of the combined companies. The new firm’s board would consist of 16 directors, consisting of 8 
incumbent DuPont directors and 8 current Dow directors. The planned merger is to be followed by 
a breakup of the integrated company into three independent, publicly traded companies through 
tax-free spin-offs giving investors a choice of retaining or selling their shares in the agricultural, 
material science, and specialty products businesses. Each of the three businesses will have Advisory 
Committees. The breakup is expected to occur 18–24 months following closing. DowDuPont will 
have dual headquarters in Midland, MI, and Wilmington Delaware. Fig. 11.2 illustrates the merger 
and subsequent spin-offs.
The deal will require regulatory approval in several countries and is expected to face intense 
antitrust scrutiny due to its huge size and scale. Groups representing various farm and agricultural 
interests have expressed concerns about the merger harming competition, particularly in seeds and 
crop chemicals markets resulting in higher prices for these products. To get approval, the firms may 
have to divest significant businesses in areas where the merger is expected to limit competition. 
This could reduce the realization of anticipated synergies and the growth potential of some of the 
businesses to be spun off.
If approved by the regulators, postclosing implementation will be enormously challenging. 
Within 2 years following closing, DowDuPont is expected to realize cost synergies annually totaling 
$3 billion in expenses. During the same time frame, the new firm must undergo extensive reorga­
nization in order to create the proposed new subsidiaries that are to be spun off to shareholders. 
Given the probable interrelationships between and among the various operations, this is likely to 
prove to be a gargantuan task.
Reorganization involves moving people around, trimming overhead, allocating debt, renego­
tiating customer and supply agreements, disentangling jointly used information technology sys­
tems, and ensuring that the eventual spun-off units will be considered tax free to shareholders. 
The logistics of such activities often take many months and DowDuPont is expecting to implement 
three spin-offs in a relatively short period of time. DuPont’s last spin-off, Chemours, a performance 
chemicals unit, has been a disaster, losing three-quarters of its value in less than a year after its 
separation and represents the ills that can befall a spin-off.
Dow Corporation
DuPont 
Corporation
DowDuPont
Corporation 
Agriculture
Material sciences
Specialty products
Spin-offs
FIGURE 11.2  DuPont and Dow merger and spin-offs.

426	
11.  Structuring the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
With a total workforce exceeding 100,000 people, the major task confronting the new firm will be 
in retaining and keeping motivated talented people. While it is customary to use retention bonuses 
to keep those workers who will be needed during the transition period leading up to the spin-offs, 
the resulting uncertainty, stress, anger, frustration, and confusion are likely to result in significant 
attrition. While such attrition may be desired from a cost savings standpoint, some of those em­
ployees leaving will be critical for the ongoing operations of the business. In businesses that have 
been as integrated as Dow and DuPont, layers of management will be stripped away. Management 
turnover typically tends to be substantially higher during this period leading to confusion among 
reporting relationships and disjointed communication. Also, it is likely that management talent will 
be stretched thin as managers are asked to maintain or improve the performance of their business 
units and to simultaneously implement the logistics required for the planned spin-offs.
Tax considerations are a primary driver of the deal. The tax-free treatment of the spin-offs is 
viewed as a highly tax-efficient alternative to selling selected businesses that could result in sig­
nificant taxable gains to Dow and DuPont. Structured as a merger of equals in a share-for-share 
exchange, the DowDuPont deal also is tax free to shareholders. Typically, companies that have been 
through a change of control are liable to pay capital gains taxes on subsequent spin-offs, under sec­
tion 355 of the US Internal Revenue Code (see Chapter 16 for more detail). If both companies, how­
ever, do not formally undergo a change of control, the spin-offs can be tax-free. After their merger, 
Dow and DuPont plan to argue that no change of control will have occurred by structuring their 
initial deal as a merger of equals. Bolstering their view that a change of control has not occurred 
is that the two companies have many shareholders in common. Vanguard Group Inc., State Street 
Global Advisors, Capital World Investors, and BlackRock Inc. are, in that order, the top holders of 
both companies’ stock.55
Investors immediately expressed skepticism following the deal’s announcement on December 
11, 2015, with Dow’s share price falling by 2.8% to $53.57 and DuPont’s shares falling by 5.6% to 
$72.91. DuPont’s shares fell more precipitously on news that its 2016 sales growth would be flat. The 
firm also announced plans to cut its global workforce by 10% as part of its restructuring program. 
Investors expressed concern about the deal’s complexity, the potential for the deal not to close due 
to regulatory issues, and the potential difficulty in implementing the breakup of the company in the 
time frame indicated by management.
Discussion Questions
1.	 Speculate as to why the deal was structured as a merger of equals. What are the advantages 
and disadvantages of such a structure? Be specific.
2.	 What are the key assumptions DowDuPont is making in arguing the merger followed by the 
spin-off of three businesses makes sense?
3.	 What is the form of payment and the form of acquisition used in this deal? What are the 
advantages and disadvantages of the form of payment and acquisition used in this deal?
4.	 In the deal, Dow shareholders will receive a fixed exchange ratio of 1.00 share of DowDuPont for 
each Dow share, and DuPont shareholders will receive a fixed exchange ratio of 1.282 shares in 
55The most recent precedent in which a merger of equals’ structure was employed to argue successfully that a change in 
control had not taken place (and therefore there was not any actual sale) was in the 2007 merger of drug distributors Am­
erisourceBergen Corp. and Kindred Healthcare Inc. Once the merger took place, the new company spun off its pharmacy 
businesses tax free to shareholders.

	
Discussion Questions	
427
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
A D D I T I O N A L  C A S E  S T U D Y  R E C O M M E N TAT I O N S 
( S E A R C H  H A RVA R D  B U S I N E S S  S C H O O L  P U B L I S H I N G 
S I T E  B Y  N A M E  O F  C A S E :  h b s p . h a r v a r d . e d u )
Acquisition of Consolidated Rail Corp., Ben-
jamin C. Esty, Mathew Mateo Millett, July 20, 
2005, HBS Premier Case Collection, Product 
Number: 298006-PDF-ENG, hbsp.harvard.edu.
Subjects Covered: Two-Tiered Offer, Bid-
ding Strategy, Takeover Defenses, Breakup 
Fees, Valuation.
Dow’s Bid for Rohm and Haas, Benjamin C. 
Esty, David Lane, Revision Date: February 
8, 2013, Product Number: 211020-PDF-ENG, 
Source: Harvard Business School, hbsp.
harvard.edu.
Subjects Covered: Legal and Contractual 
Aspects of Mergers, Merger Agreements, 
Financing, Valuation.
Flinder Valves and Controls Inc., Michael J. 
Schill, Publication Date: November 18, 2008, 
Product Number: UV1062-PDF-ENG, hbsp.
harvard.edu.
Subjects Covered: Negotiation Strategy, 
Valuation, Share Exchange Ratio Calcula-
tion, Tax Issues, Earnings Dilution, and 
Voting Power.
DowDuPont for each DuPont share. Dow and DuPont shareholders will each own approximately 
50% of the combined company, excluding preferred shares. Common shares outstanding at Dow 
and DuPont at the time of the announcement were 1.160 and 0.876 billion, respectively. Using this 
information, show how the postclosing ownership distribution can be determined. How might 
these fixed SERs have been determined during the negotiation of the deal?
5.	 Dow’s price per share on December 11, 2015, was $54.91 and DuPont’s was $74.55. Dow shares 
outstanding were 1.16 billion and DuPont’s outstanding shares were 0.876 billion. Assume 
anticipated annual cost synergies are $3.0 billion in perpetuity and DowDuPont’s cost of capital 
is 10%. What is DowDuPont’s total market cap excluding synergy? What is the market cap 
including synergy using the zero-growth method of valuation (see Chapter 7)?
Solutions to these questions are provided in the Online Instructor’s Manual for instructors using this book 
(https://textbooks.elsevier.com/web/Manuals.aspx?isbn=9780128016091).


C H A P T E R
429
Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring Activities. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-801609-1.00012-9
Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
12
Structuring the Deal
Tax and Accounting Considerations
O U T L I N E
Inside M&A: The Planned Pfizer and 
Allergan Merger Thwarted by 
Changing Tax Regulations	
430
Chapter Overview	
432
Alternative Tax Structures	
433
Taxable Transactions	
433
Taxable Mergers	
434
Taxable Purchase of Target Assets 
With Cash	
434
Taxable Purchase of Target Stock 
With Cash	
434
Section 338 Election	
435
Tax-Free Transactions	
435
Qualifying a Transaction for 
Tax-Free Treatment	
435
Alternative Tax-Free Reorganizations	
437
Treatment of Target Tax Attributes 
in M&A Deals	
441
Tax-Free Transactions Arising From 
1031 “Like-Kind” Exchanges	
441
Other Tax Considerations Affecting 
Corporate Restructuring	
443
Net Operating Losses	
443
Corporate Capital Gains Taxes	
444
Alternative Corporate Minimum Tax	
444
Master Limited Partnerships	
444
Tax Inversions	
445
Financial Reporting of Business 
Combinations	
447
Who Is the Acquirer?	
448
Recognizing Acquired Net Assets 
and Goodwill at Fair Value	
448
Recognizing and Measuring Net 
Acquired Assets in Step (or Stage) 
Transactions	
449
Recognizing Contingent 
Considerations	
449
In-Process Research and Development 
Assets	
449
Expensing Deal Costs	
449
Impact of Purchase Accounting 
on Business Combinations	
450
Balance-Sheet Considerations	
451
Income Statement and Cash Flow 
Considerations	
453
Pending Rule Changes Affecting 
Revenue Recognition	
453

430	
12.  Structuring the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
When people find they can vote themselves money that will herald the end of the republic.—
Benjamin Franklin
INSIDE M&A: THE PLANNED PFIZER AND ALLERGAN MERGER 
THWARTED BY CHANGING TAX REGULATIONS
KEY POINTS
•	 Different corporate tax rates among countries can distort the global M&A market.
•	 Frequent regulatory changes to close “loopholes” that should be done legislatively impede 
investment by creating uncertainty in corporate boardrooms.
While M&As rarely are undertaken solely for potential tax benefits, tax laws can some­
times distort the underlying economic motives for doing deals. Tax laws (and regulations) 
distort corporate decision making. Current US corporate tax rates, among the highest in the 
world, encourage US corporations to relocate to countries offering substantially more favor­
able tax rates. Corporations viewing taxes as any other operating expense have a fiduciary 
responsibility to shareholders to pare costs to remain competitive.
According to the US Congressional Budget Office, “The current (U.S.) tax system provides 
incentives for U.S. firms to locate their production facilities in countries with low taxes … 
(and) reduce economic efficiency … because the firms are not allocating resources to their 
most productive use. Those responses also reduce the income of shareholders and employees 
in the United States, and they lead to a loss of federal tax revenue … in the long run, total 
compensation for U.S. workers is lower, and employment may be concentrated in different 
industries and regions (even though total employment is not significantly affected.”1
Frustrated by a lack of movement in Congress on an overhaul of the US tax system, the 
Treasury tried three times to stem the flow of companies engaging in corporate tax inver­
sions. Tax inversions involve US corporations acquiring a foreign firm or being acquired by a 
foreign firm and then reincorporating the combined firms in the country with the more favor­
able corporate tax rate. Such strategies usually entail the transfer of executive functions but 
not operations to the country with the favorable tax environment and therefore often have 
little impact on employment.
Pending Rule Changes Affecting the 
Balance Sheet	
455
International Accounting Standards	
456
Recapitalization (“Recap”) Accounting	
456
Some Things to Remember	
457
Discussion Questions	
457
Practice Problems and Answers	
458
Case Study: Abbvie Places A Big Bet 
on Cancer Drug Maker Pharmacyclics	
459
Case Study Objectives	
459
Discussion Questions	
461
Additional Case Study Recommendations	 462
1US Congressional Budget Office, January 8, 2013, https://www.cbo.gov/publication/43764.

IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
	
INSIDE M&A	
431
On April 5, 2016, the Treasury announced new regulations, more far reaching than previ­
ous regulatory changes in 2014 and 2015, aimed at “serial inverters” (i.e., companies that have 
grown through a succession of acquisitions resulting in inversions). The new regulations con­
sisted of two parts. First, the government would disregard US assets acquired by a foreign 
firm over the previous 3 years in determining the size of the firm. Second, the government 
would have more leeway in determining whether moving cash within a consolidated com­
pany would be viewed as intercompany lending or simply a transfer of equity. The govern­
ment’s new rules would apply to all deals that close after April 6, 2016, and all intercompany 
loans after that date. Companies that have already closed inversion deals will be unaffected 
by the 3-year rule, although transferring earnings from their US subsidiaries to their foreign 
parents could become less attractive.
The first part of the new rules deals with the determination of whether or not a firm 
engaging in a corporate inversion can indeed be taxed at the lower foreign rate under cur­
rent US law. As of 2015, the US Treasury regulations applying to US acquirers of foreign 
targets implementing corporate inversions focused on the continuing percentage owner­
ship stake of the acquirer’s shareholders following closing. If the continuing stake is 80% 
or more, earnings from US operations are taxed at US rates; between 60 and 80%, some 
portion of the earnings are taxed at US rates; below 60%, earnings are taxed at the foreign 
parent’s rate.
The second part is designed to reduce the attractiveness of what is often called “earnings 
stripping.” Foreign parents can lend money to their US subsidiary in a transaction that has 
no effect on the consolidated company’s financial statements. However, interest paid by the 
subsidiary to the parent is tax deductible by the subsidiary, reducing the subsidiary’s taxable 
income. This has the effect of transferring monies earned by the subsidiary to the foreign par­
ent to be counted as income to the parent and taxed at the parent’s lower tax rate. The new 
rules would give the government more authority to treat those interest payments as dividend 
payments, which are not tax deductible under US law. The antiearnings stripping rules aren’t 
just limited to inverted companies, but could hit all companies based outside the United 
States that have operations inside the country.
What seems to have prompted the new regulations is one of the biggest takeovers in US 
history. United States–based pharmaceutical giant Pfizer announced a planned merger with 
Dublin, Ireland–based Allergan, the maker of Botox, in late 2015. This megamerger would 
have been the biggest example of an American company shedding its US corporate residence 
to lower its tax burden. From a business perspective, Pfizer was the acquirer since it was 
clearly in control of the combined firms. Why? It was the larger of the two firms with a market 
value exceeding $200 billion compared to Allergan’s $125 billion, its CEO retained that posi­
tion in the combined firms, the new board would be dominated by former Pfizer directors, 
and Allergan shareholders received a premium for their shares. However, with Allergan des­
ignated as the acquirer for tax filing purposes Pfizer would have been able to take advantage 
of the more favorable Irish corporate tax rates.
Incorporating the combined Pfizer and Allergan in Ireland, Allergan’s country of residence, 
offered sizeable tax savings for Pfizer. Pfizer’s effective tax rate averaged 25% in 2015 com­
pared to Allergan’s 15% rate. Combining the two firms was expected to generate more than 
$2 billion annually in cost-related synergies 3 years after closing by eliminating duplicate 

432	
12.  Structuring the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
overhead and negotiating lower prices paid to suppliers. The new firm would have had an 
effective tax rate of 17%–18% by the first full year after closing and no impact on earnings 
per share (EPS) in 2017 before adding to EPS in later years. The firm’s global operating head­
quarters was to remain in New York, but its principal executive offices were to be moved to 
Ireland.
In the wake of the new rules, Pfizer announced on April 7, 2016, that it would pay a ter­
mination fee of as much as $400 million to withdraw from the merger. Why? Merging with 
Allergan would no longer provide the anticipated tax savings. Allergan, perhaps the post­
er company for inversions, is a result of a string of cross-border deals. The first inversion 
started in 2013 with Ireland-based Warner Chilcott being acquired by Actavis Inc., a small 
New ­Jersey–based drug maker, with Actavis subsequently reincorporating in Ireland. What 
followed was a number of ever-larger deals, culminating in Actavis’s $66-billion takeover of 
United States–based Allergan Inc. in 2015. Under the new Treasury regulations, those deals 
would be disregarded for the purposes of determining Allergan’s size under the tax law. The 
3-year window would cover the 2015 merger of Actavis and Allergan, Actavis’ $25-­billion 
purchase of Forest Laboratories Inc. in 2014, and the original $5-billion Warner Chilcott deal. 
Deducting those deals from Allergan’s market capitalization made it too small to serve as 
Pfizer’s inversion partner and still qualify to have income generated by its US operations 
taxed at Irish corporate tax rates.
While both Pfizer and Allergan argued that the Treasury had overstepped its authority 
by changing rapidly tax laws and applying them retroactively, neither was willing to sue the 
government in federal courts due to the prospect of lengthy litigation and an uncertain out­
come. Moreover, while the new regulations severely hamper large US firms in buying foreign 
entities and then inverting, it continues to appear that foreign acquirers of US firms can have 
earnings from these operations taxed at the parent’s more favorable rate.
By changing the rules so frequently and unexpectedly in such a far-reaching way, the US 
Treasury added to an already uncertain economic environment and potentially discouraged 
corporate fixed capital investment. Congress must accept some degree of responsibility for 
the Treasury’s actions due to its inaction on an overhaul of the highly dysfunctional US tax 
system. Finally, the Pfizer board and its CEO Ian Read showed excessive hubris in engaging 
in such high stakes and very complicated deal driven largely by the desire to avoid taxes 
amidst the upheaval of a contentious US election.
CHAPTER OVERVIEW
Chapter 11 continues the discussion of the deal-structuring process with a focus on tax 
and accounting considerations. While taxes are important, the fundamental economics of 
the deal should always be the deciding factor, with any tax benefits reinforcing a purchase 
decision. The impact of accounting considerations on deal structuring can be more subtle and 
can imperil the acquirer’s current and future earnings performance. A review of this chapter 
(including practice questions and answers) is available in the file folder entitled “Student 
Study Guide” on the companion website to this book (https://www.elsevier.com/books-
and-journals/book-companion/9780128016091).

	
Taxable Transactions	
433
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
ALTERNATIVE TAX STRUCTURES
Tax considerations generally are less important for buyers than for sellers. Buyers are con­
cerned primarily with determining the basis of the acquired assets and avoiding any liability 
for tax problems the target may have. The tax basis determines future taxable gains for the 
buyer in the event such assets are sold and also the level from which they may be depreciated. 
In contrast, the seller usually is concerned about how to structure the deal to defer the pay­
ment of any taxes owed. Table 12.1 summarizes the most commonly used taxable and tax-free 
structures, including both statutory mergers (two-party transactions) and triangular mergers 
(three-party transactions). The implications of these alternative structures are explored in de­
tail in the following sections.
TAXABLE TRANSACTIONS
A deal is taxable to target shareholders if it involves purchasing the target’s stock or assets 
using mostly cash, debt, or nonequity consideration.2 Taxable deals include a cash ­purchase 
of target assets, a cash purchase of target stock, or a statutory cash merger or consolidation, 
which commonly includes direct cash mergers and triangular forward and reverse cash 
mergers.
Taxable Mergers
In a direct statutory cash merger (i.e., the form of payment is cash), the acquirer and target 
boards reach a negotiated settlement, and both firms, with certain exceptions, must receive 
approval from their respective shareholders. The target is then merged into the acquirer or 
2Nonequity, cash, and boot are terms used to describe forms of payment other than acquirer equity.
TABLE 12.1  Alternative Taxable and Nontaxable Structures
Taxable transactions: immediately taxable 
to target shareholders
Nontaxable transactions: tax deferred 
to target shareholders
1.	Purchase of assets with casha
2.	Purchase of stock with cash
3.	Statutory cash mergers and consolidations
a.	Direct merger (cash for stock)
b.	Forward triangular merger (cash for assets)
c.	Reverse triangular merger (cash for stock)
1.	Type “A” reorganization
a.	Statutory stock merger or consolidation 
(mostly acquirer stock for stock)b
b.	Forward triangular merger (asset purchase)
c.	Reverse triangular merger (stock purchase)
2.	Type “B” reorganization (stock for stock)
3.	Type “C” reorganization (stock for assets)
4.	Type “D” divisive merger
aThe form of payment consists mostly of consideration other than acquirer stock. Such consideration sometimes is called boot and could consist 
of cash, debt, or other nonequity compensation.
bAcquirer stock usually comprises 50% or more of the total consideration. The exception for Type A reorganizations is for reverse triangular 
mergers.

434	
12.  Structuring the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
the acquirer into the target, with only one surviving. Assets and liabilities on and off the bal­
ance sheet automatically transfer to the surviving firm. To protect themselves from target 
liabilities, acquirers often employ so-called triangular mergers. In such deals, the target is 
merged into an acquirer’s operating or shell acquisition subsidiary, with the subsidiary sur­
viving (called a forward triangular cash merger), or the subsidiary is merged into the target, 
with the target surviving (called a reverse triangular cash merger). Direct cash mergers and 
forward triangular mergers are treated as a taxable purchase of assets, with cash and reverse 
triangular mergers treated as a taxable purchase of stock with cash. The tax consequences of 
these deals are discussed next.
Taxable Purchase of Target Assets With Cash
If a transaction involves a cash purchase of target assets, with the buyer assuming none, 
some, or all of the target’s liabilities, the target’s tax cost or basis in the acquired assets is in­
creased, or “stepped up,” to its fair market value (FMV), equal to the purchase price (less any 
assumed liabilities) paid by the acquirer. The additional depreciation in future years reduces 
the present value of the tax liability of the combined firms. The target firm realizes an imme­
diate gain or loss on assets sold equal to the difference between the FMV of the asset and the 
asset’s net book value (i.e., book value less accumulated depreciation).
The target’s shareholders could be taxed twice—once when the firm pays taxes on any 
gains and again when the proceeds from the sale are paid to the shareholders as either a 
dividend or a distribution following liquidation of the corporation. A liquidation of the target 
firm may occur if a buyer acquires enough of the assets of the target to cause it to cease opera­
tions.3 To compensate the target company shareholders for any tax liability they may incur, 
the buyer usually will have to increase the purchase price. Taxable transactions have become 
somewhat more attractive to acquiring firms since 1993, when a change in legislation allowed 
acquirers to amortize certain intangible assets for tax purposes.4
Taxable Purchase of Target Stock With Cash
Taxable transactions (i.e., those including something other than acquirer stock) involve 
the purchase of the target’s voting stock to avoid double taxation of gains to the target’s 
shareholders. An asset purchase automatically triggers a tax on any gain on the sale by the 
3The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) views transactions resulting in the liquidation of the target as actual sales 
rather than reorganizations, in which the target shareholders have an ongoing interest in the combined firms. Thus, 
the target’s tax attributes may not be used by the acquirer following closing because they cease to exist along with 
the target. However, they may be used to offset any gain realized by the target resulting from the sale of its assets.
4Intangible assets are addressed under Section 197 of the IRS Code. Such assets include goodwill, going concern 
value, books and records, customer lists, licenses, permits, franchises, and trademarks and must be amortized 
over 15 years for tax purposes. While no immediate loss on goodwill can be recognized for tax purposes, the basis 
of other intangible assets purchased in the same transaction giving rise to the goodwill must be increased by the 
amount of the goodwill write-down. The resulting write-up of these intangible assets is then amortized over their 
remaining amortizable lives. Moreover, the current tax code allows operating losses to be used to recover taxes 
paid in the preceding 2 years and to reduce future tax liabilities up to 20 years.

	
Tax-Free Transactions	
435
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
target firm and another tax on any payment of the after-tax proceeds to shareholders. Tax­
able stock purchases avoid double taxation because the transaction takes place between the 
acquirer and the target firm’s shareholders. However, target shareholders may realize a gain 
or loss on the sale of their stock. Assets may not be stepped up to their FMV in these types of 
transactions. Since from the IRS’s viewpoint, the target firm continues to exist, the target’s tax 
attributes [e.g., investment tax credits and net operating losses (NOLs)] may be used by the 
acquirer following the transaction, but their use may be limited by Sections 382 and 383 of 
the Internal Revenue Code. These are explained in more detail later in this chapter. Table 12.2 
summarizes the key characteristics of the various forms of taxable deals.
Section 338 Election
Section 338 elections are an option with a taxable purchase of target stock. The acquirer and 
target firms can jointly elect Section 338 of the Internal Revenue Code allowing the buyer to 
record acquired assets and liabilities at their FMV for tax purposes. This allows a purchaser of 
80% or more of the voting stock and market value of the target to treat the acquisition of stock 
as an asset purchase. The target’s net acquired assets (i.e., acquired assets minus liabilities) 
are increased to their FMV, triggering a taxable gain when the deal is completed.5 For legal 
purposes, the sale of target stock under a 338 election still is treated as a purchase of stock by 
the buyer, allowing target shareholders to defer the payment of taxes on any gains realized 
on the sale of their shares.
Section 338 elections are rare because the tax liability triggered by the transaction often 
exceeds the present value of the tax savings from the step-up in the tax basis of the net ac­
quired assets. A 338 election is most useful when the target has substantial NOLs or tax credit 
carryovers that the acquirer can use to offset any taxable gain triggered by the transaction.
TAX-FREE TRANSACTIONS
A deal is tax free if the form of payment is mostly acquirer stock. Deals may be partially 
taxable if the target shareholders receive something other than the acquirer’s stock. This non­
equity consideration, or boot, generally is taxable as ordinary income. If the transaction is tax 
free, there is no step-up of net acquired assets to their FMV.
Qualifying a Transaction for Tax-Free Treatment
To qualify as tax free, a deal must provide for continuity of ownership interests, continuity 
of business enterprise, and a valid business purpose and satisfy the step-transaction doctrine. 
To demonstrate continuity of ownership interests, target shareholders must own a substantial 
part of the value of the combined firms. This requires the purchase price to consist mostly 
5Benefits to the acquirer of a 338 election include the avoidance of having to transfer assets and obtain consents 
to assignment of all contracts (as would be required in a direct purchase of assets) while still benefiting from the 
write-up of assets. Asset transfer, sales, and use taxes may also be avoided. Either the acquirer or the target must 
pay the taxes on any gain on the sale.

436	
12.  Structuring the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
TABLE 12.2  Key Characteristics of Alternative Transaction Structures That Are Taxable (to Target Shareholders)
Transaction 
structure
Form of 
payment
Acquirer retains 
tax attributes of 
target
Target 
survives?
Parent 
exposure 
to target 
liabilities
Shareholder vote required?
Minority 
freeze-out?
Automatic 
transfer of 
contracts?a
Acquirer
Target
Cash 
purchase of 
stock
Mostly cash, 
debt, or other 
nonequity 
payment
Yes, assuming no 
asset step-up due 
to 338 electionb
Yes
High
Noc
No, but 
shareholders 
may not sell 
shares
No
Yes
Cash 
purchase of 
assets
Mostly cash, 
debt, other 
nonequity 
payment
No, but can step 
up assets (tax 
attributes used to 
offset taxable gains)
Perhapsd
Low, except 
for assumed 
liabilities
Noc
Yes, if sale 
of assets is 
substantial
No minority 
created
No
Statutory 
cash 
merger or 
consolidation
Mostly cash, 
debt, or other 
nonequity 
payment
Yes, but no step-up 
in assets
No, if target 
merged into 
acquirer
High, if 
target 
merged into 
acquirer
Yes
Yes
Yese
Yes
Forward 
triangular 
cash merger 
(IRS views 
as asset 
purchase)
Mostly cash, 
debt, or other 
nonequity 
payment
No, but can step 
up assets (tax 
attributes used to 
offset taxable gains)
No
Low—
limited by 
subsidiary 
relationship
Noc
Yes
Yes
No
Reverse 
triangular 
cash merger 
(IRS views 
as stock 
purchase)
Mostly cash, 
debt, or other 
nonequity 
payment
Yes
Yes
Low—
limited by 
subsidiary
Noc
Yes
Yes
Yes
aContracts, leases, licenses, and rights to intellectual property automatically transfer unless contracts stipulate that consent to assignment is required.
bAn acquirer may treat a stock purchase as an asset purchase if it and the target agree to invoke a Section 338 election. Such an election would allow a step-up in net acquired assets and result 
in the loss of the target’s tax attributes because the target is viewed by the IRS as having been liquidated.
cMay be required by public stock exchanges or by legal counsel if deemed material to the acquiring firm or if the parent needs to authorize new stock. In practice, most big mergers require 
shareholder approval.
dThe target may choose to liquidate if the sale of assets is substantial and to distribute the proceeds to its shareholders or to continue as a shell.
eTarget shareholders must accept terms due to a merger, although in some states dissident shareholders have appraisal rights for their shares.
IRS, Internal Revenue Service.

	
Tax-Free Transactions	
437
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
of acquirer stock. Continuity of business enterprise requires the acquirer to use a significant 
portion of the target’s “historic business assets” in a business6 to demonstrate a long-term 
commitment on the part of the acquirer to the target. This usually means an acquirer must 
buy “substantially all” of the target’s assets. Furthermore, the transaction must have a valid 
business purpose, such as maximizing the profits of the acquiring corporation, rather than 
only for tax avoidance. Finally, under the step-transaction doctrine, the deal cannot be part of 
a larger plan that would have constituted a taxable deal.7 Tax-free deals are also called tax-free 
reorganizations. The continuity of interests, business enterprise, and step-doctrine require-
ments are intended to prevent transactions that more closely resemble a sale from qualifying 
as a tax-free reorganization.
Alternative Tax-Free Reorganizations
The most common is the type “A” reorganization used in direct statutory mergers or 
consolidations (mostly acquirer stock for target stock), forward triangular mergers (asset 
purchases), and reverse triangular mergers (stock purchases). Type “B” reorganizations are 
stock-for-stock acquisitions, and type “C” reorganizations are stock-for-assets acquisitions. 
Type D reorganizations may be applied to acquisitions or restructuring.8
For a type “A” statutory merger (Fig. 12.1) or consolidation (Fig. 12.2), payment can in-
clude cash, voting or nonvoting common or preferred stock, notes, or some combination. 
At least 50% of the purchase price must be acquirer stock to satisfy the IRS requirement 
6The acquirer must purchase assets critical to continuing the target’s business. Acquirers often purchase at least 
80% of the target’s assets to ensure that they are in compliance with IRS guidelines.
7The step-transaction doctrine might be applied by the IRS as follows: Firm A buys the stock or assets of Firm B 
with its stock and characterizes it as a tax-free deal. A year later, it sells B. The IRS may disallow the original deal as 
tax free, arguing that the merger and subsequent sale were part of a larger plan to postpone the payment of taxes.
8An acquisitive Type D reorganization requires that the acquiring firm receive at least 80% of the stock in the target 
firm in exchange for the acquirer’s voting stock. Divisive Type D reorganizations are used in spin-offs, split-offs, 
and split-ups and involve a firm’s transferring all or some of its assets to a subsidiary it controls in exchange for 
subsidiary stock or securities.
FIGURE 12.1  Direct statutory stock merger (“A” reorganization). Note that this figure depicts the acquirer 
surviving. In practice, either the acquirer or the target could survive the merger.

438	
12.  Structuring the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
of continuity of interests. Type “A” reorganizations are widely used because there is no 
requirement to use voting stock and acquirers can avoid dilution by issuing nonvoting 
shares. The buyer also may acquire less than 100% of the target’s net assets. Finally, there 
is no limit on the amount of cash that can be used in the purchase price, as is true of Type 
B and C reorganizations. Since some target shareholders will want cash, some stock, and 
some both, the acquirer is better able to satisfy the different needs of the target sharehold­
ers than in other types of ­reorganizations.
With a type “A” forward triangular stock merger, the parent funds the shell corporation 
by buying stock issued by the shell with its own stock (Fig. 12.3). All of the target’s stock 
is acquired by the subsidiary with the parent’s stock, the target’s stock is cancelled, the 
acquirer subsidiary survives, and the target’s assets and liabilities are merged into the 
subsidiary. The IRS views such deals as an asset purchase since the target does not survive. 
The parent’s stock may be voting or nonvoting, and the acquirer must purchase “substan­
tially all” of the target’s assets and liabilities (defined as at least 70 and 90% of the FMV 
FIGURE 12.2  Statutory stock consolidation (“A” reorganization).
FIGURE 12.3  A forward triangular stock merger (“A” reorganization).

	
Tax-Free Transactions	
439
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
of the target’s gross and net assets, respectively).9 At least 50% of the purchase price must 
consist of acquirer stock.
The advantages of the forward triangular merger include the flexible form of payment 
and the avoidance of approval by the parent firm’s shareholders. Public exchanges still may 
require shareholder approval if the amount of the parent stock used to acquire the target ex­
ceeds 20% of the parent’s voting shares outstanding. Other advantages include the possible 
insulation of the parent from the target’s liabilities, which remain in the subsidiary, and the 
avoidance of asset transfer taxes, because the target’s assets go directly to the parent’s wholly 
owned subsidiary. The target’s tax attributes that transfer to the buyer are subject to limita­
tion. Since the target disappears, contract rights do not automatically transfer to the acquirer, 
which must obtain the consent of the other parties to the contracts to reassign them to the 
buyer.
With a type A reverse triangular stock merger, the acquirer forms a shell subsidiary, which is 
merged into the target (Fig. 12.4). As the survivor, the target becomes the acquirer’s wholly 
owned subsidiary. The target’s shares are cancelled, and target shareholders receive the par­
ent’s shares. The parent, who owned all of the subsidiary stock, now owns all of the new 
target stock and, indirectly, all of the target’s assets and liabilities. At least 80% of the total 
consideration paid to the target must be in acquirer voting common or preferred stock. The 
IRS views reverse triangular mergers as a purchase of stock, since the target survives the 
transaction.
The reverse triangular merger may eliminate the need for parent firm shareholder ap­
proval, because the parent is the sole shareholder in the sub. Because the target firm survives, 
9Asset sales by the target prior to the deal may threaten the tax-free status of the deal if it is viewed as a violation 
of the step doctrine. While tax-free deals such as spin-offs are disallowed within 2 years before or after the merger, 
this rule has not been enforced consistently. In 2011, Google acquired Motorola Mobility Holdings 7 months after 
having been spun off by its parent Motorola Inc. Similarly, in 2006, Apollo Global Management acquired real estate 
broker Realogy 5 months after it had been spun off by the now defunct Cendant Corporation.
FIGURE 12.4  A reverse triangular stock merger (“A” reorganization).

440	
12.  Structuring the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
the target can retain any nonassignable franchise, lease, or other valuable contract rights. By 
not dissolving the target, the acquirer avoids accelerating10 the repayment of loans outstand­
ing. Insurance, banking, and public utility regulators may require the target to remain in 
existence. The major drawback is the need to use acquirer voting shares to buy at least 80% of 
the target’s outstanding shares.
In a Type B stock-for-stock reorganization, the acquirer must use voting common or preferred 
stock to buy at least 80% of the target’s outstanding voting and nonvoting stock in a tender 
offer (Fig. 12.5). Any cash or debt disqualifies the deal as a Type B structure.11 Type B deals 
are used as an alternative to a merger or consolidation. The target’s stock does not have to be 
purchased all at once, which allows for a “creeping merger” because the target’s stock may 
be purchased over 12 months or less as part of a formal acquisition plan. Type B reorganiza­
tions are useful if the acquirer wishes to conserve cash or its borrowing capacity. Since shares 
are being acquired directly from shareholders, there is no need for a target shareholder vote. 
Finally, contracts and licenses transfer with the stock, which obviates the need to receive 
consent to assignment, unless specified in contracts. The target firm is either retained as a 
subsidiary or merged into the parent.12
The Type C stock-for-assets reorganization is used when the acquirer does not want to assume 
any undisclosed liabilities (Fig. 12.6). It requires that at least 70 and 90% of the FMV of the 
target’s gross and net assets, respectively, be acquired in exchange for acquirer voting stock. 
Consideration paid in cash cannot exceed 20% of the FMV of the target’s assets; any liabilities 
assumed by the acquirer must be deducted from the 20%. Since assumed liabilities frequently 
exceed 20% of the FMV of the acquired assets, the form of payment generally is all stock. 
10Loan agreements often require the repayment of loans if a change of control of the borrower takes place.
11Cash may be used to purchase fractional shares.
12A type “B” stock-for-stock deal is equivalent to a reverse triangular merger, since the target firm becomes the ac­
quirer’s subsidiary. The primary difference between a reverse triangular merger and a type “B” stock-for-stock deal 
is the requirement to use at least 80% acquirer voting or preferred stock to buy target shares, in contrast to the need 
to use 100% acquirer voting common or preferred stock in a type “B” share-for-share reorganization.
FIGURE 12.5  Type B stock-for-stock reorganization.

	
Tax-Free Transactions	
441
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
The target dissolves and distributes the acquirer’s stock to the target’s shareholders. The re­
quirement to use only voting stock discourages the use of Type C reorganizations. Table 12.3 
­summarizes the key characteristics of alternative tax-free deal structures.
Treatment of Target Tax Attributes in M&A Deals
Tax attributes, such as NOL carryforwards and carrybacks, capital loss carryovers, excess 
credit carryovers, tax basis in company assets, and tax basis in subsidiary companies, can 
represent considerable value to acquiring firms in terms of tax savings. The IRS allows ac­
quirers to realize tax savings from additional depreciation resulting from the revaluation of 
net acquired target assets to their fair FMV13 or from the target’s other tax attributes, but not 
both. Thus, acquirers can use a target’s tax attributes in tax-free reorganizations and in taxable 
purchases of stock without a Section 338 election, since net acquired assets are not revalued to 
their FMV. Acquirers cannot use the target’s tax attributes in taxable purchases of assets and 
taxable purchases of stock undertaken as a 338 election, since net acquired assets are revalued 
to their FMV.14
Tax-Free Transactions Arising From 1031 “Like-Kind” Exchanges
The prospect of being able to defer taxable gains is often associated with 1031 exchanges 
of real estate property or other income-producing properties. By postponing tax payments, 
investors have more money to reinvest in new assets. Assume a property was purchased 
10 years ago for $5 million and is now worth $15 million. If the property were sold with no 
subsequent purchase of a similar property within the required period, the federal capital 
14When tax attributes do survive and carry over (transfer) to the acquirer, their use is limited by Sections 382 
(NOLs) and 383 (tax credit and capital loss carryforwards) of the tax code. When tax attributes do not survive, they 
may still be used to offset gains on the sale of target assets.
13Acquirers realize additional tax savings by depreciating net acquired target assets whose value has been increased 
to their FMV, which is generally higher than their book value listed on the target’s balance sheet.
FIGURE 12.6  Type C stock-for-assets reorganization. FMV, Fair market value.

TABLE 12.3  Key Characteristics of Alternative Transaction Structures That Are Tax-Free (to Target Shareholders)a
Transaction 
structure 
(type of 
reorganization)
Form of 
payment
Limitationb
Acquirer 
retains 
target tax 
attributes
Target 
survives?
Parent 
exposure to 
target liabilities
Shareholder vote required?
Minority 
freeze-out?
Automatic 
transfer of 
contracts?c
Acquirer
Target
Statutory merger 
or consolidation 
(Type A 
reorganization)
At least 50% 
parent voting or 
nonvoting stock
Assets and 
liabilities pass 
automatically to 
buyer
Yes, but no 
asset step-up
No
High
Yes
Yes
Yes
No, since target 
is liquidated
Forward 
triangular 
merger (Type A 
reorganization)
At least 50% 
parent voting or 
nonvoting stock
Must purchase 
at least 70 and 
90% of FMV of 
gross and net 
assets unless LLC 
acquiring sub
Yes, but no 
asset step-up
No
Low, limited by 
subsidiaryd
Noe,f
Yes
Yes
No, since target 
is liquidated
Reverse 
triangular 
merger (Type A 
reorganization)
At least 80% 
parent voting 
stock (common/
preferred)
Must purchase at 
least 80% of voting 
and of nonvoting 
shares
Yes, but no 
asset step-up
Yes
Low, limited by 
subsidiaryd
Noe,f
Yes
Yes
Yes, target 
retains 
nonassignable 
contracts, etc.
Purchase of 
stock—without 
a merger (Type B 
reorganization)
100% parent 
voting stock 
(common/
preferred)
Must purchase at 
least 80% of voting 
and of nonvoting 
shares
Yes, but no 
asset step-up
Yes
Low, limited by 
subsidiaryd
Noe
No, because 
shares bought 
directly from 
shareholders
No
Yes
Purchase of 
assets (Type C 
reorganization)
100% voting 
stockg
Must purchase at 
least 70 and 90% 
of FMV of gross 
and net assets
Yes, but no 
asset step-up
No
Low,h except 
for assumed 
liabilities
Noe
Yes, if sale 
of assets 
substantial
No minority 
created
No
aTarget shareholders are taxed at ordinary rates on any “boot” received (i.e., anything other than acquiring company stock).
bAsset sales or spin-offs 2 years prior (may reflect effort to reduce size of purchase) or subsequent (violates continuity requirement) to closing may invalidate tax-free status. Forward triangular mergers do not require 
any limitations on purchase of target net assets if a so-called “disregarded unit,” such as an LLC, is used as the acquiring entity and the target is a C corporation that ceases to exist as a result of the transaction. 
Disregarded units are businesses that are pass-through entities (i.e., not subject to the double taxation of C corporations) and include LLCs or Subchapter S corporations.
cContracts, leases, licenses, and rights to intellectual property automatically transfer with the stock unless contracts stipulate that consent to assignment is required. Moreover, target retains any nonassignable franchise, 
lease, or other contract rights as long as the target is the surviving entity as in a reverse triangular merger.
dAcquirer may be insulated from a target’s liabilities as long as it is held in a subsidiary, except for liabilities such as unpaid taxes, unfunded pension obligations, and environmental liabilities.
eMay be required by public stock exchanges or by legal counsel if deemed material to the acquiring firm or if the parent needs to authorize new stock.
fMergers are generally ill-suited for hostile transactions because they require approval of both the target’s board and target shareholders.
gWhile cash may be used to pay for up to 20% of the FMV of net assets, it must be offset by assumed liabilities, making the purchase price usually 100% stock.
hThe parent is responsible for those liabilities conveying with the assets, such as warranty claims.
FMV, Fair market value; LLC, limited liability company.

	
Other Tax Considerations Affecting Corporate Restructuring 	
443
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
gains tax bill would be $1.5 million [i.e., ($15 − $5) × 0.15], assuming a capital gains tax 
rate of 0.15. This ignores the potential for state taxes or depreciation recapture taxes owed if 
the owner took deductions for depreciation. However, by entering into a 1031 exchange, the 
owner could use the entire $15 million from the sale of the property as a down payment on a 
more expensive property. If the investor acquires a property of a lesser value, taxes are owed 
on the difference.
OTHER TAX CONSIDERATIONS AFFECTING 
CORPORATE RESTRUCTURING
The treatment of NOLs, corporate capital gains taxes, the alternative corporate minimum 
tax, master limited partnerships (MLPs), and tax inversions are discussed next. The tax impli­
cations of so-called “divisive” deals such as spin-offs, split-offs, equity carve-outs, and Morris 
Trust transactions are discussed in detail in Chapter 16.
Net Operating Losses
NOLs are created when firms generate negative taxable income or losses and can be car­
ried back 2 years to recover past tax payments in the form of a refund and forward 20 years to 
reduce future taxable income. When acquired net assets are stepped up for tax purposes, the 
target’s NOLs may be used immediately by the acquirer to offset the gain on an asset sale. For 
deals not resulting in an asset write-up for tax-reporting purposes, the target’s NOLs may be 
used by the acquirer in future years, subject to the limitation specified in Section 382 of the In­
ternal Revenue Service Code. Despite annual limits to carryforwards and carrybacks, NOLs 
may represent a significant source of value to acquirers that should be considered in valuing 
a target. Google’s 2011 acquisition of Motorola Mobility enabled it to reap an expected annual 
$700 million in tax savings on its consolidated future earnings and to reduce its immediate tax 
bill by $1 billion due to Motorola’s accumulated NOLs.15 Because the acquirer can never be 
sure that future income will be sufficient to realize the value of the NOLs before they expire, 
loss carryforwards alone rarely justify an acquisition.
Section 382 was created to prevent acquisitions of firms with substantial NOLs to reduce 
acquirer’s taxable income, without having a valid business purpose other than tax avoid­
ance. A firm’s ability to use NOLs from prior years to offset current income may be limited 
if the firm had a 50% change in ownership. An ownership change is one in which share­
holders with stakes of 5% or more increase their ownership by more than 50 percentage 
points at any time during a 3-year period beginning from the date of their initial purchase 
of stock. For example, if a shareholder owning 30% of a firm acquired another 51% within 
the span of 3 years, there would be an ownership change triggering Section 382. The share­
holder could still use NOLs in existence prior to the change in ownership but their annual 
value would be limited to a percentage of the firm’s market value on the date of the change 
in ownership equal to the market value of the stock times the IRS long-term tax-exempt 
interest rate.
15Browning and Byrnes (2011).

444	
12.  Structuring the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
When an ownership change triggers Section 382, a firm may lose most of the value of 
their NOLs. To discourage a change in ownership from jeopardizing their NOLs, firms may 
adopt a poison pill takeover defense that when paired with a staggered board substantially 
reduces the likelihood of a takeover. While investors often view the adoption of a poison 
pill as an attempt to entrench management, the adoption of such a defense when justified 
as protecting NOLs is only modestly negative, except when the link to NOL preservation is 
not credible. For example, if a firm adopting a poison pill defense to protect NOLs chooses 
not to carry back the NOLs to get an immediate tax refund, investor reaction is much more 
negative.16
Corporate Capital Gains Taxes
Since both short- and long-term corporate capital gains are taxed as ordinary income sub­
ject to a maximum federal corporate tax rate of 35%, acquirers often use legal structures in 
which participants are taxed at their personal tax rates for the profits distributed to them 
directly. These include MLPs, Subchapter S corporations, and limited liability companies.
Alternative Corporate Minimum Tax
Under certain circumstances in which corporate taxes have been significantly reduced, 
corporations may be subject to an alternative minimum tax with a flat rate of 20%. The in­
troduction of the alternative minimum tax has reduced returns significantly to investors in 
leveraged buyouts (LBOs), which—by intent—are highly leveraged and have little (if any) 
taxable income because of their high annual interest expense.
Master Limited Partnerships
MLPs are a type of limited partnership whose shares or units are publicly traded; its 
investors are subject to limited liability, and its units can be more easily bought and sold 
than those of private partnerships and privately owned corporations. The partnership in­
terests are divided into units that trade in the same manner as shares of common stock. Not 
subject to double taxation, the MLP is treated like any other partnership for which income 
is allocated pro rata to the partners. Unit holders receive their proportionate share of tax-
deductible expenses such as depletion and depreciation expenses as well as investment tax 
credits attributable to the partnership’s operations. By passing on tax-deductible expenses 
to investors, MLP distributions may be tax free; where tax-deductible expenses exceed the 
amount of the MLP’s cash distribution, the excess may be applied to shelter the investor’s 
other pretax income. Unlike common stock dividends paid by corporations, quarterly pay­
outs to investors in MLPs are mandatory. In MLPs, a missed mandatory quarterly payment 
constitutes an event of default. Because of these mandatory payments, MLPs are commonly 
found in industries that have predictable cash flows, such as natural resources and real 
estate.
16Sikes et al. (2014).

	
Other Tax Considerations Affecting Corporate Restructuring 	
445
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
Reflecting their tax advantages and potentially higher financial returns, the popularity of 
MLPs has soared from 66 in 2009 with a combined value of $160 billion to 110 in 2013 with an 
aggregate value of more than $500 billion.17 In 2014, the formation of MLPs slowed. By mid­
year, the IRS temporarily stopped issuing so-called “private letter” rulings approving such 
structures while they reviewed whether to tighten standards for approval.18
MLPs can be used as attractive restructuring vehicles. In 2013, activist investor, Carl Icahn, 
paid $2 billion for 82% of oil refiner CVR Energy. After failing in his effort to sell the business 
quickly, Icahn placed the refinery into a new company structured as an MLP. Stock market 
investors valued the firm operating in its new structure at a premium to the overall market 
enabling Icahn to raise $600 million in an IPO and to pay his firm a $1-billion dividend from 
CVR’s cash flows.
Despite their significant tax advantages, the MLP structure may limit the ability of the 
partnership to grow. In late 2014, Kinder Morgan, the huge North American oil and gas 
pipeline MLP, announced that it would reorganize into a more conventional corporate struc­
ture. Since the MLP structure requires the distribution of most of its profits to shareholders, 
it becomes increasingly difficult for the MLP to acquire new oil and gas assets that are large 
enough to increase annual payouts. It was becoming more difficult for Kinder Morgan to 
increase its payout rate as rapidly as those of smaller MLPs. Despite its less favorable tax 
structure, Kinder Morgan believes that as a corporation it can finance more acquisitions and 
make the capital outlays required to develop new oil and gas reserves to fund future divi­
dend increases.
Tax Inversions
At 35%, the US corporate tax rate is the third highest among the 32 developed countries 
that comprise the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. Including state 
tax rates, the combined tax rate for US firms can reach 40%. Including provincial rates, the 
top combined corporate tax rate in Canada is 26.5%, in the Netherlands 26%, in the United 
Kingdom 21%, and in Ireland 12.5%.
While generally not the primary motivation for a takeover, US firms have increas­
ingly opted to reduce their tax liabilities by buying a foreign firm and subsequently re­
structuring such that the foreign firm becomes the parent of the US firm. Known as tax 
inversions, reincorporations in low-tax areas such as Bermuda, the Cayman Islands, or 
Ireland are not new. However, the process has become increasingly cumbersome due to 
new regulations preventing firms from simply opening a new office abroad or moving 
to a country where they have little business. Today, most inversions are a result of cross-
border M&As.
Under legislation passed more than a decade ago, American company shareholders (i.e., 
premerger acquirer shareholders) must own less than 80% of the new combined firms. Con­
sequently, the only effective way for an American firm to “invert” in a manner consistent 
17Gelles (2013).
18MLPs are usually structured as two entities: a limited partnership that sells shares to the public and a general 
partnership controlled by the founders. Initially, the general partnership receives a 2% quarterly distribution paid 
by the company, but if distributions increase, the general partnership can receive a greater percentage of the profits.

446	
12.  Structuring the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
with the law is by reincorporating abroad as part of a merger or acquisition with relatively 
large firms. This limits the number of the potential target firms large enough to satisfy this 
requirement.19
Rules announced by the US Treasury on September 23, 2014, were designed to make future 
tax inversions less attractive.20 While making the tax advantages associated with inversions 
less compelling, the rules failed to slow mergers between US and foreign firms when the stra­
tegic rationale for the deal is strong.
In 2015, the US Treasury further tightened regulations pertaining to inversions. If the con­
tinuing ownership stake of a US acquirer of a foreign firm is 80% or more, the new foreign 
parent following an inversion is treated as a US corporation despite its new corporate ad­
dress, thereby subject to US corporate tax rates. If the new continuing ownership stake is be­
tween 60 and 80%, US tax law respects the foreign status of the new foreign parent but some 
portion of the earnings of the US subsidiary is subject to US tax rates depending on the size 
of the continuing ownership stake. Consequently, to comply with these regulations, acquirers 
in deals structured as inversions keep their ownership stake in the combined businesses to 
less than 60%. The ownership percentage can be manipulated based on the share-exchange 
ratio agreed to by the acquirer and target or by increasing or decreasing the number of target 
shares outstanding by stock splits or reverse stock splits.
Despite the two rounds of regulations in 2014 and 2015, corporate inversions continued. 
According to Dealogic, more than 40 US firms have implemented inversions during the 
past several years. When Pfizer and Allergan proposed the largest inversion in history in 
November 2015, the stage was set for the third round of new Treasury regulations.
The Treasury announced new rules pertaining to inversions on April 6, 2016. These rules 
prevent a foreign firm (or recent inverter) that acquires multiple US firms in stock-based deals 
during the last 3 years from using the increase in size to avoid the inversion thresholds de­
scribed in the 2015 regulations in making a new US acquisition. (The impact of this rule on the 
Pfizer–Allergan deal is described in the case study at the beginning of this chapter.) The rules 
also address intercompany loans made by the parents to their subsidiaries that generate large 
interest deductions thereby reducing the pretax profits of the US subsidiary. The IRS will have 
broader discretion to determine whether cash transfers between the subsidiary and the par­
ent represent loans whose interest is tax deductible or dividends paid to the parent, which are 
not deductible for tax purposes. By making it more difficult for the US subsidiary to borrow 
20These rules prevent foreign parent firms from buying enough stock in a subsidiary owned by the former US par­
ent in order to transfer ownership to the new foreign parent making the subsidiary now subject to the foreign par­
ent’s lower tax rate. These rules also make it difficult for acquirers to reduce their size by spinning off businesses 
to shareholders immediately prior to an inversion or for a foreign firm to spin off a subsidiary just the right size to 
enable a merger between the US firm and the spun-off subsidiary to satisfy the 80% rule.
19To illustrate how this regulation forces acquirers wanting to invert to seek relatively large targets (i.e., more than 
one-fifth of the size of the acquirer), assume a US firm has 100 million shares outstanding and a foreign target has 
10 million shares and that the 2 firms agree to exchange 1 share of acquirer stock for each target share outstand­
ing. This deal would not qualify for a tax inversion as the acquirer (American) shareholders would own about 
91% of the combined firm’s total shares outstanding (i.e., 10 million new acquirer shares issued to target firm 
­shareholders/110 million combined firm’s shares outstanding). This would violate the 80% rule.

	
Financial Reporting of Business Combinations	
447
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
from its foreign parent and to generate tax-deductible interest expense, a larger percentage 
of the subsidiary’s earnings will be taxable and less cash will be available for transfer to the 
parent as interest payments.21
In 2017, the incentive for US corporations to relocate to more attractive tax environments 
and to maintain substantial cash holdings abroad may be lessened. The election of Donald 
Trump as US president means that the maximum US corporate tax rate may be reduced to as 
low as 15%, more in line with those prevailing elsewhere. The expectation is that much of the 
estimated $2.5 trillion held by US corporations overseas at the end of 2016 will be repatriated 
to the United States. If the US corporate tax rates are indeed reduced significantly relative to 
those in other countries, a substantial portion of these holdings could return to the United 
States. However, it is also likely that other countries wishing to retain these cash hoards and 
US firms that had relocated their headquarters will lower their tax rates as well, reducing 
some of the justification for returning cash to the United States and moving their headquar­
ters to the United States.
FINANCIAL REPORTING OF BUSINESS COMBINATIONS
A company maintaining its financial statements under International Financial Report­
ing Standards (IFRS) or Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) needs to 
­account for business combinations using the purchase method (also called the acquisi­
tion method).22 According to the purchase method of accounting, the purchase price or 
acquisition cost is determined and then, using a cost-allocation approach, assigned first 
to tangible and then to intangible net assets and recorded on the books of the acquiring 
company. Net assets (or net acquired assets) refer to acquired assets less assumed liabili­
ties. Any excess of the purchase price over the fair value23 of the acquired net assets is 
recorded as goodwill. Goodwill is an asset representing future economic benefits arising 
from acquired assets that were not identified individually. Current accounting standards 
stipulated in SFAS 141 R require an acquirer to recognize the assets acquired, the liabilities 
assumed, and any noncontrolling interest in the target to be measured at their fair value 
as of the acquisition date. The acquisition date generally corresponds to the closing date 
rather than to the announcement or signing date.24
21Intercompany loans have represented a means of transferring cash earned abroad by US firms and held there 
to avoid paying the 35% US corporate tax rate (less any foreign taxes paid) on earnings repatriated to the United 
States. Cash held abroad by US firms can still be transferred to the United States by using so-called “transfer pric­
ing.” US corporate parents can charge their foreign subsidiaries licensing the rights to use patents and other forms 
of intellectual property as well as charging inflated prices for products sold or services provided by the US parent 
to its foreign subsidiary.
22See IFRS 3 and Statements of Financial Accounting Standards (SFAS) 141, respectively.
23According to SFAS 157, fair value is the price that would be received in selling an asset or paid to transfer a liabil­
ity between willing participants on the date an asset or liability is estimated.
24According to IFRS 38, goodwill arising from business combinations can be recognized for financial reporting 
while “internally generated” goodwill such as brands, copyrights, patents, and customer lists created within the 
firm cannot.

448	
12.  Structuring the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
Who Is the Acquirer?
As discussed in Chapter 1, there are many business reasons why one firm wants to acquire 
another. The firm designated as the acquirer is usually the one that has effective control of de­
cision making in the combined firms. However, determining which firm is the acquirer takes 
on added importance from an accounting perspective as this determines which firm’s assets 
and liabilities will be revalued on the acquisition date, whether positive or negative goodwill 
is created, and the impact of the combined firm’s future earnings.
According to SFAS 141 R, the acquirer usually is the firm retaining the largest share of vot­
ing rights following closing and is significantly larger measured in terms of assets, revenue, 
and earnings. In addition, the acquirer typically is the firm whose former board members 
make up the largest percentage of the new board, whose former management dominates the 
senior management of the combined firms, and in an equity exchange is the firm paying a 
premium for the other firm’s shares.
Determining the acquirer is not always unambiguous. Take, for example, the 2008 merger 
between regional telecom firms CenturyTel and Embarq. Several factors suggested that Cen­
turyTel should be viewed as the acquirer, since it issued new shares in exchange for Embarq 
shares, paid a premium to Embarq shareholders, and its former board members and senior 
managers comprised a majority of the board and senior management of the combined firm. 
Yet other factors suggested Embarq should be considered the acquirer since its sharehold­
ers had the largest percentage of voting rights and it is the much larger firm. Based on a 
consideration of these factors, CenturyTel was ultimately determined to be the acquirer for 
financial-reporting purposes. This designation resulted in a larger increase in net acquired 
assets and lower future reported earnings for the combined firms because of larger noncash 
expenses such as depreciation than would have been the case had Embarq been viewed as 
the acquirer.
Recognizing Acquired Net Assets and Goodwill at Fair Value
To make comparison of different transactions easier, current accounting rules require rec­
ognizing 100% of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, even if the acquirer buys less 
than 100% of the target. This results in the recognition of the target’s business in its entirety, 
regardless of whether 51, 100%, or any percentage of the target in between is acquired. 
Thus, the portion of the target that was not acquired (i.e., the noncontrolling, or minority, 
interest) is also recognized, causing the buyer to account for the goodwill attributable to 
both it and the noncontrolling interest. Noncontrolling/minority interest is reported in the 
consolidated balance sheet within the equity account, separately from the parent’s equity. 
Moreover, the revenues, expenses, gains, losses, net income or loss, and other income as­
sociated with the noncontrolling interest should be reported on the consolidated income 
statement.
For example, if Firm A were to buy 50.1% of Firm B, reflecting its effective control, Firm A 
must add 100% of Firm B’s acquired assets and assumed liabilities to its assets and liabilities 
and record the value of the 49.9% noncontrolling, or minority, interest in shareholders’ equity. 
This treats the noncontrolling interest as simply another form of equity and recognizes that 

	
Financial Reporting of Business Combinations	
449
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
Firm A is responsible for managing all of the acquired assets and assumed liabilities. Simi­
larly, 100% of Firm B’s earnings are included in Firm A’s income statement less that portion 
attributable to the 49.9% minority owner and added to the retained earnings of the consoli­
dated firms.25
Recognizing and Measuring Net Acquired Assets in 
Step (or Stage) Transactions
Staged transactions are required to recognize the acquired net assets as well as the non­
controlling interest in the target firm at the full amounts of their fair values. Net acquired 
assets at each step must be revalued to the current FMV. The acquirer must disclose gains 
or losses due to the reestimation of the formerly noncontrolling interests on the income 
statement.
Recognizing Contingent Considerations
Contingencies are uncertainties—such as potential legal, environmental, and warranty 
claims about which the future may not be fully known at the time a transaction is consum­
mated—that may result in future assets or liabilities. The acquirer must report an asset or 
liability arising from a contingency to be recognized at its acquisition-date fair value. As new 
information becomes available, the acquirer must revalue the asset or liability and record the 
impact of changes in their fair values on earnings, thereby contributing to potential earnings 
volatility.
In-Process Research and Development Assets
An acquirer must recognize separately from goodwill the acquisition-date fair values of 
R&D assets acquired in the business combination. Such assets will remain on the books as an 
asset with an indefinite life until the project’s outcome is known. If the project is a success, the 
firm will amortize the asset over the estimated useful life; if the research project is abandoned, 
the R&D asset will be expensed.
Expensing Deal Costs
Transaction-related costs such as legal, accounting, and investment banking fees are re­
corded as an expense on the closing date and charged against current earnings. Firms may 
need to explain the nature of the costs incurred in closing a deal and the impact of such 
costs on the earnings of the combined firms. Financing costs, such as expenses incurred 
as a result of new debt and equity issues, will continue to be capitalized and amortized 
over time.
25On a nonconsolidated basis, Firm B will be operated within Firm A as a majority-owned subsidiary, with Firm A’s 
investment in Firm B shown as cost, according to the equity method of accounting. The value of this investment 
will increase with Firm B’s net income and decrease with dividends paid to Firm A.

450	
12.  Structuring the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
IMPACT OF PURCHASE ACCOUNTING ON BUSINESS 
COMBINATIONS
A long-term asset is impaired if its fair value falls below its book or carrying value. Impair­
ment could occur due to loss of customers, loss of contracts, loss of key personnel, obsoles­
cence of technology, litigation, patent expiration, failing to achieve anticipated cost savings, 
overall market slowdown, and so on. When assets are impaired, the firm must report a loss 
equal to the difference between the asset’s fair value and its carrying (or book) value. Acquir­
ers using overvalued shares as the form of payment often tend to overpay for the target and 
experience subsequent write-offs of goodwill.26
While publicly traded companies are required under GAAP to check goodwill for im­
pairment annually, private companies have a choice as of December 15, 2014: either check 
goodwill annually or amortize goodwill using the straight-line method over 10 years (i.e., 
amortize goodwill equally over 10  years). If a private firm chooses to amortize good­
will, goodwill must only be tested if there is a “triggering event” indicating possible 
impairment.27
The write-down of assets due to impairment associated with an acquisition constitutes 
a public admission by the firm’s management of having overpaid for the acquired assets.28 
How often do such write-downs result in a dramatic drop in a firm’s share price? Perhaps 
somewhat surprisingly a firm’s share price declines only about one-half of the time following 
such announcements. The remainder of the time the share price either rises or remains largely 
unchanged as investors anticipate that management is prepared to take the needed correc­
tive actions.29 To increase investor confidence in management, such announcements should 
be accompanied by detailed explanations about why the asset has been impaired and specific 
actions for remedying the situation.
But Goodwill write-downs simply represent one type of the larger category of “restruc­
turing” charges. Viewed as a one-time expense paid by the firm when it reorganizes, such 
charges are incurred when employees are laid off, manufacturing plants closed, or assets 
sold off at below book value. If investors view such charges as a result of management’s im­
plementation of a new and more effective business strategy, the firm’s share price might in­
crease following the announcement. However, if investors view such charges as a reflection 
of current management’s incompetence, their announcement may increase the likelihood 
26Gu and Lev (2011).
27Amortizing goodwill impacts a firm’s annual earnings. While private firms do not have to worry about public 
shareholders, the reduction in earnings due to amortization could cause them to be in violation of certain loan 
covenants. Furthermore, if the private firm eventually goes public, it will have to incur the cost of having to restate 
its historical earnings to show what it would look like had it been a public firm. Whether goodwill for private firms 
is evaluated annually for impairment or amortized depends on how savings generated by not evaluating goodwill 
annually compare to the potential costs of amortizing goodwill.
28In an effort to minimize goodwill, auditors often require that factors underlying goodwill be tied to specific intan­
gible assets for which fair value can be estimated, such as customer lists and brand names. These intangible assets 
must be capitalized and shown on the balance sheet. If the anticipated cash flows associated with such assets have 
not materialized, the carrying value of the assets must be written down to reflect its current value.
29Cao et al. (2014).

	
Impact of Purchase Accounting on Business Combinations	
451
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
of a subsequent takeover bid.30 Why? Because substantial charges signal a poorly perform­
ing firm and represent the potential for value creation if the firm’s current management is 
removed.
Balance-Sheet Considerations
For financial-reporting purposes, the purchase price paid, including the fair value of any 
noncontrolling interest (FMVNCI) in the target at the acquisition date, for the target company 
consists of the FMV of total identifiable acquired tangible and intangible assets (FMVTA) less 
total assumed liabilities (FMVTL) plus goodwill (FMVGW). The difference between FMVTA and 
FMVTL is called net asset value. PP is the total consideration transferred to target firm share­
holders for net acquired assets less any interest not owned by the acquirer (i.e., noncontrol­
ling interest). These relationships can be summarized as follows:
Purchase price(total consideration) : PP
FMV
FMV
FMV
FMV
TA
TL
GW
NCI
=
−
+
−
	
(12.1)
Goodwill : FMV
PP
FMV
FMV
FMV
(PP
FMV
)
(FMV
FMV )
GW
NCI
TA
TL
NCI
TA
TL
=
+
−
+
=
+
−
−
	
(12.2)
From Eq. (12.2), it should be noted that as net asset value increases, FMVGW decreases. Also 
note that the calculation of goodwill can result in either a positive (i.e., PP > net asset value) 
or a negative (i.e., PP < net asset value). Negative goodwill arises if the acquired assets are 
purchased at a discount to their FMV and is referred to under SFAS 141R as a “bargain pur­
chase.”31
Table  12.4 illustrates how the purchase method of accounting can be applied in busi­
ness combinations. Assume Acquirer buys 100% of Target’s equity for $1 billion in cash on 
December 31, 2014. Columns 1 and 2 present the preacquisition book values of the two firms’ 
balance sheets. Column 3 reflects the restatement of the book value of the Target’s balance 
sheet in column 2 to their FMV. As the sum of columns 1 and 3, column 4 presents the Acquir­
er’s postacquisition balance sheet. This includes the Acquirer’s book value of the preacquisi­
tion balance sheet plus the FMV of the Target’s balance sheet. As shown in column 3, total 
assets are less than shareholders’ equity plus total liabilities by $100 million, reflecting the 
unallocated portion of the purchase price, or goodwill. This $100 million is shown in column 
4 as goodwill on the postacquisition Acquirer balance sheet to equate total assets with equity 
plus total liabilities. Note that the difference between the Acquirer’s preacquisition and post­
acquisition equity is equal to the $1 billion purchase price.
Exhibit 12.1 shows the calculation of goodwill in a transaction in which the acquirer pur­
chases less than 100% of the target’s outstanding shares but is still required to account for all 
30Adut et al. (2016).
31A “bargain” purchase is a business combination in which the total acquisition-date fair value of the acquired net 
assets exceeds the fair value of the purchase price plus the fair value of any noncontrolling interest in the target. 
Such a purchase may arise due to forced liquidation or distressed sales. SFAS 141R requires the acquirer to recog­
nize that excess on the consolidated income statement as a gain attributable to the acquisition.

452	
12.  Structuring the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
EXHIBIT 12.1  ESTIMATING GOODWILL
On January 1, 2014, the closing date, Acquirer Inc. purchased 80% of Target Inc.’s 1 million shares 
outstanding at $50 per share, for a total value of $40 million (i.e., 0.8 × 1,000,000 shares outstand­
ing × $50/share). On that date, the fair value of the net assets acquired from Target was estimated 
to be $42 million. Acquirer paid a 20% control premium, which was already included in the $50-per-
share purchase price. The implied minority discount of the noncontrolling (minority) shares is 
16.7% [i.e., 1 − (1/(1 + 0.2)].a What is the value of the goodwill shown on Acquirer’s consolidated 
balance sheet? What portion of that goodwill is attributable to the noncontrolling interest retained 
by Target’s shareholders? What is the FMV of the 20% noncontrolling interest per share reflecting 
the minority discount?
Goodwill shown on Acquirer’s balance sheet: From Eq. (12.2), goodwill (FMVGW) can be estimated 
as follows:
FMV
(PP
FMV
)
(FMV
FMV )
($40,000,000
$10,000,000)
$42,000,000
$8,000,000
GW
NCI
TA
TL
=
+
−
−
=
+
−
=
Goodwill attributable to the noncontrolling interest: Note that 20% of the total shares outstanding 
equals 200,000 shares, with a market value of $10 million ($50/share × 200,000). Therefore, the 
amount of goodwill attributable to the noncontrolling interest is calculated as follows:
Fair Value of Noncontrolling Interest:
$10,000,000
Less: 20% fair value of net acquired assets (0.2 × $42,000,000):
$8,400,000
Equal: Goodwill attributable to noncontrolling interest:
$1,600,000
TABLE 12.4  Example of Purchase Method of Accounting
Acquirer 
preacquisition book 
value,a column 1
Target 
preacquisition book 
value,a column 2
Target fair market 
value,a column 3
Acquirer 
postacquisition 
value,a column 4
Current assets
12,000
1,200
1,200
13,200
Long-term assets
7,000
1,000
1,400
8,400
Goodwill
100b
Total assets
19,000
2,200
2,600
21,700
Current liabilities
10,000
1,000
1,000
11,000
Long-term debt
3,000
600
700
3,700
Common equity
2,000
300
1,000c
3,000
Retained earnings
4,000
300
4,000
Equity + liabilities
19,000
2,200
2,700d
21,700
aMillions of dollars.
bGoodwill = purchase price − FMV of net acquired assets = $1000 − ($2600 − $1000 − $700).
cThe FMV of the target’s equity is equal to the purchase price. Note that the value of the target’s retained earnings is implicitly included in the 
purchase price paid for the target’s equity.
dThe difference of $100 million between the FMV of the target’s equity plus liabilities less total assets represents the unallocated portion of the 
purchase price.
FMV, Fair market value.

	
Impact of Purchase Accounting on Business Combinations	
453
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
of the target’s net acquired assets, including 100% of goodwill. Exhibit 12.2 lists valuation 
guidelines for each major balance-sheet category.
Table 12.5 illustrates the balance-sheet impacts of purchase accounting on the acquirer’s 
balance sheet and the effects of impairment subsequent to closing. Assume that Acquirer Inc. 
purchases Target Inc. on December 31, 2013 (the acquisition/closing date), for $500 million. 
Identifiable acquired assets and assumed liabilities are shown at their fair value on the acqui­
sition date. The excess of the purchase price over the fair value of net acquired assets is shown 
as goodwill. The fair value of the “reporting unit” (i.e., Target Inc.) is determined annually 
to ensure that its fair value exceeds its carrying (book) value. As of December 31, 2014, it is 
determined that the fair value of Target Inc. has fallen below its carrying value, due largely to 
the loss of a number of key customers.
Income Statement and Cash Flow Considerations
For reporting purposes, an upward valuation of tangible and intangible assets, other than 
goodwill, raises depreciation and amortization expenses, which lowers operating and net 
income. For tax purposes, goodwill created after July 1993 may be amortized up to 15 years 
and is tax deductible. Goodwill booked before July 1993 is not tax deductible. Cash flow ben­
efits from the tax deductibility of additional depreciation and amortization expenses that are 
written off over the useful lives of the assets. If the purchase price paid is less than the target’s 
net asset value, the acquirer records a one-time gain equal to the difference on its income 
statement. If the carrying value of the net asset value subsequently falls below its FMV, the 
acquirer records a one-time loss equal to the difference.
Pending Rule Changes Affecting Revenue Recognition
Revenue recognition under GAAP determines the specific conditions under which rev­
enue is recognized on a firm’s financial statements. Generally, revenue is recognized only 
Fair value of the Noncontrolling Interest per share: Since the fair value of Acquirer’s interest in Target 
and Target’s retained interest are proportional to their respective ownership interest, the value of 
the ownership distribution of the controlling (majority) and noncontrolling (minority) owners is as 
follows:
Acquirer Interest (0.8 × 1,000,000 × $50/share):
$40,000,000
Target noncontrolling Interest (0.2 × 1,000,000 × $50/share):
$10,000,000
Total Market Value:
$50,000,000
The FMV per share of the noncontrolling interest is $41.65 [i.e., ($10,000,000/200,000) 
× (1 − 0.167)]. The noncontrolling interest share value is less than the share price of the controlling 
shareholders (i.e., $50/share) because it must be discounted for the relative lack of influence of non­
controlling or minority shareholders on the firm’s decision-making process.
aSee Chapter 10 for a discussion of how to calculate control premiums and noncontrolling/minority discounts.

454	
12.  Structuring the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
when a specific event has occurred and the amount of revenue is measureable. Revenue rec­
ognition states that revenue should not be recorded until it is earned. On May 28, 2014, the 
Financial Accounting Standards Board and International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) 
jointly issued a new standard for recognizing revenue from customer contracts, providing a 
uniform standard for recognizing such revenue. The old standard relied on industry-specific 
guidance, which created revenue recognition policies that differed by industries. The new 
standard must be fully implemented by 2018.
Firms must utilize substantial judgment when applying the new standard. AT&T’s pro­
posed takeover of Time Warner in late 2016 illustrates how the application of the new revenue 
recognition standard could impact reported financial statements for business combinations. 
The new accounting standard would affect AT&T’s allocation of contract revenues between 
services and equipment like handsets and the timing of when those revenues are recognized. 
As of September 30, 2016, Time Warner’s program licensing revenue backlog totaled $6.9 bil­
lion of future revenue reflecting the terms of existing contracts for licensing theatrical and TV 
content for cable networks and syndicated TV and subscription video-on-demand. Under the 
new standard, licenses could be treated as rights that transfer at a point in time starting when 
the customer can direct the use of and obtain the benefits from the license. This could enable 
revenue from certain licenses to be accelerated while others could be deferred depending on 
the terms of the contracts. While it would not impact the timing of taxes paid, it would affect 
EXHIBIT 12.2  GU IDELINES FOR VALU ING ACQU IRED 
ASSETS AND LIABILITIES
1.	 Cash and accounts receivable, reduced for bad debt and returns, are valued at their values on 
the books of the target on the acquisition/closing date.
2.	 Marketable securities are valued at their realizable value after transaction costs.
3.	 Inventories are broken down into finished goods and raw materials. Finished goods are 
valued at their liquidation value; raw material inventories are valued at their current 
replacement cost. Target last-in, first-out inventory reserves are eliminated.
4.	 Property, plant, and equipment are valued at the FMV on the acquisition/closing date.
5.	 Accounts payable and accrued expenses are valued at the levels stated on the target’s books 
on the acquisition/closing date.
6.	 Notes payable and long-term debt are valued at their net present value of the future cash 
payments discounted at the current market rate of interest for similar securities.
7.	 Pension fund obligations are booked at the excess or deficiency of the present value of the 
projected benefit obligations over the present value of pension fund assets. This may result in 
an asset or liability being recorded by the consolidated firms.
8.	 All other liabilities are recorded at their net present value of future cash payments.
9.	 Intangible assets are booked at their appraised values on the acquisition/closing date.
10.	 Goodwill is the difference between the purchase price and the FMV of the target’s net asset 
value. Positive goodwill is recorded as an asset, whereas negative goodwill (i.e., a bargain 
purchase) is shown as a gain on the acquirer’s consolidated income statement.

	
Impact of Purchase Accounting on Business Combinations	
455
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
the measurement of deferred taxes and income taxes for a specific reporting period and re­
ported earnings.
Pending Rule Changes Affecting the Balance Sheet
Currently, operating leases need only be discussed in footnotes to the balance sheet for 
financial-reporting purposes. For firms using large amounts of leased assets, this often does 
not give analysts a clear picture of the firm’s total obligations. Under present reporting re­
quirements it is important to value a firm’s operating leases and show their impact on the 
firm’s balance sheet in calculating a firm’s borrowing capacity as measured by debt to equity 
or total capital ratios. Once the operating leases are converted to debt, lease expense must be 
TABLE 12.5  Balance-Sheet Impacts of Purchase Accounting
Target Inc., December 31, 2013, Purchase Price (Total Consideration)
$500,000,000
Fair Values of Target Inc.’s Net Assets on December 31, 2013
  Current assets
$40,000,000
  Plant and equipment
200,000,000
  Customer list
180,000,000
  Copyrights
120,000,000
  Current liabilities
(35,000,000)
  Long-term debt
(100,000,000)
Value assigned to identifiable net assets
$405,000,000
Value assigned to goodwill
$95,000,000
Carrying value as of December 31, 2013
$500,000,000
Fair Values of Target Inc.’s Net Assets on December 31, 2014
$400,000,000a
  Current assets
$30,000,000
  Plant and equipment
175,000,000
  Customer list
100,000,000
  Copyrights
120,000,000
  Current liabilities
(25,000,000)
  Long-term debt
(90,000,000)
Fair value of identifiable net assets
$310,000,000
Value of goodwill
$90,000,000
Carrying value after impairment on December 31, 2014
$400,000,000
Impairment loss (difference between December 31, 2014, and December 
31, 2013, carrying values)
$(100,000,000)
aNote that the December 31, 2014, carrying value is estimated based on the discounted value of projected cash flows of the reporting unit and 
therefore represents the FMV of the unit on that date. The fair value is composed of the sum of the fair values of identifiable net assets plus goodwill.
FMV, Fair market value.

456	
12.  Structuring the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
added to EBIT. Why? Because it is a financial expense and EBIT represents operating income 
before such expenses. An estimate of depreciation expense associated with the leased asset 
must be deducted from EBIT as is depreciation expense associated with other fixed assets 
owned by the firm. The resulting “adjusted” EBIT is then used to calculate free cash flow to 
the firm. For more detail on operating leases and valuation, see Chapter 7.
The treatment of operating leases is to change significantly according to a 2016 ruling 
by the Financial Accounting Standards Board. Beginning in 2019, operating leases must be 
shown on firm’s balance sheet. While the change does not create new corporate obligations, 
some firms will look more leveraged than they do currently when evaluated in terms of debt 
to equity ratios. For purposes of financial analysis, these ratios are generally looked at in 
terms of the market value of debt and the market value of equity. Consequently, the value of 
a firm relying heavily on operating leases may show a large increase in the value of its debt 
relative to equity. The value of equity should be relatively unaffected because the addition of 
operating leases on the balance sheet has no impact on the firm’s cash flow generation capa­
bility and in turn the market value of its equity.
International Accounting Standards
The objective of the IASB is the convergence of accounting standards worldwide and the 
establishment of global standards, sometimes referred to as “global GAAP.” The IASB is­
sues IFRS, and, since 2005, firms in the European Union have had to conform to IFRS direc­
tives. Concerns in the United States about moving to international standards from GAAP 
include higher taxes (if the conversion results in increases in reported earnings), increased 
implementation costs, and litigation. In a report issued in mid-2012, the US Securities and 
Exchange Commission (SEC) indicated that if the United States ultimately decides to shift to 
international rules, it will use a hybrid structure incorporating certain IFRS rules into the US 
system of accounting standards.32 The IASB is currently considering their own guidelines for 
the treatment of operating leases.
RECAPITALIZATION (“RECAP”) ACCOUNTING
Business combinations qualifying for recapitalization accounting do not have to be record­
ed using purchase accounting. “Recap” accounting is designed to record restructuring ac­
tions reflecting changes in a firm’s capital structure without having any impact on the firm’s 
assets and liabilities and triggering any tax liabilities. It applies to firms engaging in internal 
reorganizations, repurchasing their own stock, undertaking LBOs, or executing reverse merg­
ers. The SEC views such activities as not having a material impact on the assets and liabilities 
of the firm and in which participants have a continuing interest in the surviving entity. Each 
of these scenarios is discussed next.
When two entities have the same parent, transfers of assets between these entities are 
viewed as reorganizations internal to the firm that do not result in a change in control impact­
ing the value of the operating assets and liabilities of the firm. Such transfers do not require 
32U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (2012).

	
Discussion Questions	
457
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
any revaluation of the firm’s assets and liabilities. Recap accounting also applies when a firm 
buys its own stock; the repurchased shares, valued at the price paid for the stock, are included 
in treasury stock, which is deducted from the firm’s shareholders’ equity. The transaction 
does not have any impact on the value of the firm’s assets or liabilities, and it does not require 
any change in the book value of the corporation’s assets or liabilities. The full impact of the 
transaction is centered in the firm’s shareholders’ equity.
Recap accounting also may be used for the financial reporting of LBOs. In LBOs, the buy­
out firm often creates a shell subsidiary and merges it into the target, with the target surviv­
ing. Target firm assets and liabilities are shown at their pretransaction book values. Since 
there is no write-up (or write-down) to FMV, there is no additional depreciation and amor­
tization that would reduce the firm’s net income. The LBO buyout firm may use recap ac­
counting rather than purchase accounting if it anticipates exiting the firm through an IPO, 
since reported earnings are higher than they would have been under purchase accounting 
and no goodwill is created. The target’s shareholders’ equity usually is negative, since the 
repurchased stock is shown as treasury stock, which is deducted from shareholders’ equity. 
To qualify for recap accounting, the shareholders of the firm undergoing the LBO (the target) 
must retain an interest in the recapitalized firm of 5%–20%. The SEC views that merger of the 
LBO buyout firm’s sub into the target, with the target surviving, as a recapitalization of the 
target rather than as a business combination in which the survivor gained valuable assets due 
to the deal.
Finally, recap accounting is employed to record reverse mergers. Reverse mergers involve 
a private firm’s merging into a public shell corporation with nominal net assets, with the 
public company surviving. The owners of the private firm typically have effective or actual 
control of the surviving company at closing, with the former public shell shareholders having 
an ongoing noncontrolling interest in the recapitalized firm. The SEC views reverse mergers 
as changes in the acquiring firm’s capital structure rather than as a business combination in 
which the shell corporation had significant pretransaction assets whose value was impacted 
by the transaction; as such, recap accounting is employed for reporting purposes.
SOME THINGS TO REMEMBER
Taxes are rarely the deciding factor in most M&A deals, which happen because they make 
good business sense. A deal is tax free if mostly acquirer stock is used to buy the target’s stock 
or assets; otherwise, it is taxable. For financial-reporting purposes, M&As (except those quali­
fying for recapitalization accounting) must be recorded using the purchase method.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
12.1	 When does the IRS consider a transaction to be nontaxable to the target firm’s share­
holders? What is the justification for the IRS position?
12.2	 What are the advantages and disadvantages of a tax-free transaction for the buyer?
12.3	 Under what circumstances can the assets of the acquired firm be increased to FMV 
when the transaction is deemed a taxable purchase of stock?

458	
12.  Structuring the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
12.4	 What is goodwill and how is it created?
12.5	 Under what circumstances might an asset become impaired? How might this event 
affect the way in which acquirers bid for target firms?
12.6	 Why do boards of directors of both acquiring and target companies often obtain so-
called fairness opinions from outside investment advisors or accounting firms? What 
valuation methodologies might be employed in constructing these opinions? Should 
stockholders have confidence in such opinions? Why or why not?
12.7	 Archer Daniel Midland (ADM) wants to acquire AgriCorp to augment its ethanol 
manufacturing capability. AgriCorp wants the deal to be tax free. ADM wants to 
preserve AgriCorp’s investment tax credits and tax loss carryforwards so that they 
transfer in the transaction. Also, ADM plans on selling certain unwanted AgriCorp 
assets to help finance the transaction. How would you structure the deal so that both 
parties’ objectives could be achieved?
12.8	 Tangible assets are often increased to FMV following a transaction and depreciated 
faster than their economic lives. What is the potential impact on posttransaction EPS, 
cash flow, and balance sheet?
12.9	 Discuss how the form of acquisition (i.e., asset purchase or stock deal) could affect the 
net present value or internal rate of return of the deal calculated postclosing.
12.10	 What are some of the important tax-related issues the boards of the acquirer and 
target companies may need to address prior to entering negotiations? How might the 
resolution of these issues affect the form of payment and form of acquisition?
Solutions to these Chapter Discussion Questions are found in the Online Instructor’s Manual for 
instructors using this book (https://textbooks.elsevier.com/web/Manuals.aspx?isbn=9780128016091).
PRACTICE PROBLEMS AND ANSWERS
12.11	 Target Company has incurred $5 million in losses during the past 3 years. Acquiring 
Company anticipates pretax earnings of $3 million in each of the next 3 years. What 
is the difference between the taxes that Acquiring Company would have paid before 
the merger as compared to actual taxes paid after the merger, assuming a marginal tax 
rate of 40%?
	
Answer: $2 million.
12.12	 Acquiring Company buys 100% of Target Company’s equity for $5 million in cash. 
As an analyst, you are given the premerger balance sheets for the two companies 
(Table 12.6). Assuming plant and equipment are revalued upward by $500,000, what 
will be the combined companies’ shareholders’ equity plus total liabilities? What is 
the difference between Acquiring Company’s shareholders’ equity and the sharehold­
ers’ equity of the combined companies?
Answer: The combined companies’ shareholders’ equity plus total liabilities is $7.1 
million, and the change between the combined companies’ and Acquiring Company’s 
shareholders’ equity is $5 million. Note that the change in the acquirer’s equity equals 
the purchase price.
Solutions to these problems are found in the Online Instructor’s Manual available to instructors 
using this text (https://textbooks.elsevier.com/web/Manuals.aspx?isbn=9780128016091).

	
Practice Problems and Answers	
459
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
END OF CHAPTER CASE STUDY: ABBVIE PLACES A BIG BET 
ON CANCER DRUG MAKER PHARMACYCLICS
Case Study Objectives: To Illustrate
•	 Form of payment and of acquisition
•	 The application of common takeover tactics
•	 Tax and accounting considerations
•	 The importance of discipline during negotiations
Successful takeovers require a sound business strategy, an intelligent takeover plan, unwaver­
ing discipline during the negotiations, and excellent postmerger execution. The AbbVie business 
strategy seems to have consisted of placing a high-risk bet on a single drug intended to restore and 
sustain the firm’s growth in revenue and profits. Prior failed takeover attempts may have made 
AbbVie an undisciplined bidder contributing potentially to overpaying for the target. In this case 
study, we discuss the circumstances leading up to the deal, how they may have affected the deal, 
and tactics common to transactions of this type.
Pharmaceutical company AbbVie, a leading supplier of cancer-fighting drugs, had been on the 
hunt for growth as its top-selling drug Humira, a treatment for rheumatoid arthritis, faced patent 
expiration in 2016, a dilemma faced by most major pharmaceutical firms. Humira accounted for 
about 56% of AbbVie’s total $22.33 billion in 2014 sales. Illustrating its dependence on Humira, Ab­
bvie’s next biggest drug, Androgel, generated only 4% of its annual revenue. The firm’s earnings 
had been deteriorating for several years as generic drug makers cut into the firm’s market share. 
The day of reckoning was fast approaching.
AbbVie had been frustrated in its attempt to acquire United Kingdom–based Shire for $54 bil­
lion in 2014. The takeover would have enabled AbbVie to diversify its pharmaceutical offering and 
to reincorporate overseas to lower its tax bill in a “tax inversion.” When US regulatory authorities 
changed tax rules to make such strategies less attractive, AbbVie withdrew its bid.
Against this backdrop, AbbVie moved aggressively in a bidding war to acquire Pharmacyclics, 
challenging Johnson & Johnson (J&J) and Novartis for the right to acquire the target, eventually 
winning out in mid-2015. What made Pharmacyclics attractive was its blood cancer drug called 
TABLE 12.6  Premerger Balance Sheets for Companies in Problem 12.12 ($ Million)
Acquiring company
Target company
Current assets
600,000
800,000
Plant and equipment
1,200,000
1,500,000
  Total assets
1,800,000
2,300,000
Long-term debt
500,000
300,000
Shareholders’ equity
1,300,000
2,000,000
  Shareholders’ equity + total liabilities
1,800,000
2.300,000

460	
12.  Structuring the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
Imbruvica, the only drug Pharmcyclics sells. What makes Imbruvica so valuable is its future cash 
flow generation potential. In 2014, the drug brought in $492.4 million in sales, which AbbVie expects 
to double to about $1 billion in 2015 and to top $3.5 billion by 2018.
J&J already owns 50% of Imbruvica via a manufacturing partnership through its Janssen Biotech 
subsidiary. J&J was edged out of the bidding after it offered $261 per share, slightly below AbbVie’s 
winning bid of $261.25 per share consisting of $58% in cash and the rest in stock. The AbbVie bid 
valued Pharmacyclics at more than $21 billion and represented a 39% premium over Pharmacy­
clics’s closing price on February 29, 2015, when the bidding war began.
AbbVie’s board and management in justifying the price paid argued that the companies’ shared 
expertise, combined with AbbVie’s five late-stage oncology drugs in its development pipeline set to 
launch during the next several years, has the potential to transform cancer treatment protocols and 
improve patient outcomes and quality of life. Pharmacyclics’ Imbruvica has been approved in 50 
countries for mid- to late-stage cancers and offers broad international expansion.
The risk to AbbVie is clear. Can it earn enough from Imbruvica to enable it to earn back the hefty 
premium paid for Pharmacyclics and still earn its cost of capital? Some analysts question whether 
Imbruvica can reach the lofty sales goals, unless the drug can prove effective against other kinds 
of tumor types and different diseases. Failure to reach these ambitious sales goals could result in 
substantial future write-offs. But the real risk may have been one of entering into a deal when you 
are feeling desperate.
An important objective for AbbVie was to gain complete control of Pharmacyclics through a 
tender offer to gain initially majority control followed by a back-end merger to “squeeze out” any 
remaining target firm shareholders. A tender offer consisting of both cash and stock was used to 
broaden the appeal of the proposed bid to Pharmacyclics shareholders. Deal terms also included a 
termination fee and a fixed-value collar.
AbbVie’s tender offer consisted of three options for Pharmacyclics shareholders. They could 
choose to receive all-cash, all-stock, or a combination for their shares. AbbVie sought to acquire all 
of the outstanding shares of Pharmacyclics through the tender offer that ended on May 22, 2015. 
By the end of the period, 87% of Pharmacyclics’ outstanding shares had been tendered. Of those 
tendered, 24.1 million made an election to receive mixed consideration (both cash and stock), 14 
million made an election to receive the all-cash option, and 29.3 million chose to receive all-stock.
The transfer of ownership was accomplished through successive mergers involving two AbbVie 
wholly owned subsidiaries: Merger Sub 1 and Merger Sub 2. The tender offer was the first step in 
AbbVie’s plan to acquire a controlling interest and ultimately all outstanding shares of Pharmacy­
clics. Once the exchange offer was completed, Merger Sub 1 was merged into Pharmacyclics with 
Pharmacyclics surviving. As permissible under Delaware Corporation Law (AbbVie was incorpo­
rated in Delaware), all Pharmacyclics common shares not tendered in the share exchange were 
cancelled and converted into the right to exercise the same options offered in the tender offer. Im­
mediately following the first merger, the surviving corporation (Pharmacyclics) was merged into 
Merger Sub 2, with Merger Sub 2 surviving the merger as a wholly owned subsidiary of AbbVie.
The tender offer qualified as a tax-free reorganization. Shareholders receiving stock will incur a 
taxable gain or loss only when they sell their shares, while those receiving cash will incur an imme­
diate taxable event. Pharmacyclics would have had to pay a termination fee of 3% of the transaction 
value if the merger agreement were terminated because Pharmacyclics board accepted a better offer. 

	
Practice Problems and Answers	
461
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
The equity portion of the purchase price involved an exchange ratio subject to a “collar” in which 
the value of AbbVie’s share price could fluctuate up or down by 10% without changing the value 
of the offer price. To secure financing for the cash portion of the deal and for anticipated working 
capital requirements, AbbVie obtained an $18-billion 364-day senior unsecured bridge loan commit­
ment from a consortium of major banks. The firm had the option to obtain permanent (long-term) 
financing during this period but chose not to do so.
Discussion Questions
1.	 What is the form of payment used in this deal? Why might this form have been selected? What 
are the advantages and disadvantages of the form of payment used in this deal?
2.	 What is the form of acquisition used in this deal? Why might this form have been chosen? 
What are the advantages and disadvantages of the form of acquisition?
3.	 Would you characterize this as a reverse or forward merger? Based on your answer why might 
this type of reorganization have been selected by AbbVie?
4.	 How would the fixed-value collar arrangement work to fix the value of the offer price? How 
would this affect AbbVie and Pharmacyclics shareholders?
5.	 How would this deal be treated for financial-reporting purposes? Briefly describe how the 
methodology you have identified might be applied to how Pharmacyclics’ financial data would 
be presented on AbbVie’s consolidated financial statements.
6.	 Assume it is determined by auditors during the next several years that AbbVie overpaid 
significantly for Pharmacyclics. What is the most likely reason this determination could 
happen? How might this impact the firm’s reported EPS and in turn its share price? Be specific.
7.	 What is the purpose of a termination fee in these types of deals?
8.	 Did the sale of Pharmacyclics require a vote by the firm’s shareholders? Explain.
Solutions to these questions are provided in the Online Instructor’s Manual for instructors using this book 
(https://textbooks.elsevier.com/web/Manuals.aspx?isbn=9780128016091).

462	
12.  Structuring the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
A D D I T I O N A L  C A S E  S T U D Y  R E C O M M E N D AT I O N S 
( S E A R C H  H A RVA R D  B U S I N E S S  S C H O O L 
P U B L I S H I N G  S I T E  B Y  N A M E  O F  C A S E : 
h b s p . h a r v a r d . e d u )
Accounting Fraud at WorldCom, Robert 
S. Kaplan, David Kiron, Revision Date: 
September 14, 2007, HBS Premier Case 
Collection, Product Number: 104071-PDF-
ENG, https://cb.hbsp.harvard.edu.
Subjects Covered: Accounting 
Procedures, Bankruptcy, Board of Directors, 
Business Ethics, Corporate Governance, 
Financial Accounting, Financial Statements, 
Fraud, Leadership, Organizational Behavior, 
Organizational Culture.
Flinder Valves and Controls Inc., Michael J. 
Schill, Publication Date: November 18, 2008, 
Product Number: UV1062-PDF-ENG, hbsp.
harvard.edu.
Subjects Covered: Negotiation Strategy, 
Valuation, Share Exchange Ratio Calculation, 
Tax Issues, Earnings Dilution, and Voting 
Power.
The Treatment of Goodwill and Other 
Purchased Intangibles for Tax Purposes, 
Mary Margaret Frank, Revision Date: 
January 20, 2011, Product Number: UV081-
PDF-Eng, Source: Darden School of 
Business, hbsp.harvard.edu.
Subjects Covered: M&A Related 
Accounting and Taxation Issues, Allocation 
of Purchase Price.
Oracle Corporation’s Acquisition of Siebel 
Systems, Inc.: The Battle of Two Silicon 
Valley Titans Comes to an End, Mary 
Margaret Frank, Michael Pozzi, Publication 
Date: August 28, 2007, Product Number: 
UV0809-PDF-ENG, Source: Darden School 
of Business, hbspharvard.edu.
Subjects Covered: Deal Structuring, Tax 
and Accounting issues.
Tyco: M&A Machine: Maureen McNichols, 
Nathan T. Blair, Publication Date: March 
12, 2009, Product Number: A202-PDF-
ENG, Source: Stanford Graduate School of 
Business, hbsp.harvard.edu.
Subjects Covered: Accounting Fraud, 
Earnings Management.

C H A P T E R
463
Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring Activities. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-801609-1.00013-0
Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
13
Financing the Deal
Private Equity, Hedge Funds, 
and Other Sources of Financing
O U T L I N E
Inside M&A: Informatica Goes 
Private to Implement an 
Aggressive Spending Program	
464
Chapter Overview	
466
How Are M&A Transactions 
Commonly Financed?	
466
Financing Options: Borrowing	
467
Types of Long-Term Financing	
469
Financing Options: Common 
and Preferred Equity	
470
Seller Financing	
471
Impact of Near-Zero/Negative 
Interest Rates on M&As	
473
What Is the Role of Private Equity, 
Hedge, and Venture Capital Funds 
in Deal Financing?	
473
Financial Intermediaries	
474
Lenders and Investors of Last Resort	
475
Providers of Financial Engineering 
and Operational Expertise 
for Target Firms	
476
Leveraged Buyouts as Financing 
Strategies	
479
The Private Equity Market Is a 
Global Phenomenon	
480
Pure Management Buyouts 
Are Rare	
480
LBO Transactions Span Many 
Different Industries	
481
Sales to Strategic Buyers Represent 
the Most Common Exit Strategy	
481
Most LBOs Involve Acquisitions 
of Private Firms	
482
The Effects of LBOs on Innovation	
482
The Effects of LBOs on Employment 
Growth	
483
The Changing Nature of Private 
Equity Firm Collaboration	
483
What Factors Are Critical to 
Successful LBOs?	
485
Target Selection	
485
Not Overpaying	
486
Improving Operating Performance	
487
How Do LBOs Create Value?	
487
Alleviating Public Firm Agency Problems	 488
Providing Access to Capital for 
Private Firms	
489
Creating a Tax Shield	
490
Debt Reduction	
490
Improvement in Operating Margin	
490
Timing the Sale of the Firm	
490

464	
13.  Financing the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
The only difference between you and someone you envy is that you settled for less. —Philip McGraw
INSIDE M&A: INFORMATICA GOES PRIVATE 
TO IMPLEMENT AN AGGRESSIVE SPENDING PROGRAM
KEY POINTS
•	 Firms hoping to spur growth through new capital investments and takeovers often find it 
difficult to do so as a public firm due to investor impatience.
•	 One option is to take the firm private.
•	 Leveraged buyouts (LBOs) undertaken following the 2008 recession have tended to be more 
conservatively financed than those prior to 2008.
The realization of sustained earnings growth often requires a sizable initial investment. In­
vestments in software and other intellectual property must be expensed according to Gener­
ally Accepted Accounting Principles resulting in an immediate reduction in earnings. While 
certain types of investments can be capitalized and depreciated or amortized over their useful 
lives, such spending can depress near-term earnings. Similarly, acquisitions made to jump-
start growth often have a short-term negative impact on earnings as firms write off acquisi­
tion-related expenses and incur substantial postacquisition integration costs.
Firms with successful track records in achieving revenue and earnings growth goals such 
as Facebook, Google, and Amazon.com often are able to convince investors to be patient fol­
lowing a major investment. However, firms with poor track records can get hammered by 
investors immediately following the announcement of an aggressive investment program. 
What options are available for such firms?
One alternative is to take the firm private by consolidating ownership among a few inves­
tors patient enough to allow the firm to realize promised returns. This public-to-private LBO 
requires an investor group or financial sponsor (sometimes involving a firm’s management) 
using a combination of equity and borrowed funds to acquire publicly held shares.1 This 
is exactly what data integrator Informatica did. On August 6, 2015, the firm’s shares were 
1While public-to-private LBOs get the most publicity because of their size and visibility, most LBOs involve the 
leveraging of private firms. The reasons for this are discussed in detail later in this chapter.
Common LBO Deal and Capital 
Structures	
492
Common Deal Structures	
492
Common Capital Structures	
493
Some Things to Remember	
495
Discussion Questions	
495
Case Study: The Legacy of Leverage, 
Bad Assumptions, and Poor Timing—The 
Largest LBO in US History 
Goes Bankrupt	
496
Case Study Objectives 	
496
Discussion Questions 	
500
Additional Case Study 
Recommendations	
501

	
Inside M&A: Informatica Goes Private to Implement an Aggressive Spending Program	
465
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
removed from the NASDAQ, retiring the INFA ticker symbol, following the completion of its 
acquisition by private equity investors Permira and Canada Pension Plan Investment Board. 
The newly private firm also has several strategic investors: Microsoft and Salesforce Ventures, 
the investment arm of Salesforce.com. The LBO was the biggest of 2015. Public investors re­
ceived $48.75 per share held.
Informatica, once a high-flying stock, offers enterprise-wide data integration and manage­
ment software enabling firms to analyze masses of data stored in offsite servers often referred 
to as the “cloud.” Data integration is the use of technical and business processes to combine 
data from disparate sources into useful information. The firm claims to have more than 5800 
enterprise-wide customers.
In 1999, the firm displayed a meteoric price to earnings ratio common among internet 
firms during the dotcom bubble enabling the firm to reach a multibillion-dollar valuation. 
However, the firm’s valuation collapsed when the speculative bubble burst in 2000. It would 
be years before the firm would again be able to reach its pre-2000 valuation.
Like competitor Tibco, Informatica had seen its revenue growth slow due to market matu­
ration after seeing its stock soar and then crater. Both firms have since seen their valuations 
grow to multibillion-dollar levels, but it has taken years to get back to where they were before 
the dotcom debacle. Tibco was taken private in December 2014 for $4.3 billion.
In explaining why the firm went private, Informatica announced its intention to “grow into 
a multi-billion dollar leader in all things data.” As a private company, with a long view mea­
sured in years, not quarters, the firm reasoned that it will have more flexibility and more time to 
implement a transformative business model based in part on a string of strategic acquisitions.
Informatica had undertaken an auction process to sell itself in early 2015 attracting a range 
of bidders including Silver Lake Partners and Hellman & Friedman. The sale was marred by 
litigation initiated by shareholders alleging improprieties during the sale process. The ratio­
nale for including Microsoft and Salesforce Ventures was their prior partnership relationships 
with Informatica. Informatica has been working with Salesforc.com for years and utilizes 
Microsoft’s cloud services.
Under private ownership, Informatica will continue to focus on its main product areas, 
including cloud services, data security, and “big data” analysis. But the company, with the 
support of its new backers, will also search for potential takeover targets as part of an effort 
to be a consolidator in the fragmented data integration industry. The new owners will be able 
to provide financing for future takeovers.
Financing for the Informatica LBO consisted of $650,000,000 of 7.125% senior notes due 
in 2023. The notes are fully and unconditionally guaranteed, joint and severally, on a senior 
unsecured basis by each of the Company’s subsidiaries and parent entities. The firm also 
entered into new credit facilities (lending arrangements) with a syndicate (group) of financial 
institutions led by Bank of America, N.A. The new credit facilities consisted of a $1710-mil­
lion term or multiyear loan and a €250-million term loan, each maturing August 6, 2022, and 
a $150.0-million revolving facility (short-term line of credit) that matures August 6, 2020. The 
revolving loan facility is intended to satisfy short-term financing requirements for the firm. 
The lenders have first priority on the proceeds of any liquidation of the firm in the event it 
defaults on its loans. Unlike extraordinarily highly leveraged LBOs of the 2004–07 period, the 
Informatica capitalization is comparatively conservative with debt comprising about one-
half of total capital (debt plus equity).

466	
13.  Financing the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
CHAPTER OVERVIEW
“The stock market is not conducive to taking very many companies public today” and 
selling highly indebted retailers is “just not an option,” said Jim Zenni, chief executive of pri­
vate equity firm Z Capital Partners LLC, which invests in distressed companies.2 Like other 
private equity investors Mr. Zenni was lamenting the unfavorable market conditions in 2016 
that made “cashing out” of their investments impractical.
To understand the basis for his concern, it is necessary to understand how deals are 
financed. This chapter begins with a discussion of common sources of merger and acquisi­
tion (M&A) financing. The role of private equity firms in financing highly leveraged trans­
actions is discussed in detail. Highly leveraged transactions, typically referred to as LBOs, 
are discussed in the context of a financing strategy. The terms buyout firm and financial 
sponsor are used interchangeably (because they are in the literature on the subject) through­
out the chapter, to include a variety of investor groups. The companion website to this 
book (https://www.elsevier.com/books-and-journals/book-companion/9780128016091) 
contains a review of this chapter in the file folder entitled “Student Study Guide.”
HOW ARE M&A TRANSACTIONS COMMONLY FINANCED?
M&A transactions typically are financed by using cash, equity, debt, or some combination. 
For example, in late 2015, French telecommunications giant, Altice, in a deal valued at $17.7 
billion (including assumed debt) financed its takeover of US cable company, Cablevision, by 
using a combination of bank financing, cash on hand, and new equity issues. Which source(s) 
of financing is chosen depends on a variety of factors, including current capital market con­
ditions, the liquidity and creditworthiness of the acquiring and target firms, the incremental 
borrowing capacity of the combined acquiring and target firms, the size of the deal, and the 
preference of the target shareholders for cash or acquirer shares.
The decision to acquire can be separated from how the deal is financed. By decoupling 
these decisions, an acquirer can attract different types of investors (or clientele). In the case of 
M&As, a firm can issue shares in advance of a bid to raise funds to finance a cash purchase of 
a target. By explicitly stating that the purpose of the issue is to finance future acquisitions, the 
firm is able to attract investors who believe that acquisitions are a better use of the proceeds 
than providing working capital, building liquidity, or reinvestment in the firm. As such, the 
abnormal acquirer returns on the announcement date of the acquisition may be higher than if 
the acquirer’s mix of investors was less supportive of the firm making acquisitions. Moreover, 
the value of the deal to the acquirer could be enhanced at least in the short run if it can time the 
issuance of shares to periods when they are highly valued by investors and use the proceeds 
to buy another firm in the same industry when firms in the industry are seen as undervalued.3
Ultimately what source of funds or combination of sources is used and the timing of when 
they are used depends on the specific circumstances of the deal. The range of financing sourc­
es and the context in which they are used are discussed next.
3Ang et al. (2014a, 2014b).
2Jarzemsky (2016).

	
How Are M&A Transactions Commonly Financed?	
467
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
Financing Options: Borrowing
An acquirer or financial sponsor may tap into an array of alternative sources of borrow­
ing, including asset- and cash flow–based lending, long-term financing, and leveraged bank 
loans.
Asset-Based (Secured) Lending
Under asset-based lending, the borrower pledges certain assets as collateral. These loans 
are often short term (i.e., less than 1  year in maturity) and secured by assets that can be 
liquidated easily, such as accounts receivable and inventory. Borrowers often seek revolving 
lines of credit on which they draw on a daily basis. Under a revolving credit arrangement, the 
bank agrees to make loans up to a maximum for a specified period, usually a year or more. 
As the borrower repays a portion of the loan, an amount equal to the repayment can be bor­
rowed again under the terms of the agreement. In addition to interest on the notes, the bank 
charges a fee for the commitment to make the funds available. For a fee, the borrower may 
choose to convert the revolving credit line into a term loan. A term loan usually has a maturity 
of 2–10 years and typically is secured by the asset that is being financed, such as new capital 
equipment.4
Loan documents define the rights and obligations of the parties to the loan. The loan agree­
ment stipulates the terms and conditions under which the lender will loan the firm funds; the 
security agreement specifies which of the borrower’s assets will be pledged to secure the loan; 
and the promissory note commits the borrower to repay the loan, even if the assets, when liqui­
dated, do not fully cover the unpaid balance.5 Loan agreements routinely contain an accelera­
tion clause allowing a lender to demand that a borrower repay all or part of an outstanding 
loan if the contract is breached (i.e., not honored) such as failing to pay interest and principal 
when due or breaking a covenant. If the borrower defaults on the loan, the lender can seize 
and sell the collateral to recover the value of the loan.6 Furthermore, loan agreements often 
have cross-default provisions that allow a lender to collect its loan immediately if the borrower 
is in default on a loan to another lender.
These documents contain certain security provisions and protective positive and negative 
covenants limiting what the borrower may do as long as the loan is outstanding. Typical 
security provisions include the assignment of payments due to the lender, an assignment of a 
portion of the receivables or inventories, and a pledge of marketable securities held by the 
borrower. An affirmative covenant in a loan agreement specifies the actions the ­borrower agrees 
to take during the term of the loan. These typically include furnishing periodic ­financial 
4Acquiring firms often prefer to borrow funds on an unsecured basis because the added administrative costs 
involved in pledging assets as security raise the total cost of borrowing significantly. Secured borrowing also can 
be onerous because the security agreements can severely limit a company’s future borrowing and ability to pay 
dividends, make investments, and manage working capital aggressively.
5The security agreement is filed at a state regulatory office in the state where the collateral is located. Future lenders 
can check with this office to see which assets a firm has pledged and which are free to be used as future collateral. 
The filing of this security agreement legally establishes the lender’s security interest in the collateral.
6The process of determining which of a firm’s assets are free from liens is made easier today by commercial credit-
reporting repositories, such as Dun & Bradstreet, Experian, Equifax, and Transunion.

468	
13.  Financing the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
­statements to the lender, carrying sufficient insurance to cover insurable business risks, main­
taining a minimum amount of net working capital, and retaining key management personnel. 
A negative covenant restricts the actions of the borrower. They include limiting the amount of 
dividends that can be paid, the level of compensation that may be given to the borrower’s 
employees, the total amount of borrower indebtedness, capital investments, and the sale of 
certain assets.
The existence of restrictive covenants can reduce the cost of borrowing by as much as 
three-quarters of 1% for highly leveraged firms. Despite incurring potentially higher borrow­
ing costs, other firms may choose to negotiate loan agreements without such highly restrictive 
covenants as limitations on dividend payments or issuing additional debt without approval 
of existing lenders. Why? Because the perceived benefits of greater financial flexibility to pur­
sue unanticipated investment opportunities and to adopt what the firm’s board believes is an 
appropriate dividend policy outweigh the lower cost of borrowing.7 In general, lenders are 
willing to extend loans with relatively few restrictive covenants to firms with substantial cash 
balances on hand and other liquid assets such as receivables that can be rapidly converted to 
cash by the firm to pay outstanding loan balances.8
Debt covenants are frequently renegotiated, often substantially, prior to a firm being tech­
nically in default (i.e., in violation of a covenant). Over 60% of covenant renegotiations relax 
restrictive covenants, while the remainder tighten existing restrictions. Such renegotiations 
occur as lenders and borrowers attempt to avoid actual default.9 Renegotiation to remove 
onerous bond covenants may not be practical because of the sheer number of bondholders 
and the likelihood that a significant number of “holdouts” would remain even if agreement 
can be reached with the largest bondholders. Firms may be inclined to tender for these bonds 
offering a significant premium to their current market price as a means of “indirectly renego­
tiating” with their bondholders.10
Cash Flow (Unsecured) Lenders
Cash flow lenders view the borrower’s future capability to generate cash flow as the pri­
mary means of recovering a loan and the borrower’s assets as a secondary source of funds in 
the event of default. In the mid-1980s, LBO capital structures assumed increasing amounts of 
unsecured debt. Unsecured debt that lies between senior debt and the equity, called mezza­
nine financing, includes senior subordinated debt, subordinated debt, and bridge financing. It 
frequently consists of high-yield junk bonds, which may also include zero-coupon deferred-
interest debentures (i.e., bonds whose interest is not paid until maturity) used to increase the 
postacquisition cash flow of the acquired entity. Unsecured financing often consists of several 
layers of debt, each subordinate in liquidation to the next-most-senior issue. Those with the 
lowest level of security typically offer the highest yields, to compensate for their higher level 
of risk in the event of default. Bridge financing consists of unsecured loans, often provided by 
investment banks or hedge funds, to supply short-term financing pending the sale of subor­
dinated debt (i.e., long-term or “permanent” financing). Bridge financing usually is replaced 
6–9 months after the closing date of the LBO transaction.
7Reisel (2014).
8Cook et al. (2015).
9Denis and Wang (2014).
10Billett et al. (2016).

	
How Are M&A Transactions Commonly Financed?	
469
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
Types of Long-Term Financing
The attractiveness of long-term debt is its relatively low after-tax cost and the potential for 
leverage to improve earnings per share and returns on equity. Too much debt can increase the 
risk of default. Excessive amounts of leverage also can reduce a firm’s ability to finance un­
anticipated investment opportunities as they arise. Since the late 1970s, there has been a dra­
matic increase in the fraction of firms exhibiting low to no leverage in the United States. Firms 
without any debt have increased from about 7% in 1977 to about 20% in 2010; firms with less 
than 5% debt as a percent of total capital increased from 14% in 1977 to about 35% in 2010.11 
Why? Firms seem to value the flexibility that low leverage allows in financing attractive but 
unforeseen investment opportunities over the tax benefits associated with debt. However, 
merging firms, whose cash flows are relatively uncorrelated, tend to increase leverage follow­
ing completion of the deal, as more stable total cash flows better enable the combined firms to 
pay interest and principal on the incremental debt.12
Long-term debt issues are classified as senior or junior in liquidation. Senior debt has a 
higher-priority claim to a firm’s earnings and assets than junior debt. Unsecured debt also 
may be classified according to whether it is subordinated to other types of debt. In general, 
subordinated debentures are junior to other types of debt, including bank loans, because they 
are unsecured and backed only by the overall creditworthiness of the borrower.
Convertible bonds are types of debt that are convertible, at some predetermined ratio (i.e., 
a specific number of shares per bond), into shares of stock of the issuing company. They nor­
mally have a relatively low coupon rate. The bond buyer is compensated primarily by the 
ability to convert the bond to common stock at a substantial discount from the stock’s market 
value. Current shareholders will experience earnings or ownership dilution when the bond­
holders convert their bonds into new shares.
The extent to which a debt issue is junior to other debt depends on the restrictions placed 
on the company in an agreement called an indenture, a contract between the firm that issues 
the long-term debt securities and the lenders. The indenture details the nature of the issue, 
specifies the way in which the principal must be repaid, and specifies affirmative and nega­
tive covenants applicable to the long-term debt issue. Debt issues often are rated by various 
credit-rating agencies according to their relative degree of risk. The agencies consider such 
factors as a firm’s earnings stability, interest coverage ratios, debt as a percent of total capi­
tal, the degree of subordination, and the firm’s past performance in meeting its debt service 
­requirements.13
Junk Bonds
Junk bonds are high-yield bonds that credit-rating agencies have deemed either to be below 
investment grade or to have no rating.14 When originally issued, junk bonds frequently yield 
11D’Mello and Gniskin (2014).
12Agliardi et al. (2016).
13Rating agencies include Moody’s Investors Services and Standard & Poor’s (S&P) Corporation. Each has its own 
scale for identifying the risk of an issue. For Moody’s, the ratings are Aaa (the lowest-risk category), Aa, A, Baa, Ba, 
B, Caa, Ca, and C (the highest risk). For S&P, AAA denotes the lowest-risk category, and risk rises progressively 
through ratings AA, A, BBB, BB, B, CCC, CC, C, and D.
14Moody’s usually rates noninvestment-grade bonds Ba or lower; for S&P, it is BB or lower.

470	
13.  Financing the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
more than 4 percentage points above the yields on US Treasury debt of comparable maturity. 
Junk bond prices tend to be positively correlated with equity prices. As a firm’s cash flow 
improves, its share price generally rises due to improving future cash flow expectations, and 
the firm’s junk bond prices increase, reflecting the lower likelihood of default. Junk bond 
financing exploded in the early 1980s but has become less important due to the popularity of 
leveraged bank loans.
Leveraged Bank Loans
Leveraged loans are defined as unrated or noninvestment-grade bank loans and include 
second mortgages, which typically have a floating rate and give lenders a lower level of se­
curity than first mortgages. Some analysts include mezzanine or senior unsecured debt and 
payment-in-kind notes, for which interest is paid in the form of more debt. Leveraged loans are 
often less costly than junk bonds for borrowers because they are senior to high-yield bonds 
in a firm’s capital structure. Globally, the syndicated loan market, including leveraged loans, 
senior unsecured debt, and payment-in-kind notes, is growing more rapidly than public mar­
kets for debt and equity. Syndicated loans are those typically issued through a consortium of 
institutions, including hedge funds, pension funds, and insurance companies, to individual 
borrowers. A syndicated loan is one structured, arranged, and administered by one or several 
commercial banks or investment banks known as arrangers.
Increasingly, nonbank institutional lenders are taking larger roles in the corporate syn­
dicated leveraged loan market. Examples of nonbank institutional lenders include hedge 
funds, private equity funds, pension funds, mutual funds, and insurance companies. Lending 
alongside banks, these nonbank lenders typically charge higher fees and interest rates than 
banks since they generally have higher required returns.15 Firms are willing to pay the higher 
rates if they cannot satisfy all of their financing requirements in the traditional bank market.
The role of nonbank lenders in the leveraged loan market has been bolstered by the intro­
duction of new lending guidelines. Worried that bank underwriting practices have eroded in 
recent years, bank regulators attempted to restrict risky bank loans. Taking effect in May 2013, 
the new guidelines updated those from 2001 and apply to leveraged loans of $20 million or 
more. Leverage levels in excess of six times debt-to-EBITDA after asset sales are now classi­
fied as “criticized loans.” In 2013, the share of US leveraged loans in this category was 27% as 
compared to the record level of 52% in 2007 according to S&P Capital IQ. Banks participating 
in deals regulators feel are too risky could face fines. Private equity investors that commonly 
use financial leverage to pump up returns are concerned that these new guidelines could 
curtail the size and number of LBO deals.
Financing Options: Common and Preferred Equity
There are many varieties of common stock, and some pay dividends and provide vot­
ing rights. Other common shares have multiple voting rights. In addition to voting rights, 
common shareholders sometimes receive rights offerings that allow them to maintain their 
proportional ownership in the company in the event that the company issues another stock 
offering. Common shareholders with rights may, but are not obligated to, acquire as many 
15Lim et al. (2014).

	
How Are M&A Transactions Commonly Financed?	
471
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
shares of the new stock as needed to maintain their proportional ownership in the company. 
Rights are short-term instruments that usually expire within 30–60 days of issuance. The ex­
ercise price of rights is always set below the firm’s current share price. Common shares often 
are used as a method of payment in mergers when the acquiring firm believes that its stock is 
overvalued or may be issued before or after the deal to pay off deal-related debt or to finance 
capital expenditures associated with mergers.16 About 15% of transactions in which sellers 
received only cash from publicly traded acquirers are financed by the acquirer issuing stock 
during the 12 months prior to the deal.17
Although preferred stockholders receive dividends rather than interest, their shares often 
are considered a fixed-income security. Dividends on preferred stock are generally constant 
over time, like interest payments on debt, but the firm is generally not obligated to pay them 
at a specific time.18 In liquidation, bondholders are paid first, then preferred stockholders, 
and lastly common stockholders. To conserve cash, LBOs frequently issue paid-in-kind (PIK) 
preferred stock, where dividends are paid in the form of more preferred stock.19
When new common shares are issued, shareholders’ proportional ownership in that com­
pany is reduced. Commonly referred to as dilution, the value of existing shares may also de­
cline unless offset by improved earnings expectations. Dilutive situations can arise as a result 
of conversion of options or other convertible debt and preferred securities20 into common 
shares, secondary common share issues21 to raise capital, or share exchanges in mergers. The 
net effect of all three is to increase the number of new shares outstanding and for a given level 
of earnings to lower earnings per share and in turn the firm’s share price.
Seller Financing
Seller financing is one way to “close the gap” between what sellers want and what a buyer 
is willing to pay on the purchase price. It involves the seller’s deferring the receipt of a por­
tion of the purchase price until some future date—in effect, providing a loan to the buyer. A 
buyer may be willing to pay the seller’s asking price if a portion is deferred because the buyer 
18Unpaid dividends cumulate for eventual payment by the issuer if the preferred stock is a cumulative issue.
19To attract investors to start-ups, preferred stock may have additional benefits or preferences; for example, if a 
company is sold or goes public, investors get a multiple of their initial investment before common sharehold­
ers get anything; other preferences could include board seats and veto rights over important decisions. Preferred 
dividends paid to corporate investors receive favorable tax treatment (i.e., the dividend received deduction). Up to 
70% of preferred dividends received are tax deductible if a firm owns less than 20% of another company, 80% if the 
company owns more than 20% but less than 80% of the company paying the dividend, and up to 100% if it owns 
more than 80% of the dividend-paying firm. The purpose of this tax treatment is to soften the impact of potential 
“triple taxation.”
20See Chapter 14 for a more detailed explanation of options and other convertible securities.
21Secondary equity issues are those implemented after a firm has undertaken an initial public offering (IPO) and are 
normally undertaken when the firm’s equity price is at or near historical highs. If the price per share realized in the 
secondary issue is lower than the IPO price or that realized in earlier secondary issues, the price of shares held by 
current shareholders fall to that realized in the secondary issue.
16Di Giuli (2013).
17Ang et al. (2014a, 2014b).

472	
13.  Financing the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
recognizes that the loan will reduce the present value of the purchase price. The advantages 
to the buyer include a lower overall risk of the transaction (because of the need to provide 
less capital at the time of closing) and the shifting of operational risk to the seller if the buyer 
ultimately defaults on the loan to the seller.22
Earnouts and warrants also represent forms of seller financing. With the earnout, the seller 
agrees to defer a portion of the purchase price contingent on realizing a future earnings target 
or some other predetermined performance measure. Warrants may be issued to the seller 
enabling them to purchase an amount of the acquirer’s common stock at a stipulated exer­
cise price, which is usually higher than the price at the time the warrant is issued. Warrants 
may be converted over a period of many months to many years enabling the warrant holder 
to participate in the upside potential of the business. Table 13.1 summarizes the alternative 
forms of financing.
22Many businesses do not want to use seller financing, since it requires that they accept the risk that the note will 
not be repaid. Such financing is necessary, though, when bank financing is not an option. The drying up of bank 
lending in 2008 and 2009 due to the slumping economy and the crisis of confidence in the credit markets resulted in 
increased reliance on seller financing to complete the sale of small- to intermediate-size businesses.
TABLE 13.1  Alternative Financing by Type of Security and Lending Source
Type of security
Debt
Backed by
Lenders loan up to
Lending source
Secured Debt
  Short-term (<1 year) debt
Liens generally on 
receivables and 
inventories
50%–80%, depending on 
quality
Banks and finance 
companies
  Intermediate-term 
(1–10 years) debt
Liens on land and 
equipment
Up to 80% of appraised 
value of equipment and 
50% of real estate
Life insurance companies, 
private equity investors, 
pension and hedge funds
Unsecured or mezzanine debt 
(subordinated and junior 
subordinated debt, including 
seller financing)
  First layer
  Second layer, etc.
Cash-generating 
capabilities of the 
borrower
Face value of securities
Life insurance companies, 
pension funds, private 
equity, and hedge funds
Bridge financing
Payment-in-kind
Type of security
Equity
Preferred stock
•	Cash dividends
•	Convertible
•	Payment-in-kind
Cash-generating 
capabilities of the firm
Life insurance companies, pension funds, hedge 
funds, private equity, and angel investors
Common stock
Cash-generating 
capabilities of the firm
Same

	
What Is the Role of Private Equity, Hedge, and Venture Capital Funds in Deal Financing?	
473
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
Impact of Near-Zero/Negative Interest Rates on M&As
More than $13 trillion of sovereign debt outstanding exhibited negative interest rates by 
the end of 2016. While still rare, some corporations began to issue debt offering negative re­
turns. Increasingly, investors were paying for the “privilege” of lending to companies. In late 
September 2016, German consumer products firm Henkel AG and French pharmaceutical 
company Sanofi SA sold no-interest bonds at a premium to face value resulting in investors 
paying more at the time of issue than they would receive when the bonds mature.
How will these developments affect business investment? Near-zero or negative interest 
rates should, unless offset by other factors, stimulate business investment on such things 
as plant and equipment as well as on M&As. Why? Projects whose expected returns were 
not attractive when borrowing costs were higher now become viable. Moreover, holding 
cash in excess of normal operating requirements offers poor returns or may even come at 
a cost.
But in recent years, global business investment and M&A activity has been much lower 
than would have been expected in such a low interest rate environment. The stimulus 
that should have accompanied plunging borrowing costs has been blunted in part by de­
clining business confidence as senior managers view the near-zero/negative interest rate 
environment as portending continued sluggish growth or, worse, recession. Central banks 
seem to have exhausted all their tools in their effort to spur increased economic growth. 
Instead of reinvesting in their operations or seeking strategic transactions that can sup­
press near-term reported earnings, firms often have opted to borrow to buy back their 
own stock to placate yield-starved investors. This often is viewed as a less risky way of 
generating shareholder returns than reinvesting excess cash flow in the firm or buying 
other companies.
Low or negative interest rates have another insidious effect: they prop up so-called “zom­
bie companies.” Such firms are those that are hemorrhaging cash but are able to remain in 
business because they can meet their near-term working capital requirements through bor­
rowing. Thus, the low interest rate environment slows industry consolidation as these zombie 
firms would otherwise have sought to merge with more financially viable competitors or to 
reorganize under the protection of the bankruptcy court. Such firms often are acquired as part 
of the reorganization process.
WHAT IS THE ROLE OF PRIVATE EQUITY, HEDGE, AND VENTURE 
CAPITAL FUNDS IN DEAL FINANCING?
Private equity, hedge, and venture capital funds take money from large institutions such 
as pension funds, borrow additional cash, and buy private and public companies. Private 
equity funds invest for the long term and often take an active role in managing the firms 
they acquire. Hedge funds are viewed more as traders than as investors, investing in a wide 
variety of assets (be it stocks, commodities, or foreign currency), holding them for a short 
time, and then selling. Finally, venture capital funds take money from institutional investors 
and make numerous small investments in start-ups. At the end of 2015, global assets under 
management by private equity firms, hedge funds, and venture capital funds totaled about 

474	
13.  Financing the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
$3.7 trillion, $2.8 trillion, and $270 billion, respectively.23 The amount of new financing raised 
by these investor groups may be leveraged by as much as $4 for every $1 of equity capital. 
In the global buyout boom of 2007 and 2008, new monies flowing into these funds exceeded 
$1 trillion, suggesting that these investor groups controlled as much as $4 trillion in potential 
buyout financing at that time.
In deal financing, these investor groups play the role of financial intermediaries and “lend­
ers of last resort” for firms having limited access to capital. Moreover, private equity investors 
provide financial engineering and operating expertise and monitor management activities 
such that private equity–owned firms often show superior operational performance and are 
less likely to go bankrupt than comparably leveraged firms. These roles are discussed next.
Financial Intermediaries
Private equity, hedge, and venture capital funds represent conduits between investors/
lenders and borrowers, pooling these resources and investing in firms with attractive growth 
prospects. All three types of buyout funds limit investors’ ability to withdraw funds for a 
number of years as they seek new investment opportunities. Both private equity and venture 
capital funds tend to invest almost all of the funds entrusted to them by investors within 
5 years, with more than one-half of new investments made during the first 2 years of the aver­
age fund’s lifetime.24
All three typically exit their investments via sales to strategic buyers, IPOs, or another buy­
out fund. However, their roles in financing M&A activity differ in significant ways. Private 
equity firms use substantial leverage to acquire firms, remain invested for up to 10 years, 
and often take an active operational role in firms in which they have an ownership stake. 
While hedge funds also use leverage to acquire firms outright, they are more likely to provide 
financing for takeovers through short-term loans or minority equity stakes. Finally, venture 
capital funds’ primary role is to finance nascent businesses. Such investments often are criti­
cal for businesses with limited access to capital markets to sustain internal growth and create 
employment opportunities.25
Private equity, hedge, and venture capital funds usually are limited partnerships (for US 
investors) or offshore investment corporations (for non-US or tax-exempt investors) in which 
the general partner (GP) has made a substantial personal investment, allowing the GP to 
wield substantial control. Partnerships offer favorable tax benefits, a finite life, and investor 
liability limited to the amount of their investment. Institutional investors, such as pension 
funds, endowments, insurance companies, and private banks, as well as high-net-worth in­
dividuals, typically invest in these types of funds as limited partners. Once a partnership 
has reached its target size, the partnership closes to further investment, whether from new 
23Estimates of assets under management are obtained for private equity firms from prequin.com (https://www.
preqin.com/docs/samples/The_2015_Preqin_Global_Private_Equity_Report_Sample_Pages.pdf), for hedge funds 
from BarclayHedge.com (http://www.barclayhedge.com/research/indices/ghs/mum/Hedge_Fund.html), and 
for venture capital firms from the National Venture Capital Association (file:///C:/Users/Donald/Downloads/
NVCA_Yearbook_2015.pdf).
24Giot et al. (2014).
25Paglia and Harjoto (2014).

	
What Is the Role of Private Equity, Hedge, and Venture Capital Funds in Deal Financing?	
475
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
or existing investors. While GPs may invest in their own funds, the bulk of the equity funds 
are raised from institutional investors. Successful private equity funds raise new funds every 
3–5 years to remain in business. Consequently, they must be able to demonstrate an ability to 
outperform alternative investments to remain in business and grow.
Private equity, hedge, and venture capital funds’ revenue has both a fixed and a variable 
component. GPs earn most of the private equity firm’s revenue through management fees, 
often as much as 70%.26 Management fees commonly equal 2% of assets under management 
annually. GPs can also earn variable revenue from so-called carried interest, or the percent­
age of profits, often 20%, accruing to the GP. The carried interest percentage may be applied 
without the fund’s having achieved any minimum financial return for investors or may be 
triggered only if a certain preset return is achieved, often 8%. The carried interest figure often 
exceeds 20% of cumulative profits since GPs seldom share in the losses the partnership in­
curs. For example, if the partnership earns $40 million resulting in the GPs earning $8 million 
(i.e., 0.2 × $40 million) in the first year but loses $10 million in each of the next 2 years, the 
effective carried interest percentage over the 3-year period is 40% [i.e., $8 million/($40 mil­
lion − $20 million)]. Private equity funds also receive fees from their portfolio companies for 
completing transactions, arranging financing, performing due diligence, providing legal and 
consulting advice, and monitoring business performance.
Lenders and Investors of Last Resort
Since 1995, hedge funds and private equity funds have participated in more than half of 
the private equity placements (i.e., sales to a select number of investors rather than the gen­
eral public) in the United States. Contributing more than one-fourth of the total capital raised, 
hedge funds have consistently been the largest single investor group in these types of transac­
tions.27 Such investments have frequently allowed firms in which hedge and private equity 
firms invest to improve profitability, increase capital expenditures, and grow revenue faster 
than their peers.28
Publicly traded firms using private placements tend to be small, young, and poorly per­
forming. With reliable data often lacking, these firms have difficulty obtaining financing.29 
Since security issues by such firms often tend to be relatively small, their limited trading vol­
ume and subsequent lack of liquidity make them unsuitable for the public stock ­exchanges. 
Consequently, such firms often undertake transactions called private investments in public 
­equity (PIPEs).30 With few options, firms issuing private placements of equities often have 
little leverage in negotiating with investors. Therefore, many of the private placements grant 
investors repricing rights, which protect investors from a decline in the price of their holdings 
by requiring firms to issue more shares if the price of the privately placed shares decreases.
Hedge funds can purchase PIPE securities that cannot be sold in public markets until they 
are registered with the SEC at discounts from the issuing firms and simultaneously sell short 
29Wu (2004).
30See Chapter 10 for a more detailed discussion of PIPE transactions.
26Metrick and Yasuda (2010).
27Brophy et al. (2009).
28Boucly et al. (2011).

476	
13.  Financing the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
the securities of the issuing firms that are already trading on public markets. Although firms 
obtaining funding from hedge funds perform relatively poorly, hedge funds investing in PIPE 
securities perform relatively well, because they buy such securities at substantial discounts 
(affording some protection from price declines), protect their investment through repricing 
rights and short selling, and sell their investments after a relatively short period. By being 
able to protect their investments in this manner, hedge funds are able to serve “as investors of 
last resort” for firms having difficulty borrowing.
Providers of Financial Engineering and Operational Expertise for Target Firms
In this context, financial engineering describes the creation of a viable capital structure that 
magnifies financial returns to equity investors. The additional leverage drives the need to 
improve operating performance to meet debt service requirements; in turn, the anticipated 
improvement in operating performance enables the firm to assume greater leverage. In this 
manner, leverage and operating performance are inextricably linked.
Successful private equity investors manage the relationship between leverage and operat­
ing performance, realizing superior financial returns and operating performance on average 
relative to their peers. Furthermore, private equity firms seem better able to survive financial 
distress than other, comparably leveraged, firms. These conclusions are supported by an ex­
amination of abnormal financial returns to both prebuyout shareholders, who benefit from 
the premium paid for their shares as a result of the LBO, and postbuyout shareholders.31
Prebuyout Returns to LBO Target Firm (Prebuyout) Shareholders
Numerous studies document that prebuyout shareholder abnormal financial returns often 
exceed 40% on the announcement date for nondivisional LBOs. The commonly cited sources 
of these sizeable returns to prebuyout target shareholders are the anticipated improvement in 
the target’s operating performance (i.e., cost reduction, productivity improvement, and rev­
enue enhancement) due to management incentives, the discipline imposed on management 
to repay debt, and future tax savings.32
Because tax benefits are highly predictable for a given future earnings stream, the value 
of future tax savings tends to be more predictable than future improvements in operating 
performance. Therefore, the impact of tax benefits often is fully reflected in premiums offered 
to shareholders of firms subject to LBOs while the effects of improved operating performance 
often are not.33 The failure of expected improvements in operating performance to be fully 
reflected in premiums helps to explain the presence of sizeable postbuyout returns to LBO 
shareholders.
Another factor contributing to the abnormal returns to prebuyout shareholders is the 
elimination of prebuyout inefficient decision making in firms having significant differenc­
es among the rights of different shareholder groups. For example, firms having dual class 
31Recall that abnormal financial returns are those realized by investors in excess of what one would expect for firms 
exhibiting similar risk and premiums refer to what the target firm shareholder is paid compared to the target firm’s 
prebuyout share price.
32Guo et al. (2011), Renneboog et al. (2007), Weir et al. (2005), and Ofek (1994).
33Newbould et al. (1992).

	
What Is the Role of Private Equity, Hedge, and Venture Capital Funds in Deal Financing?	
477
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
capital structures in which investors holding stock with multiple voting rights have control 
while investors holding another class of stock receive dividends. The first class of sharehold­
ers has control rights while the second class has rights to cash flow. Such differences among 
shareholder groups often create substantial differences in the way each group wants to see 
the firm’s cash flow used: controlling shareholders may want excess cash flow reinvested 
in the firm while others may want it disbursed as dividends or share repurchases. As such, 
controlling shareholders may see significant value in buying out the other public sharehold­
ers in order to gain complete control over decisions about how the firm’s cash flow will be 
used. Controlling shareholders may be willing to pay very attractive premiums to take pub­
lic firms private (so-called public-to-private LBOs), documented to average about 36% in 18 
Western European countries.34 Premiums paid may be even higher when large institutional 
shareholders, capable of exerting substantial leverage in negotiations, are among the target 
firm’s shareholders.35
Postbuyout Returns to LBO Shareholders
Public-to-private LBOs on average improve a firm’s operating profits and cash flow, irre­
spective of methodology, benchmarks, and time period. However, there is evidence that more 
recent public-to-private LBOs may have a more modest impact on operating performance 
than those of the 1980s.36
Large-sample studies in the United States, the United Kingdom, and France consistently 
show that companies in private equity portfolios improve their operations more than their 
competitors on average, as measured by their profit margins and cash flows. Private equity 
funds accelerate the process of creative destruction that invigorates the economy by replacing 
mature, often moribund, firms with more innovative, dynamic ones, tending to increase pro­
ductivity by more than 2%.37 Industry and GDP growth and stock market returns also have a 
substantial impact on private equity financial returns, with governance playing only a limited 
role in value creation.38 Some studies document that average private equity fund returns in 
the United States have exceeded those of public markets in both the short term and the long 
term. On average, private equity funds have earned at least 18%–20% more over the life of 
their investments than the S&P 500 during the same period; private equity firms also have 
outperformed public equities in both good and bad markets.39 These higher returns compen­
sate private equity investors for the relative illiquidity of their investments as compared to 
more conventional investments, such as equities.40
36Cumming et al. (2014), in a summary of much of the literature on post-LBO performance, concluded that LBOs 
and especially management buyouts (MBOs) enhance firm operating performance. However, Guo et al. (2011) find 
that the improvement in operating performance following public-to-private LBOs has been more modest during 
the period from 1990 to 2006 than during the 1980s. Weir et al. (2007) found similar results over roughly the same 
period.
37Alperovych et al. (2013), Harford and Kolasinski (2012), Davis et al. (2011), Stromberg et al. (2011), Guo et al. 
(2011), Lerner et al. (2011), Kaplan and Stromberg (2009), and Wright et al. (2008).
38Valkama et al. (2013).
39Harris et al. (2014), Robinson and Sensoy (2011), and Kaplan (2012).
40Frazoni et al. (2012).
35Bajo et al. (2013).
34Broubaker et al. (2014).

478	
13.  Financing the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
Contrary viewpoints note that the financial returns for private equity funds are self-report­
ed and therefore problematic and may be distorted by measurement errors, choice of meth­
odology, and failure to include all management fees. A widely quoted study for the period 
between 1980 and 2001 found that financial returns to private equity limited partners once all 
fees were considered were equivalent to what they could have earned if they had invested in 
the S&P 500.41 Others argue that once management fees, the illiquid nature of the investment, 
and the risk of losing money are taken into account, investors essentially break even.42
Still others find that the positive improvement in operating results following an LBO occur 
largely in empirical studies of LBOs for which public financial statements are available due to 
such firms having publicly traded debt outstanding or that go public again and provide his­
torical financial statements. Some researchers attribute the post-LBO operating improvement 
for such firms to sample bias. That is, such samples include only those firms that are superior 
performers in their industries since only the best performers are likely to be taken public and 
in general only higher-quality corporate borrowers issue public debt. In a recent study of US 
firms using Internal Revenue Service data, the average LBO firm shows little improvement in 
operating performance between the pre- and post-LBO periods.43
Private Equity–Owned Firms and Financial Distress
Energy Future Holdings’ (formerly TXU Corporation) Chapter  11 bankruptcy filing in 
mid-2014 represented one of the largest failures in history of a private equity–funded deal. 
TXU had been taken private in 2007 in a transaction financed with more than $40 billion in 
debt and was based on a bet that natural gas prices would continue to escalate, a gamble that 
failed miserably. The private equity owners had written their investments down to zero years 
before the bankruptcy filing and many lenders had already sold their debt at a substantial 
loss. The failure of this deal seemed to confirm the precarious nature of private equity deals 
made during the peak of LBO activity.
Despite this headline-grabbing announcement, the data seem to show otherwise. Firms 
acquired by private equity investors do not display a higher default rate than other, similarly 
leveraged firms. Furthermore, firms financed with private equity funds are less likely to be liq­
uidated and exit Chapter 11 sooner than comparably leveraged firms.44 Private equity–backed 
firms exhibited a default rate between 1980 and 2002 of 1.2% versus Moody’s Investors Ser­
vices–reported default rate of 1.6% for all US corporate bond issuers during the same period.45 
Bankruptcy rates among private equity buyouts of European firms showed that experienced 
private equity investors were better able to manage financial distress and avoid bankruptcy 
than their peer companies. The success of many private equity investors in avoiding bank­
ruptcy reflects their selection of undervalued but less financially distressed firms as buyout 
targets46 and their ability manage the additional leverage once the buyout is completed.47
41Kaplan and Schoar (2005).
42Sorensen et al. (2014).
43Cohn et al. (2014).
44Stromberg et al. (2011).
45Kaplan and Stromberg (2009).
46Dittmar et al. (2012) document that private equity firms excel at identifying targets with high potential for opera­
tional improvement.
47Tykova and Borell (2011).

	
Leveraged Buyouts as Financing Strategies	
479
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
LEVERAGED BUYOUTS AS FINANCING STRATEGIES
LBOs refer to a commonly used financing strategy often employed by private equity firms 
to acquire companies using a substantial amount of debt to pay for the cost of the acquisition. 
Such deals often result in an increased concentration of ownership and their leverage magni­
fies financial returns to equity (Table 13.2).
In a typical LBO transaction, the tangible assets of the firm to be acquired are used as col­
lateral for the loans. The most highly liquid assets often are used as collateral for obtaining 
bank financing. Such assets commonly include receivables and inventory. The firm’s fixed 
assets usually are used to secure a portion of long-term senior financing. Subordinated 
debt, either unrated or low-rated debt, is used to raise the balance of the purchase price. 
When a public company is subject to a LBO, it is said to be going private because the equity 
of the firm has been purchased by a small group of investors and is no longer publicly 
traded.
LBOs are characterized by a substantial increase in a firm’s post-LBO debt-to-equity ra­
tio, usually as a result of the substantial increase in borrowing to purchase shares held by 
its prebuyout private or public shareholders. However, in some instances, a firm’s leverage 
increases even though there is no significant increase in borrowing. This may result from 
the way in which the target firm’s assets are used to finance the buyout. The investor group 
initiating the takeover may use the target’s excess cash balances or sell certain target as­
sets using the proceeds to buy out current shareholders. If the amount of the target’s debt 
outstanding remains unchanged, the target firm’s debt-to-equity ratio will rise due to the 
decline in the firm’s equity (i.e., assets decline relative to liabilities, shrinking the firm’s 
equity).
TABLE 13.2  Impact of Leverage on Return to Shareholdersa
All-cash 
purchase
50% cash/50% 
debt
20% cash/80% 
debt
Purchase price ($)
100
100
100
Equity (cash investment)
100
50
20
Borrowings
0
50
80
Earnings before interest, taxes, 
depreciation, and amortization
20
20
20
Interest at 10%
0
5
8
Depreciation and amortization
2
2
2
Income before taxes
18
13
10
Less income taxes at 40%
7.2
5.2
4
Net income ($)
10.8
7.8
6
After-tax return on equity (%)
10.8
15.6
30
aUnless otherwise noted, all numbers are in millions of dollars.

480	
13.  Financing the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
Historically, empirical studies of LBOs have been subject to small samples due to limited 
data availability, survival bias,48 and a focus on public-to-private LBO deals. Insights pro­
vided by more recent studies, often based on much larger samples over longer time periods,49 
are discussed in the following sections.50
The Private Equity Market Is a Global Phenomenon
While US private equity investors have been more active for a longer time period, the 
number of non-US private equity deals has grown to be larger than that in the United States. 
LBO activity tends to be substantially larger in countries with stronger creditor protections 
due to the availability of low-cost credit. Private equity investors in cross-border deals struc­
tured as LBOs typically come from countries with strong creditor protections, where such in­
vestors are more commonplace, and acquire firms in countries with weak creditor protections 
where potential financial returns may be higher. Corporate debt used to finance such deals 
is issued in the name of the target firm since it is more likely to be recognized in the target 
firm’s country. To protect lenders, “choice of law” contract provisions stipulate that viola­
tions of debt covenants are subject to the corporate and bankruptcy laws of a country with 
strong creditor protections. Examples of strong creditor rights include the right of the creditor 
to seize collateral once bankruptcy reorganization has been approved, the requirement that 
creditors consent before a debtor firm can enter bankruptcy, whether secured creditors are 
paid first when a debtor firm is liquidated, and whether creditors are responsible for running 
a firm while the firm is in bankruptcy.51
The ease with which the majority owner can squeeze out minority shareholders is another 
factor affecting cross-border deals. The United States, the United Kingdom, and Ireland tend 
to be less restrictive when it comes to squeezing out minority investors, while Italy, Denmark, 
Finland, and Spain tend to be far more restrictive.52 Other factors such as exchange rates, a 
country’s political environment, and the potential for asset expropriation are discussed in 
detail in Chapter 18.
Pure Management Buyouts Are Rare
Only one in five LBOs between 1970 and 2007 involved pure MBOs, in which individual in­
vestors (typically the target firm’s management) acquired the firm in a leveraged transaction. 
The majority were undertaken by a traditional private equity financial sponsor ­providing 
48Failed firms were excluded from the performance studies because they no longer existed.
49The data for the large sample studies come from S&P’s Capital IQ and the US Census Bureau databases. The 
studies compare a sample of LBO target firms with a “control sample.” Selected for comparative purposes, firms 
in control samples are known to be similar to the private equity transaction sample in all respects except for not 
having undergone an LBO.
50Observations in this section pertaining to changes having taken place between 1970 and 2007 are based on the 
findings of Kaplan and Stromberg (2009), who analyzed 21,397 private equity deals during this time period in the 
largest and most exhaustive study of its type.
51Cao et al. (2015).
52Wright et al. (2008).

	
Leveraged Buyouts as Financing Strategies	
481
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
most of the equity financing. MBOs can create potential conflicts of interest. In its effort to 
take the firm private in 2007, the top management of oil and gas pipeline company Kinder 
Morgan waited more than 2 months before informing the firm’s board of its desire to take 
the firm private. It is customary for boards under such circumstances to create a committee 
within the board consisting of independent members to solicit other bids. While the board 
did eventually create such a committee, the board’s lack of awareness of the pending manage­
ment proposal gave management an important lead over potential bidders in structuring a 
proposal.
LBO Transactions Span Many Different Industries
While private equity deals occur in a variety of industries, including chemicals, machinery, 
and retailing, buyout activity has shifted increasingly to the “high-tech” market segments. 
The shift may reflect a change in the composition of US industry or simply a shortage of tar­
gets deemed appropriate by private equity investors in the more traditional industries.
Sales to Strategic Buyers Represent the Most Common Exit Strategy
LBO financial sponsors and management are able to realize their expected financial returns 
on exiting the business. Constituting about 13% of total transactions since the 1970s, IPOs de­
clined in importance as an exit strategy. At 39% of all exits, the most common way of exiting 
buyouts is through a sale to a strategic buyer53; the second most common method, at 24%, is 
a sale to another buyout or private equity firm in so-called secondary buyouts (SBOs). The 
choice between IPOs and SBOs depends heavily on debt and equity market conditions. IPOs 
tend to be used when the stock market is rising; SBOs are more popular when debt is readily 
available and cheap making deals more attractive to private equity firms that heavily rely 
on debt.54
Selling to a strategic buyer often results in the best price, because the buyer may be able 
to generate significant synergies by combining the firm with its existing business. However, 
selling to a private equity firm can provide an even more attractive price when the target is 
poorly performing and has few investment opportunities. Private equity firms often have 
greater expertise in managing underperforming firms and access to cheaper capital.55
Buyout firms sometimes remain invested in a specific business portfolio for up to 10 years. 
They may sell these businesses through SBOs when their holding period comes to a close, and 
they have to pay off investors at the highest possible price and in the shortest possible time. 
Pressure to sell quickly often causes them to sell at depressed cash flow multiples making such 
businesses attractive to other buyout firms seeking new investment opportunities.56 An IPO 
is often less attractive due to the massive amount of public disclosure required, the substan­
tial commitment of management time, the difficulty in timing the market, and the potential 
for valuing the IPO incorrectly. The original investors also can cash out while management 
53Harford and Kolasinski (2012).
54Jenkinson and Souza (2015).
55Gorbenko and Malenko (2014).
56Arcot et al. (2015).

482	
13.  Financing the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
remains in charge of the business through a leveraged recapitalization: borrowing additional 
funds to repurchase stock from other shareholders. This strategy may be employed once the 
firm has paid off its original debt.
Empirical studies show that strategic buyers of private equity–backed firms experience an­
nouncement-date abnormal returns of 1%–3%. Strategic acquirers of venture capital–backed 
firms, private equity investors who invest in firms at their earliest stage of development, 
display positive announcement-date returns of about 3%.57
Most LBOs Involve Acquisitions of Private Firms
Public-to-private transactions, although the focus of most prior research, accounted for 
only 6.7% of all transactions between 1970 and 2007, whereas they did comprise 28% of the 
dollar value of such deals, since public firms usually are larger than private ones. Private-firm 
takeovers constituted 47% of all deals between 1970 and 2007. During the same period, buy­
outs of divisions of firms accounted for 31% of the transactions and 31% of total deal value.
The Effects of LBOs on Innovation
It has long been recognized that economic growth is influenced significantly by the rate of 
innovation, which is in turn affected by the level of R&D spending.58 Although early studies 
found a correlation between more debt and lower R&D spending,59 this seems to be true only 
for the smallest firms.60
Private equity–financed LBOs may tend to improve the rate of innovation.61 Private equity 
firms’ expertise with respect to strategy development; operational, financial, and human re­
source management; marketing and sales; and M&As may create an innovative environment. 
Private equity sponsors’ relationships with customers, suppliers, lenders, and other investors 
assist in leveraging the innovation process. They also play an important role in assessing in­
cumbent management skills and those of their potential replacements.62 Finally, LBO targets 
are more likely to implement innovative marketing programs (e.g., design, packaging, and 
promotion) to increase sales and market share.63
Private firms or firms taken private through an LBO often demonstrate higher rates of 
unique, higher-quality innovation than public firms as measured by the number of patent 
citations per firm even though public firms typically generate more patents overall. Why? Pri­
vate firms tend to be more focused, less bureaucratic, and consequently more attractive to the 
57Harford and Kolasinski (2012) and Masulis and Nahata (2011).
58Jaffe and Trajtenberg (2002).
59Hall (1992) and Himmelberg and Petersen (1994).
60Hao and Jaffe (1993).
62Meuleman et al. (2009).
63Le Nadant and Perdreau (2012).
61Lerner et al. (2011) found the rate of innovation, as measured by the quantity and generality of patents, does not 
change following private equity investments. In fact, the patents of private equity–backed firms applied for in the 
years following the investment by the private equity firm are more frequently cited, suggesting some improvement 
in the rate of innovation.

	
Leveraged Buyouts as Financing Strategies	
483
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
most talented innovators than are public firms, and they are less prone to interference from 
the less sophisticated shareholders of public firms.64 When firms go public, they tend to lose 
a lot of internal talent, often made rich as a result of the IPO, causing a substantial decline in 
the uniqueness of their innovation even though the amount of innovation remains about the 
same as the total number of new patents shows little change. Once public, these firms tend 
to shift the way in which they innovate from reliance on internal resources to innovating by 
acquiring more innovative firms.65
The Effects of LBOs on Employment Growth
After a buyout, employment in existing operations tends to decline relative to other com­
panies in the same industry by about 3%. However, employment in new operations tends to 
increase relative to other companies in the same industry by more than 2%. Therefore, the 
overall impact on employment of private equity transactions is a modest 1% decline. How­
ever, the picture varies by industry, with net job losses (gains less losses) concentrated in buy­
outs of retailers. Excluding retailers, the overall net employment change appears to be neutral 
or positive. In France, private equity transactions lead to employment increases.66 These find­
ings are consistent with the notion that private equity groups act as catalysts to shrink inef­
ficient segments of underperforming firms. Furthermore, new ventures undertaken by firms 
show substantially higher job creation rates than those in current businesses, creating the po­
tential for higher long-term employment gains than at firms not having undergone buyouts.
A recent US government study found that in private equity–financed transactions between 
2004 and 2008, employment growth typically grew following the takeover by the private eq­
uity investors as compared to the growth in employment at these firms prior to the takeover. 
The same report also concluded that private equity LBOs generally had a positive impact on 
the financial performance of the acquired companies.67
The Changing Nature of Private Equity Firm Collaboration
To finance the increased average size of targets taken private in the early to mid-2000s, 
buyout firms started to bid for target firms as groups of investors.68 Often time-consuming 
to set up, such transactions were referred to as club deals. Critics of such tactics argued that 
banding together to buy large LBO targets could result in lower takeover premiums for target 
firms by reducing the number of potential bidders. By mitigating risk and allowing for a pool­
ing of resources, supporters countered that clubbing could increase premiums.
The empirical evidence concerning how club deals impact target firm shareholders is mixed. 
For deals involving large private equity firms and relatively few bidders, club bidding may 
64Kamoto (2016).
65Bernstein (2015).
66Davis et al. (October 1, 2011).
67U.S. General Accountability Office (2008).
68Boone and Mulherin (2011) found that nearly half of all acquisitions by private equity firms between 2003 and 
2007 involved clubbing. Officer et al. (2008) found similar results between 2002 and 2006.

484	
13.  Financing the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
­depress purchase premiums.69 However, when the number of independent bidders is high, 
there is little evidence of anticompetitive activity,70 and purchase premiums may be increased.71 
Still other researchers find no correlation between purchase premiums and club deals.72
In August 2014, after 7 years of litigation and mounting legal bills, three leading US private 
equity firms agreed to pay a combined $325 million to settle accusations they colluded with 
one another to drive down prices of corporate takeover targets. Under the terms of the court 
settlement, the firms (Kohlberg Kravis Roberts, the Blackstone Group, and TPG) did not ad­
mit any wrongdoing. The plaintiffs, who included pension funds and individual investors, 
had sought billions of dollars in compensation. Three other defendants, Bain Capital, Silver 
Lake, and Goldman Sachs, agreed several months earlier to settle claims for $150.5 million. 
The lawsuits were filed after the US Justice Department’s antitrust division began investigat­
ing potential collusion relating to club deals. The government has never filed charges.
The nature of collaboration for private equity funds has changed in recent years, due in 
part to the smaller size of the average deal. In mid-2014, the Blackstone Group solicited fi­
nancing directly from some of its fund investors to acquire auto parts manufacturer Gates Inc. 
for $5.4 billion. According to a survey conducted by research firm Preqin, nearly one-third of 
buyout firms in 2014 offered more “coinvestment” opportunities than in 2013. Buyout firms 
have found that coinvestment with limited partners (often institutional investors such as pen­
sion funds and endowments) enables them to raise funds more easily when the opportunities 
arise. Advantages to limited partners include escaping management fees they would have 
incurred had they invested through a new fund and retaining the share of capital gains that 
would have accrued to the fund’s GPs. Moreover, their capital is invested more quickly than 
is normally the case with a new fund that raises financing in anticipation of finding new 
investment opportunities. However, returns to investors that coinvest with private equity 
funds have tended to underperform those that could have been earned had they invested 
as a limited partner in one of the private equity firm’s funds. It appears that the institutional 
investors are given the opportunity to coinvest only after the hedge funds have selected the 
most promising opportunities for their own investments.73
Private equity (buyout funds) funds may generate returns for their limited partners less 
than what they could have earned had they invested in a broad stock market index when they 
purchase businesses for their portfolios through SBOs late in their investment period.74 Un­
der these circumstances, they may tend to overpay in order to utilize quickly any remaining 
money in the investment fund. Of course, such practices discourage future limited partner 
investment in the buyout firm’s funds. SBOs made early in the investment period tend to gen­
erate returns similar to other buyout transactions. Finally, buyout firms with complementary 
skills (e.g., finance vs. operating; regional vs. global) show on average significantly higher 
returns than SBOs between buyout firms with similar skills.75
69Officer et al. (2008).
70Boone and Mulherin (2011).
71Meuleman and Wright (2007), Guo et al. (2008), and Marquez and Singh (2013) found some evidence that “club­
bing” is associated with higher target transaction prices when the number of independent bidders is large.
72U.S. General Accountability Office (2008).
73Fang et al. (2015).
74Buyout firms frequently have defined periods of time in which they must invest their limited partners’ money.
75Degeorge et al. (2016).

IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
	
WHAT FACTORS ARE CRITICAL TO SUCCESSFUL LBOs?	
485
WHAT FACTORS ARE CRITICAL TO SUCCESSFUL LBOs?
While many factors contribute to the success of LBOs, studies suggest that target selection, 
not overpaying, and improving operating performance are among the most important.
Target Selection
Traditionally, firms that represent good candidates for an LBO are those that have sub­
stantial unused borrowing capacity, tangible assets, predictable positive operating cash flow, 
and assets that are not critical to the continuing operation of the business. Competent and 
highly motivated management is always crucial to the eventual success of the LBO. Finally, 
firms in certain types of industries or that are part of larger firms often represent attractive 
­opportunities.
Private equity investors often argue that their ability to find (or “source”) deals in which 
they have some insight not widely known in the industry represents a significant source of 
value creation. The process for selecting the target is exhausting. For every 100 opportunities 
considered, the average private equity firm investigates in detail about 15, signs a purchase 
agreement with 8, and actually closes on 4.76
Firms With Unused Borrowing Capacity and Redundant Assets
Factors enhancing borrowing capacity include target firm cash in excess of working capital 
needs, relatively low leverage, and a strong performance track record. Firms with underval­
ued assets may use such assets as collateral for loans from asset-based lenders. Undervalued 
assets also provide a significant tax shelter because they may be revalued following closing 
of the deal to their fair market value and depreciated or amortized over their allowable tax 
lives. In addition, operating assets, such as subsidiaries that are not germane to the target’s 
core business and that can be sold quickly for cash, can be divested to accelerate the payoff 
of debt.
Firms That Are Poorly Performing With Potential to Generate Cash Flow
Buyout firms initiating LBOs often have expertise to turn around such firms through 
­aggressive reorganization and restructuring, as well as providing financial incentives to 
­management. The reputation of the buyout firm and long-standing bank relationships may 
provide the firm with access to relatively low cost capital.77
Firms With Significant Agency Problems
LBOs may alleviate conflicts between managers intent on empire building and share­
holders seeking competitive financial returns. The imposition of the discipline of repaying 
debt forces managers to focus on operational improvements. Public firms having under­
taken LBOs often are those that have exhibited high free cash flows and limited investment 
­opportunities.
76Gompers et al. (2016, p. 463).
77Malenko and Malenko (2015) and Demiroglu and James (2010).

486	
13.  Financing the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
Firms Whose Management Is Competent and Motivated
While management competence is necessary for success, it does not ensure exceptional 
firm performance. Management must be highly motivated by the prospect of substantial fi­
nancial gains in a relatively short time. Consequently, management of the firm to be taken 
private is normally given an opportunity to own a significant portion of the firm’s equity. On 
average, 17% of firm’s equity is allocated to the CEO and employees, with the CEO receiving 
about 8%. While private equity investors rarely recruit a new management team when they 
acquire a firm, about one-half end up doing it at some point after the takeover is completed.78
Firms in Attractive Industries
Typical targets are in mature industries, such as manufacturing, retailing, textiles, food 
processing, apparel, and soft drinks. Such industries usually are characterized by large tan­
gible book values, modest growth prospects, stable cash flow, and limited R&D, new product, 
or technology spending. Such industries are not dependent on technologies and production 
processes that are subject to rapid change. Empirical studies have shown that industries that 
have high free cash flows and limited growth opportunities are good candidates for LBOs.
Firms That Are Large-Company Operating Divisions
The best candidates for MBOs often are underperforming divisions of larger companies, 
in which the division is no longer considered critical to the parent firm’s overarching strat­
egy. Frequently, such divisions have excessive overhead, often required by the parent, and 
­expenses are allocated to the division by the parent for services, such as legal, auditing, 
and treasury functions, that could be purchased less expensively from sources outside the 
parent firm.
Firms Without Change-of-Control Covenants
Such covenants in bond indentures either limit the amount of debt a firm can add or require 
the company to buy back outstanding debt, sometimes at a premium, whenever a change of 
control occurs. Firms with bonds lacking such covenants are twice as likely to be the target 
of an LBO.79
Not Overpaying
Overpaying for LBOs can be disastrous. Failure to meet debt service obligations in a timely 
fashion often requires that the LBO firm renegotiate the terms of the loan agreements with the 
lenders. If the parties to the transaction cannot reach a compromise, the firm may be forced 
to file for bankruptcy, often wiping out the initial investors. Highly leveraged firms also are 
subject to aggressive tactics from major competitors, who understand that taking on large 
amounts of debt raises the breakeven point for the firm. If the amount borrowed is made even 
more excessive as a result of having paid more than the economic value of the target firm, 
competitors may gain market share by cutting product prices. The ability of the LBO firm to 
match such price cuts is limited because of the required interest and principal repayments.
78Gompers et al. (2016, p. 461).
79Billett et al. (2010).

IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
	
HOW DO LBOs CREATE VALUE?	
487
Improving Operating Performance
Ways to improve performance include negotiating employee wage and benefit conces­
sions in exchange for a profit-sharing or stock ownership plan and outsourcing services once 
provided by the parent. Other options include moving the corporate headquarters to a less 
expensive location, pruning unprofitable customer accounts, and eliminating such perks as 
corporate aircraft.
Private equity investors are more likely than nonprivate equity investors to place represen­
tatives with relevant industry experience on the boards of firms in which they make minority 
investments. As board members, private equity investors tend to take a much more active 
role in monitoring management performance. Firms with private equity investor representa­
tion on their boards are more likely to display higher announcement date returns and im­
proved operating performance than firms without such representation.80
Research shows that new owners choosing to retain their investment longer, such as 
private equity investors, have more time to put controls and reporting–monitoring systems 
in place, enhancing the firm’s competitive performance. Other factors contributing to post­
buyout returns include professional management, willingness to make the difficult deci­
sions, and often the private equity firm’s reputation.81 Research also suggests that public to 
private to public IPOs (so-called reverse LBOs) tend to show greater post-IPO performance 
improvement than IPOs. Why? Because investors can review the firm’s historical perfor­
mance when it was public and benefit from any restructuring that had taken place while it 
was private.82
HOW DO LBOs CREATE VALUE?
A number of factors combine to create value in a LBO. Public firms create value through 
LBOs by reducing underperformance related to agency conflicts between management and 
shareholders; for private firms, LBOs improve access to capital. For both public and private 
firms, LBOs create value by temporarily shielding the firm from taxes, reducing debt, improv­
ing operating performance, and timing properly the sale of the business (Fig. 13.1).
To illustrate this process, the Blackstone Group used a combination of operating margin 
­improvement, debt reduction, and fortuitous timing in undertaking an IPO to convert what 
80Chen et al. (2014a, 2014b).
81Katz (2008) reports that private equity–sponsored firms display superior performance after they go public, due 
to professional ownership, tighter monitoring, and the reputations of the private equity firms. Gurung and Lerner 
(2008) find that private equity groups have a greater capacity to squeeze more productivity out of companies 
during times of financial stress than do other types of acquirers. Acharya and Kehoe (2010) conclude that private 
equity firms contribute the most to firms when their representatives on the boards of these firms have relevant in­
dustry experience. Guo et al. (2011) find that postbuyout performance improves due to the discipline debt imposes 
on management and better alignment between management shareholders due to managements typically owning a 
large part of the firm’s equity. Cornelli et al. (2013) show that, as private equity investors learn more about a CEO’s 
competence, their willingness to take corrective action adds to improved firm performance.
82Datta et al. (2015).

488	
13.  Financing the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
appeared to be a disastrous investment into a highly profitable one in late 2013. As financial 
sponsor, Blackstone paid $26 billion to take the Hilton hotel chain private in 2007, shortly before 
the onset of one of the worst recessions in US history. To buy Hilton, Blackstone contributed 
$5.5 billion and borrowed the rest. Over the next few years, Blackstone through disciplined man­
agement improved Hilton’s operating performance and used the resulting profits to reduce debt.
Concerns about Hilton’s ability to repay its debt caused the market value of its debt to 
plummet. In 2010, Blackstone was able to restructure Hilton’s outstanding debt buying back 
some of the debt from lenders at discounts of as much as 65% of face value. Blackstone was 
also able to convince lenders to refinance the remaining debt at record low interest rates by 
investing another $1 billion into the business, bringing its total equity stake in Hilton to $6.5 
billion or 76% of total equity. In an IPO on December 10, 2013, Hilton raised $2.4 billion, most 
of which was used to pay off additional debt, bringing the firm’s outstanding debt to $12.5 
billion. Immediately following the IPO, Hilton shares traded at $21.50 per share, giving Hil­
ton a market capitalization of $21.2 billion and Blackstone’s ownership stake a value of $16.1 
billion. On paper, Blackstone had a $9.6-billion profit ($16.1 billion × 0.76 − $6.5 billion).
Alleviating Public Firm Agency Problems
While access to liquid public capital markets enables a firm to lower its cost of capital, par­
ticipating in public markets may create disagreements between the board and management on 
FIGURE 13.1  Factors contributing to LBO value creation. LBO, Leveraged buyout.

IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
	
HOW DO LBOs CREATE VALUE?	
489
one hand and shareholders on the other, so-called agency problems.83 Public firms may be sub­
ject to conflicts between managers engaging in empire building and shareholders seeking com­
petitive financial returns. Improvements in corporate governance attenuating such conflicts re­
duce borrowing costs and the likelihood of default.84 The discipline imposed by leverage forces 
management to focus on improving performance. Public-to-private LBOs often engage in asset 
sales and reduced capital spending to improve performance rather than build empires.85
While agency problems often describe conflicts between a firm’s management and share­
holders, similar conflicts can arise when ownership is heavily concentrated. Majority share­
holders may utilize their dominant voting positions to make decisions inconsistent with those 
desired by minority shareholders. For example, the majority shareholder wants to increase 
dividends while minority shareholders want to pursue a more aggressive investment strat­
egy reinvesting excess cash flow. Sometimes conflicts between minority and majority share­
holders can be eliminated by taking a firm private in which the majority shareholder buys out 
the minority shareholders. In countries where ownership often is highly concentrated, pre­
transaction minority shareholders often receive cumulative abnormal financial returns (the 
increase in the value of their shares prior to the deal announcement date) on their investment 
of 22% and a purchase price premium for their shares of 35%.86
Private equity investors attempt to deal with agency conflicts through improved gover­
nance by appointing small boards of directors consisting of five to seven members. The private 
equity firm often takes three of the board seats, with one or two more going to management 
and the rest to outsiders not affiliated with the buyout firm. The presumption is that the spe­
cialized industry knowledge of the private equity investors can be helpful in growing the busi­
ness and the small size of the board makes it possible to be more nimble in decision making.
Providing Access to Capital for Private Firms
For private firms, agency problems are less significant than in public firms due to the concen­
tration of ownership and control. Private firms often undertake LBOs to gain access to capital 
and to enable owners and managers to take cash out of the business partially or totally.87 Given 
access to additional capital provided by private equity investors, LBOs of private firms initi­
ated by private equity investor groups often enable such firms to increase asset and revenue 
growth, employment, and capital expenditures. Private firms having undergone LBOs also 
tend to be more profitable and experience faster growth than their peers.88 Why? Because pri­
vate equity investors introduce professional management methods, more aggressively moni­
tor performance, and are willing to take the necessary actions to improve firm performance 
because of the discipline imposed by the need to satisfy principal and interest payments.
83Boot et al. (2008).
84Pasal and Instefjord (2013).
85There is evidence that the Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002 also encouraged LBOs by adding to the cost of governance 
for firms as a result of the onerous reporting requirements of the bill. This has been a particular burden to smaller 
firms (Engel et al., 2004; Hartman, 2005; Kamar et al., 2009). Leuz et al. (2008) document a spike in delistings of 
public firms attributable to the passage of the Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002.
86Boubaker et al. (2014).
87Asker et al. (2010), Gao et al. (2010), and Brav (2009).
88Chung (2011) and Boucly et al. (2011).

490	
13.  Financing the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
Creating a Tax Shield
LBOs often do not pay taxes for 5–7 years89 or longer following the buyout, due to the 
tax deductibility of interest and the additional depreciation resulting from the write-up of 
net acquired assets to fair market value.90 Profits are shielded from taxes until a substantial 
portion of the outstanding debt is repaid and the assets depreciated. Investors in successful 
LBOs utilize cumulative free cash flow to increase firm value by repaying debt and improving 
operating performance.
Debt Reduction
When debt is repaid, the equity value of the firm increases in direct proportion to the re­
duction in outstanding debt—equity increases by $1 for each $1 of debt repaid—assuming the 
financial sponsor can sell the firm for at least what it paid for the company. Debt reduction 
contributes to cash flow by eliminating future interest and principal payments.91
Improvement in Operating Margin
When a firm reinvests cumulative free cash flow, the firm’s profit margins can increase by 
a combination of revenue growth and cost reduction. Private equity investors tend to con­
centrate more on revenue growth as they focus on industries in which they have substantial 
experience and proprietary knowledge rather than on cost reduction.92 Revenue gains are 
achieved through a combination of new product/service introduction, enhanced marketing 
efforts, and by making targeted acquisitions. The margin increase augments operating cash 
flow, which in turn raises the firm’s equity value, if the level of risk is unchanged.
Timing the Sale of the Firm
LBOs may benefit from rising industry multiples while the firm is private. The amount of 
the increase in firm value depends on the valuation multiple investors place on each dollar of 
earnings, cash flow, or EBITDA when the firm is sold. LBO investors create value by timing 
the sale of the firm to coincide with the decline of the firm’s leverage to the industry average 
91Not all LBOs reduce their posttakeover leverage. Cohn et al. (2014) find that some firms do not reduce their lever­
age even if they generate cash flow in excess of their investment needs. Such LBOs may add to leverage to pay 
dividends and to acquire other businesses. Private equity firms can pay dividends only when banks are willing to 
lend more money, which happens only when the banks expect to be paid back. Furthermore, the appearance that 
some LBOs do not reduce their post-LBO leverage may reflect the way such deals are financed. LBOs often use the 
target firm’s excess cash and sell assets to finance the transaction resulting in a higher debt to total asset ratio for a 
longer time period following the LBO.
92Gompers et al. (2016, p. 466).
89Cohn et al. (2014).
90This assumes that the LBO is recorded using purchase accounting rather than recapitalization accounting, which 
does not permit asset revaluation. Recap accounting may be used if the LBO is expected to be taken public through 
an IPO and the financial sponsor wishes to maximize reporting earnings. For more details, see Chapter 12.

IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
	
HOW DO LBOs CREATE VALUE?	
491
leverage and with favorable industry conditions. This occurs when the firm assumes the risks 
of the average firm in the industry and when the industry in which the business competes is 
most attractive to investors, a point at which valuation multiples are likely to be the highest.93
Table 13.3 provides a numerical example of how LBOs create value by “paying down” debt, 
in part using cash generated by tax savings, by improving the firm’s operating margins, and 
by increasing the market multiple applied to the firm’s EBITDA in the year in which the firm 
is sold.94 Each case assumes that the sponsor group pays $500 million for the target firm and 
finances the transaction by borrowing $400 million and contributing $100 million in equity. The 
93The annual return on equity (ROE) of the firm will decline, as the impact of leverage declines, to the industry 
average ROE, which usually occurs when the firm’s debt-to-total capital ratio approximates the industry average 
ratio. At this point, the financial sponsor is unable to earn excess returns by continuing to operate the business. 
Table 13.2 illustrates this point. ROE is highest when leverage is highest and lowest when leverage is zero, subject 
to the caveat that ROE could decline due to escalating borrowing costs if debt were to be viewed by lenders as 
excessive.
94Guo et al. (2011) find that operating performance, tax benefits, and market multiples applied when the investor 
group exits the business each explain about one-fourth of the financial returns to buyout investors.
TABLE 13.3  LBOs Create Value by Reducing Debt, Improving Margins, and Increasing Exit Multiples
Case 1: debt 
reduction
Case 2: debt reduction + 
margin improvement
Case 3: debt reduction + margin 
improvement + higher exit multiples
LBO FORMATION YEAR
Total debt ($)
400,000,000
400,000,000
400,000,000
Equity
100,000,000
100,000,000
100,000,000
Transaction value ($)
500,000,000
500,000,000
500,000,000
EXIT-YEAR (YEAR 7) ASSUMPTIONS
Cumulative cash available 
for debt repaymenta ($)
150,000,000
185,000,000
185,000,000
Net debtb ($)
250,000,000
215,000,000
215,000,000
EBITDA ($)
100,000,000
130,000,000
130,000,000
EBITDA multiple
7.0×
7.0×
8.0×
Enterprise valuec ($)
700,000,000
910,000,000
1,040,000,000
Equity valued ($)
450,000,000
695,000,000
825,000,000
Internal rate of return (%)
24
31.9
35.2
Cash-on-cash returne
4.5×
6.95×
8.25×
LBO, Leveraged buyout.
aCumulative cash available for debt repayment and EBITDA increase between Case 1 and Case 2 due to improving margins and lower interest 
and principal repayments, reflecting the reduction in net debt.
bNet debt = total debt − cumulative cash available for debt repayment = $400 million − $185 million = $215 million.
cEnterprise value = EBITDA in the seventh year × EBITDA multiple in the seventh year.
dEquity value = enterprise value in the seventh year − net debt.
eThe equity value when the firm is sold divided by the initial equity contribution. The internal rate of return (IRR) represents a more accurate 
financial return because it accounts for the time value of money.

492	
13.  Financing the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
sponsor group is assumed to exit the LBO at the end of 7 years. In Case 1, all cumulative free 
cash flow is used to reduce outstanding debt. Case 2 assumes the same exit multiple as Case 
1 but that cumulative free cash flow is higher due to margin improvement and lower interest 
and principal repayments as a result of debt reduction. Case 3 assumes the same cumulative 
free cash flow available for debt repayment and EBITDA as in Case 2 but a higher exit multiple.
COMMON LBO DEAL AND CAPITAL STRUCTURES
Deal structures refer to the mechanism for transferring ownership; capital structures describe 
the way in which these deals are financed. These are discussed next.
Common Deal Structures
Due to the epidemic of bankruptcies of cash flow–based LBOs in the late 1980s, the most 
common form of LBO today is the asset-based LBO. This type of LBO can be accomplished in 
one of two ways: the sale of assets by the target to the acquiring company, with the seller using 
the cash received to pay off outstanding liabilities, or a merger of the target into the acquiring 
company (direct merger) or a wholly owned subsidiary of the acquiring company (subsidiary 
merger). For small companies, a reverse stock split may be used to take the firm private. An 
important objective of “going private” transactions is to reduce the number of shareholders to 
below 300 to enable the public firm to delist from many public stock exchanges.
In a direct merger, the firm to be taken private merges with a firm controlled by the financial 
sponsor, with the seller receiving cash for stock. The lender will make the loan to the buyer once 
the security agreements are in place and the target’s stock has been pledged against the loan. 
The target then is merged into the acquiring company, which is the surviving corporation. In a 
subsidiary merger (Figure 13.3), the company (i.e., the Parent) controlled by the financial sponsor 
creates a new shell subsidiary (Merger Sub) and contributes cash or stock in exchange for the 
subsidiary’s stock.95 The subsidiary raises additional funds by borrowing from lenders whose 
loans are collateralized by the stock of the target firm at closing. The subsidiary then makes a 
tender offer for the outstanding public shares and merges with the target, often with the target 
surviving as a wholly owned subsidiary of the Parent. This may be done to avoid any negative 
impact that the new company might have on existing customer or creditor relationships. If 90% 
of the target firm’s shares can be acquired in the tender offer, the remaining shareholders can 
be squeezed out in a back-end merger. The financial sponsor may negotiate a top-up option 
(i.e., an option to buy as many shares as necessary to reach the 90% threshold) with the target 
firm’s board if there is concern the 90% figure cannot be reached in the tender offer.96
A reverse stock split enables a corporation to reduce the number of shares outstanding. The 
total number of shares will have the same market value after the reverse split as before, but 
each share will be worth more. Reverse splits may be used to take a firm private where a firm 
95The Parent makes an equity contribution rather than a loan, usually in the form of cash so as not to leverage 
excessively the Merger Sub.
96If the merger qualifies under Delaware General Corporation Law by satisfying a variety of conditions as required 
by Section 251(h), a back-end merger involving a publicly traded target firm is possible with only a simple majority 
of shares purchased through the tender offer.

	
Common LBO Deal and Capital Structures	
493
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
is short of cash. The majority shareholders retain their stock after the split, while the minority 
shareholders receive a cash payment. MagStar Technologies, a Minnesota-based manufac­
turer intending to go private, announced a reverse split in which each of 2000 shares of the 
firm’s common stock would be converted into 1 share of common stock, and holders of fewer 
than 2000 shares would receive cash of $0.425 per presplit share. The split reduced the num­
ber of shareholders to less than 300, the minimum required to list on many public exchanges. 
Under Minnesota law, the board of directors of a company may amend the firm’s articles of 
incorporation to conduct the reverse split without shareholder approval.
Common Capital Structures
LBOs tend to have complicated capital structures consisting of bank debt, high-yield debt, 
mezzanine debt, and private equity provided primarily by the financial sponsor. Fig. 13.2 il­
lustrates a typical LBO capital structure. The degree of leverage used in LBOs is determined 
FIGURE 13.2  Typical LBO capital structure. LBO, Leveraged buyout; PIK, paid in kind.

494	
13.  Financing the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
by capital market liquidity (i.e., when interest rates are low, financial sponsors borrow more), 
the reputation of the financial sponsor,97 tax benefits, and the potential for financial distress if 
the firm were unable to meet its obligations to pay interest and principal on a timely basis.98
As secured debt, the bank debt generally is the most senior in the capital structure in the 
event of liquidation. Given that such loans usually mature within 5–7 years, interest rates 
on them often vary at a fixed spread or difference over the London interbank offering rate. 
Bank loans usually must be paid off before other types of debt. Bank credit facilities consist 
of revolving credit and term loans.99 A revolving credit facility is used to satisfy daily liquid­
ity requirements, secured by the firm’s most liquid assets such as receivables and inventory. 
Term loans are usually secured by the firm’s longer-lived assets and are granted in tranches 
(or slices), denoted as A, B, C, and D, with A the most senior and D the least of all bank fi­
nancing. While bank debt in the A tranche usually must be amortized or paid off before other 
forms of debt can be paid, the remaining tranches generally involve little or no amortization 
and are repaid at maturity. While lenders in the A tranche often sell such loans to other com­
mercial banks, loans in the B, C, and D tranches often are sold to hedge funds and mutual 
funds. Loans in B, C, and D tranches commonly are referred to as leveraged loans, reflecting 
their risk relative to loans in the A tranche.
The next layer of LBO capital structure consists of unsecured subordinated debt, also re­
ferred to as junk bonds. Interest is fixed and represents a constant percentage or spread over 
the US Treasury bond rate. The amount of the spread depends on the credit quality of the 
debt. Often callable at a premium, this debt usually has a 7- to 10-year maturity range, with 
the debt often paid off in a single payment. Such loans often are referred to as bullet loans. 
As an alternative to high-yield publicly traded junk bonds, second mortgage or lien loans 
became popular between 2003 and mid-2007. Often called mezzanine debt, such loans are pri­
vately placed with hedge funds and collateralized loan obligation (CLO) investors. They are 
secured by the firm’s assets but are subordinated to the bank debt in liquidation. By pooling 
large numbers of first and second mortgage loans (so-called noninvestment-grade, or lever­
aged, loans) and subdividing the pool into tranches, CLO investors sell tranches to institu­
tional investors such as pension funds. Such debt may be issued with warrants to buy equity 
in the firm.100
The final layer of the capital structure consists of equity (common and preferred) contrib­
uted by the financial sponsor (usually a single private equity or hedge fund or a number of 
them) and management. Preferred stock offers a greater likelihood of recovering some por­
tion of the financial sponsor’s initial investment in the event of bankruptcy because holders of 
97Financial sponsors are more likely to be able to increase leverage if they have successful track records (De Maese­
neire and Brinkhuis, 2013).
98Gompers et al. (2016, p. 460).
99Credit or loan facilities may represent a single loan or a collection of loans to a borrower. Such facilities vary in 
terms of what is being financed, the type of collateral, terms, and duration.
100Warrants are long-term instruments that allow shareholders or bondholders to purchase additional shares of 
stock at a discounted price but they are typically issued with an exercise price above the market value of the firm’s 
current share price. Warrants generally cannot be exercised for a period ranging from 6 months to 1 year giving the 
stock price time to rise in excess of the exercise price. The potential for this gain is what “sweetens” a bond deal for 
investors. Both rights offerings and warrants resemble market call options.

	
Discussion Questions	
495
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
such equity are paid before common shareholders. Convertible preferred shares (or convert­
ible debt) are commonly employed to provide investors with some minimum rate of return 
as well as the opportunity to participate in any future appreciation of the common shares. 
Convertible securities include an option for the holder to convert such shares (or debt) into a 
fixed number of common shares any time after a predetermined date. Convertible securities 
also are used to minimize agency problems arising between investors and managers: inves­
tors want some amount of current income in the form of dividends or interest and manage­
ment wishes to use all cash flow to pay off debt.
SOME THINGS TO REMEMBER
M&A transactions typically are financed by using cash, equity, debt, or some combination 
thereof, with funding sources ranging from cash on hand to commercial banks to seller fi­
nancing. Highly leveraged transactions, typically referred to as LBOs, often are structured by 
financial sponsors such as hedge funds, private equity firms, and venture capitalists.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
13.1	 What are the primary ways in which an LBO is financed?
13.2	 How do loan and security covenants affect the way in which an LBO is managed? 
Note the differences between positive and negative covenants.
13.3	 Describe common strategies LBO firms use to exit their investment. Discuss the cir­
cumstances under which some methods of “cashing out” are preferred to others.
13.4	 Hospital chain HCA relied heavily on revenue growth in its effort to take the firm 
private. On July 24, 2006, management again announced that it would “go private” in 
a deal valued at $33 billion, including the assumption of $11.7 billion in existing debt. 
Would you consider a hospital chain a good or bad candidate for an LBO? Explain 
your answer.
13.5	 Seven private investment firms acquired 100% of the outstanding stock of SunGard 
Data Systems Inc. (SunGard). SunGard is a financial software firm known for provid­
ing application and transaction software services and creating backup data systems in 
the event of disaster. The company’s software manages 70% of the transactions made 
on the NASDAQ stock exchange, but its biggest business is creating backup data sys­
tems in case a client’s main systems are disabled by a natural disaster, blackout, or ter­
rorist attack. Its large client base for disaster recovery and backup systems provides a 
substantial and predictable cash flow. Furthermore, the firm had substantial amounts 
of largely unencumbered current assets. The deal left SunGard with a nearly 5-to-1 
debt-to-equity ratio. Why do you believe lenders might have been willing to finance 
such a highly leveraged transaction?
13.6	 Cox Enterprises announced on August 3, 2004, a proposal to buy the remaining 38% 
of Cox Communications’ shares that it did not already own. Cox Enterprises stated 
that the increasingly competitive cable industry environment makes investment in the 
cable industry best done through a private company structure. Why would the firm 

496	
13.  Financing the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
believe that increasing future levels of investment would be best done as a private 
company?
13.7	 Following Cox Enterprises’ announcement on August 3, 2004, of its intent to buy the 
remaining 38% of Cox Communications’ shares that it did not already own, the Cox 
Communications board of directors formed a special committee of independent direc­
tors to consider the proposal. Why? Be specific.
13.8	 Qwest Communications agreed to sell its slow but steadily growing yellow pages 
business, QwestDex, to a consortium led by the Carlyle Group and Welsh, Carson, 
Anderson, and Stowe for $7.1 billion. Why do you believe the private equity groups 
found the yellow pages business attractive? Explain the following statement: “A busi­
ness with high growth potential may not be a good candidate for an LBO.”
13.9	 Describe the potential benefits and costs of LBOs to stakeholders, including share­
holders, employers, lenders, customers, and communities, in which the firm undergo­
ing the buyout may have operations. Do you believe that on average LBOs provide a 
net benefit or a cost to society? Explain your answer.
13.10	 Sony’s long-term vision has been to create synergy between its consumer electron­
ics products business and its music, movies, and games. On September 14, 2004, a 
consortium consisting of Sony Corp. of America, Providence Equity Partners, Texas 
Pacific Group, and DLJ Merchant Banking Partners agreed to acquire MGM for $4.8 
billion. In what way do you believe that Sony’s objectives might differ from those of 
the private equity investors making up the remainder of the consortium? How might 
such differences affect the management of MGM? Identify possible short-term and 
long-term effects.
Answers to these Chapter Discussion Questions are available in the Online Instructor’s Manual for 
instructors using this book (https://textbooks.elsevier.com/web/Manuals.aspx?isbn=9780128016091).
END OF CHAPTER CASE STUDY: THE LEGACY OF LEVERAGE, 
BAD ASSUMPTIONS, AND POOR TIMING—THE LARGEST LBO 
IN US HISTORY GOES BANKRUPT
Case Study Objectives: To Illustrate
•	 Leverage offers the prospect of outsized financial returns for investors.
•	 However, excessively leveraged firms often have little margin for error.
•	 If key assumptions underlying the deal are unrealistic, the only alternative may be bankruptcy.
•	 Chapter 11 reorganization can be protracted.
Energy Future Holdings Corporation emerged from bankruptcy in late 2016 bringing to a close 
a deal based on excessive optimism, poor timing, and unrealistic assumptions. What follows is a 
discussion of why the LBO seemed attractive, the deal’s complex legal and financial structure, fac­
tors that ultimately pushed the firm into bankruptcy, and how the firm was ultimately reorganized.
Amid great fanfare, a consortium of storied investor groups along with highly sophisticated 
lenders took Texas-based electric utility holding company TXU private on October 7, 2007. Immedi­
ately following closing, TXU Corp. was renamed Energy Future Holdings (EFH). EFH consisted of 
two subsidiaries: Oncor, a business that sells electricity in wholesale markets to other utilities and 

	
Discussion Questions	
497
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
big businesses, and Texas Competitive Electric Holdings (TCEH), which holds TXU’s public utility 
operating assets and liabilities. The latter firm is the one that ultimately filed for bankruptcy.
Valued at $48 billion, the leverage buyout consisted of $40 billion in debt and $8 million in eq­
uity provided by the private equity consortium, subsequently referred to as the financial sponsor. 
The deal was fueled by record low borrowing rates and the belief that natural gas prices that had 
been trending lower would turn around, dramatically improving EFH’s profit and cash flow. While 
things looked rosy at the closing, the underpinnings of what was to be the nation’s largest bank­
ruptcy of a nonfinancial firm already were underway.
The United States went into recession in December 2007 and did not emerge until June 2009 
according to the National Bureau of Economic Research, the widely recognized organization that 
defines such things. The recession reduced the demand for electricity and forced natural gas prices 
lower. While the recession clearly exacerbated the situation, much of the damage done to EFH 
was self-inflicted by the complex financial engineering used to finance the deal and by the byzan­
tine legal structure created to limit investors’ exposure to potential liabilities. These factors made 
it increasingly difficult for the firm to meet its scheduled debt service payments and ultimately to 
reorganize in bankruptcy.
Since the 2007 closing, equity investors who put $8 billion into the deal have seen their positions 
wiped out and bondholders have experienced large losses. By early 2014, those who bought the 
firm’s $40 billion in debt saw its market value plunge to as low as ¢20–30 on the dollar. The firm 
struggled for years to remain afloat, renegotiating the terms of its loans with creditors. However, the 
$20-billion loan repayment due in 2014 proved the downfall of the firm. Unable to meet its commit­
ments and with lenders running out of patience, the firm sought the protection of Chapter 11 of the 
US Bankruptcy Court in late spring of 2014.
Chapter 11 gives the debtor the exclusive right to formulate a reorganization plan that if ac­
ceptable to the court and lenders enables the firm to emerge from bankruptcy. The firm has 1 year 
to submit a plan for emerging from bankruptcy to the court and can get a 6-month extension if 
permitted by the court. At the end of this time, so-called creditor committees representing secured 
and unsecured debt and equity groups can submit their own plans. Such plans can range from the 
debtors swapping what they are owed for an equity stake in the business to forgiveness of much of 
the debt (or at least repayment on more lenient terms) to outright liquidation of the firm with the 
proceeds used to pay its obligations.
How could investors with sterling reputations and sophisticated lenders make such a big mis­
take? Simply saying it was due to greed would be overly simplistic. The investors and lenders par­
ticipating in this deal were at some level victims of their own earlier success. Private equity firms seek 
unusually high returns on the equity they put into projects by borrowing as much as they feel can be 
managed. And given Federal Reserve policies that pushed interest rates to historical lows, LBO finan­
cial sponsors were encouraged to take on much more debt than would have been considered prudent 
had interest rates been higher. Investors and lenders were piling into LBO deals in 2007 in a search 
for higher financial returns. The prior successes of the LBO sponsors lent credibility to the deals they 
put together. The conditions were ripe for the addictive effects of overoptimism and cheap money 
to create a megadeal whose success was dependent on literally everything going according to plan.
A private equity consortium consisting of Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co., Texas Pacific Group, 
and Goldman Sachs (the financial sponsor group) considered TXU an attractive investment because 

498	
13.  Financing the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
it was the biggest utility in the fast-growing Texas electricity market and the only one in the state 
that had not been broken up as a result of the state’s deregulation of its electricity market. The key 
assumption underlying the deal was that natural gas prices would go up in line with the global 
price of oil as they had done for years. Electricity rates in Texas were pegged by regulators to natural 
gas prices, but since TXU generated most of its electricity with less-expensive coal and uranium for 
nuclear plants, it stood to profit from higher electricity rates. Instead natural gas prices plunged as 
hydraulic fracturing of shale rock unleashed a glut in the United States, pushing down natural gas 
prices and in turn electricity rates.
Wall Street banks were similarly enamored with the proposed deal to take TXU private. They 
were competing in 2007 to make loans to buyout firms on easier terms, with the banks also investing 
their own funds in the deal. The allure to the banks was the prospect of dividing up as much as 
$1.1 billion in fees for originating the loans, repackaging such loans into pools called collateralized 
loan obligations (CLOs), and reselling them to long-term investors such as pension funds and insur­
ance companies. In doing so, the loans would be removed from the banks’ balance sheets, eliminat­
ing potential losses that could arise if the deal soured at a later date. Furthermore, the deal appeared 
to be attractive as an investment opportunity as some banks put up $500 million of their own cash 
for a stake in the TXU.
Despite the sophistication of the sponsor group and lenders in this deal success was to be elusive. 
In fact, hubris seems to have clouded what previously had been sound economic reasoning. No one 
seems to have taken into account the potential for a recession and a further decline in natural gas 
prices. Both of these factors were beyond the control of those involved in the deal and both occurred 
to doom the deal.
The financial sponsor group created a shell corporation referred to as Merger Sub Parent and its 
wholly owned subsidiary Merger Sub. TXU was merged into Merger Sub, with Merger Sub surviv­
ing. Each outstanding share of TXU common stock was converted into the right to receive $69.25 in 
cash. Total cash required for the purchase was provided by the financial sponsor group and lenders 
(Creditor Group) to the Merger Sub (Fig. 13.3).
Merger Sub
parent
(sponsor
group)
TXU 
Merger Sub
TXU public
shareholders
Cash
Merger Sub
stock
Cash
Cash
Lenders
(creditor
group)
TXU stock
FIGURE 13.3  Forward triangular cash merger.

	
Discussion Questions	
499
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
Subsequent to closing, Merger Sub was reorganized into a new holding company, controlled by 
the Financial Sponsor Group and renamed Energy Future Holdings (EFH). EFH consisted of two 
subsidiaries: a regulated business, Oncor, and an unregulated business, TCEH. All TXU non–Spon­
sor Group–related debt incurred to finance the transaction is held by EFH (Fig. 13.4).
The firm faced an untenable financial position by 2014. Absent a turnaround in natural gas pric­
es, EFH had to find a way to substantially reduce the burden of the pending 2014, $20-billion loan 
payment with its lenders through a debt for equity swap, more favorable terms on existing debt, 
or pursuing Chapter 11 bankruptcy. In December 2012 in an effort to extend debt maturities to buy 
time for a turnaround and to reduce interest expense, EFH exchanged $1.15 billion of new payment-
in-kind notes (interest is paid with more debt) for existing notes with a face value of $1.6 billion. 
However, despite this limited debt restructuring, the firm was still in violation of loan covenants on 
existing debt.101
EFH’s ability to reduce its leverage was further weakened as the private equity sponsors si­
phoned off $560 million in advisory and monitoring fees since the buyout’s inception in late 2007. 
With nowhere to turn and the $20-billion loan payment looming, EFH had run out of options. On 
April 29, 2014, EFH entered into Chapter 11 bankruptcy. Its initial reorganization plan was to hand 
control of the firm’s operations to its lenders. Creditors objected to various aspects of the plan. A 
sticking point with creditors was how to value the unregulated subsidiary for tax purposes. Under 
the terms of the proposed deal, the lenders would forgive debt for ownership of the unregulated 
subsidiary (TCEH) through a debt for equity swap with bondholders and a subsequent tax-free 
spin-off to avoid a huge tax bill for EFH. EFH bondholders owed $1.7 billion were set to take control 
of the regulated Oncor unit.
The bankruptcy court judge extended the company’s exclusive right to solicit acceptances to 
its reorganization plan on October 29, 2014, to December 29, 2015. The extension represents the 
maximum exclusivity extension available under the US Bankruptcy Code, which limits plan fil­
ing exclusivity to the debtor to 18 months and vote solicitation to 20 months. During this period 
no other creditor or investor can develop its own reorganization plan for EFH and solicit others to 
101Loan covenants limit EFH’s and its subsidiaries’ ability to incur additional indebtedness or issue preferred stock; pay 
dividends on, repurchase, or make distributions of capital stock or make other restricted payments; make investments; sell 
or transfer assets; consolidate, merge, sell, or dispose of all or substantially all its assets; and repay, repurchase, or modify 
debt. A breach of any of these covenants could result in an event of default.
FIGURE 13.4  Postmerger organization.
Energy Future Holdings—EFH
(formerly Merger Sub) 
Texas Competitive Electric
Holdings—TCEH 
Oncor

500	
13.  Financing the Deal
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
vote for their plan. Arguing that EFH’s plan had no creditor support, the committee representing 
unsecured creditors of EFH, TCEH, as well as TCEH first lien holders objected to no avail to the 
length of the firm’s exclusivity extension. They argued for much shorter extensions ranging from 
2 weeks to 2 months.
In an effort to gain support for its reorganization plan, EFH called off the bankruptcy auction of 
its 80% stake in Oncor on June 26, 2015, and proceeded to promote the spin-off of Oncor in a tax-free 
transaction. EFH would leave $805 million in cash to pay TCEH secured creditors. The bankruptcy 
court judge approved the firm’s reorganization plan on December 3, 2015. The tax-free spin-off of 
Oncor was completed on October 4, 2016, paving the way for emergence from Chapter 11, almost 
2.5 years after the firm had sought court protection.
What can be learned from this investment debacle? Investors often are seduced by the potential 
for eye-popping financial returns made possible by the use of leverage: other people’s money. How­
ever, it is easy to overlook the dark side of leverage. If everything doesn’t go according to plan, as 
is often the case, the inability to satisfy debt service requirements can force the firm into default and 
subsequent bankruptcy. The financial sponsor group and the lenders involved in taking TXU pri­
vate were well aware of this potential outcome but were confident that history would repeat itself: 
natural gas prices would rise significantly, which as we know did not happen. Also, the exceedingly 
low cost of borrowing made possible by the Federal Reserve coaxed borrowers to take on more debt 
than would have been prudent at higher rates of interest. All these factors combined to set the stage 
for the largest bankruptcy of a nonfinancial firm in US history.
Discussion Questions
1.	 This chapter identifies a number of ways in which LBOs can create value for their investors. 
The financial sponsor group in this case study was relying on which of the sources of value 
creation identified in this chapter? Be specific. In your opinion, were the financial sponsors 
placing too great a bet on factors that were beyond their control? Explain your answer.
2.	 How does the postclosing holding company structure protect the interests of the financial 
sponsor group and the utility’s customers but potentially jeopardize creditor interests in the 
event of bankruptcy? Be specific.
3.	 What was the purpose of the preclosing covenants and the closing conditions in the merger 
agreement?
4.	 Loan covenants exist to protect the lender. How might such covenants inhibit the EFH from 
meeting its 2014, $20-billion obligations?
Solutions to these case study discussion questions are available in the Online Instructor’s Manual for 
instructors using this book (https://textbooks.elsevier.com/web/Manuals.aspx?isbn=9780128016091).

	
Discussion Questions	
501
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
A D D I T I O N A L  C A S E  S T U D Y  R E C O M M E N D AT I O N S 
( S E A R C H  H A RVA R D  B U S I N E S S  S C H O O L 
P U B L I S H I N G  S I T E  B Y  N A M E  O F  C A S E :  h b s p .
h a r v a r d . e d u )
Auction for Burger King, Carliss Y. Bald-
win, James W. Quinn, October 10, 2012, 
Harvard Business School, Product Number: 
906012-PDF-ENG, hbsp.harvard.edu.
Subjects Covered: Leveraged Buyouts, 
Acquisitions, Auctions, Bids, Decision Mak-
ing, and Valuation.
BCE Inc.: World’s Largest LBO Deal in Jeop-
ardy, Stephen R. Foerster, Publication Date: 
June 29, 2010, Product Number: 909N29-
PDF-ENG, Source: Ivey Publishing, hbsp.
harvard.edu.
Subjects Covered: LBOs, Financing.
Bidding for Hertz: Leveraged Buyout, Susan 
Chaplinsky, Felicia C. Marston, Publication 
Date: October 5, 2009, Product Number: 
UV1056-PDF-ENG, Source: Darden School 
of Business, hbsp.harvard.edu.
Subjects Covered: LBOs, Club Bidding, 
Valuation, Financing.
The Toys “R” Us LBO, David P. Stowell, 
Matthew Raino, Publication Date: January 
1, 2007, Product Number: Kel168-PDF-ENG, 
Source: Kellogg School of Business, hbsp.
harvard.edu.
Subjects Covered: Model simulation, 
LBOs, Restructuring, Financing.
RadNet, Inc.: Financing an Acquisition, Su-
san Chaplinsky, Alex Droznik, Publication 
Date: August 5, 2011, Product Number: 
UV5658, Source: Darden School of Busi-
ness, hbsp.harvard.edu.
Subjects Covered: Deal Financing, Choos-
ing Financing Arrangements, Debt Manage-
ment.


C H A P T E R
503
Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring Activities. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-801609-1.00014-2
Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
14
Applying Financial Models
To Value, Structure, and Negotiate 
Stock and Asset Purchases
O U T L I N E
Inside Mergers and Acquisitions: 
M&A Financial Model Applications	
504
Chapter Overview	
506
Understanding and Applying 
M&A Financial Models	
507
Common Elements of M&A Models	
507
Key Data Linkages and Model 
Balancing Mechanism	
510
M&A Models: Stock Purchases	
513
Step 1: Construct Historical 
Financials and Determine 
Key Value Drivers	
513
Step 2: Project Acquirer and Target 
Financials and Estimate 
Stand-Alone Values	
515
Step 3: Estimate Value of Newco, 
Including Synergy and 
Deal Terms	
516
Step 4: Determine Appropriateness 
of Offer Price and Posttransaction 
Capital Structure	
524
M&A Models: Asset Purchases	
533
Quantifying Synergy	
536
Revenue-Related Synergy	
537
Cost Savings–Related Synergies	
537
Some Things to Remember	
537
Discussion Questions	
538
Practice Problems and Answers	
539
Case Study: Thermo Fisher Acquires 
Life Technologies	
542
Case Study Objectives	
542
Discussion Questions	
544
Additional Case Study 
Recommendations	
546
Appendix A: Debt Repayment 
Schedule, Convertible Securities, 
Interest Rates, and β	
547
Debt Repayment Schedule	
547
Options, Warrants, and 
Convertible Securities	
547
Betas	
547
Interest Rates	
547
Industry Credit Ratios	
548

504	
14.  Applying Financial Models
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
He who lives by the crystal ball soon learns to eat ground glass. —Edgar R. Fiedler
INSIDE MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS: 
M&A FINANCIAL MODEL APPLICATIONS
KEY POINTS
•	 Merger and acquisition (M&A) models address valuation, deal structuring, and financing 
questions.
•	 M&A models may be used by both buyers and sellers to assess alternative deal structures.
•	 M&A models help define risks associated with specific options in “real time.”
In a deal fraught with tax and competitive risks, Shire PLC announced on January 11, 2016, 
that it had inked a deal valued at about $32 billion to acquire Baxalta Inc., ending its 6-month 
pursuit of the firm. The pair had reached an agreement earlier but had difficulty overcoming 
fears that the combination would run afoul of US laws precluding firms created as a result of 
a tax-free spin-off from acquiring another firm in the 2-year period following the spin-off. As 
such, the deal could have created a substantial tax liability for Shire’s former parent, Baxter 
International, which had spun off Shire in July 2015. An additional risk in buying Baxalta was 
the intensifying competition to its primary cash-generating hemophilia drug from a promis­
ing series of similar treatments being developed by rivals.
Shire PLC is an Irish-headquartered specialty pharmaceutical firm with global operations 
in more than 100 countries. Originating in the United Kingdom, the firm has substantial oper­
ations in the United States. Following the withdrawal of America-based pharmaceutical firm 
AbbVie’s bid to acquire Shire due to concerns about new tax inversion rules, Shire’s stock 
plummeted almost 30%. To support its share price, Shire announced its intention to acquire a 
string of smaller firms with proven treatments for rare diseases.
What would be the likely impact of such a strategy? Sophisticated firms typically utilize 
long range planning as described in Chapters 4 and 5 to evaluate their ability to perform in 
what they perceive as their future competitive environment. Financial models are commonly 
used to project a “baseline” forecast or reference point of cash flow over a number of years 
to determine if the firm’s current strategy results in achieving its vision and long-term goals. 
The baseline projection can subsequently be adjusted for the impact of future investments 
(including M&As) on the firm’s market value. If it is determined that such investments would 
enhance current firm value, the baseline strategy may be altered to include the impact of 
investments such as M&As on the firm’s consolidated balance sheet, income statement, and 
cash flow statements. In this manner, the firm can assess its ability to finance future invest­
ments and takeovers by determining their impact on current loan covenants, consolidated 
EPS, and their ability to earn the firm’s cost of capital.
In addition to their role in the firm’s business planning process, financial models play 
a critical role in the decision-making process underlying M&As. Shire initiated its largest 
takeover attempt in August 2015 when it made an unsolicited offer to Acquire Baxalta for 
about $30 billion in an all-stock bid. Although the proposal included a nearly 30% premium, 
Baxalta’s board rejected the offer claiming that it undervalued the firm and insisted that any 
bid should contain a substantial amount of cash.

	
Inside Mergers and Acquisitions: M&A Financial Model Applications	
505
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
Shire countered that since 80.5% of its shares1 had been spun off from Baxter International 
in July 2015, any cash used in the Baxalta takeover bid could jeopardize the nontaxable status 
under US law of the spin-off to its shareholders.2 Despite its reservations, Shire revised the 
cash and stock bid to include $18 billion in cash plus 0.1482 share of its American Deposi­
tory Shares3 for each outstanding common share of Baxalta in January 2016. At closing, Shire 
shareholders will own 66% of the combined firms and Baxalta shareholders the remainder, 
which appeared to preserve the tax status of the spin-off.4
M&A negotiations are by their nature dynamic in that the circumstances surrounding a 
takeover attempt can change quickly requiring decision makers to evaluate their options in 
“real time” to bring the negotiations to a satisfactory conclusion. Financial models often serve 
as an important tool in such situations as their pro forma (or adjusted) financial statements 
illustrate what the combined firms would look like under alternative scenarios. For example, 
Shire announced that the combined firms could deliver $20 billion in revenue by 2020 and 
that the deal would be accretive to earnings by the second year following closing based on the 
firm’s estimates of the amount and timing of anticipated synergies.
Shire would be able to determine the implications of an all-stock versus a cash-and-stock 
deal on the combined firms’ earnings per share and credit rating due to the resulting in­
creased leverage, as well as postclosing ownership distribution. Such models provide esti­
mates of synergy from potential cost savings or revenue enhancements needed to determine 
if the proposed purchase premium could be earned back within a reasonable time period en­
abling the firm to earn its cost of capital. Moreover, models could be used to display on a pro 
forma (or adjusted) basis the impact of tax savings resulting from Baxalta paying an effective 
US tax rate of 23 versus 17% if incorporated in Ireland. Models also are helpful in determining 
the impact of concessions demanded by the regulators to approve the deal on the attractive­
ness of the deal.
Baxalta could have used models to evaluate the attractiveness of the various offers made 
by Shire and to provide their own estimate of potential synergy, allowing it to argue that 
Baxalta shareholders should be compensated at least for the amount of additional value they 
are contributing to the merged companies.
Models also assist in evaluating the impact of target defenses such as a poison pill on the 
cost of the deal to the acquirer. Baxalta’s poison pill defense would have been triggered when 
a suitor unwanted by the board acquired more than a 9.9% stake in the business. Removing 
2For spin-offs to be nontaxable to a firm’s shareholders, it must satisfy certain IRS rules. One requirement is that 
the parent’s shareholders must retain a continuing interest in both the parent and the subsidiary (subject to a 
spin-off) for a period of 4 years beginning 2 years prior to the spin-off and extending 2 years after the spin-off. The 
continuity of interest principle stipulates that an acquisition can be tax free to target shareholders if the acquirer’s 
shareholders hold an ongoing equity stake in the target firm. This requirement may be satisfied if the parent’s 
shareholders collectively maintain a 50% equity ownership interest in both the parent firm and the spun-off firm. If 
this condition is not satisfied, the parent can be subject to a tax penalty. This is called the “anti-Morris Trust rule.”
3An American Depository Share is a stock trading on a US exchange that represents a specific number of shares in a 
foreign firm.
4Shire’s revised bid is predicated on their belief that the deal will not trigger a tax liability for Baxter International 
as long as it can show that the deal negotiated with Baxalta was not negotiated as part of a plan developed prior to 
the spin-off by Baxter. As part of the spin-off agreement with Baxter, Shire would be required to reimburse Baxter 
for tax liability it might incur as a consequence of the spin-off.
1Baxter International retained a 19.5% interest in Shire following the spin-off.

506	
14.  Applying Financial Models
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
this pill would have been particularly difficult because of Baxalta’s staggered board in which 
its directors serve 3-year, overlapping terms, meaning that it would take Shire 2 years to gain 
control.
Thus, from start to finish, financial models can play a key role in the M&A process. First 
by providing a baseline financial projection reflecting the firm’s current strategy and later the 
ability to see how certain acquisitions and investments could impact the baseline projection. 
In addition, once a target has been identified, financial models assist in valuing the target 
and assessing the attractiveness of alternative offers and counteroffers and the ability of the 
acquirer to finance the deal.
CHAPTER OVERVIEW
As illustrated in the Baxalta takeover battle, financial models are commonly used in vari­
ous aspects of the M&A process discussed earlier in this book. Highly skilled specialists often 
develop complex, interactive models to simulate potential investment outcomes. Managers uti­
lize the output of such models to assist in making important investment decisions. The degree 
of confidence they have in the reliability of such output depends on the extent to which they 
understand how such models operate, as well as their advantages and limitations. Consequent­
ly, it is critical that decision makers have a working knowledge of such models.
The emphasis in Chapter 9 was on how financial modeling can be used to estimate the 
stand-alone value of a single firm. In this chapter, the focus is on the application of financial 
modeling to value and structure M&As. A detailed discussion of how to construct M&A 
financial models is beyond the scope of this book. Rather, the intent of this chapter is to 
provide the reader with an appreciation of the general characteristics of such models, their 
data input requirements, and how they may be used to address questions relating to valu­
ation, deal structuring, and financing (Table 14.1). Such information is critical to each side 
in the negotiating process in determining an appropriate purchase price and distribution 
of risk.
This chapter begins with a general discussion of elements common to most sophisticated 
M&A financial models, followed by illustrations of how M&A models may be applied to a 
purchase of stock and a purchase of assets. The model discussed in this chapter exhibits many 
of the characteristics of the highly sophisticated proprietary M&A models used by practi­
tioners. The acquiring firm, target firm, and combined firms are referred to throughout the 
chapter as Acquirer, Target, and Newco. The case study at the end of this chapter provides a 
hypothetical illustration of how models could have been applied in the negotiation process 
using a recently completed deal in which lab equipment maker Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc. 
merged with Life Technologies Corporation. See the section “Appendix A: Debt Repayment 
Schedule, Convertible Securities, Interest Rates, and β” for a listing of potential sources of 
data inputs required to run the financial model discussed in this chapter.
The Excel worksheets of the detailed M&A model discussed in this chapter are avail­
able on the companion site to this book in a Microsoft Excel file entitled M&A Valuation 
and Deal Structuring Model (https://www.elsevier.com/books-and-journals/book-
companion/9780128016091). A review of this chapter also is available in the file folder 
entitled “Student Study Guide” on the companion site.

	
Understanding and Applying M&A Financial Models	
507
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
UNDERSTANDING AND APPLYING M&A FINANCIAL MODELS
The logic underlying the Excel-based M&A model found on the companion site follows 
the four-step process outlined in Table  14.2. The key outputs of the model in a purchase 
of stock deal are displayed on Acquirer Transaction Summary Worksheet (Table 14.3). This 
table allows for a quick review of deal terms and their implications based on a specific set of 
assumptions. The cells highlighted in yellow are called “input cells” and require the analyst 
to input data in each of these cells. The remaining cells have formulas utilizing these inputs 
to calculate their values automatically.
Common Elements of M&A Models
M&A models commonly require the estimation of the stand-alone value of Target and Ac­
quirer. The stand-alone value is what the firm would be worth if it were a wholly independent 
entity and all revenue is valued at current market prices and all costs incurred in generating 
these revenues are known. The stand-alone value of Target is theoretically what the business 
would be worth as a going concern (i.e., in the absence of any takeover bid); Acquirer’s stand-
alone value represents a reference point against which the value of the combined businesses 
(Newco) must be compared. It makes sense to Acquirer shareholders to do the deal only if the 
value of Newco exceeds the value of Acquirer as a stand-alone (or going concern) business. 
TABLE 14.1  Key Deal Questions Commonly Addressed by M&A Models
Key questions:
•	Valuation (see Chapters 7 and 8)
–	 What are the key drivers of firm value?
–	 How much is Target worth without the effects of synergy (i.e., stand-alone value)? How much is Acquirer 
worth on a stand-alone basis? Will the combination of the two businesses create value for Acquirer’s share­
holders?
–	 What is the value of expected synergy?
–	 What is the maximum price Acquirer should pay for Target?
•	Financing (see Chapter 13)
–	 Can the proposed purchase price be financed?
–	 What combination of potential sources of funds, both internally generated and external sources, provides 
the lowest cost of funds for Acquirer, subject to existing loan covenants and credit ratios Acquirer hopes to 
maintain or achieve?
–	 What is the acquisition’s impact on Acquirer’s fully diluted earnings per share?
–	 Are existing loan covenants violated?
–	 Is the firm’s credit rating in jeopardy?
–	 Will the firm’s ability to finance future opportunities be impaired?
•	Deal structuring (see Chapters 11 and 12)
–	 What is the impact on financial performance and valuation if Acquirer is willing to assume certain Target 
liabilities?
–	 What is the impact on Acquirer’s earnings per share of alternative forms of payment?
–	 What are the implications of a purchase of stock versus a purchase of assets?
–	 What is the distribution of ownership of the combined businesses between Acquirer and Target sharehold­
ers following closing?
–	 What is the impact on Acquirer’s financial performance of a tax-free rather than a taxable deal?
M&A, Merger and acquisition.

508	
14.  Applying Financial Models
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
The valuation of the combined businesses should reflect not only the sum of their stand-alone 
values but also the incremental value of synergy and the deal terms.
The offer price is considered appropriate if the net present value (NPV) of the investment 
is greater than or equal to zero. In this context, NPV is defined as the difference between the 
present value of Target plus anticipated synergy and the offer price including any transac­
tion-related expenses. That is, the value received is greater than or equal to what is paid for 
the business. Furthermore, Acquirer’s posttransaction capital structure is suitable only if it 
can be supported by the future cash flows, if it does not result in a violation of current loan 
covenants or desired credit ratios, if it does not jeopardize the firm’s credit rating, and, for 
public companies, if EPS is not subject to sizeable or sustained dilution.
Value drivers are variables that exert the greatest impact on firm value, often including the 
revenue growth rate, cost of sales as a percent of sales, sales, general, and administrative ex­
penses (SG&A) as a percent of sales, weighted average cost of capital (WACC) assumed dur­
ing annual cash flow growth and terminal periods, and the cash flow growth rate assumed 
during terminal period.5 These variables are commonly changed to simulate alternative 
5The constant growth method described in detail in Chapter 7 is used in this chapter to approximate the present 
value of cash flows beyond the annual forecast period in this chapter. However, practitioners often use so-called 
“exit multiples” for this purpose. This involves using a multiple of some income or cash flow measure, such as net 
income, free cash flow to the firm, or EBITDA. The multiple is estimated by looking at how comparable companies 
are valued by the market. For example, assume an analyst projects free cash flow to the firm of $10 million and a 
projected price-to-cash flow multiple of 8 in the fifth year. Multiplying these figures suggests that investors would 
be willing to pay $80 million in the fifth year for all those cash flows generated in perpetuity by the firm beyond 
the fifth year.
TABLE 14.2  M&A Model Building Process Steps
Step 1: Construct historical financials for both Acquirer and Target and determine key value drivers
a.	Collect and analyze historical data to understand the key determinants (“key value drivers”) of each 
firm’s historical financial performance
b.	“Normalize” (i.e., remove anomalies) historical data for forecasting purposes
c.	Build historical financial accounts including income statement, balance sheet, and cash flow statements
Step 2: Project Target and Acquirer financials and estimate stand-alone values
a.	Determine assumptions for each key input variable to the model
b.	Input assumptions into the model to project financials
c.	Select appropriate WACC and terminal period assumptions to estimate stand-alone values
Step 3: Estimate value of Newco, including synergy and deal terms
a.	Estimate synergy and investment required to realize synergy
b.	Project Newco financials, including the impact of synergy and deal terms
c.	Select appropriate WACC and terminal period assumptions to value Newco
Step 4: Determine appropriateness of Target offer price and Newco’s posttransaction capital structure
a.	Compare the offer price with the estimated value of synergy and recent comparable deals
b.	Compare projected credit ratios with industry average ratios
c.	Determine impact of the deal on Newco’s EPS
d.	Determine if the deal allows Newco to meet or exceed required financial returns
M&A, Merger and acquisition; WACC, weighted average cost of capital.

	
Understanding and Applying M&A Financial Models	
509
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
TABLE 14.3  Acquirer Transaction Summary Worksheet: Stock Purchase
SG&A, Sales, general, and administrative expenses.

510	
14.  Applying Financial Models
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
scenarios.6 Anyone reviewing model results can focus on these value drivers to determine if 
the results should be considered credible.
Key Data Linkages and Model Balancing Mechanism
Fig. 14.1 displays the important data linkages underlying the four process steps within 
the model. The Acquirer Transaction Summary Worksheet plays a dual role: summarizing 
important deal terms and performance metrics while also providing key inputs for Steps 3 
and 4 of the modeling process. Fig. 14.2 illustrates the model’s balancing mechanism. Finan­
cial models normally are said to be in balance when total assets equal total liabilities plus 
shareholders’ equity. This may be done manually by inserting a “plug” value whenever the 
two sides of the balance sheet are not equal or automatically by building a mechanism for 
forcing equality. The latter has the enormous advantage of allowing the model to simulate 
alternative scenarios over many years without having to stop the forecast each year to manu­
ally force it to balance.
The mechanism in this model for forcing balance involves a revolving loan facility or 
line of credit. Such arrangements allow a firm to borrow up to a specific amount. Once 
the maximum has been reached, the firm can no longer borrow. To maintain the ability 
to borrow to meet unanticipated needs, firms have an incentive to pay off the loan as 
6The reader should understand that these variables can be excessively manipulated by the user to result in a wide 
range of outcomes. Such manipulation often is counterproductive, because it may result in outcomes the user 
would like to see rather than realistic ones.
FIGURE 14.1  M&A model worksheet flow diagram. M&A, Merger and acquisition.

	
Understanding and Applying M&A Financial Models	
511
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
quickly as possible. If total assets exceed total liabilities plus equity, the model borrows 
(i.e., the “revolver” shows a positive balance on the liability side of the balance sheet) to 
provide the cash needed to finance the increase in assets. If total liabilities plus equity 
exceed total assets, the model first pays off any outstanding “revolver” balances and then 
uses the remaining excess cash flow to add to cash and short-term marketable securities on 
the balance sheet.
How does the model determine the size of the loan repayment when the loan balance is 
positive? Firms consider the amount of available cash and the minimum cash balance they 
wish to maintain. If available cash less the loan balance is less than the desired minimum 
cash balance, the loan payment equals the difference between available cash and minimum 
cash. Loan payments greater than this amount cause the firm’s ending cash to be less than the 
desired minimum balance. To illustrate, consider the following:
If Available Cash = $80 million
Beginning Loan Balance = $75 million
Minimum Cash = $10 million
Then
Available Cash − Loan Balance = $80 million − $75 million < $10 million 
(minimum cash) and
Loan Payment = $80 − $10 = $70 million
Ending Loan Balance = $75 million − $70 million = $5 million
FIGURE 14.2  M&A model balancing mechanism. Available Cash, cash available for paying off any loan balance 
owed on the revolving loan credit facility; Loan Balance, outstanding balance on the revolving loan credit facility; 
M&A, merger and acquisition; Min Cash, minimum cash balance required by firm.

512	
14.  Applying Financial Models
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
However, if available cash less the loan balance exceeds the desired minimum cash bal­
ance, the loan repayment equals the loan balance, as there is more than enough cash to re­
pay the loan and still maintain the desired minimum cash balance. Consider the following 
example:
If Available Cash = $85 million
Beginning Loan Balance = $75 million
Minimum Cash = $10 million
Then
Available Cash − Loan Balance = $85 million − $75 million = $10 million 
(minimum cash)
Loan Payment = $85 million − $75 million = $10 million
Ending Loan Balance = 0
How does the model determine the firm’s ending cash balances? Ending cash balances 
will always equal minimum cash if available cash is less than the loan balance. Why? Because 
only that portion of the loan balance greater than minimum balance will be used to repay the 
loan. Conversely, if available cash exceeds the loan balance, the ending cash balance equals 
the difference between available cash and the loan payment, since the loan balance will not 
be repaid unless there is sufficient cash available to cover the minimum balance. Table 14.4 
provides a numerical example of how the firm’s ending cash balance is determined assuming 
the revolving credit facility balance in the Sources and Uses section of Table 14.3 is $2 billion 
and that the firm requires a minimum operating cash balance of $100 million. See the table’s 
footnotes for a definition of each line item.
TABLE 14.4  Determining Newco’s Ending Cash Balances
Projections
2016
2017
2018
Cash from operating, investing, and financing activities ($)
1899.0
229.3
363.1
Beginning cash balance
131.6
100.0
259.9
Cash available for revolving credit facilitya
2030.6
329.3
623.0
Beginning revolving credit facility balance
2000.0
69.4b
0.0
Repayment of revolving credit facility loan balancec
1930.6
69.4
0.0
Ending revolving credit facility balanced
69.4
0.0
0.0
Ending cash balance
100.0
259.9e
623.0
aCash from operating, investing, and financing activities plus the beginning cash balance.
bEnding revolver balance.
cCash available less minimum balance if cash available less beginning revolver balance is less than minimum cash; otherwise, total repayment 
equals beginning revolver balance.
dBeginning revolver balance less total repayment.
eMinimum cash if cash available is less than the beginning revolver balance and minimum cash; otherwise, ending cash equals cash available less 
total loan repayment.

	
M&A Models: Stock Purchases	
513
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
M&A MODELS: STOCK PURCHASES
The three basic legal forms of M&A deals include a merger, stock purchase, or purchase of 
assets (see Chapter 11 for more detail). What follows is a discussion of an M&A model that 
applies to either a merger or a stock purchase. Such models are generally more complex than 
asset purchase models. A merger transaction is similar to a stock purchase in that the buyer 
will acquire all of Target company’s assets, rights, and liabilities (known and unknown)7 
and will be unable to specifically identify which assets and liabilities it wishes to assume. In 
contrast, in an asset purchase, the seller retains ownership of the firm’s shares and only assets 
and liabilities that are specifically identified in the purchase agreement are transferred to the 
buyer. All other assets and liabilities remain with the seller. Asset purchases will be discussed 
later in this chapter and in more detail in Chapter 11.
A merger involves the mutual decision of two companies to combine to become a single 
legal entity and generally involves two firms relatively equal in size, with one disappearing. 
All Target assets and liabilities, known and unknown, automatically transfer to Acquirer. 
Target shareholders usually have their shares exchanged for Acquirer shares at some ne­
gotiated share-exchange ratio (SER), for cash, or some combination. A stock purchase usu­
ally involves the purchase of all the shares of another entity for cash or stock. However, 
Acquirer may purchase less than 100% of Target’s outstanding shares as all shareholders 
may not agree to sell their shares. As in a merger, Target’s assets and liabilities effectively 
transfer to Acquirer without interruption. However, unlike a merger, Acquirer may be left 
with minority Target shareholders and Target may continue to exist as a legal subsidiary 
of Acquirer.
The M&A model discussed in this chapter consists of a series of linked worksheets, each 
reflecting either a financial statement or a related activity. Table 14.5 illustrates how the 17 
worksheets fit into each of the 4 process steps described in Table 14.2. IS, BS, and CF refer to 
income statement, balance sheet, and cash flow statement, respectively. The organizational 
structure of the following sections reflects the process steps and the activities within each 
process step outlined in Table 14.2.
Step 1: Construct Historical Financials and Determine Key Value Drivers
Although public firms are required to file their financial statements with the Securities and 
Exchange Commission (SEC) in accordance with GAAP, so-called pro forma financial state­
ments are used as hypothetical representations of the potential performance of the acquirer 
and target firms if they had been merged.8 Such statements can refer to the future as well as 
to the past. That is, they can represent what the combined firms would look like in the future 
and what they could have looked like in the past based on the assumptions of the analyst who 
constructed the financial statements.
8Because there are no accepted standards for pro forma accounting, pro forma statements may deviate substantially 
from GAAP statements.
7Known liabilities are those shown on Target’s balance sheet and unknown liabilities are those not recorded.

514	
14.  Applying Financial Models
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
Step 1(a): Collect and Analyze Required Historical Data to Understand Key 
Value Drivers
A valuation’s accuracy depends on understanding the historical competitive dynamics 
of the industry and of the company within the industry, as well as the reliability of the data 
used in the valuation. Competitive dynamics refer to the factors within the industry that de­
termine industry profitability and cash flow. A careful examination of historical information 
can provide insights into key relationships among various operating variables. Examples of 
relevant historical relationships include seasonal or cyclical movements in the data, the re­
lationship between fixed and variable expenses, and the impact on revenue of changes in 
product prices and unit sales.
While public companies are required to provide financial data for only the current and 2 
prior years, it is highly desirable to use data spanning at least one business cycle (i.e., about 
5–7 years) to identify trends.9 While actual historical data is used to build the historical Tar­
get and Acquirer financial statements, projecting key drivers such as sales and cost of sales 
as a percent of sales is best done using normalized historical data. This enables the analyst to 
9For public companies, data is commonly obtained from the firm’s 10Ks and 10Qs to value firms prior to signing a 
nondisclosure with Target. See Chapters 4 and 5 for additional data sources for both public and private firms.
TABLE 14.5  M&A Model Worksheetsa
Model Instructions
Acquirer transaction summary (includes deal terms, form of payment, sources/uses of funds, synergy esti­
mates, EPS impact, and key credit ratios)
Step 1: Construct historical financials and determine key value drivers
–	 Target and Acquirer assumptions (historical period only)
–	 Target and Acquirer IS (historical period only)
–	 Target and Acquirer BS (historical period only)
–	 Target and Acquirer CF (historical period only)
Step 2: Project Target’s and Acquirer’s financials and estimate stand-alone value
–	 Acquirer assumptions (includes key value drivers)
–	 Acquirer IS
–	 Acquirer BS
–	 Acquirer CF
Step 3: Estimate value of combined firms (Newco), including synergy and deal terms
–	 Newco assumptions (includes key value drivers)
–	 Newco IS
–	 Newco BS
–	 Newco CF
Step 4: Determine appropriateness of offer price and Newco postclosing capital/financing structure
–	 Debt repayment (includes repayment schedule for Target debt assumed by Acquirer, Acquirer’s pretransac­
tion debt, and new debt issued to finance the deal)
–	 Options—convertibles (estimates the number of new Target shares that must be acquired due to the conver­
sion of options as well as convertible debt and preferred equity)
–	 Valuation (includes the valuation of Target, Acquirer, and Newco enterprise value, equity value, and price per 
share)
aEach dashed item describes a specific worksheet.
BS, Balance sheet; CF, cash flow; IS, income statement; M&A, merger and acquisition.

	
M&A Models: Stock Purchases	
515
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
identify longer-term trends and relationships in the data. For a more detailed discussion of 
value drivers in the context of model building, see Chapter 9.
Step 1(b): Normalize Historical Data for Forecasting Purposes
To ensure that these historical relationships can be accurately defined, normalize the data 
by removing nonrecurring changes and questionable accounting practices. Cash flow may be 
adjusted by adding back unusually large increases in reserves or deducting large decreases 
in reserves from free cash flow to the firm. An example of reserves would be accounting 
entries established in anticipation of a pending expense such as employee layoffs in the year 
following a merger. The effect of the reserve would be to lower income in the current year. 
However, the actual cash outlay would not occur until the following year when the layoffs 
actually occur.
Similar adjustments can be made for significant nonrecurring gains or losses on the sale of 
assets or nonrecurring expenses, such as those associated with the settlement of a lawsuit or 
warranty claim. Monthly revenue may be aggregated into quarterly or even annual data to 
minimize period-to-period distortions in earnings or cash flow resulting from inappropriate 
accounting practices.
Step 1(c): Build Historical Financial Statements
Once collected, input all historical financial data for both Target and Acquirer into the 
historical input cells in the income statement, balance sheet, and cash flow statements work­
sheets. Note the reconciliation line at the bottom on the balance sheet worksheet. This rep­
resents the difference between total assets and total liabilities plus shareholders’ equity and 
should be equal to zero if the model is balancing properly.
Step 2: Project Acquirer and Target Financials and Estimate 
Stand-Alone Values
If the factors affecting sales, profit, and cash flow historically are expected to exert the same 
influence in the future, a firm’s financial statements may be projected by extrapolating nor­
malized historical growth rates in key variables such as revenue. If the factors affecting sales 
growth are expected to change due to the introduction of new products, total revenue growth 
may accelerate from its historical trend. In contrast, the emergence of additional competitors 
may limit revenue growth by eroding the firm’s market share and selling prices. The Porter 
Five Forces Model discussed in Chapter 4 and illustrated in more detail in Chapter 9 can be 
very helpful in projecting key value drivers for both Target and Acquirer.
Key normalized financial data should be projected for at least 5 years, and possibly more, 
until cash flow turns positive or the growth rate slows to what is believed to be a sustainable 
pace. Projections should reflect the best information about product demand growth, future 
pricing, technological changes, new competitors, new product and service offerings from cur­
rent competitors, potential supply disruptions, raw material and labor cost increases, and 
possible new product or service substitutes. Projections also should include the revenue and 
costs associated with known new product introductions and capital expenditures, as well as 
additional expenses required to maintain or expand operations by the acquiring and target 
firms.

516	
14.  Applying Financial Models
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
Step 2(a): Determine Assumptions for Each Key Input Variable
Cash flow forecasts commonly involve the projection of revenue and the various compo­
nents of cash flow as a percent of projected revenue. For example, cost of sales, depreciation, 
gross capital spending, and the change in working capital often are projected as a percent of 
estimated future revenue. What percentage is applied to projected revenue for these com­
ponents of free cash flow to the firm may be determined by calculating their historical ratio 
to revenue. In this simple model, revenue drives cash-flow growth. Thus, attention must 
be given to projecting revenue by forecasting unit growth and selling prices, the product of 
which provides estimated revenue. Common projection methods include trend extrapolation 
and scenario analysis.10
Step 2(b): Input Assumptions into the Model and Project Financials
The Target Assumptions Worksheet in Table 14.6 is an example of the financial statements 
used in the model. Each input cell (denoted in yellow) may be changed with the subsequent 
years changed automatically to reflect the new entry in the input cell. Changes to the model 
are made primarily by making changes in the worksheets labeled Target Assumptions and 
Acquirer Assumptions. The analyst should input cell values one at a time using only small 
changes in such values in order to assess accurately the outcome of each change on perfor­
mance metrics such as net income, EPS, and NPV. In doing so, it will become evident which 
variables represent key value drivers. See the practice exercise in Exhibit 14.1 for an illustra­
tion of how to change revenue growth, a key value driver.
Step 2(c): Select Appropriate Discount Rate and Terminal Period Assumptions to 
Estimate Stand-Alone Values
The actual valuation of Target and Acquirer is done on the Valuation Worksheet using in­
puts from Target and Acquirer Assumptions Worksheets. See Chapter 7 for a detailed discus­
sion of how to estimate the appropriate WACC and terminal period assumptions for Target 
and Acquirer.
Step 3: Estimate Value of Newco, Including Synergy and Deal Terms
This process step involves adjusting the sum of Target and Acquirer financial statements 
to create combined company pro forma statements that purport to show what Newco would 
look like adjusted for synergy and the terms of the deal. Synergy in the popular press often 
is defined as the value (i.e., incremental cash flows) created as a result of combining two 
businesses in excess of the sum of their individual market values. In practice, the combina­
tion of businesses can create as well as destroy value measured in terms of cash flows. In 
this chapter, we discuss the notion of net synergy, that is, the difference between sources 
10Trend extrapolation entails extending present trends into the future using historical growth rates or multiple 
regression techniques. Scenario analysis projects multiple outlooks, with each differing in terms of key vari­
ables (e.g., growth in gross domestic product, industry sales growth, fluctuations in exchange rates) or issues 
(e.g., competitive new product introductions, new technologies, and new regulations).

	
M&A Models: Stock Purchases	
517
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
TABLE 14.6  Target Assumptions Worksheet
COGS, Cost of goods sold; SG&A, selling, general, and administrative expenses.

518	
14.  Applying Financial Models
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
of value and destroyers of value. Sources of value add to the economic value (i.e., ability to 
generate future cash flows) of the combined firms; destroyers of value tend to reduce cash 
flows. To determine if certain cash flows result from synergy, ask if they can be generated 
only if the businesses are combined. If the answer is yes, then the cash flow in question is 
due to synergy.
Deal terms refer to the amount and composition of the form of payment (usually cash, 
stock, or some combination) for Target, whether Acquirer is purchasing the stock or assets 
of Target (form of acquisition), the number of shares being acquired, and how it is being 
financed. The amount of the purchase price will affect what has to be financed by borrowing, 
using excess cash balances, or issuing some form of equity consideration (i.e., common stock, 
preferred stock, or warrants). Such factors will impact interest expense on the income state­
ment and goodwill, cash balances, and shareholders’ equity on the balance sheet.
Step 3(a): Estimate Synergy and Investment Required to Realize Synergy
Common sources of value include potential cost savings resulting from shared overhead, 
elimination of duplicate facilities, better utilization of existing facilities (i.e., economies of 
scale), and minimizing overlapping distribution channels (e.g., direct sales forces, websites, 
agents). Synergy related to cost savings is more easily realized than synergy due to other 
sources.11 Other sources of value include cross-selling of Acquirer’s products to Target’s cus­
tomers and vice versa. Potential sources of value also include land and “obsolete” inventory 
and depreciated equipment whose value has been written down to zero. Such inventory can 
still be discounted and sold to raise cash and fully depreciated equipment can still have a use­
ful life. Underutilized borrowing capacity or significant excess cash balances also can make 
an acquisition target more attractive. The addition of Target’s assets, low level of indebted­
ness, and strong cash flow from operations could enable the buyer to increase substantially 
11(Christofferson et al., 2004). In addition to cost savings from eliminating duplicate functions, Fee et al. (2012) 
document that acquirers frequently cut substantially advertising and marketing budgets following closing.
EXHIBIT 14.1  PRACTICE EXERCISE: CHANGING TARGET 
REVENUE GROWTH
Using the Excel spreadsheet model in the file entitled M&A Valuation and Structuring Model 
on the companion website accompanying this book (see the beginning of this chapter for website 
address), change Target’s revenue growth rate assumption. On Target’s Assumptions Worksheet, to 
raise Target’s revenue growth rate by 1 percentage point during the annual forecast period (2016–
20), increase the growth rate from 5.5 to 6.5% in the yellow input cell on the Sales Growth line for 
the year 2016. The model will increase automatically the growth rate annually from 2016 to 2020 by 
1 percentage point. The model also accommodates a variable growth rate forecast. For example, if 
the growth rate in 2017 is expected to increase by an additional 1 percentage point and to continue 
at that higher rate in subsequent years, the analyst simply increases the growth rate from 5.5 to 6.5% 
in 2016 and to 7.5% in 2017.

	
M&A Models: Stock Purchases	
519
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
the borrowing levels of the combined companies.12 Other sources of value include access to 
intellectual property (e.g., patents and trade names), new technologies, and new customer 
groups. Likewise, income tax losses and tax credits also may represent an important source 
of value by reducing the combined firms’ current and future tax burden.
Factors destroying value include poor product quality, excessive wage and benefit levels, 
low productivity, high employee turnover, and customer attrition. A lack of or badly written 
contracts often result in customer disputes about terms, conditions, and amounts owed. Verbal 
agreements made with customers by the seller’s sales representatives may become unprofit­
able obligations for the buyer. Environmental issues, product liabilities, and unresolved law­
suits are also major potential destroyers of value for the buyer. For a more detailed discussion 
of how to quantify revenue and cost-related synergies, see the section “Quantifying Synergy.”
In calculating synergy, it is important to include the costs associated with recruiting and 
training employees, achieving productivity improvements, layoffs, and exploiting revenue 
opportunities. Employee attrition following closing will add to recruitment and training 
costs. Cost savings due to layoffs frequently are offset in the early years by severance expens­
es. Realizing productivity gains requires more spending in new structures and equipment or 
redesigning work flow. Exploiting revenue-raising opportunities may require training the 
sales force of the combined firms in selling each firm’s products or services and additional 
advertising expenditures to inform current or potential customers of what has taken place.
Step 3(b): Project Newco Financials Including Effects of Synergy and Deal Terms
Table 14.7 displays the key deal terms found on the Acquirer Transaction Summary Work­
sheet. These include the form of acquisition (stock or asset) and the amount and form of 
payment (Acquirer stock, cash, or some combination), as well as the timing of payment. In 
12The incremental borrowing capacity can be approximated by comparing the combined firms’ current debt-to-total 
capital ratio with the industry average. For example, assume Firm A’s acquisition of Firm B results in a reduction 
in the combined firms’ debt-to-total capital ratio to 0.25 (e.g., debt represents $250 million of the new firm’s total 
capital of $1 billion). If the same ratio for the industry is 0.5, the new firm may be able to increase its borrowing by 
$250 million to raise its debt-to-total capital ratio to the industry average. Such incremental borrowing often is used 
to finance a portion of the purchase price paid for the target firm.
TABLE 14.7  Acquirer Transaction Summary Worksheet: Deal Terms

520	
14.  Applying Financial Models
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
some transactions, payment of some portion of the purchase price may be deferred. See the 
practice exercise in Exhibit 14.2 for an illustration of how to change payment terms.
The Transaction Summary Worksheet also displays the primary synergy inputs as shown 
in Table 14.8. These include profit margin improvements, improvements in SG&A as a per­
cent of revenue, and incremental revenue resulting from combining the firms. Margin im­
provements reflect both improvements in cost of goods sold (COGS) and increases in selling 
prices. Incremental sales often reflect cross-selling one firm’s products into the other firm’s 
customers. The model presumes that the SG&A associated with the incremental sales is less 
than the historical ratio of SG&A as a percent of revenue. Assuming the two firms are similar, 
the existing sales and administrative infrastructure often can support a substantial portion of 
the additional revenue without having to add personnel.
The additional SG&A as a percent of revenue assumed to support the incremental revenue 
is shown in an input cell at the bottom of the Transaction Summary Worksheet (see Model’s 
Acquirer Transaction Summary Worksheet on the website accompanying this book). Note 
the synergies are phased in over time reflecting delays in realizing anticipated savings and 
revenue improvements, and, once fully realized, they are sustained at that level during the 
remainder of the forecast period.
Newco’s Income Statement Worksheet (Table 14.9) displays, in the Transaction Adjust­
ments column between the historical and projected financial data, the effects of anticipat­
ed synergy, costs incurred to realize synergy, and other acquisition-related costs in 2016. 
The purpose of these adjustments is to create a pro forma income statement to illustrate 
what the combined firms would have looked like had they been operated jointly for the 
entire year.
EXHIBIT 14.2  PRACTICE EXERCISE: SETTING PAYMENT 
TERMS
Using the Excel spreadsheet model in the file folder entitled M&A Valuation and Structuring 
Model on the companion website accompanying this book (see the beginning of this chapter for 
website address), change the payment terms on the Summary Worksheet. Input the percentage of 
the total payment that is Acquirer stock in the Form of Payment Section and the model automatical­
ly treats the remaining portion of the payment as cash. For example, an all-cash deal would require 
setting the percentage of the total payment that is stock to zero; for a deal that is 30% stock and 70% 
cash, set the percentage of the total payment that is stock to 30%.
TABLE 14.8  Acquirer Transaction Summary Worksheet Synergy Assumptions: Stock Purchase
SG&A, Selling, general, and administrative expenses.

	
M&A Models: Stock Purchases	
521
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
The incremental revenue due to synergy in 2016 of $25 million generates an incremental 
$13.6 million in COGS.13 The net increase in COGS (i.e., additional cost to support the increase 
in sales less the improvement in operating margin) is $8.5 million and represents 34% of in­
cremental sales (i.e., $8.5/$25), as compared to its 58.4% historical average during the preced­
ing 3 years.14 The improvement in the COGS ratio reflects a $5-million improvement in the 
operating margin due to a better utilization of existing capacity and savings associated with 
purchases of raw materials and services.15
13(1 − gross margin) × $25 million = (1 − 0.458) × $25 million = $13.6 million: see Table 14.8, Incremental Sales 
Synergy section.
14See the Acquirer Transaction Worksheet in M&A Model on the companion Website accompanying this book. The 
10% figure is located in a blue input cell immediately below the last line of the worksheet.
15See the Gross Margin Improvement section of Table 14.8.
TABLE 14.9  Newco’s Income Statement Worksheet Adjustments: Stock Purchase
SG&A, Selling, general, and administrative expenses.

522	
14.  Applying Financial Models
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
The model assumes that the ratio of SG&A to incremental sales is 10% resulting in an in­
crease of SG&A of $2.5 million.16 However, this increase in SG&A is expected to be offset by 
a $3-million reduction in SG&A overhead due to the elimination of duplicate sales, market, 
and administrative functions between the two firms. Integration expense incurred in the first 
full year of Newco operations is estimated at $100 million and includes severance expense, 
lease buyouts, retraining expenses, etc. Interest expense is up by $134.2 million, reflecting ad­
ditional borrowing costs associated with closing the deal. Taxes decrease by $151 million due 
to expensing of nonfinancing-related transaction closing expenses of $444.5 million.17
Transaction adjustments for Newco’s balance sheet (Table 14.10) illustrate how the trans­
action purchase price is financed. This data comes from the Transaction Summary Work­
sheet Sources and Uses section of Table 14.7. The equity consideration or purchase price of 
$14,494.8 million (excluding transaction expenses) is 50% cash, with the remainder paid in 
newly issued Acquirer shares valued at $7247.4. The cash portion of the purchase price in­
cluding transactions expenses is $7882.4 million18 and is financed through a combination of 
reducing cash on the balance sheet by $1000 million, borrowing $2882.4 million in senior 
debt, and issuing new acquirer common shares to the public valued at $4000 million.
The adjustment entry in Table 14.10 for common stock of $5513.7 million equals the sum 
of $7247.4 million in new acquirer common stock exchanged for target shares plus $4000 mil­
lion in new shares issued to help finance the cash portion of the purchase price less $5733.7 in 
Target common stock.19 Target retained earnings are eliminated as they are implicit in the pur­
chase price. Goodwill, representing the difference between the purchase price and the book 
value of net acquired assets, totals $9841.4 million.20 Pretransaction adjustments to the bal­
ance sheet refer to reductions in receivables for those deemed uncollectable, inventory to 
reflect damaged and obsolete items, obsolete or poorly maintained equipment, and impaired 
goodwill.21
Step 3(c): Select Appropriate Discount Rate and Terminal Period Assumptions to 
Value Newco
Newco’s enterprise value is estimated on the Model’s Valuations Worksheet (as are Target 
and Acquirer) using inputs from the Newco Assumptions Worksheet. Enterprise value often is 
defined as the sum of the market value of a firm’s equity, preferred shares, debt, and noncon­
trolling interest less total cash and cash equivalents.22 Cash in excess of working capital is com­
monly deducted, because it is viewed as unimportant to the ongoing operation of the business 
and can be used by Acquirer to finance the deal.23 Once the enterprise value has been estimated, 
16$25 million × 0.10: see Table 14.8, SG&A Synergies section.
17Note that financing fees can be capitalized on the Newco balance sheet and amortized over the life of the loan.
18$7882.4 = 0.5 × $14,494.8 million in equity consideration + $635 million in transaction fees.
19Once Target shareholders exchange their shares for Acquirer stock or cash, they are canceled.
20Note that the model conservatively assumes that book value equals fair market value. This assumption may be 
changed once the acquirer has completed full due diligence.
21Goodwill is said to be impaired when its book or carrying value exceeds its current fair market value. The book 
value of such goodwill must be reduced by the difference between its book value and fair market value.
22Suggestions for determining an appropriate WACC and terminal period assumptions are found in Chapter 7.
23It is often useful to deduct other assets not germane to the ongoing operation of the combined businesses from the 
enterprise value if they can be easily sold for cash and subsequently used to finance the transaction.

	
M&A Models: Stock Purchases	
523
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
TABLE 14.10  Newco’s Balance Sheet Worksheet Adjustments: Stock Purchase

524	
14.  Applying Financial Models
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
the market value of equity is then calculated by adding cash to and deducting long-term debt 
and noncontrolling interests from the enterprise value.24 The marginal rather than the effective 
tax rate is used since the enterprise value is calculated prior to financing concerns.25
While this definition may reasonably approximate the takeover value of a company, it 
does not encompass all of the significant nonequity claims on cash flow such as operating 
leases, unfunded pension and healthcare obligations, and loan guarantees. Thus, the com­
mon definition of enterprise value may omit significant obligations that must be paid by 
Acquirer and whose present value should be included in estimating Target’s purchase price. 
When calculating the ratio of enterprise to EBITDA as a valuation multiple, the analyst needs 
to add back leasing and pension expenses to EBITDA in order to compare the ratio for a firm 
with substantial amounts of such long-term obligations with other companies.
Chapter 7 discusses alternative ways of estimating the market value of a firm’s long-term 
debt. Commonly used methods for modeling purposes by practitioners involve valuing the 
book value of a firm’s long-term debt at either its current market value if it is publicly traded 
or book value if it is not. Alternatively, the market value of similar debt at a firm exhibiting a 
comparable credit rating can be used to value a target firm’s debt. For example, assume the 
book value of Target’s debt with 10 years remaining to maturity is $478 million and its cur­
rent market value or the market value of comparable publicly traded debt is 1.024 per $1000 
of face value. The market value of the firm’s debt can be estimated as $489.5 million (i.e., 
1.024 × $478). The market value of noncontrolling interests can be estimated by multiplying 
the book value of such interests by the price-to-earnings ratio for comparable firms.
Step 4: Determine Appropriateness of Offer Price and Posttransaction Capital 
Structure
The Sources and Uses section of Acquirer Transaction Summary Worksheet displayed in 
Table 14.7 shows how the transaction is financed. Since the form of payment in this example is 
50% equity and 50% cash, the model automatically finances the equity portion of the purchase 
price by exchanging Acquirer for Target shares in an amount equal to one-half of the purchase 
price. The financing of the cash portion of the purchase price requires the analyst to input values 
for the amount of excess cash to be used and new common or preferred equity issues, as well as 
any increases in subordinated debt. Once these inputs are provided, the model automatically 
assumes that any additional cash to be financed will come from increase in senior debt. These 
inputs determine the capital structure proposed for financing the deal. See the practice exercise 
in Exhibit 14.3 for an illustration of how to change how a transaction is financed.
This process step is a reality check. Is the offer price for Target reasonable? Is Newco’s 
proposed capital structure sustainable? Does the financial return on the deal meet or exceed 
Acquirer’s cost of capital? Is the capital structure consistent with the desired credit rating?
The first question can be answered by comparing the offer price to recent comparable 
transactions and by comparing it to the “maximum” offer price. While recent comparable 
transaction values were explained in detail in Chapter 8, the notion of a maximum price has 
24Noncontrolling interests are deducted from the enterprise value in calculating the market value of the firm’s 
equity because they represent the portion of the consolidated financial statements not owned by the firm.
25The use of the often lower effective tax rate would be impacted by interest expense associated with any borrowing 
undertaken to finance the deal.

	
M&A Models: Stock Purchases	
525
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
not been discussed in this text. The maximum offer price is equal to the sum of the stand-alone 
value (or minimum price) plus 100% of net synergy. The present value of net synergy is equal 
to the present value of sources of value (factors that contribute to positive cash flow) less the 
present value of destroyers of value (factors that reduce cash flow). The presumption is that no 
rational seller will sell at below the minimum price and no rational buyer will pay more than 
the maximum price. Consequently, a reasonable offer price is one that lies between the mini­
mum and maximum prices. These definitions are described in more detail in the next section.
Step 4(a): Compare Offer Price With Estimated Maximum Offer Price and Recent 
Comparable Deals
The initial offer price for Target lies between the minimum26and maximum offer prices. 
The offer price also is referred to as the equity value of the target firm. In a stock purchase 
EXHIBIT 14.3  PRACTICE EXERCISE: CHANGING HOW THE 
DEAL IS FINANCED
Using the Excel spreadsheet model in the file folder entitled M&A Valuation and Structuring 
Model on the companion website accompanying this book (see the beginning of this chapter for 
the website address), change the financing structure on the Summary Worksheet. Once the portion 
of the purchase price to be paid in Acquirer stock is input into the model, it is necessary to deter­
mine how the remaining cash portion of the purchase price will be financed. The model subtracts 
from the amount paid for Target’s equity (i.e., equity consideration) plus transaction expenses the 
dollar value of Acquirer shares exchanged for Target shares and finances the remainder of the pur­
chase price by some combination of other financing sources. Any amount of the cash portion of the 
purchase price that is not funded in some other way is assumed financed by an increase in senior 
debt. That is, total equity consideration + transaction expenses − dollar value of Acquirer equity 
exchanged for Target equity − excess cash − new common shares issues − preferred equity is­
sued − revolving loan balance − subordinated debt = senior debt issued.
To change the financing structure shown on the Summary Worksheet to one including only Ac­
quirer shares exchanged for Target shares and new senior debt, simply set the yellow input cells for 
excess cash and new common shares issued to zero. The model would subtract the $7247.4 million 
(i.e., dollar value of Acquirer shares exchanged for Target shares) from $15,129.8 million (i.e., equity 
consideration including transaction expenses of $635 million) and finance the difference of $7882.4 
million by issuing senior debt equal to that amount.
As the equity portion of the purchase price is increased, senior debt can become negative. Since 
this is meaningless, the analyst should manually increase some other source of funds by the amount 
of the negative senior debt figure.
26The notion of a minimum price should be viewed as a starting point for determining an offer price and does 
not preclude circumstances in which the buyer may be able to buy a target at a significant discount to its intrinsic 
value. For small, privately owned firms, either the buyer or the seller may not have access to all relevant informa­
tion about the economic value of the target. Markets for private firms may also be illiquid; sellers seeking to “cash 
out” quickly may be willing to sell at a significant discount from the firm’s intrinsic value. The cost of performing 
due diligence and the risks associated with buying nonpublic firms often are significant and encourage the buyer to 
offer less than what they may believe is the target’s true worth.

526	
14.  Applying Financial Models
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
deal,27 the minimum price is Target’s stand-alone present value (PVT) or its current market 
value (MVT) (i.e., Target’s current stock price times its shares outstanding). The maximum 
price is the sum of the minimum price plus the present value of net synergy (PVNS).28 The ini­
tial offer price (PVIOP) is the sum of the minimum purchase price and a percentage, α between 
0 and 1, of PVNS. Exhibit 14.4 provides an algebraic illustration of how the initial offer price 
is determined and a numerical example of how the offer price premium and multiple can be 
determined for a given offer price.
Note that α represents the portion of net synergy shared with target shareholders and not 
the purchase price premium. Once the offer price has been determined, the purchase price 
EXHIBIT 14.4  DETERMINING THE OFFER PRICE (PV OP)—
PURCHASE OF STOCK
1.	 PVMIN = PVT or MVT, whichever is greater. MVT is Target’s current share price times the number 
of shares outstanding
2.	 PVMAX = PVMIN + PVNS, where PVNS = PV (sources of value) − PV (destroyers of value)
3.	 PVOP = PVMIN + αPVNS, where 0 ≤ α ≤ 1
4.	 Offer price range for Target = (PVT or MVT) < PVOP < (PVT or MVT) + PVNS
Once the dollar value of the offer price has been determined, the offer price per share, premium, 
and offer (purchase) price multiple can be determined as follows:
Assumptions:
Target’s predeal price per share = $18
Target shares outstanding = 5 million
Target’s current earnings per share = $2.20
Target’s minimum (stand-alone or market) value = $100 million
PV of net synergy = $20 million
α = 50%
Solution:
Offer price per share
Target's minimum value
PV
Target shares outstanding
$100 million
0.5
$20 million
5 million
$22
NS
α
=
+
×
=
+
×
=
Offer (purchase) price premium = $22/$18 = 22.2%.
Offer (purchase) price multiple = $22/$2.20 = 10.a
a Offer price multiple, in this instance measured as a P/E ratio, can be compared to P/E ratios for recent comparable 
transactions to determine the reasonableness of the premium.
27Calculating the minimum and maximum offer price in an asset purchase is discussed later in this chapter.
28Note that the maximum price may be overstated if the current market value of the target firm reflects investor 
expectations of an impending takeover. As such, the current market value may reflect a portion of future synergies.

	
M&A Models: Stock Purchases	
527
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
premium may be estimated by comparing the offer price to Target’s preannouncement share 
price. The offer price should also be compared to similar recent deals to determine if it is 
excessive.29
To determine α, Acquirer may estimate the portion of net synergy supplied by Target. 
Cash flows due to synergy are those that arise only because of the combination of the firms. 
The percentage of net synergy contributed by Target can be estimated by calculating the 
contribution to incremental operating profit attributable to cross-selling or to cost savings 
resulting from a reduction in the number of Target employees or elimination of other Target-
related overhead such as leased facilities. Additional Target-related synergy could include 
intellectual property whose value is represented by the potential profit generated by selling 
such property to others or from new products based on Target copyrights or patents. Ulti­
mately, what fraction of synergy is negotiated successfully by Target depends on its leverage 
or influence relative to Acquirer.30
If it is determined that Target would contribute 30% of net synergy, Acquirer may share up 
to that amount with Target’s shareholders. To discourage potential bidders, acquirers might 
make preemptive bids so attractive that Target’s board could not reject the offer for fear of 
possible shareholder lawsuits, resulting in more than 30% of net synergy shared with Target. 
In other instances, Acquirer may share less than 30% if it is concerned that realizing synergy 
on a timely basis is problematic.
The offer price should fall between the minimum and maximum prices for three reasons. 
First, it is unlikely that Target can be purchased at the minimum price, because Acquirer nor­
mally has to pay a premium to induce Target’s shareholders to sell their shares. In an asset 
purchase, the rational seller would not sell at a price below the after-tax liquidation value of 
acquired assets less assumed liabilities, since this represents what the seller could obtain by 
liquidating rather than selling the assets. Second, at the maximum end of the range, Acquirer 
would be ceding all of the net synergy created by combining the two firms to Target’s share­
holders. Finally, it often is prudent to pay significantly less than the maximum price, because 
of the uncertainty of realizing estimated synergy on a timely basis.
Step 4(b): Compare Projected Credit Ratios With Industry Average Ratios
Table 14.11 shows the impact of increased borrowing on Newco’s projected credit ratios 
in comparison to current industry averages. Investors often use such comparisons to assess a 
firm’s solvency and liquidity. This table measures the magnitude of Newco’s projected debt 
burden (debt-to-total capital ratio) and ability to repay its debt (interest coverage ratio). The 
29The percent difference between purchase price multiples of the target’s earnings, cash flow, sales, book value, and 
so on can be compared to similar multiples of recent comparable transactions to determine the relative magnitude 
of the price paid for the target versus those of comparable deals. If the price to earnings ratio paid for the target 
firm is 12 versus 10 paid for comparable recent deals, the implicit relative purchase premium paid for the target is 
20%.
30The contribution to the creation of synergy by each party to the deal is often subjective. For example, Target may 
argue that it should receive full credit for the increase in operating earnings resulting from the shutdown of their 
underutilized plant and the movement of its output to Acquirer’s plant increasing its average operating rate. How­
ever, Acquirer could counter that the synergy would not have been realized had it not had a similar underutilized 
facility and further that its operation was more efficient.

528	
14.  Applying Financial Models
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
higher the debt-to-total capital ratio relative to the industry average, the more investors will 
become concerned about the potential insolvency of the firm (i.e., the likelihood the firm 
will be unable to pay its outstanding debt if liquidated). Similarly, investors could view the 
liquidity of a firm with a low interest coverage ratio compared to the industry as problematic.
Assume that the current industry average credit ratios will prevail during the forecast 
period. Does Newco’s projected debt-to-total capital ratio exceed significantly the average for 
the industry? Does the firm’s projected interest coverage fall substantially below the industry 
average due to the increase in the firm’s indebtedness? Will Newco still be in compliance 
with pretransaction loan covenants? Is the firm’s credit rating in jeopardy? If the answer to 
these questions is yes, it may be impractical to finance the deal under the proposed capital 
structure.
One method for determining an appropriate financing or postclosing capital structure is 
to establish a target credit rating for Newco.31 Firms often desire at least an investment grade 
rating (for firms exhibiting a relatively low risk of default) to limit an increase in borrow­
ing costs. Achieving a specific credit rating requires the firm to achieve certain credit ratios, 
measured as debt-to-total capital and interest coverage ratios. The magnitude of these ratios 
will be affected by the size of the firm and the industry in which it competes. Larger firms are 
expected to be better able to repay their debts in liquidation due to their greater asset value. 
Firms with stable cash flows are considered less risky than those whose cash flows are cycli­
cal and therefore less predictable. For example, a large firm (market capitalization greater 
than $5 billion) would have to achieve an interest coverage ratio of at least 2.5 (i.e., $2.5 in 
earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization per dollar of interest expense) 
to achieve the minimum investment grade rating of BBB. To achieve the highest rating of 
AAA, the interest coverage ratio would have to be at least 8.5. For firms with market caps of 
less than $5 billion, a BBB rating would require an interest coverage ratio of at least 4.32
Step 4(c): Determine Impact of Deal on Newco’s EPS
Newco’s EPS will be impacted by Acquirer’s and Target’s projected earnings plus the con­
tribution to future earnings from net synergy. EPS will also be affected by the number of 
Acquirer shares exchanged for each Target share plus any Acquirer shares issued to raise 
cash to finance the cash portion of the purchase price. In addition to credit ratios, Table 14.11 
also displays Newco’s projected EPS and how this compares to what Acquirer would have 
earned per share had it not completed the deal. Despite the issuance of a large number of Ac­
quirer shares to complete the deal, Newco’s EPS and cash flow per share are sharply higher 
following completion of the deal than they would have been had the transaction not been 
undertaken.
31Credit ratings represent a presumed independent assessment of the likelihood that a firm will repay its debt on 
a timely basis. The major credit rating agencies include Standard & Poor’s, Moody’s, and Fitch IBCA. Long-term 
credit ratings are denoted within a range as follows: from a triple A (AAA), the highest credit quality, to C or D 
(depending on the agency issuing the rating) as the lowest rating. Anything above a Baa for Moody’s and BBB for 
S&P is considered investment grade (i.e., exhibiting a relatively low risk or probability of default).
32New York University Stern School: http://pages.stern.nyu.edu/-adamodar/New_Home_Page/datafo;e/ra­
tomgs.htm.

	
M&A Models: Stock Purchases	
529
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
Acquirers often adjust or normalize earnings per share during the first full year in which 
they operate Target for that portion of transaction-related expenses that cannot be amortized 
and for integration expenditures. Consistent with GAAP, such expenses would be deducted 
from consolidated earnings before determining EPS and reporting such figures to the SEC. 
However, so-called adjusted EPS is calculated by adding to GAAP-based EPS transaction and 
integration expenses per share to show what the consolidated performance would be without 
these nonrecurring expenses.
To calculate Newco’s postclosing EPS, it is necessary to estimate the number of new Ac­
quirer shares to be issued to complete the deal. The exchange of Acquirer’s shares for Target’s 
shares requires the calculation of the appropriate SER. The SER can be negotiated as a fixed 
number of shares of Acquirer’s stock to be exchanged for each share of Target’s stock. Alter­
natively, SER can be defined in terms of the dollar value of the negotiated offer price per share 
of Target stock (POP) to the dollar value of Acquirer’s share price (PA). The SER is calculated 
by the following equation:
= P
P
SER
A
OP
The SER can be less than, equal to, or greater than 1, depending on the value of Acquirer’s 
shares relative to the offer price on the date set during the negotiation for valuing the transac­
tion. Exhibit 14.5 illustrates how SERs can be used to estimate the number of Acquirer shares 
that must be issued in a share for share exchange and the resulting ownership distribution in 
the combined firms between Acquirer and former Target shareholders.
The number of new Acquirer shares that must be issued to complete a deal also is affected 
by such derivative securities as options issued to Target’s employees and warrants, as well as 
convertible securities. Such securities derive all or most of their value from the firm’s common 
stock into which they may be converted. On conversion, these securities result in additional 
TABLE 14.11  Transaction Summary Worksheet Credit Ratios and EPS Impact: Stock Purchase

530	
14.  Applying Financial Models
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
common shares that must be purchased by a buyer wishing to avoid minority shareholders 
following a takeover. Such securities are commonly assumed to have been converted in calcu­
lating fully diluted shares outstanding, that is, the number of Target’s “basic” shares outstanding 
(i.e., pretransaction shares outstanding) plus the number of shares represented by the firm’s 
“in-the-money” options, warrants, and convertible debt and preferred securities. Basic shares 
are found on the cover of a firm’s most recent 10Q or 10K submission to the SEC. Options and 
convertible securities information can be found in the firm’s most recent 10K.
Granted to employees, stock options represent noncash compensation and offer the holder 
the right to buy (call) shares of the firm’s common equity at a predetermined “exercise” or 
“strike” price. Such options can be exercised once they are vested. Option holders are said to 
be vested once the required holding or “vesting” period expires and can be converted into 
shares of the firm’s common equity. An option is considered to be “in the money” when­
ever the firm’s common share price exceeds the option’s exercise price; otherwise, they are 
described as “out of the money.” Warrants are securities often issued along with debt and 
entitle holders of the debt to buy the firm’s common shares at a preset price during a given 
time period. It is common to assume that only “in-the-money” options and warrants will be 
converted as a result of a takeover. However, all options and warrants can be exercised, re­
gardless of their vesting status (i.e., vested or not vested) and exercise price, in the event of a 
hostile takeover if these securities include change of control provisions.33
33Options not currently vested may become fully vested on a change in control, thereby increasing the number of 
options that could be converted to common shares. Such options should be added to the number of “in-the-money” 
options in calculating the number of fully diluted shares outstanding.
EXHIBIT 14.5  APPLYING SHARE-EXCHANGE RATIOS
Assume the following information:
Offer price per share = $82
Pretransaction Acquirer share price = $77.12
Pretransaction Acquirer shares outstanding = 358.1 million
Pretransaction Target shares outstanding = 176.8 million
Target shares outstanding: 174.5 million + 2.3 million (due to options exercised) = 176.8
What is the number of Acquirer shares exchanged for each Target share, the number of new Ac­
quirer shares issued, and total shares outstanding of the combined firms (i.e., Newco)?
Solution:
Share-exchange ratio: $82/$77.12 = 1.0633 (i.e., 1.0633 Acquirer shares exchanged for each Target 
share)
Total new acquirer shares issued:
New acquirer shares issued to Target shareholders: 1.0633 × 176.8 million = 188.0
Total Newco shares outstanding: (Hint: Target shares are canceled) 358.1 + 188.0 = 546.1 million

	
M&A Models: Stock Purchases	
531
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
The treasury method assumes all in-the-money options and warrants, since they are issued 
at different times and prices, are exercised at their weighted average exercise price34 and op­
tion proceeds are assumed used to repurchase outstanding Target shares at the company’s 
current share price. Since the exercise price is less than the current price of target shares 
(which has risen to approximately the level of the offer price), the dollar proceeds received 
by the firm when holders exercise their options and warrants enable the firm to repurchase 
fewer shares than had been exercised. Therefore, the number of shares outstanding will in­
crease by the difference between the number of options exercised and those repurchased.35
In Table 14.12, 4.045 options, whose weighted average exercise price is $37.46, are assumed 
to be converted as they are well below Target’s current share price (i.e., Acquirer’s offer price 
of $82 per target share). The net increase in the value of shares outstanding resulting from the 
exercise of options equals the dollar value of such shares valued at the firm’s current share price 
less the value of option proceeds expressed at the weighted average exercise price of $180.16 
million [i.e., ($82 − $37.46) × 4.045]. This figure represents the value of shares the firm is unable 
34The weights are the number of options issued at each exercise price as a percent of total options issued.
35The treasury stock method is based on the notion that when employees exercise options, the firm has to issue the ap­
propriate number of new shares but also receives the exercise price of the options in cash. Implicitly, the firm can use 
the cash to offset the cost of issuing new shares. Consequently, the dilutive effect of exercising an option is not one full 
share but rather a fraction of a share equal to what the firm does not receive in cash divided by the share price.
TABLE 14.12  Dilutive Impact of Target Options, Warrants, and Convertible Securities

532	
14.  Applying Financial Models
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
to repurchase with the proceeds received from exercised options. Therefore, the net increase in 
shares outstanding resulting from the exercising of options equals 2.1971 (i.e., $180.16/$82).36
The same table also illustrates how other types of convertible securities must be considered 
when calculating the number of target shares to be acquired. If convertible securities are pres­
ent, it is necessary to add to Target’s basic shares outstanding the number of new shares issued 
following the conversion of such securities. Convertible securities commonly include preferred 
stock and debt. Information on the number of options outstanding, vesting periods,37 and their 
associated exercise prices, as well as convertible securities, generally is available in the foot­
notes to Target’s financial statements. It is reasonable to assume that such securities will be con­
verted to common equity when the conversion price is less than the offer price for each share.
Convertible preferred stock can be exchanged for common stock at a specific price at the 
discretion of the shareholder. The value of the common stock for which the preferred stock 
is exchanged is called the conversion price. If the preferred stock is convertible into 1.75 com­
mon shares and is issued at a par value of $100, the price at which it can be converted (i.e., its 
conversion price) is $57.14 (i.e., $100/1.75). That is, the preferred shareholder would receive 
1.75 shares of common stock if the preferred shareholder choses to convert when the common 
share price exceeds $57.14. Similarly, convertible debt can be converted into a specific number 
of common shares and is normally denominated in units of $1000. If when issued buyers of 
such debt were given the right to convert each $1000 of debt they held into 20 common shares, 
the implied conversion price would be $50 (i.e., $1000/20).
Table 14.12 also illustrates the additional common shares created due to the conversion of 
in-the-money options and warrants as well as convertible preferred stock and debt. Following 
conversion, the total number of new shares into common shares that must be added to the 
number of basic target shares is 2.2654 million shares (i.e., 2.1971 + 0.0088 + 0.0595). This will 
add $185.75 million (i.e., 2.2653 × $82) to the purchase price for 100% of Target’s shares.
Step 4(d): Determine if the Deal Will Allow Newco to Meet or Exceed 
Required Returns
Newco’s minimum required financial return is its WACC. Standard capital budgeting theory 
tells us that a firm will meet or exceed its cost of capital as long as the NPV of a discrete invest­
ment is greater than or equal to zero. Acquirer’s investment in Target is not only the equity con­
sideration (EQC), but also any transaction expenses (TE) associated with closing the deal. Eq­
uity consideration refers to what Acquirer pays for Target’s equity. Therefore, the challenge for 
Acquirer is to create sufficient value by combining the two firms such that the following is true:
−
+
≥
(PV
+PV
)
(EQC
TE)
0
Target
NetSynergy
	
(14.1)
where PVTarget and PVNetSynergy are the present values of Target as a stand-alone business and 
the net synergy resulting from combining Target and Acquirer, respectively.
36The net increase in the number of shares outstanding can be summarized as follows: [($82 × 4.045) − ($37.46 
× 4.045)]/$82 = ($82 − $37.46) × 4.045/$82 = 2.1971.
37A firm’s basic shares outstanding commonly are found on the first page of the firm’s 10K or 10Q, or sometimes in 
proxy statements. Information on options, warrants, and convertible securities usually is found in the firm’s most 
recent 10K.

	
M&A Models: Asset Purchases	
533
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
The valuation section of Acquirer Transaction Summary Worksheet (Table 14.3) indicates 
that about $7.4 billion in incremental value or net synergy is created by Acquirer’s takeover 
of Target. This implies that the financial return on the purchase of Target is well in excess of 
Acquirer’s WACC or minimum required rate of return on assets.
Depending on size and deal complexity, as well as how they are financed, transaction 
expenses often approximate 3%–5% of the purchase price, with this percentage generally 
decreasing for larger deals. To estimate such expenses, it is necessary to distinguish between 
financing-related and nonfinancing-related expenses. Financing-related expenses for M&As 
can equal 1%–2% of the dollar value of bank debt and include fees for arranging the loan and 
for establishing a line of credit. Fees for underwriting nonbank debt can average 2%–3% of 
the value of the debt. Nonfinancing-related fees often represent as much as 2% of the pur­
chase price and include investment banking, legal, accounting, and other consulting fees. 
For accounting purposes, nonfinancing-related expenses are expensed in the year in which 
the deal closes, while those related to deal financing are capitalized on the balance sheet and 
amortized over the life of the loan.
M&A MODELS: ASSET PURCHASES
As with a stock purchase model, asset purchases begin with the estimation of Target’s en­
terprise value. Viewed in this context as total Target assets (TA), the enterprise value is then 
adjusted by subtracting Target assets excluded from the deal (Aexcl)38 and Target liabilities 
included in the deal (Linc), that is, assumed by the buyer.39 The end result is referred to as net 
acquired assets.40
=
−
−
=
−
A
L
A
L
Net Acquired Assets
TA
excl
inc
incl
inc
	
(14.2)
Aincl equals Target assets included in the deal (i.e., assumed by the buyer). The purchase price 
is what Acquirer pays for net acquired assets and is often expressed as a multiple of net 
book assets (i.e., book assets less book liabilities). This multiple should be compared to recent 
comparable deals to determine its reasonableness. The purchase price should lie between the 
minimum (i.e., after-tax liquidation value of the assets less liabilities) and the maximum (i.e., 
minimum price plus net synergy) price.
It is common for buyers to purchase selected assets and to assume responsibility for short-
term seller liabilities incurred during the operation of the acquired assets. These include current 
liabilities such as payables and such items as accrued vacation, employee benefits, bonuses, and 
commissions to ensure a smoother transition for those Target employees transferring to Acquir­
er. Acquirer may also assume responsibility for other liabilities such as product warranty claims 
that have not been satisfied to ensure that they are paid in order to retain customer loyalty.
38Excluded assets are those the Target chooses to retain or the Acquirer does not want.
39Recall that enterprise value can be viewed from either the asset side (total assets) or the liability side (total liabili­
ties plus equity) of the balance sheet. In the context of an asset purchase, enterprise value equals total Target assets.
40TA = Aexcl + Aincl = Lexcl + Lincl + EQ and Aincl − Lincl = Lexcl − Aexcl + EQ, where EQ, Target shareholders’ equity; and 
Ainc − Lincl, Net acquired assets by Acquirer.

534	
14.  Applying Financial Models
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
Assume that Acquirer pays $90 million to purchase $75 million in net acquired assets, 
consisting of $100 million of Target net property, plant, and equipment (i.e., Net PP&E) less 
assumed Target current liabilities of $25 million and that the book values of Target assets and 
liabilities are equal to their fair market value.41 The implied purchase price multiple is 1.2 
times net acquired assets (i.e., $90 million/$75 million), a 20% premium.
Sales, cost of sales, and operating income associated with the net acquired assets, as well 
as any additional interest expense incurred to finance the purchase and expenses incurred 
to integrate the acquired assets, are added to Acquirer’s income statement (Table 14.13). For 
this illustration, the Adjustments column shows the addition of Target’s sales, cost of sales, 
additional interest expense, and taxes to Acquirer’s income statement. Incremental revenue 
generated by selling Acquirer products to Target’s customers is assumed to be $200 million. 
Target’s cost of sales before the deal was $195 million, which is reduced by anticipated cost-
related synergy of $5 million. Expenditures related to integrating Target assets are $15 mil­
lion. A one-time $10 million noncash gain is added to Acquirer’s income statement, because 
it is buying Target’s assets at a discount from their book value (i.e., paying $90 million for 
$100 million in Net PP&E). Acquirer is able to negotiate the favorable purchase of Net PP&E 
because of its willingness to assume certain Target liabilities. Incremental interest expense 
related to financing the deal is $7 million. Taxes paid for purposes of illustration are calcu­
lated at the firm’s marginal tax rate of 40%. The addition of the assets is expected to increase 
Acquirer’s net income in subsequent years due to anticipated cost savings as a result of pro­
ductivity improvements and incremental revenue from cross-selling former Target products 
to Acquirer’s customers.
41If the net acquired assets are revalued up to their fair market value, any additional depreciation expense would 
impact both the income statement and in turn the cash flow statement. The simplifying assumption that the book 
value of net acquired assets equals its fair market value implies no incremental depreciation related to this asset 
purchase. Efforts to assume the magnitude of potential asset write-ups (write-downs) prior to completing a full 
due diligence on Target is highly questionable, potentially resulting in a serious distortion of projected financial 
performance.
TABLE 14.13  Acquirer’s Income Statement: Asset Purchase
Acquirer predeal
Adjustments
Acquirer postdeal
Sales ($)
1750.0
200.0
1950.0
Cost of sales
1488.0
190.0
1678.0
Integration expense
15.0
15.0
EBIT
262.0
257.0
Other income
0.0
10.0
10.0
Net interest expense
30.0
7.0
37.0
EBT
232.0
230.0
Tax at 0.40
92.8
(0.8)
92.0
Net income ($)
139.2
138.0

	
M&A Models: Asset Purchases	
535
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
In consolidation, the dollar value of net acquired assets is recorded on Acquirer’s balance 
sheet by adding the purchased assets to Acquirer’s assets and assumed liabilities to Acquir­
er’s liabilities. In addition, entries are made to the liability/equity side of Acquirer’s balance 
sheet to show how the purchase is to be financed. Table 14.14 illustrates Acquirer’s balance 
sheet adjustments made to reflect the purchase of specific Target assets and the assumption 
of certain Target liabilities. Goodwill (i.e., the difference between the purchase price and the 
fair market value of net acquired assets) equals $15 million (i.e., $90 million less $75 million). 
The purchase is financed by using $20 million in Acquirer pretransaction cash balances and 
by borrowing $70 million in long-term debt at a 10% interest rate. Consequently, the entries 
in the Adjustments column include a $20-million reduction in cash and an increase of $100 
million in Net PP&E, $15 million in goodwill, $25 million for assumed current liabilities, and 
$70 million in new debt.
Table 14.15 shows the cash flow statement for the purchase of the previously described net 
acquired assets. Ending cash balances in 2015 are reduced by $20 million to partially finance 
the purchase of the $100 million in Target Net PP&E. Acquirer net income of ($1.2) million 
represents the difference between predeal net income of $139.2 and postdeal net income of 
$138.0 million. Negative net income during the first full year of operation including the net 
acquired assets resulted from integration expenses and incremental interest expense exceed­
ing the positive contribution of operating income and the one-time gain. The one-time gain 
of $10 million due to the purchase of Net PP&E at a discount is eliminated in the calcula­
tion of cash flow, because it does not involve the actual receipt of cash. Current liabilities 
increase cash flow from operations by the amount of assumed Target liabilities. Cash flow 
TABLE 14.14  Acquirer’s Balance Sheet: Asset Purchase
Actual
Transaction
Pro Forma
2015
Adjustments
2016
Cash ($)
125.00
(20.00)
105.00
Current assets (excluding cash)
550.00
550.00
Net property, plant, and equipment
1250.00
100.00
1350.00
Goodwill
15.00
15.00
Other long-term assets
450.00
450.00
Total assets ($)
2375.00
2470.00
Current liabilities
550.00
25.00
575.00
Long-term debt
450.00
70.00
520.00
Other long-term liabilities
375.00
375.00
Total liabilities
1375.00
1470.00
Common stock
500.00
500.00
Preferred equity
50.00
50.00
Retained earnings
400.00
400.00
Other adjustments
50.00
50.00
Total shareholders’ equity
1000.00
1000.00
Total liabilities and equity ($)
2375.00
2470.00

536	
14.  Applying Financial Models
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
from investing activities decreases by the amount paid for Net PP&E, while cash flow from 
financing activities increases by the amount of new borrowing.
QUANTIFYING SYNERGY
One of the more commonly given reasons why acquirers sometimes overpay is a tendency 
to overestimate synergy.42 Consequently, substantial effort should be given to estimate ac­
curately the incremental value that can be realized by combining firms. Broadly speaking, 
there are two general categories of synergy: revenue-related and cost savings–related syn­
ergy. Revenue-related synergy arises from sales and marketing opportunities that can be 
realized as a result of combining of the target and acquiring firms and improved marketing 
efficiency as measured by the increase in revenue per dollar of sales and marketing expense.43 
Similarly, cost savings–related synergy refers to the opportunities for the elimination of du­
plicate operations, processes, and personnel, as well as productivity improvements, resulting 
from combining firms.
42Rodregues and Stegemoller (2014).
43Rahman et al. (2016).
TABLE 14.15  Statement of Cash Flows: Asset Purchase
2015 ending cash ($)
125.00
Cash used to finance PP&E purchase
(20.00)
2016 beginning cash balance ($)
105.00
Cash from operations
  Net income
(1.20)
  Depreciation
0.00
  (Gain)/loss
(10.00)
  Current assets
0.00
  Current liabilities
25.00
  Net cash flow from operations
13.80
Cash from investing
  PP&E acquisition
(90.00)
  Net cash flow from investing
(90.00)
Cash from financing
  Increase in debt
70.00
  Net cash flow from financing
70.00
  Net cash flow
(6.20)
  Ending cash balance ($)
98.80
PP&E, Property, plant, and equipment.

	
Some Things to Remember	
537
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
Revenue-Related Synergy
The customer base for the target and acquiring firms can be segmented into three catego­
ries: (1) those served only by the target, (2) those served only by the acquirer, and (3) those 
served by both firms. The first two segments may represent revenue enhancement opportuni­
ties by enabling the target or the acquirer to sell its current products into the other’s current 
customer base. The third segment could represent a net increase or decrease in revenue for 
the new firm. Incremental revenue may result from new products that could be offered only 
as a result of exploiting the capabilities of the target and acquiring firms in combination. 
However, revenue may be lost as some customers choose to have more than one source of 
supply. The analysis of incremental revenue opportunities is simplified by focusing on the 
largest customers, because it often is true that 80% of a company’s revenues come from about 
20% of its customers. Incremental revenue can be estimated by having the sales force provide 
estimates of the potential additional revenue that could be achieved from having access to 
new customers and offering current customers new products. In general, such revenue can 
be realized over time as the target’s and acquirer’s sales forces must be trained to sell each 
other’s products.
Cost Savings–Related Synergies
The cost of sales for the combined firms may be adjusted for cost savings resulting from 
such factors as the elimination of redundant jobs. Direct labor refers to those employees di­
rectly involved in the production of goods and services. Indirect labor refers to supervisory 
overhead and administrative support staff. A distinction needs to be made because of likely 
differences in average compensation for direct and indirect labor. SG&A may be reduced 
by the elimination of overlapping jobs and the closure of unneeded sales offices resulting in 
lease expense savings. However, leased space may be eliminated prior to the lease expiration 
date by paying off the balance of what is owed. The amount paid for this purpose is called the 
lease buyout expense. For an illustration of how to quantify revenue-related synergy; gross 
margin improvement; and sales, general, and administrative synergy, see Table 14.16. The 
projected data for incremental sales, gross margin improvement, and SG&A savings serve as 
inputs into the synergy section of the Summary Worksheet of the model. Note that headcount 
reduction figures shown in 2018 are held constant in subsequent years. This does not mean 
that the same number of staff is being terminated in those years but rather that the savings 
continue indefinitely or until these employees are replaced.
SOME THINGS TO REMEMBER
M&A modeling facilitates deal valuation, structuring, and financing. Acquirers may use 
such models to estimate the approximate value of Target before making a formal bid and to 
determine the appropriate capital structure to finance the deal. Targets can use models to es­
timate the value of the combined businesses and their contribution to the creation of synergy. 
Finally, both acquirers and targets often use models to understand the implications of various 
proposals and counterproposals that are likely to arise before an agreement is reached.

538	
14.  Applying Financial Models
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
14.1.	 Why should a target company be valued as a stand-alone business? Give examples of 
the types of adjustments that might have to be made if Target is part of a larger com­
pany.
14.2.	 Why should “in-the-money” options, warrants, and convertible preferred stock and 
debt be included in the calculation of the purchase price to be paid for Target?
14.3.	 What are value drivers? How can they be misused in M&A models?
TABLE 14.16  Quantifying Anticipated Synergy
2016 ($ 
millions)
2017 ($ 
millions)
2018 ($ 
millions)
2019 ($ 
millions)
2020 ($ 
millions)
Revenue-Related Synergy
  New customers for Acquirer products
15,000,000
30,000,000
50,000,000
50,000,000
50,000,000
  New customers for Target products
20,000,000
25,000,000
40,000,000
40,000,000
40,000,000
  New product revenue
0
25,000,000
60,000,000
60,000,000
60,000,000
  Loss from customer attrition
−10,000,000
−5,000,000
0
0
0
    Total incremental sales
25,000,000
75,000,000
150,000,000 150,000,000
150,000,000
Gross Margin Improvement
  Cost of sales
  Headcount reduction—direct labor
40
77
109
109
109
  Average salary and benefits
69,000
69,515
69,910
69,910
69,910
    Direct labor savings
2,760,000
5,352,655
7,620,190
7,620,190
7,620,190
  Headcount reduction—indirect labor
28
57
90
90
90
  Average salary and benefits
80,000
81,535
82,000
82,000
82,000
    Indirect labor savings
2,240,000
4,647,495
7,380,000
7,380,000
7,380,000
      Total direct and indirect labor savings
5,000,000
10,000,150
15,000,190
15,000,190
15,000,190
Sales, General, and Administrative Savings
  Headcount reduction—direct sales
16
21
38
38
38
  Average salary and benefits
90,000
91,500
92,000
92,000
92,000
    Selling expense savings
1,440,000
1,921,500
3,496,000
3,496,000
3,496,000
  Headcount reduction—administrative
20
36
52
52
52
  Average salary and benefits
78,000
79,000
80,000
80,000
80,000
    General and administrative savings
1,560,000
2,844,000
4,160,000
4,160,000
4,160,000
  Total SG&A savings
3,000,000
4,765,500
7,656,000
7,656,000
7,656,000
  Leased space savings (net of buyout)
0
234,500
344,000
344,000
344,000
    Total SG&A savings
3,000,000
5,000,000
8,000,000
8,000,000
8,000,000
SG&A, Sales, general, and administrative expenses.

	
Practice Problems and Answers	
539
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
14.4.	 Can the offer price ever exceed the maximum purchase price? If yes, why? If no, why 
not?
14.5.	 Why is it important to clearly state assumptions underlying a valuation?
14.6.	 Assume two firms have little geographic overlap in terms of sales and facilities. If 
they were to merge, how might this affect the potential for synergy?
14.7.	 Dow Chemical, a leading manufacturer of chemicals, in announcing that it had an 
agreement to acquire competitor Rohm and Haas, said it expected to broaden its cur­
rent product offering by offering the higher-margin Rohm and Haas products. What 
would you identify as possible synergies between these two businesses? In what 
ways could the combination of these two firms erode combined cash flows?
14.8.	 Dow Chemical’s acquisition of Rohm and Haas included a 74% premium over the 
firm’s preannouncement share price. What is the possible process Dow employed in 
determining the stunning magnitude of this premium?
14.9.	 For most transactions, the full impact of net synergy will not be realized for many 
months. Why? What factors could account for the delay?
14.10.	 How does the presence of management options and convertible securities affect the 
calculation of the offer price for Target?
Answers to these Chapter Discussion Questions are available in the Online Instructor’s Manual for 
instructors using this book (https://textbooks.elsevier.com/web/Manuals.aspx?isbn=9780128016091).
PRACTICE PROBLEMS AND ANSWERS
14.11	 Acquiring Company is considering the acquisition of Target Company in a share-for-
share transaction in which Target Company would receive $50.00 for each share of its 
common stock. Acquiring Company does not expect any change in its P/E multiple 
after the merger.
Acquiring 
Company
Target 
Company
Earnings available for 
common stock ($)
150,000
30,000
Number of shares of common 
stock outstanding
60,000
20,000
Market price per share ($)
60.00
40.00
	
	
Using the preceding information about these two firms and showing your work, 
calculate the following:
a.	 Purchase price premium. Answer: 25%.
b.	SER. Answer: 0.8333.
c.	 New shares issued by Acquiring Company. Answer: 16,666.
d.	Total shares outstanding of the combined companies. Answer: 76,666.
e.	 Postmerger EPS of the combined companies. Answer: $2.35.
f.	 Premerger EPS of Acquiring Company. Answer: $2.50.
g.	Postmerger share price. Answer: $56.40, compared with $60.00 premerger.

540	
14.  Applying Financial Models
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
h.	Postmerger ownership distribution. Answer: Target shareholders = 21.7% and 
Acquirer shareholders = 78.3%.
14.12	 Acquiring Company is considering buying Target Company. Target Company 
is a small biotechnology firm that develops products licensed to the major 
pharmaceutical firms. Development costs are expected to generate negative 
cash flows during the first 2 years of the forecast period of $(10) and (5) million, 
respectively. Licensing fees are expected to generate positive cash flows during 
years 3–5 of the forecast period of $5, 10, and 15 million, respectively. Because of the 
emergence of competitive products, cash flow is expected to grow at a modest 5% 
annually after the fifth year. The discount rate for the first 5 years is estimated to be 
20% and then drop to the industry average rate of 10% beyond the fifth year. Also, 
the present value of the estimated net synergy created by combining Acquiring and 
Target companies is $30 million. Calculate the minimum and maximum purchase 
prices for Target Company. Show your work.
	
Answer: Minimum price: $128.5 million; Maximum price: $158.5 million.
14.13	 Using the information given below, calculate fully diluted shares. Assume the 
firm uses proceeds received from the conversion of options to common shares to 
repurchase as many of these new shares as possible.
Calculating fully diluted shares outstanding
$ million, except per share data, shares in millions
Current share price ($)
30.00
Basic shares outstanding
200.00
Options that can be exercised
40.0
Weighted average exercise price ($)
20.00
a.	 224.52
b.	263.59
c.	 213.33
d.	256.87
e.	 233.47
	
Answer: c.
14.14	 What is the fully diluted offer price (equity value) for a tender offer made to acquire 
a target whose pretender shares are trading for $1.50 per share? The tender offer 
includes a 30% premium to the target’s pretender share price. The target has basic 
shares outstanding of 70 and 5 million options that may be converted into common 
shares at $1.60 per share.
	
Answer: $138.25 million.
14.15	 Using the M&A Valuation & Deal Structuring Model on the website accompanying 
this text (see the website address in the section “Chapter Overview”) and the data 
contained in the cells as a starting point, complete the following:
a.	 What is the enterprise and equity value of Target on the Valuation Worksheet?
b.	Increase the sales growth rate by 1 percentage point (i.e., to 6.5%) on the Target 
Assumptions Worksheet. What is the impact on the Target’s enterprise and equity 

	
Practice Problems and Answers	
541
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
values? (Hint: See Valuation Worksheet.) Undo change or close model but do not 
save results in order to restore the model’s original data.
	
Answers:
a.	 Before change to revenue growth assumption by 1 percentage point:
-	 Target enterprise value: $11,582.2
-	 Target equity value: $9796.8
b.	After change in revenue growth assumption by 1 percentage point:
-	 Target enterprise value: $12,356.3
-	 Target equity value: $10,570.9
14.16	 Using the M&A Valuation & Deal Structuring Model accompanying this text (see the 
website address in the section “Chapter Overview”) and the data contained in the 
cells as a starting point, complete the following:
a.	 What is the enterprise and equity value of Target on the Valuation Worksheet?
b.	On the worksheet named Target Assumptions, increase COGS as a percent of sales 
by 1 percentage point (i.e., 0.43–0.44). What is the impact on the Target’s enterprise 
and equity values? (Hint: See Valuation worksheet.) Undo change or close the 
model but do not save the results in order to restore the model’s original data.
	
Answers:
a.	 Before change to COGS ratio by 1 percentage point:
-	 Target enterprise value: $11,582.2
-	 Target equity value: $9796.8
b.	After change in COGS ratio by 1 percentage point:
-	 Target enterprise value: $11,104.8
-	 Target equity value: $9319.4
14.17	 Using the M&A Valuation & Deal Structuring Model accompanying this text (see the 
website address in the section “Chapter Overview”):
a.	 On the Valuation worksheet, note the enterprise and equity values for Newco.
b.	On the Summary worksheet under Incremental Sales Synergy, change incremental 
revenue to $200 million in the first year, $250 million in the second year, and $350 
in the third year. What is the impact on Newco’s enterprise and equity values? 
(Hint: See Valuation worksheet.) Undo changes or close the model but do not save 
the results.
	
Answers:
a.	 Before incremental sales growth:
-	 Newco enterprise value: $32,813.7
-	 Newco equity value: $20,970.8
b.	After change in incremental sales:
-	 Newco enterprise value: $33,766.5
-	 Newco equity value: $21,923.6
14.18	 Using the M&A Valuation & Deal Structuring Model accompanying this text (see the 
website address in the section “Chapter Overview”):
a.	 On the Transaction Summary Worksheet, under the heading Form of Payment, 
change the composition of the purchase price to 100% cash. Assume the purchase 

542	
14.  Applying Financial Models
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
price is partially financed by reducing Acquirer excess cash by $1 billion and by 
raising $4 billion by issuing new Acquirer equity. Under the Sources and Uses 
heading, how is the remainder of the purchase price financed?
b.	Change the composition of the purchase price to 100% equity. What is the impact 
on how the purchase price is financed? Close model but do not save the results.
	
Answers:
a.	 Form of Payment = 100% cash. Senior debt is increased by $10,129.8 million.
b.	Form of Payment = 100% equity. Senior debt shows a negative $4365 million, 
which does not make sense. Set excess cash and new common shares issued to 
public equal to zero. Senior Debt automatically increases by $635 million.
Solutions to these Practice Problems are available in the Online Instructor’s Manual for instructors 
using this book (https://textbooks.elsevier.com/web/Manuals.aspx?isbn=9780128016091).
END OF CHAPTER CASE STUDY: THERMO FISHER ACQU IRES 
LIFE TECHNOLOGIES
Case Study Objectives: To Illustrate How Acquirers Utilize Financial Models to
•	 Evaluate the impact of a range of offer prices for the target firm, including what constitutes the 
“maximum price” an acquirer would logically pay for the target firm
•	 Determine which financing structures are consistent with maintaining or achieving a desired 
credit rating
•	 Investigate the implications of different payment structures (form and composition of the 
purchase price)
•	 Identify the impact of changes in operating assumptions such as different revenue growth rates or 
the amount and timing of synergy
Almost 9 months after reaching an agreement to combine their operations, the merger between 
Life Technologies Corporation (Life Tech) and Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc. (Thermo Fisher) was 
completed on January 14, 2014. Thermo Fisher is the largest provider by market value of analytical 
instruments, equipment, reagents and consumables, software, and services for scientific research, 
analysis, discovery, and diagnostics applications. Life Tech is the second largest by market value 
provider of similar products and services to the scientific research and genetics analysis communi­
ties. While the fanfare surrounding the closing echoed sentiments similar to those expressed when 
the deal was first announced, the hard work of integrating the two firms was just beginning. What 
led to this moment illustrates the power of financial models.
Life Tech had been evaluating strategic options for the firm since mid-2012, concluding that put­
ting itself up for sale would be the best way to maximize shareholder value (see the Case Study at 
the end of Chapter 9 titled “Life Tech Undertakes a Strategic Review” for more detail). After enter­
ing into discussions with Thermo Fisher in late 2012, the two firms announced jointly on April 15, 
2013, that they had reached an agreement to merge. Exuding the usual optimism accompanying 

	
Practice Problems and Answers	
543
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
such pronouncements, Mark N. Casper, president and chief executive officer of Thermo Fisher, stat­
ed, “We are extremely excited about this transaction, because it creates the ultimate partner for our 
customers and significant value for our shareholders … enhancing all three elements of our growth 
strategy: technological innovation, a unique customer value proposition, and expansion in emerg­
ing markets.” Expressing similar confidence, Greg T. Lucier, chairman and chief executive officer of 
Life Tech, noted, “This transaction brings together two companies intent on accelerating innovation 
for our customers and achieving greater success in a highly competitive global industry.”
This case study utilizes the publicly announced terms of the merger of Life Tech into a wholly 
owned subsidiary of Thermo Fisher, with Life Tech surviving. The terms were used to develop pro 
forma financial statements for the combined firms. These statements are viewed as a “base case.”44
The financial model discussed in this chapter is used to show how changes in key deal terms 
and financing structures impacted the base case scenario. The discussion questions following the 
case address how the maximum offer price for Life Tech could be determined, what the impact 
of an all-debt or all-equity deal would have on the combined firms’ financial statements, and the 
implications of failing to achieve synergy targets. Such scenarios represent the limits of the range 
within which the appropriate capital structure could fall and could have been part of Thermo Fish­
er’s predeal evaluation. As announced by Thermo Fisher, the appropriate capital structure is that 
which maintains an investment grade credit rating following the merger. Thermo Fisher’s senior 
management could have tested various capital structures between the two extremes of all-debt and 
all-equity before reaching agreement on the form of payment with which they were most comfort­
able. Therefore, the form of payment and how the deal was financed were instrumental to the deal 
getting done.
According to the terms of the deal, Thermo Fisher acquired all of Life Tech’s common shares 
outstanding, including all vested and unvested outstanding stock options, at a price of $76 per share 
in cash, with the Life Tech shares canceled at closing. The actual purchase price consisted of an 
equity consideration (i.e., what was paid for Life Tech’s shares) of $13.6 billion plus the assumption 
of $2.2 billion of Life Tech’s outstanding debt. The purchase price was funded by a combination of 
new debt, equity, and cash on Thermo Fisher’s balance sheet. Thermo Fisher executed a commit­
ment letter, dated April 14, 2013, with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., J.P. Morgan Securities LLC, 
and Barclays Bank PLC that provided a commitment for a $12.5-billion 364-day unsecured bridge 
loan facility. The facility enabled the firm to pay for much of the purchase price before arranging 
permanent financing by issuing new debt and equity in late 2013.
In an effort to retain an investment grade credit rating45 by limiting the amount of new borrow­
ing,46 Thermo Fisher issued new common equity and equity-linked securities such as convertible 
debt and convertible preferred totaling $3.25 billion to finance about one-fourth of the $13.6-billion 
equity consideration. The $3.25 billion consisted of $2.2 billion of common stock sold in connection 
with its public offering prior to closing, and up to a maximum of $1.05 billion of additional equity 
to be issued at a later date in the form of convertible debt and preferred shares. Thermo Fisher fi­
nanced the remaining $10.35 billion of the purchase price with the proceeds of subsequent borrow­
ings and $1 billion in cash on its balance sheet.
Thermo Fisher and Life Tech compete in the medical laboratory and research industry. The aver­
age debt-to-total capital ratio for firms in this industry is 44.6%,47 and the average interest coverage 
ratio is 4.0.48 Thermo Fisher expects that available free cash flow will allow for a rapid reduction in 

544	
14.  Applying Financial Models
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
its debt. The firm expects to be below the industry average debt-to-total capital ratio by the end of 
the third full year following closing and about 12 percentage points below it within 5 years after 
closing. The firm’s interest coverage ratio is expected to be equal to the industry average by the 
second year and well above it by the third year and beyond. These publicly stated goals established 
metrics shareholders and analysts could use to track the Thermo Fisher’s progress in integrating 
Life Tech.
Consistent with management’s commitment to only make deals that immediately increase earn­
ings per share, Thermo Fisher expects the deal to increase adjusted earnings per share during the 
first full year of operation by as much as $0.70–1.00 per share. Adjusted earnings per share exclude 
the impact on earnings of transaction-related expenses and expenses incurred in integrating the two 
businesses. Including these expenses in the calculation of EPS is expected to result in $(0.16) per 
share during the first full year following closing, but excluding these expenses will result in $0.99 
per share.49
Realizing synergy on a timely basis would be critical for Thermo Fisher to realize its publicly 
announced goal that the deal would be accretive on an adjusted earnings per share basis at the end 
of the first full year of operation. Synergies anticipated by Thermo Fisher include the realization of 
additional gross margin of $75 million and the realization of $20 million in SG&A savings in 2014, 
the first full year following closing. Gross margin improvement and SG&A savings are projected to 
grow to $225 and 100 million, respectively, by 2016, and to be sustained at these levels indefinitely. 
Most of the cost savings are expected to come from combining global infrastructure operations. 
Revenue-related synergy is expected to reach $300 million annually from cross-selling each firm’s 
products into the other’s customer base by the third year, up from $25 million in the first year.
Mark Fisher, CEO of Thermo Fisher, knew that the key to unlocking value for shareholders once 
the deal closed was realizing the anticipated synergy on a timely basis. However, rationalizing fa­
cilities by reducing redundant staff, improving gross margins, and increasing revenue was fraught 
with risk. Eliminating staff had to be done in such a way as not to demoralize employees retained by 
the firm and increasing revenue could be achieved only if the loss of existing customers due to the 
attrition that often follows M&As could be kept to a minimum. Having been through postmerger 
integrations before, he knew first-hand the challenges accompanying these types of activities. At the 
time of closing, many questions remained. What if synergy were not realized as quickly and in the 
amount expected? What if expenses and capital outlays would be required in excess of what had 
been anticipated? How patient would shareholders be if the projected impact on earnings per share, 
a performance metric widely followed by investors and Wall Street Analysts alike, was not realized? 
Only time would tell.
Discussion Questions
Answer questions 1–4 using as the base case the firm valuation and deal structure data in the 
Microsoft Excel model available on the companion site to this book entitled Thermo Fisher Acquires 
Life Technologies Financial Model. Please see the section “Chapter Overview” for the site’s internet 
address. Assume that the base case assumptions were those used by Thermo Fisher in its merger 
with Life Tech. The base case reflects the input data described in this case study. To answer each 
question you must change selected input data in the base case, which will change significantly the 
base case projections. After answering a specific question, either undo the changes made or close 

	
Practice Problems and Answers	
545
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
the model and do not save the model results. This will cause the model to revert back to the base 
case. In this way, it will be possible to analyze each question in terms of how it is different from 
the base case.
1.	 Thermo Fisher paid $76 per share for each outstanding share of Life Tech. What is the 
maximum offer price Thermo Fisher could have made without ceding all of the synergy value 
to Life Tech shareholders? (Hint: Using the Transaction Summary Worksheet, increase the offer 
price until the NPV in the section entitled Valuation turns negative.) Why does the offer price 
at which NPV turns negative represent the maximum offer price for Life Tech? Undo changes 
to the model before answering subsequent questions.
2.	 Thermo Fisher designed a capital structure for financing the deal that would retain its 
investment grade credit rating. To do so, it targeted a debt-to-total capital and interest coverage 
ratio consistent with the industry average for these credit ratios. What is the potential impact 
on Thermo Fisher’s ability to retain an investment grade credit rating if it had financed the 
takeover using 100% senior debt? Explain your answer. (Hint: In the Sources and Uses section 
of the Acquirer Transaction Summary Worksheet, set excess cash, new common shares issued, 
and convertible preferred shares to zero. Senior debt will automatically increase to 100% of the 
equity consideration plus transaction expenses.50) Undo changes to the model before answering 
subsequent questions.
3.	 Assuming Thermo Fisher would have been able to purchase the firm in a share for share 
exchange, what would have happened to the EPS in the first year? Explain your answer. (Hint: 
In the form of payment section of the Acquirer Transaction Summary Worksheet, set the 
percentage of the payment denoted by “% Stock” to 100%. In the Sources and Uses Section, 
set excess cash, new common shares issued, and convertible preferred shares to zero.) Undo 
changes made to the model before answering the remaining question.
4.	 Mark Fisher, CEO of Thermo Fisher, asked rhetorically what if synergy were not realized 
as quickly and in the amount expected. How patient would shareholders be if the projected 
impact on earnings per share was not realized? Assume that the integration effort is far more 
challenging than anticipated and that only one-fourth of the expected SG&A savings, margin 
improvement, and revenue synergy are realized. Furthermore, assume that actual integration 
expenses (shown on Newco’s Assumptions Worksheet) due to the unanticipated need to 
upgrade and colocate research and development facilities and to transfer hundreds of staff 
are $150 million in 2014, $150 million in 2015, $100 million in 2016, and $50 million in 2017. 
The model output resulting from these assumption changes is called the Impaired Integration 
Case.
	
What is the impact on Thermo Fisher’s earning per share (including Life Tech) and the 
NPV of the combined firms? Compare the difference between the model “Base Case” and 
the model output from the “Impaired Integration Case” resulting from making the changes 
indicated in this question. [Hints: In the Synergy Section of the Acquirer (Thermo Fisher) 
Worksheet, reduce the synergy inputs for each year between 2014 and 2016 by 75% and 
allow them to remain at those levels through 2018. On the Newco Assumptions Worksheet, 
change the integration expense figures to reflect the new numbers for 2014, 2015, 2016, and 
2017.]

546	
14.  Applying Financial Models
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
A D D I T I O N A L  C A S E  S T U D Y  R E C O M M E N D AT I O N S 
( S E A R C H  H A RVA R D  B U S I N E S S  S C H O O L 
P U B L I S H I N G  S I T E  B Y  N A M E  O F  C A S E : 
h b s p . h a r v a r d . e d u )
Finance Simulation: M&A in Wine Country, 
Timothy A. Luerhman, W. Carl Kester, 
Revision Date: June 23, 2011, Harvard 
Business Publishing, Product Number: 
329-HTM-ENG, hbsp.harvard.edu.
Subjects Covered: Mergers & Acquisitions, 
Negotiation, Valuation, Value Creation.
Flinder Valves and Controls Inc., Michael J. 
Schill, Publication Date: November 18, 2008, 
Product Number: UV1062-PDF-ENG, hbsp.
harvard.edu.
Subjects Covered: Negotiation Strategy, 
Valuation, Share Exchange Ratio Calculation, 
Tax Issues, Earnings Dilution, and Voting 
Power.
The Toys “R” Us LBO, David P. Stowell, 
Matthew Raino, Publication Date: January 
1, 2007, Product Number: Kel168-PDF-ENG, 
Source: Kellogg School of Business, hbsp.
harvard.edu.
Subjects Covered: Model Simulation, LBOs, 
Restructuring, Financing.
Answers to these questions are found in the Online Instructor’s Manual Available to instructors using 
this book (https://textbooks.elsevier.com/web/Manuals.aspx?isbn=9780128016091).
44While this case study investigates the role of financial modeling in business combinations, the case study at the end of 
Chapter 11 entitled “Life Technologies Corporation Undertakes a Strategic Review” discusses the application of finan­
cial modeling to assess the impact of alternative strategic options for a single firm, Life Tech.
45According to Bonds Online, Thermo Fisher Scientific has a BBB (the low end of the investment grade range) currently. 
See http://www.bondsonline.com/Todays_Market/Credit_Rating_News_.php?DA=view&RID=30687.
46Investment grade ratings indicate that a municipal or corporate bond has a relatively low risk of default. Bond rating 
firms, such as Standard & Poor’s, use different designations consisting of upper- and lower-case letters “A” and “B” 
to identify a bond’s credit quality rating. “AAA” and “AA” (high credit quality) and “A” and “BBB” (medium credit 
quality) are considered investment grade. Credit ratings for bonds below these designations (“BB,” “B,” “CCC,” etc.) 
are considered low credit quality, and are commonly referred to as “junk bonds.”
47Yahoo Finance Industry Center.
48pages.stern.nyu.edu/∼adamodar/pc/datasets/covratio.xls.
49Per the Summary Transaction Worksheet of the Thermo Fisher Buys Life Technologies Financial Model on the website ac­
companying this textbook, transaction-related expenses impacting first-year earnings consist of total expenses less that 
portion that is amortizable divided by total shares outstanding {[$494 × (1 − 0.2)]/386.6} and equal $1.02 per share. 
Integration expenses per share equal $50 million (see Newco Assumptions Worksheet) divided by total shares outstand­
ing or $0.13 per share (i.e., $50/386.6). Note that $494 million, $50 million, 386.6 million, and 0.2% are, respectively, 
transaction-related expenses, integration expenses, total Thermo Fisher shares outstanding, and that portion of transac­
tion expenses that is amortized. Therefore, adjusted earnings per share equal the preadjustment loss plus transaction 
expense per share plus integration expense per share [i.e., $(0.16) + $1.02 + $0.13 = $0.99).
50Note that other combinations of financing could have been used. For example, transaction expenses could have been 
paid out of excess cash balances. If this had been done, there would have been no increase in senior debt outstanding.

	
Appendix A: Debt Repayment Schedule, Convertible Securities, Interest Rates, and β	
547
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
APPENDIX A: DEBT REPAYMENT SCHEDULE, CONVERTIBLE 
SECURITIES, INTEREST RATES, AND β
Debt Repayment Schedule
Principal repayment schedules are shown for the Acquirer’s debt and Target’s debt (as­
sumed by the Acquirer) and any debt that is used to finance the deal in the Acquirer’s and 
Target’s 10Ks. In these documents under Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, see the 
Note on Debt and Other Long-Term Obligations for the repayment terms associated with 
Acquirer and Target debt assumed by the Acquirer at the close. Debt incurred to finance the 
deal and related terms are required data input (see Summary worksheet) and the repayment 
schedule is calculated by the model.
The Note on Debt and Long-term Obligations describes the types of debt outstanding, ma­
turity dates, and associated interest rates, and usually gives a 5-year projection of a total annual 
debt repayment schedule. Principal repayments beyond the fifth year are shown as an aggre­
gate figure. Interest expense and principal usually can be estimated by using a weighted aver­
age of each type of debt (i.e., senior, subordinate, etc.) and applying the applicable amortization 
rate (i.e., principal repayment rate) for the largest amount of debt outstanding in each category.
Options, Warrants, and Convertible Securities
Under Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, see the Note on Stock Options for the 
dollar value of outstanding options, exercise prices, and expiration dates. If the firm has con­
vertible preferred, see the Note on Consolidated Shareholders’ Equity to get the par value 
and amount issued. If convertible debt exists, see the Note on Debt and Other Obligations to 
determine the amount issued and the conversion price.
Betas
Historical β for public firms are available from a number of sources: Yahoo Finance, Google 
Finance, Value Line Research Center, Standard & Poor’s Net Advantage, One Source, and 
Thomson One Banker. Go to the Yahoo.com/finance website and search in the “look up” block 
for the company in which you are interested. The firm’s β is located below the day’s closing 
price in the table of daily trading activity. Alternatively, go to google.com/finance and search 
for your company; the firm’s β will be at the top of the page among the daily trading data.
Interest Rates
Information on Treasury bond rates and yield curve (i.e., interest rates on Treasury debt 
that varies in maturity from 1 month to 30 years) may be found at the US Department of 
Treasury Resource Center (http://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/data-chart-center/
interest-rates/Pages/TextView.aspx?data=yield).
“Swap rates” arise as a result of an interest rate swap in which one party agrees to ex­
change a fixed interest payment stream they are paying for a variable or floating rate [usually 
based on the London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR)] another party is paying. Such deals 

548	
14.  Applying Financial Models
IV.  Deal Structuring and Financing Strategies
result from different perceptions about the future direction of interest rates. The “swap rate” 
is the fixed interest rate (calculated on the notational or estimated face value of the loan) that 
the party in an interest rate swap demands in exchange for the uncertainty of having to pay 
the short-term LIBOR (floating) rate over time. The market’s forecast of what LIBOR will be 
is reflected in the forward LIBOR curve.51 For 1-, 3-, 6-, 9-, and 12-month LIBOR rates, see 
http://www.global-rates.com/interest-rates/libor/american-dollar/american-dollar.aspx.
Swaps are typically quoted in this fixed rate, or alternatively in the “swap spread,” which 
is the difference between the swap rate and the US Treasury bond yield (or equivalent local 
government bond yield for non-US swaps) for the same maturity. Swap rate data may be 
found at the following website: http://www.barchart.com/economy/swaps.php.
Revolving credit facility interest rates equal the sum of the risk-free rate (i.e., usually the 
US Treasury bond rate) plus the default risk premium (i.e., the number of basis points52 over 
the Treasury bond rate) plus interest rate risk premium (i.e., the potential for future interest 
rate fluctuations). If we assume the 5-year US Treasury bond rate is 1.3%, the default risk 
premium is 250 basis points, and the swap rate is 60 basis points. The revolving credit facility 
rate is calculated as follows:
×
+
+
=
1.3% 100
60
100
250
100
440
Dividing both sides by 100 results in the following expression:
+
×
+
×
=
1.3
60
100 100
250
100 100
440
100
and
+
+
=
1.3
60
10,000
250
10,000
4.40%
Finally, the default risk associated with senior debt is estimated as the spread or difference 
in basis points between the interest rate on senior debt and the risk-free Treasury bond rate. 
The Treasury bond rate is assumed to be free of default risk only.
Industry Credit Ratios
Go to Yahoo.com/finance; click on investing and then industries. Locate in the left-hand 
column the industry in which you are interested. Click on the industry. Scroll down the right-
hand column until you find Industry Statistics, which includes the industry debt-to-total 
capital ratio required by the M&A model. Industry interest coverage ratios may be found 
by going to the following website: http://pages.stern.nyu.edu/∼adamodar/New_Home_
Page/data.html.
51At the time of the swap agreement, the total value of the swap’s fixed rate interest payments will be equal to the 
value of expected floating rate payments implied by the forward LIBOR curve (i.e., expected LIBOR rates). As 
forward expectations for LIBOR change, so will the fixed rate that investors demand to enter into new swaps.
52One percentage point of interest equals 100 basis points. Thus, 40 basis points equal four-tenths of 1 percentage 
point.

P A R T V
ALTERNATIVE BUSINESS 
AND RESTRUCTURING 
STRATEGIES
Source: Courtesy of www.Cartoonstock.com. TCRN149.

550	
V.  ALTERNATIVE BUSINESS AND RESTRUCTURING STRATEGIES
﻿ ﻿﻿
Part V addresses strategic growth options as alternatives to domestic M&As, 
including cross-border M&A deals and business alliances. This section also 
discusses what can be done if corporations believe more value can be created 
by exiting certain businesses or product lines or by reorganizing or liquidating 
either outside of or under bankruptcy court protection.
Chapter 15 describes the common motives for entering business alliances, 
ranging from minority investments to joint ventures, as well as the critical 
success factors for establishing alliances. Reasons for employing alternative 
legal forms and ways of resolving common deal-structuring issues also are 
addressed. The advantages and disadvantages of the various types of alliances 
are discussed in detail as well as what a manager should consider in choosing 
the type of business alliance most appropriate for the circumstances.
The emphasis in Chapters  16 and  17 is on portfolio restructuring rather 
than on organizational (i.e., revamping a firm’s internal processes) or financial 
restructuring (i.e., altering a firm’s capital structure). Portfolio restructuring 
involves selling, shutting down, or spinning off money-losing operations or 
those not fitting with the firm’s core business strategy. It is often a response 
to intensified competition or technological change and frequently results in 
firms being acquired, reorganized in bankruptcy, or liquidated, resulting in 
their elimination as independent corporate entities. Reflecting these factors, 
the average life span of S&P 500 corporations has been declining from an aver­
age of 90 years in 1935 to less than 20 years today.1 Chapter 16 describes how 
corporations choose from among a range of restructuring options, including 
divestitures, spin-offs, split-ups, equity carve-outs, and split-offs to improve 
shareholder value. Chapter 17 focuses on failing firms that may attempt to 
preserve shareholder value by negotiating voluntarily with creditors to re­
structure their debt outside of bankruptcy court. Alternatively, such firms may 
choose or be compelled to seek the protection of the court system.
Finally, Chapter 18 outlines common motives for international expansion, 
describes widely used international market–entry strategies, and how to val­
ue, structure, and finance cross-border transactions. This chapter carefully 
notes the adjustments that should be made when valuing a target firm in an 
emerging or developed country. Important tax considerations associated with 
cross-border deals also are addressed.
1Colvin (2014).

C H A P T E R
551
Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring Activities. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-801609-1.00015-4
Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
15
Business Alliances
Joint Ventures, Partnerships, Strategic 
Alliances, and Licensing
O U T L I N E
Inside M&A: Comcast’s NBCUniversal 
Invests in BuzzFeed and Vox in a 
Search for a Younger Audience	
552
Chapter Overview	
553
Motivations for Business Alliances	
555
Risk Sharing	
555
Gaining Access to New Markets	
557
Globalization	
557
A Prelude to Acquisition or Exit	
558
Favorable Regulatory Treatment	
558
What Makes Business Alliances 
Successful?	
559
Synergy	
559
Clarity of Purpose, Roles, 
and Responsibilities	
559
Accountability	
559
Cooperation	
560
Win–Win Situation	
560
Compatible Time Frames 
and Financial Expectations	
560
Support From the Top	
560
Alternative Legal Forms of Business 
Alliances	
560
Corporate Structures	
562
Limited Liability Company	
564
Partnership Structures	
565
Franchise Alliance	
566
Equity Partnership	
566
Written Contract	
567
Strategic and Operational Plans	
567
Resolving Business Alliance 
Deal-Structuring Issues	
567
Scope	
568
Duration	
569
Legal Form	
569
Governance	
569
Resource Contributions 
and Ownership Determination	
569
Financing Ongoing Capital Requirements	 571
Owner or Partner Financing	
571
Equity and Debt Financing	
572
Control	
573
Distribution Issues	
573
Performance Criteria	
573
Dispute Resolution	
574
Revision	
574
Termination	
574

552	
15.  Business Alliances
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
Humility is not thinking less of you. It is thinking less about you. —Rick Warren
INSIDE M&A: COMCAST’S NBCUNIVERSAL INVESTS IN BUZZFEED 
AND VOX IN A SEARCH FOR A YOUNGER AUDIENCE
KEY POINTS
•	 Firms may make minority investments in other companies to gain access to skills, assets, and 
customers they do not currently possess.
•	 While money invested in alliances does matter, the eventual success of alliances often depends 
on the value of the intangible and tangible assets contributed by each partner.
•	 Large companies often attempt to hedge their investments by making a number of 
relatively small investments in different firms in the hope at least one will be wildly 
successful.
The media world is in turmoil. The median age of prime-time TV viewers rose from 46.3 
to 50.5 in the past 5 years, according to Horizon Media. Less than one-quarter of people aged 
18–34 watch prime-time TV today, compared to 53.1% of those over 55. Younger people are 
fleeing in droves to watch online content and videos. Increasingly, the big-name media firms 
are in a panic as they see their customers increase in age. Advertisers tend to be attracted 
mostly by younger viewers who tend to spend more impulsively and often more lavishly 
than baby boomers. Not knowing precisely what to do, large media companies are struggling 
to adapt to the changing demographics.
Self-described as a social news and entertainment online firm, BuzzFeed was founded in 
2006. The firm has grown into a global media company providing news on a wide range 
of topics that have specific appeal to a younger audience. In mid-August, 2015, Comcast’s 
NBCUniversal subsidiary invested $200 million in BuzzFeed in an effort to gain access to 
younger viewers. The equity stake values BuzzFeed at almost $1.5 billion, almost twice its 
mid-2014 valuation. The BuzzFeed investment comes a week after NBCUniversal made an­
other $200 million equity investment in BuzzFeed competitor Vox Media, the parent com­
pany of sites like The Verge, Vox, and SB Nation.
Transfer of Interests	
574
Taxes	
575
Management and Organizational Issues	
575
Regulatory Restrictions and Notifications	 576
Empirical Findings	
576
Some Things to Remember	
578
Discussion Questions	
578
Case Study: General Motors Hedges 
Its Bets With an Investment in 
Ride-Hailing Firm Lyft	
579
Case Study Objectives	
579
Discussion Questions	
581
Additional Case Study 
Recommendations	
582

	
Chapter Overview	
553
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
More than half of BuzzFeed’s 82.4 million unique monthly visitors are between the ages 
of 18 and 34, according to comScore Inc. Prior to the NBCUniversal investment, BuzzFeed 
had raised $96.3 million in five investment rounds. Last year, it raised $50 million from ven­
ture capital firm Andreessen Horowitz, valuing the company at $850 million. BuzzFeed used 
much of that money to invest heavily in BuzzFeed Motion Pictures, its Los Angeles–based 
video production unit. According to Quantcast, Vox gets about 75 million unique visitors a 
month to its various content sites, with about 40% of its traffic between 18 and 34 years of age. 
Vox is spending aggressively to grow its advertising business and as such is losing money 
and burning through its available cash. The NBCUniversal investment in Vox Media valued 
the company at almost $1 billion. While the number of monthly visitors for both firms is im­
pressive, both BuzzFeed and Vox are much smaller than sites like the Huffington Post that 
gets more than 125 million monthly visitors.
While Vox has raised considerable sums of money from venture capital firms, its appetite 
for additional cash seems open ended. Most of the firm’s earlier funding came from ven­
ture capital firms that sometimes have short investment time horizons. The most stable and 
“patient” capital often comes from a strategic partner like Comcast. Substantially larger than 
Vox, BuzzFeed is also trying to grow extremely quickly, which means it also needs funding.
So what does Comcast’s NBCUniversal get out of these kinds of deals? For the most part, 
it means they are hedging their future bets. There is the possibility of the cable provider using 
media content provided by these two firms for its various broadcast properties. The larger 
benefit may be the association with new media firms that gives old media companies a certain 
cachet and a window into content favored by millennials. Moreover, giant money machines 
like Comcast often lack the ability to innovate due to bone-crushing bureaucracy. They need 
to acquire other, more nimble businesses to infuse fresh thinking into their aging businesses.
Given the soft nature of the presumed synergy between NBCUniversal and upstart media 
companies, BuzzFeed and Vox, it remains to be seen how much NBCUniversal and its parent 
Comcast will actually benefit. At a minimum, Comcast may recover its investment and earn 
a return on its investments if they go public. But whether they will be able to change their 
much larger culture to reflect the creativity of BuzzFeed and Vox is problematic. In reality, 
what Comcast is really providing is cash and maybe some content, although much of what 
Comcast has to offer is of little interest to millennials. So Comcast is doing what many large 
companies do when their creativity runs dry: they throw money at smaller fast-growing firms 
in the hope that at least one of these relatively small bets will take off. This “big company” 
strategy is not very imaginative but it is sometimes successful.
CHAPTER OVERVIEW
What all business alliances have in common is that they generally involve sharing the risk, 
reward, and control among all participants. The term business alliance is used throughout this chap­
ter to describe the various forms of cooperative relationships common in business today, including 
joint ventures (JVs), partnerships, strategic alliances, equity partnerships, licensing agreements, 
and franchise alliances. The primary theme of this chapter is that well-constructed business al­
liances often represent viable alternatives to mergers and acquisitions (M&As), and they always 
should be considered one of the many options for achieving strategic business objectives.

554	
15.  Business Alliances
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
The principal differences in the various types of business alliances were discussed in some 
detail in Chapter 1 and are therefore only summarized in Table 15.1. This chapter discusses 
the wide variety of motives for business alliances and the factors common to most successful 
alliances. Also addressed are the advantages and disadvantages of alternative legal struc­
tures, important deal-structuring issues, and empirical studies that purport to measure the 
contribution of business alliances to creating shareholder wealth. A review of this chapter 
TABLE 15.1  Key Differences Among Business Alliances
Type
Key characteristics
Joint ventures
•	Independent legal entity involving two or more parties
•	May be organized as a corporation, partnership, or other legal/business 
organization selected by the parties
•	Ownership, responsibilities, risks, and rewards allocated to parties
•	Each party retains corporate identity and autonomy
•	Created by parties contributing assets for a specific purpose and for a limited 
duration
Strategic alliances (e.g., 
technology transfer, 
R&D sharing, and 
cross-marketing)
•	Do not involve the formation of separate legal entities
•	May be precursor to a joint venture, partnership, or acquisition
•	Generally not passive, but involve cross-training, coordinated product 
development, and long-term contracts based on performance metrics such as 
product quality rather than price
Equity partnerships
•	Have all the characteristics of an alliance
•	Involve making minority investment in the other party (e.g., 5%–10%)
•	Minority investor may have an option to buy a larger stake in the other party
Licensing
•	Product
•	Process
•	Merchandise and 
trademark
•	Patent, trademark, or copyright licensed in exchange for a royalty or fee
•	Generally no sharing of risk or reward
•	Generally stipulates what is being sold, how and where it can be used, and for 
how long
•	Payments usually consist of an initial fee and royalties based on a percentage 
of future license sales
Franchising alliances
•	Network of alliances in which partners are linked by licensing agreements 
(e.g., fast-food chains, hardware stores)
•	Often grant exclusive rights to sell or distribute goods or services in specific 
geographic areas or markets
•	Licensees may be required to purchase goods and services from other firms in 
the alliance
Network alliances
•	Interconnecting alliances among companies crossing international and 
industrial boundaries (e.g., airlines)
•	May involve companies collaborating in one market while competing in others 
(e.g., computers, airlines, cellular telephones)
•	Most often formed to access skills from different but increasingly 
interconnected industries
Exclusive agreements
•	Usually involve rights for manufacturing or marketing specific products or 
services
•	Each party benefits from the specific skills or assets the other party brings to 
the relationship
R&D, Research and development.

	
Motivations for Business Alliances	
555
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
(including practice questions and answers) is available in the file folder entitled “Student 
Study Guide” on the companion website (https://www.elsevier.com/books-and-journals/
book-companion/9780128016091) to this book.
MOTIVATIONS FOR BUSINESS ALLIANCES
Money alone rarely provides for a successful long-term business alliance. A partner of­
ten can obtain funding from a variety of sources but may be able to obtain access to a set of 
skills or nonfinancial resources only from another party. The motivations for an alliance vary 
widely and are discussed next.
Risk Sharing
Risk often is perceived to be greater the more money, management time, or other resourc­
es a company has committed to an endeavor and the less certain the outcome. To mitigate 
perceived risk, companies often enter into alliances to gain access to know-how and scarce 
resources, to reduce the amount of resources they would have to commit if they were to do 
it on their own, or to limit losses if the endeavor proves unsuccessful. For example, Canada’s 
Valeant Pharmaceuticals agreed to help British-based pharmaceutical firm AstraZeneca by 
paying certain development costs incurred in bringing to market a drug designed to combat 
the skin ailment psoriasis in an exchange for the rights to market the drug.
Sharing Proprietary Knowledge
Given the pace at which technology changes, the risk is high that a competitor will be 
able to develop a superior technology before a firm can bring its own new technology to 
market. Consequently, high-technology companies with expertise in a specific technology of­
ten combine their efforts with those of another company or companies with complementary 
know-how, to reduce the risk of failing to develop the “right” technology. Such alliances often 
do result in knowledge sharing between alliance partners. Automakers Ford, Daimler, and 
Renault-Nissan announced in 2013 that each firm would invest equally in an alliance to accel­
erate the development of a common hydrogen fuel cell technology to power their own cars.
Sharing Management Skills, Information, and Resources
Firms often lack the management skills, information, and resources to solve complex tasks 
and projects. These deficiencies can be remedied by aligning with other firms that possess 
the requisite skills and proprietary knowledge. Building contractors and real estate develop­
ers have collaborated for years by pooling their resources to construct, market, and manage 
large, complex commercial projects. The contribution of Dow Chemical management person­
nel to a JV with Cordis, a small pacemaker manufacturer, enabled the JV to keep pace with 
accelerating production. Reflecting the bureaucratic inertia often found in megacorporations, 
large pharmaceutical firms actively seek partnerships with smaller, more nimble and innova­
tive firms as a way of revitalizing their new-drug pipelines. Such relationships are also com­
monplace among biotechnology firms. Small biotechnology firms are in fact likely to fund 
their research and development (R&D) through JVs with large corporations, with the larger 

556	
15.  Business Alliances
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
partner receiving the controlling interest.1 Oil and gas deep water drilling shows greater suc­
cess rates when an alliance of firms undertakes the effort with alliance members combining 
their information and expertise.2
While it often is convenient for small start-ups to align with industry leading companies, 
cultural differences sometimes prove intractable. In 2011, Toyota bought a $50-million stake 
in Tesla Motors Inc., sold the firm a shuttered auto assembly plant in Fremont, CA, for only 
$42 million, and agreed to retrofit the Toyota RAV4 utility vehicle using Tesla technology. 
Tesla was motivated to do the deal for the cash infusion, gaining access to a factory at a 
bargain price, and the credibility that comes from working alongside an industry leader. 
By late 2014, the partnership was unraveling swiftly due largely to differences between the 
firms’ engineering approaches and difficulties in sharing proprietary technologies. More­
over, Toyota distanced itself from Tesla’s core electric vehicle technology and embraced fuel 
cells, a technology that Tesla’s founder Leon Musk has ridiculed publicly. Toyota allowed the 
alliance to expire in 2015.
Sharing Substantial Capital Outlays
Regional and foreign cellular phone carriers were encouraged to join forces to achieve 
the scale necessary to support the creation of national networks. Vodafone and Verizon 
Communications joined forces in 1999 to form Verizon Wireless, with Verizon eventually buy­
ing out Vodafone in early 2014. Microsoft agreed in early 2012 to invest almost $600 million 
over 5 years in Barnes & Noble’s (B&H) e-book business to assist in the development and 
marketing of the firm’s Nook e-book reader in exchange for a 16.8% stake in B&H. Failure 
of the Nook to gain wider market acceptance resulted in Microsoft selling its shares back to 
B&H for $125 million.3
Securing Sources of Supply
The chemical industry is highly vulnerable to swings in energy costs and other raw 
materials. Chemical companies such as Dow, Hercules, and Olin have used JVs to build new 
plants throughout the world. When shortages of raw materials threaten future production, 
these firms commonly form JVs to secure future sources of supply. Similarly, CNOOC, the 
large Chinese oil concern, has been busily investing in oil and natural gas assets in highly 
diverse geographic areas to obtain reliable sources of supply. CNOOC’s efforts in recent years 
have ranged from outright acquisition (e.g., the attempted takeover of Unocal in the United 
States) to long-term contracts (e.g., Canadian tar sands) to JVs in various locations in Africa 
(e.g., Sudan and Kenya).
Cost Reduction
In the 1980s and 1990s, retailers and financial services firms outsourced such back-office 
activities as information and application processing to such firms as IBM and EDS. Others 
outsourced payroll processing and benefits management to such firms as ADP. More recently, 
1Lerner et al. (2003).
2Beshears (2013).
3In 2015, B&H split up the company into a retail store and website unit and another housing its college bookstores 
and Nook unit.

	
Motivations for Business Alliances	
557
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
package carrier FedEx and the US Post Office entered a so-called logistics alliance cover­
ing both transportation and warehousing services. Companies also may choose to combine 
their manufacturing operations in a single facility with the capacity to meet the production 
requirements of all parties involved. By building a large facility, the firms jointly can benefit 
from economies of scale. Examples include Hitachi and Mitsubishi’s forming an $8 billion-a-
year semiconductor JV and Canon and Toshiba’s spending a combined $1.8 billion to create a 
joint manufacturing operation to satisfy their requirements for surface-conduction electron-
emitter displays (SEDs) for TVs.
Gaining Access to New Markets
Accessing new customers is often a highly expensive effort involving substantial initial 
marketing costs, such as advertising, promotion, warehousing, and distribution expenses. 
The cost may be prohibitive unless alternative distribution channels providing access to the 
targeted markets can be found. A company may enter into an alliance to sell its products 
through another firm’s direct sales force, telemarketing operation, retail outlets, or Internet 
site. The alliance may involve the payment of a percentage of revenue generated in this man­
ner to the firm whose distribution channel is being used. Firms may also enter into a “cross-
marketing” relationship, in which they agree to sell the other firm’s products through their 
own distribution channels sharing the incremental revenues generated. For example, in late 
2006, eBay granted Google the exclusive right to display text advertisements on eBay’s auc­
tion websites outside the United States, with eBay sharing in the revenue generated by the 
advertisements. Google was able to expand its advertising reach without having to make 
substantial additional investments.
Alternatively, firms may take minority investments in other companies to increase their 
understanding of unfamiliar markets or to offer customers an alternative means of accessing 
their products and services. Apple invested $1 billion in mid-2016 in Chinese ride-sharing 
giant Didi Chuxing, which has investments in San Francisco–based Lyft, Malaysian taxi app 
Grab, and Olacabs in Mumbai India, giving Apple an indirect stake in these companies. Ap­
ple’s publicly stated intent is to learn about this segment of the Chinese economy; its unstated 
intent could be to position itself as a provider of self-driving taxi service software. Also in 
2016, at a time when younger consumers are canceling cable subscriptions, cable and content 
provider Time Warner invested $583 million for a 10% stake in online TV streaming service 
Hulu to provide consumers an alternative means of accessing the firm’s TV programs.
Globalization
The dizzying pace of international competition increased the demand for alliances and JVs 
to enable companies to enter markets in which they lack production or distribution channels 
or in which laws prohibit 100% foreign ownership of a business. While the focus in this book 
is on M&As, cross-border corporate investment strategies are far more likely to involve busi­
ness alliances than M&As, with alliances constituting the preferred international investment 
strategy almost two-thirds of the time.4 Many companies, such as General Motors (GM) and 
4Bodnaruk et al. (2016).

558	
15.  Business Alliances
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
Ford, take minority equity positions in other companies within the industry to gain access to 
foreign markets. By aligning with Lenovo Group as a strategic partner in 2007, IBM hoped 
to enlarge dramatically its market share in China. More recently, Nissan and Daimler an­
nounced in 2010 the formation of a partnership in which the firms would share the cost of 
developing engines and small-car technologies with projected cumulative savings totaling 
$5.3 billion. As part of the arrangement, each firm will buy a 3.1% stake in the other, as an 
expression of the degree of their commitment to partnership.
A Prelude to Acquisition or Exit
Rather than acquire a company, a firm may choose to make a minority investment in an­
other company. In exchange for the investment, the investing firm may receive board repre­
sentation, preferred access to specific proprietary technology, and an option to purchase a 
controlling interest in the company. The investing firm is able to assess the quality of man­
agement, the cultural compatibility, and the viability of the other firm’s technology without 
having to acquire a controlling interest in the firm. In mid-2012, American drugstore chain 
Walgreen Company (Walgreen) agreed to buy a 45% stake in Alliance Boots (Alliance), the 
European pharmacy retailer, for $6.7 billion in cash and stock, with an option to buy the re­
maining 55% for $9.5 billion in cash and stock sometime during the 3 years following closing. 
Walgreen can take advantage of Alliance Boots’ operations in Europe and several emerging 
markets, while Alliance Boots gets a foothold in the United States. Similarly, Heineken, which 
already owns 42% of Asian Pacific Breweries, agreed to buy an additional 40% for $4.1 billion 
in the Singapore conglomerate in August 2012 as a play to enlarge its position in emerging 
markets. The deal also required Heineken to buy out the remaining shareholders before the 
end of 2012. Deals involving the gradual accumulation of control sometimes are referred to 
as “creeping” takeovers.
A parent wanting to exit a subsidiary may contribute the unit to a JV or partnership and 
negotiate as part of the deal a put or call option with the other partners. A call option gives 
the partners the right to purchase the unit, and the put option gives the parent the right to sell 
the unit to the other partners. General Electric (GE) negotiated a put option with Comcast in 
2010 when GE announced that it would be contributing its NBCUniversal subsidiary to a JV 
corporation in which Comcast and GE would own 51 and 49% stakes, respectively. In early 
2013, Comcast acquired the portion of NBCUniversal it did not already own.
In the wake of the deteriorating financial performance of their respective operations, GE 
contributed its oil and gas operations along with $7.4 billion into a partnership with oil servic­
es behemoth Baker Hughes in late 2016 to create a new entity called the New Baker Hughes. 
GE owned 62.5% of the partnership. With anticipated synergies having a present value of $14 
billion, the partnership gives GE a variety of strategic options: retain the business if oil and 
gas prices recover from their depressed levels of recent years or to sell the business, take it 
public, or spin it off to shareholders.
Favorable Regulatory Treatment
As noted in Chapter 2, the Department of Justice has looked on JVs far more favorably 
than M&As, which result in a reduction in the number of firms. JVs increase the number of 

	
What Makes Business Alliances Successful?	
559
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
firms because the parents continue to operate while another firm is created. Project-orient­
ed JVs often are viewed favorably by regulators. Regulatory authorities tend to encourage 
collaborative research, particularly when the research is shared among all the parties to 
the JV. Alliances may also be used to gain regulatory approval to take control of a local 
company. In late 2014, United States–based multinational GE agreed to partner with the 
French government in its takeover of French engineering group, Alstrom. French regula­
tors agreed to the tie up contingent on the government having a 20% stake in Alstrom, 
veto rights over the JV’s business strategy, and a commitment by GE to increase jobs in 
France.
WHAT MAKES BUSINESS ALLIANCES SUCCESSFUL?
Success depends on synergy; clarity of purpose, roles, and responsibilities; accountability; 
cooperation; a “win–win” situation; compatible time frames and financial expectations for 
the partners; and support from top management.5 Each of these factors is discussed next.
Synergy
Successful alliances are those in which partners either complement existing strengths or 
offset significant weaknesses. Examples include partners providing opportunities for real­
izing economies of scale and scope, access to new products, distribution channels, and pro­
prietary know-how. Successful alliances are often those in which the partners contribute a 
skill or resource in addition to or other than money. Such alliances often make good economic 
sense and, as such, are able to get financing.
Clarity of Purpose, Roles, and Responsibilities
Early on, parties to the alliance must agree to a well-understood and well-thought-out 
purpose or mission for the business alliance that must be communicated to all those respon­
sible for achieving the mission. The roles and responsibilities of the alliance partners in real­
izing the mission should be clearly established. How the mission is to be achieved is defined 
by more specific goals, milestones for achieving the goals, and commitments to achieving 
milestones in accordance with the timetable. Internal conflict and lethargic decision making 
inevitably result from poorly defined roles and responsibilities of alliance participants.
Accountability
Performance goals established for individual managers should be tied directly to the pri­
mary goals for the alliance. Incentives should be in place to reward good performance with 
respect to realizing their goals on a timely basis, and those failing to perform should be held 
accountable.
5Kantor (2002) and Lynch (1993).

560	
15.  Business Alliances
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
Cooperation
A lack of cooperation contributes to poor communication and reduces the likelihood that 
alliance objectives will be realized. Firms with similar philosophies, goals, rewards, operating 
practices, and ethics are more likely to cooperate over the long run.
Win–Win Situation
Alliance partners must believe they are benefiting from the activity for it to be successful. 
Johnson & Johnson’s (J&J’s) alliance with Merck & Company in the marketing of Pepcid AC 
is a classic win–win situation. Merck contributed its prescription drug Pepcid AC to the al­
liance so that J&J could market it as an over-the-counter drug. With Merck as the developer 
of the upset-stomach remedy and J&J as the marketer, the product became the leader in this 
drug category. In contrast, the attempt by DaimlerChrysler, Ford, and GM to form an online 
auction network for parts failed in part because of the partners’ concern that they would lose 
competitive information.
Compatible Time Frames and Financial Expectations
The length of time an alliance agreement remains in force depends on the partners’ objec­
tives, the availability of resources, and the accuracy of the assumptions on which the alliance’s 
business plans are based. Incompatible time frames are a recipe for disaster. The management 
of a small Internet business may want to “cash out” within the next 18–24 months, whereas a 
larger firm may wish to gain market share over a number of years.
Support From the Top
Top management of the parents of a business alliance must involve themselves aggres­
sively and publicly. Tepid support filters down to lower-level managers and proves to be de­
motivating. Managers focus their time on those activities that maximize their compensation, 
potentially diverting attention from the alliance.
ALTERNATIVE LEGAL FORMS OF BUSINESS ALLIANCES
The legal form of an alliance should follow the creation of a business strategy. Alliances 
may assume a variety of legal structures, including corporate, partnership, franchise, equity 
partnership, and written contract.6 The five basic legal structures are discussed in detail in 
this section. Each has implications for taxation, control by the owners, ability to trade owner­
ship positions, limitations on liability, duration, and ease of raising capital (Table 15.2).
6Technically, a “handshake” agreement is also an option. Given the inordinate risk associated with the lack of a 
written agreement, those seeking to create an alliance are encouraged to avoid this type of arrangement. However, 
in some cultures, insistence on a detailed written agreement may be viewed as offensive.

	
Alternative Legal Forms of Business Alliances	
561
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
TABLE 15.2  Alternative Legal Forms Applicable to Business Alliances
Legal form
Advantages
Disadvantages
Corporate Structures
•	C corporation
Continuity of ownership
Limited liability
Provides operational autonomy
Provides for flexible financing
Facilitates tax-free merger
Double taxation
Inability to pass losses on to 
shareholders
Relatively high setup costs, 
including charter and bylaws
•	Subchapter S
Avoids double taxation
Limited liability
Maximum of 100 shareholders
Excludes corporate shareholders
Must distribute all earnings
Allows only one class of stock
Lacks continuity of C corporation
Difficult to raise large sums of 
money
Limited Liability 
Company (LLC)
Limited liability
Owners can be managers without losing 
limited liability
Avoids double taxation
Allows an unlimited number of members 
(i.e., owners)
Allows corporate shareholders
Can own more than 80% of another 
company
Allows flexibility in allocating investment, 
profits, losses, and operational 
responsibilities among members
Duration set by owners
Can sell shares to “members” without SEC 
registration
Allows foreign corporations as investors
Owners also must be active 
participants in the firm
Lacks continuity of a corporate 
structure
State laws governing LLC 
formation differ, making it difficult 
for LLCs doing business in 
multiple states
Member shares are often illiquid 
because the consent of members is 
required to transfer ownership
Partnership Structures
•	General partnerships
Avoid double taxation
Allow flexibility in allocating investment, 
profits, losses, and operational 
responsibilities
Life set by general partner
Partners have unlimited liability
Lack continuity of corporate 
structure
Partnership interests illiquid
Partners jointly and severally liable
Each partner has authority to bind 
the partnership to contracts
•	Private limited liability 
partnershipsa
Limit partner liability (except for general 
partner)
Avoid double taxation
State laws consistent (covered under the 
Uniform Limited Partnership Act)
Partnership interests are illiquid
Partnership is dissolved if a 
partner leaves
Private partnerships are limited to 
35 partners
•	Master limited 
partnerships
Same as mentioned earlier
Units/shares are publicly traded and more 
liquid than other types of partnership 
interests
Unlike corporate dividends, failure 
to make quarterly distributions 
constitutes default
(Continued)

562	
15.  Business Alliances
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
Corporate Structures
A corporation is a legal entity created under state law in the United States with an unend­
ing life and limited financial liability for its owners. From a legal perspective, corporations in 
certain circumstances can be considered as people. The doctrine of corporate personhood holds 
that corporations, as groups of people, may exercise certain rights under the US Constitution 
or under common law. For example, corporations may make contracts with other parties, 
sue or be sued in court in the same way as natural persons can.7 Corporate legal structures 
include a generalized corporate form (also called a C-type corporation) and the Subchapter S 
(S-type) corporation. S-type corporations have tax advantages intended to facilitate the for­
mation of small businesses.
C-Type Corporations
A JV corporation normally involves a stand-alone business whose income is taxed at 
the prevailing corporate tax rates. Corporations other than S-type corporations are subject 
to “double” taxation. Taxes are paid by the corporation when profits are earned and again 
by the shareholders when the corporation issues dividends. Moreover, setting up a corpo­
rate legal structure may be more time consuming and costly than other legal forms because 
of legal expenses incurred in drafting a corporate charter and bylaws. Although the corporate 
legal structure has adverse tax consequences and may be more costly to establish, it does of­
fer advantages over other legal forms. The four primary characteristics of a C-type corporate 
structure include managerial autonomy, continuity of ownership, ease of transferring owner­
ship and raising money, and limited liability. These characteristics are discussed next.
Managerial autonomy refers to a high level of discretionary authority granted by owners 
to those managing the organization and is most often used when the JV is large or complex 
enough to require a separate or decentralized management structure. The corporate struc­
ture works best when the JV requires some operational autonomy to be effective. The parent 
7This doctrine does not grant corporations certain other rights such as the right to marry, run for office, or to vote.
Legal form
Advantages
Disadvantages
Franchise Alliances
Allow repeated application of a successful 
business model
Minimize start-up expenses
Facilitate communication of common 
brand and marketing strategy
Success depends on quality of 
franchise sponsor support
Royalty payments (3%–7% of 
revenue)
Equity Partnerships
Facilitate close working relationship
Potential prelude to merger
May preempt competition
Limited tactical and strategic 
control
Written Contracts
Easy start-up
Potential prelude to merger
Limited control
Lack close coordination
Potential for limited commitment
aPublic limited partnerships may have an unlimited number of investors and must be registered with the SEC.
TABLE 15.2  Alternative Legal Forms Applicable to Business Alliances (cont.)

	
Alternative Legal Forms of Business Alliances	
563
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
companies would continue to set strategy, but the JV’s management would manage the day-
to-day operations.
Unlike other legal forms, the corporate structure provides continuity of ownership, because 
it has an indefinite life. That is, it does not have to be dissolved due to the death of the own­
ers or if an owner wishes to liquidate his or her ownership stake. A corporate legal structure 
may be warranted if the JV’s goals are long term and the parties choose to contribute cash 
directly to the JV. In return for the cash contribution, the JV partners receive stock in the new 
company, enabling a partner to “cash out” by selling his or her shares. Alternatively, the 
partner–shareholder can withdraw from active participation in the JV but remain a passive 
shareholder in anticipation of potential future appreciation of the stock. A corporate structure 
also facilitates a tax-free merger, since the stock of the acquiring firm can be exchanged for the 
stock or assets of another firm.
Under a C-type corporate structure, the ease of transferring ownership facilitates raising mon­
ey. Shares, legal claims on the assets, liabilities, cash flows, and earnings of a corporation, can 
be transferred from one owner to another without disrupting the operations of the business. 
Such structures provide a broader array of financing options than other legal forms, includ­
ing the ability to sell shares and issue corporate debentures and mortgage bonds. Selling new 
shares enables the corporation to raise funds while still retaining control if less than 50.1% of 
the corporation’s shares are sold.
Finally, this legal form provides for limited liability in that a shareholder’s liability is limited 
to the extent of their investment. However, an owner can be held personally liable if the own­
er injures someone directly or personally guarantees a bank loan or a business debt on which 
the firm defaults. Other exceptions include failing to deposit taxes withheld from employees’ 
wages or committing intentional fraud that causes harm to the corporation or someone else. 
An owner also may be liable for failing to capitalize the corporation adequately or hold regu­
lar directors and shareholders meetings or for withholding information from other owners.
Subchapter S Corporations
A firm having 100 or fewer shareholders may qualify as an S-type corporation and be taxed 
as if it were a partnership and thus avoid double taxation. The members of a single family 
may be considered a single shareholder.8 An ESOP maintained by an S corporation is not in 
violation of the requirement regarding the maximum number of shareholders because the S 
corporation contributes stock to the ESOP. The major disadvantages to S-type corporations 
are the exclusion of any corporate shareholders, the requirement to issue only one class of 
stock, the necessity of distributing all earnings to the shareholders each year, and that no 
more than 25% of the corporation’s gross income may be derived from passive income.
C corporations may convert to S corporations to eliminate double taxation on dividends. 
Asset sales within 10 years of the conversion are subject to capital gains taxes at the prevailing 
corporate income tax rate. After 10 years, such gains are tax free to the S corporation but are 
taxable when distributed to shareholders, at their personal tax rates. Sales of assets acquired 
by an S corporation or after a 10-year period following conversion from one form of legal 
8A husband and wife would be treated as a single shareholder. Family members refer to those with a common ances­
tor, lineal descendants of the ancestor, and the spouses of such lineal descendants or common ancestor.

564	
15.  Business Alliances
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
entity to an S corporation are taxed at the capital gains tax rate, which is generally more favor­
able than the corporate income tax rate.9
As discussed next, the limited liability company (LLC) offers its owners the significant ad­
vantage of greater flexibility in allocating profits and losses and is not subject to the many re­
strictions of the S corporation. Consequently, the popularity of the S corporation has declined.
Limited Liability Company
LLCs can be viewed as hybrid legal entities. Like a corporation, the LLC limits the liability 
of its owners (called members) to the extent of their investment. Like a limited partnership, the 
LLC passes through all of the profits and losses of the entity to its owners without itself being 
taxed. To obtain this favorable tax status, the IRS requires that the LLC adopt an organization 
agreement eliminating the characteristics of a C corporation: management autonomy, conti­
nuity of ownership or life, and free transferability of shares. Management autonomy is lim­
ited by placing decisions about major issues pertaining to the management of the LLC (e.g., 
mergers or asset sales) in the hands of all its members. LLC agreements require that they be 
dissolved in case of the death, retirement, or resignation of any member, thereby eliminating 
continuity of ownership or life. Free transferability is limited by making a transfer of owner­
ship subject to the approval of all members.
Unlike S-type corporations, LLCs can own more than 80% of another corporation and have 
an unlimited number of members. Also, corporations as well as non-US residents can own 
LLC shares. Equity capital is obtained through offerings to members (i.e., owners). The LLC 
can sell shares or interests to members without completing the costly process of registering 
them with the SEC, which is required for corporations that sell their securities to the public. 
LLC shares are not traded on public exchanges. This arrangement works well for corporate 
JVs or projects developed through a subsidiary or affiliate. The parent corporation can sepa­
rate a JV’s risk from its other businesses while getting favorable tax treatment and greater 
flexibility in the allocation of revenues and losses among owners. Finally, LLCs can incorpo­
rate before an IPO, tax free.
The LLC’s drawbacks are evident if one owner decides to leave. All other owners must 
agree formally to continue the firm. Also, all the LLC’s owners must take active roles in man­
aging the firm. LLC interests are often illiquid, since transfer of ownership is subject to the 
approval of other members. LLCs must be set for a limited time, typically 30 years. Each 
state has different laws about LLC formation and governance, so an LLC that does business 
in several states might not meet the requirements in every state. LLCs are formed when two 
or more “persons” [i.e., individuals, limited liability partnerships (LLPs), corporations, etc.] 
agree to file articles of organization with the secretary of state’s office. The most common 
types of firms to form LLCs are family-owned businesses, professional services firms such as 
lawyers, and companies with foreign investors.
9The 10-year “built-in-gains” period is designed by the IRS to discourage C corporations from converting to S 
corporations to take advantage of the more favorable capital gains tax rates on gains realized by selling corporate 
assets. Gains on the sale of assets by C corporations are taxed at the prevailing corporate income tax rate rather 
than a more favorable capital gains tax rate.

	
Alternative Legal Forms of Business Alliances	
565
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
Partnership Structures
Frequently used as an alternative to a corporation, partnership structures include general 
partnerships and limited partnerships.
General Partnerships
Under this legal structure, investment, profits, losses, and operational responsibilities are 
allocated to the partners. Because profits and losses are allocated to the partners, the partner­
ship is not subject to tax. The partnership structure also offers substantial flexibility in how 
the profits and losses are allocated to the partners. Typically, a corporate partner forms a spe­
cial-purpose subsidiary to hold its interest. This not only limits liability but also may facilitate 
disposition of the JV interest in the future. The partnership structure is preferable to the other 
options when the business alliance is expected to have short (3–5 years) duration and if high 
levels of commitment and management interaction are necessary for short time periods.
The primary disadvantage of the general partnership is that all the partners have unlim­
ited liability. Each partner is said to be jointly and severally liable for the partnership’s debts. 
If one partner negotiates a contract resulting in a substantial loss, each partner must pay for a 
portion of the loss, based on a previously determined agreement on the distribution of profits 
and losses. Because each partner has unlimited liability for all the debts of the firm, creditors 
of the partnership may claim assets from one or more of the partners if the remaining partners 
are unable to cover their share of the loss. Another disadvantage is the ability of any partner 
to bind the business to a contract or other business deal. Consequently, if one partner pur­
chases inventory at a price that the partnership cannot afford, the partnership is still obligated 
to pay. Partnerships also lack continuity, in that they must be dissolved if a partner dies or 
withdraws, unless a new partnership agreement can be drafted. To avoid this possibility, a 
partnership agreement should include a buy–sell condition or right of first refusal, allowing 
the partners to buy out a departing partner’s interest so the business can continue. Finally, 
partnership interests may also be difficult to sell because of the lack of a public market, thus 
making it difficult to liquidate the partnership or to transfer partnership interests.
Limited Liability Partnerships
In an LLP, one or more of the partners can be designated as having limited liability as long 
as at least one partner has unlimited liability. Those who are responsible for the day-to-day 
operations of the partnership’s activities, whose individual acts are binding on the other part­
ners, and who are personally liable for the partnership’s total liabilities are called general part­
ners. Those who contribute only money and are not involved in management decisions are 
called limited partners. Usually limited partners receive income, capital gains, and tax benefits, 
whereas the general partner collects fees and a percentage of the capital gain and income.
Typical limited partnerships are in real estate, oil and gas, and equipment leasing, but they 
also are used to finance movies, R&D, and other projects. Public limited partnerships are sold 
through brokerage firms, financial planners, and other registered securities representatives. 
Public partnerships may have an unlimited number of investors, and their partnership plans 
must be filed with the SEC. Private limited partnerships have fewer than 35 limited partners, 
who each invest more than $20,000. Their plans do not have to be filed with the SEC. The 
sources of equity capital for limited partnerships are the funds supplied by the general and 

566	
15.  Business Alliances
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
limited partners. The total amount of equity funds needed by the limited partnerships is typi­
cally committed when the partnership is formed; ventures that are expected to grow are not 
usually set up as limited partnerships. LLPs are very popular for accountants, physicians, 
attorneys, and consultants.
Master Limited Partnerships (MLPs)
MLPs are partnerships whose interests are separated into units that trade like shares of 
stock. Unlike common stock dividends paid by corporations, the failure to make quarterly 
payouts to investors is an act of default. Because of these mandatory payments, MLPs are 
used in industries with predictable cash flows, such as natural resources and real estate. To 
avoid being taxed as a corporation, an MLP can have only two of the four characteristics of a 
corporation: managerial autonomy, limited liability, an unlimited life, and freely traded shares. 
Generally, MLPs have freely traded shares and managerial autonomy but do not have unlim­
ited life or unlimited liability for all owners, in that at least one partner has unlimited liability.
Franchise Alliance
Franchises typically involve a franchisee’s making an initial investment to purchase a 
license, plus additional capital investment for real estate, machinery, and working capital. 
For this investment, the franchisor provides training, site-selection assistance, and discounts 
resulting from bulk purchasing. Royalty payments for the license typically run 3%–7% of 
annual franchisee revenue. Franchise success rates exceed 80% over a 5-year period as com­
pared with some types of start-ups, which have success rates of less than 10% after 5 years. 
The franchise alliance is preferred when a given business format can be replicated many 
times. Moreover, franchise alliances are also appropriate when there needs to be a common, 
recognizable identity presented to customers of each of the alliance partners and close op­
erational coordination is required. A franchise alliance also may be desirable when a com­
mon marketing program needs to be coordinated and implemented by a single partner. The 
franchisor and franchisee operate as separate entities, usually as corporations or LLCs. The 
four basic types of franchises are distributor (auto dealerships), processing (bottling plants), 
chain (restaurants), and area franchises (a geographic region is licensed to a new franchisee 
to subfranchise to others).
Franchising offers the prospect of converting assets owned and operated by a firm to those 
owned and operated by someone else. By moving toward franchising, a firm can reduce its 
capital expenditures and achieve a more stable revenue stream based on franchise fees. US 
fast-food and casual-dining restaurant chains are increasingly questioning the desirability of 
running rather than franchising restaurants.
Equity Partnership
Such arrangements involve a company’s purchase of stock (resulting in a less-than-
controlling interest) in another company or a two-way exchange of stock by the two firms.10 
10Such exchanges keep both parties committed to the success of the partnership. If the partnership fails, the value of 
each party’s partnership interest declines, as could the ownership stake each partner has in the other firm.

	
Resolving Business Alliance Deal-Structuring Issues	
567
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
It is referred to as a partnership because of the equity ownership exchanged. Equity partner­
ships are used in purchaser–supplier relationships, technology development, and marketing 
alliances and when a larger firm makes an investment in a smaller firm to ensure its contin­
ued financial viability. In exchange for an equity investment, a firm often receives a seat on 
the board of directors and possibly an option to buy a controlling interest in the company. The 
equity partnership is most effective when there is a need to have a long-term or close strategic 
relationship, to preempt a competitor from making an alliance or acquisition, or as a prelude 
to a takeover.
Written Contract
The written contract is the simplest form of legal structure and is used most often with 
strategic alliances because it maintains an “arm’s-length” or independent relationship be­
tween the parties to the contract. The contract normally stipulates such things as how 
the revenue is divided, the responsibilities of each party, the duration of the alliance, and 
confidentiality requirements. No separate business entity is established for legal or tax 
purposes. The written contract most often is used when the business alliance is expected 
to last less than 3 years, frequent close coordination is not required, capital investments 
are made independently by each party to the agreement, and the parties have had little 
previous contact.
STRATEGIC AND OPERATIONAL PLANS
Before any deal-structuring issues are addressed, the prospective parties must agree on 
the basic strategic direction and purpose of the alliance as defined in the alliance’s strate­
gic plan, as well as the financial and nonfinancial goals established in the operation’s plan. 
The strategic plan identifies the primary purpose or mission of the business alliance; com­
municates specific quantifiable targets, such as financial returns or market share and mile­
stones; and analyzes the business alliance’s strengths and weaknesses, opportunities, and 
threats relative to the competition. Teams representing all parties to the alliance should 
be involved from the outset of the discussions in developing both a strategic plan and an 
operations plan for the venture. The operations plan (i.e., annual budget) should reflect 
the specific needs of the proposed business alliance and be written by those responsible 
for implementing the plan. The operations plan is typically a 1-year plan that outlines for 
managers what is to be accomplished, when it is to be accomplished, and what resources 
are required.
RESOLVING BUSINESS ALLIANCE DEAL-STRUCTURING ISSUES
The purpose of deal structuring in a business alliance is to allocate risks, rewards, resource 
requirements, and responsibilities among participants. Table 15.3 summarizes the key issues 
and related questions that need to be addressed as part of the business alliance deal-structur­
ing process. This section discusses how these issues most often are resolved.

568	
15.  Business Alliances
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
Scope
A basic question in setting up a business alliance involves which of the partners’ products 
are included and which excluded from the business alliance. This question deals with defin­
ing the scope of the business alliance, that is, how broadly the alliance will be applied in 
pursuing its purpose. For example, an alliance whose purpose is to commercialize products 
developed by the partners could be broadly or narrowly defined in specifying what products 
or services are to be offered, to whom, in what geographic areas, and for what time period. 
TABLE 15.3  Business Alliance Deal-Structuring Issues
Issue
Key questions
Scope
What products are included and what are excluded? Who receives rights to 
distribute, manufacture, acquire, or license technology or purchase future 
products or technology?
Duration
How long is the alliance expected to exist?
Legal form
What is the appropriate legal structure—stand-alone entity or contractual?
Governance
How are the interests of the parent firms to be protected? Who is 
responsible for specific accomplishments?
Control
How are strategic decisions to be addressed? How are day-to-day 
operational decisions to be handled?
Resource contributions and 
ownership determination
Who contributes what and in what form? Cash? Assets? Guarantees/
loans? Technology including patents, trademarks, copyrights, and 
proprietary knowledge? How are contributions to be valued? How is 
ownership determined?
Financing ongoing capital 
requirements
What happens if additional cash is needed?
Distribution
How are profits and losses allocated? How are dividends determined?
Performance criteria
How is performance to the plan measured and monitored?
Dispute resolution
How are disagreements resolved?
Revision
How will the agreement be modified?
Termination
What are the guidelines for termination? Who owns the assets on 
termination? What are the rights of the parties to continue the alliance 
activities after termination?
Transfer of interests
How are ownership interests to be transferred? What are the restrictions 
on the transfer of interests? How will new alliance participants be 
handled? Will there be rights of first refusal, drag-along, tag-along, or put 
provisions?
Tax
Who receives tax benefits?
Management/organization
How is the alliance to be managed?
Confidential information
How is confidential information handled? How are employees and 
customers of the parent firms protected?
Regulatory restrictions and 
notifications
What licenses are required? What regulations need to be satisfied? What 
agencies need to be notified?

	
Resolving Business Alliance Deal-Structuring Issues	
569
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
Failure to define scope adequately can lead to situations in which the alliance may be compet­
ing with the products or services offered by the parent firms. With respect to both current and 
future products, the alliance agreement should identify who receives the rights to market or 
distribute products, manufacture products, acquire or license technology, or purchase prod­
ucts from the venture.
Duration
The participants need to agree on how long the business alliance is to remain in force. 
Participant expectations must be compatible. The expected longevity of the alliance is also 
an important determinant in the choice of a legal form. The corporate structure more readily 
provides for a continuous life than a partnership, because it is easier to transfer ownership 
interests. Most business alliances have a finite life, corresponding to the time required to 
achieve their original strategic objectives.11
Legal Form
Businesses that are growth oriented or intend eventually to go public through an IPO gen­
erally become a C corporation due to its financing flexibility, unlimited life, continuity of 
ownership, and ability to combine on a tax-free basis with other firms. With certain exceptions 
concerning frequency, firms may convert from one legal structure to a C corporation before 
going public. The nature of the business greatly influences the legal form chosen (Table 15.4).
Governance
In the context of an alliance, governance may be defined broadly as an oversight function 
providing for efficient, informed communication between two or more parent firms. The pri­
mary responsibilities of this oversight function are to protect the interests of the corporate 
parents, approve changes to strategy and annual operating plans, allocate resources needed to 
make the alliance succeed, and arbitrate conflicts among lower levels of management. Histor­
ically, governance of business alliances has followed either a quasicorporate or a quasiproject 
approach. For example, the oil industry traditionally has managed alliances by establishing a 
board of directors to provide oversight of managers and to protect the interests of nonoperat­
ing owners. In contrast, in the pharmaceutical and automotive industries, where nonequity 
alliances are common, firms treat governance like project management by creating a steering 
committee that allows all participants to comment on issues confronting the alliance.
Resource Contributions and Ownership Determination
As part of the negotiation process, the participants must agree on a fair value for all tan­
gible and intangible assets contributed to the business alliance. The valuation of partner con­
tributions is important, in that it often provides the basis for determining ownership shares 
11Rahma and Korn (2014).

570	
15.  Business Alliances
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
in the business alliance. The shares of the corporation or the interests in the partnership are 
distributed among the owners in accordance with the value contributed by each participant. 
The partner with the largest risk, the largest contributor of cash, or the person who contrib­
utes critical tangible or intangible assets generally is given the greatest equity share in a JV.
It is relatively easy to value tangible, or “hard,” contributions, such as cash, promissory 
cash commitments, contingent commitments, stock of existing corporations, and assets and 
liabilities associated with an ongoing business in terms of actual dollars or their present val­
ues. A party that contributes “hard” assets, such as a production facility, may want the contri­
bution valued in terms of the value of increased production rather than its replacement cost 
or lease value. The contribution of a fully operational, modern facility to a venture interested 
in being first to market with a particular product may provide far greater value than if the 
venture attempted to build a new facility because of the delay inherent in making the facility 
fully operational.
Intangible, or “soft” or “in-kind,” contributions, such as skills, knowledge, services, pat­
ents, licenses, distribution channels, brand names, and technology, are often much more dif­
ficult to value. Partners providing such services may be compensated by having the business 
alliance pay a market-based royalty or fee for such services.12 Alternatively, contributors of 
12If the royalties or fees paid by the alliance are below standard market prices for comparable services, the differ­
ence between the market price and what the alliance actually is paying may become taxable income to the alliance.
TABLE 15.4  Key Factors Affecting Choice of Legal Entity
Determining factors: businesses with
Should select
High liability risks
C corporation, LLP, or LLC
Large capital/financing requirements
C corporation
Desire for continuity of existence
C corporation
Desire for managerial autonomy
C corporation
Desire for growth through M&A
C corporation
Owners who are also active participants
LLC
Foreign corporate investors
LLC
Desire to allocate investments, profits, losses, and 
operating responsibilities among owners
LLC and LLP
High pretax profits
LLC and LLP
Project focus/expected limited existence
LLP
Owners who want to remain inactive
LLP and C corporation
Large marketing expenses
Franchise
Strategies that are easily replicated
Franchise
Close coordination among participants not required
Written “arm’s-length” agreement
Low risk/low capital requirements
Sole proprietorship or partnership
LLC, Limited liability company; LLP, limited liability partnership; M&A, mergers and acquisitions.

	
Resolving Business Alliance Deal-Structuring Issues	
571
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
intellectual property may be compensated by receiving rights to future patents or technolo­
gies developed by the alliance. Participants in the business alliance that contribute brand 
identities, which facilitate the alliance’s entry into a particular market, may require assur­
ances that they can purchase a certain amount of the product or service, at a guaranteed price, 
for a specific time period.
International partnerships often involve a foreign investor (foreign partner) seeking a firm 
(domestic partner) within the country they hope to enter. The domestic partner may contrib­
ute to the JV such intangible assets as government contacts, distribution channels, a brand 
name, customer lists, or licenses to do business within the country. If the foreign partner is 
relatively unsure of the value of such assets, the domestic partner may be required to con­
tribute additional cash when the JV is formed. This discourages the domestic partner from 
overstating the value of its contributed intangible assets during negotiations to form the JV, 
since the value of the JV will be less if the assets are less productive than promised. Both part­
ners will suffer as a result.13 With both partners having a cash investment in the JV, they are 
motivated to achieve a successful outcome.
Exhibit  15.1 illustrates how the distribution of ownership between GE and Vivendi 
Universal Entertainment may have been determined in the formation of NBCUniversal.
Financing Ongoing Capital Requirements
The business alliance may fund capital requirements that cannot be financed internally 
by calling on the participants to make a capital contribution, issuing additional equity or 
partnership interests, or borrowing. If it is decided that the alliance should be able to bor­
row, the participants must agree on an appropriate financial structure for the enterprise. 
Financial structure refers to the amount of equity that will be contributed to the business 
alliance and how much debt it will carry. Alliances established through a written contract 
obviate the need for such a financing decision because each party to the contract finances 
its own financial commitments to the alliance. Project-based JVs, particularly those that 
create a separate corporation, sometimes sell equity directly to the public or through a 
private placement.
Owner or Partner Financing
The equity owners or partners may agree to make contributions of capital in addition 
to their initial investments in the enterprise. The contributions usually are made in direct 
proportion to their equity or partnership interests. If one party chooses not to make a 
capital contribution, the ownership interests of all the parties are adjusted to reflect the 
changes in their cumulative capital contributions. This adjustment increases the owner­
ship interest of those making the contribution while reducing the interest of those not 
contributing.
13Bowe et al. (2014).

572	
15.  Business Alliances
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
Equity and Debt Financing
JVs formed as a corporation may issue different classes of either common or preferred 
stock. JVs established as partnerships raise capital through the issuance of limited partner­
ship units to investors, with the sponsoring firms becoming general partners. When a larger 
company aligns with a smaller company, it may make a small equity investment in the smaller 
firm to ensure it remains solvent or to benefit from potential equity appreciation. Such invest­
ments often include an option to purchase the remainder of the shares, or at least a controlling 
interest, at a predetermined price if the smaller firm or the JV satisfies certain financial targets.
EXHIBIT 15.1  DETERMINING OWNERSHIP DISTRIBUTION 
IN A JOINT VENTURE
Vivendi Universal Entertainment (VUE) contributed film and television assets valued at 
$14 billion to create NBCUniversal, a joint venture with TV station NBC, which was wholly owned 
by GE at that time. NBCUniversal was valued at $42 billion at closing. NBCUniversal’s EBITDA was 
estimated to be $3 billion, of which GE contributed two-thirds; VUE accounted for the remaining 
one-third. EBITDA multiples for recent transactions involving TV media firms averaged 14 times 
EBITDA at that time. GE provided VUE an option to buy $4 billion in GE stock, assumed $1.6 billion 
in VUE debt, and paid the remainder of the $14 billion purchase price in the form of NBCUniversal 
stock. At closing, VUE converted the option to buy GE stock into $4 billion in cash. GE owned 80% 
of NBCUniversal and VUE 20%. How might this ownership distribution have been determined?
Solution
Step 1: Estimate the total value of the joint venture.
×
=
$3 billion
14
$42 billion
Step 2: Estimate the value of assets contributed by each partner.
Reflecting the relative contribution of each partner to EBITDA (two-thirds from GE; one-
third from VUE), GE’s contributed assets were valued at $28 billion (i.e., two-thirds of $42 
billion) and VUE’s at $14 billion (i.e., one-third of $42 billion).
Step 3: Determine the form of payment.
$4.0 billion (GE stock)
$1.6 billion (assumed Vivendi debt)
$8.4 billion (value of VUE’s equity position in NBCUniversal = $14 − $4.0 − $1.6)
$14.0 billion (purchase price paid by GE to Vivendi for VUE assets)
Step 4: Determine ownership distribution.
At closing, Vivendi chose to receive a cash infusion of $5.6 billion (i.e., $4 billion in cash in 
lieu of GE stock + $1.6 billion in assumed VUE debt). Thus,
=
−
=
=
’
VUE s ownership of NBCUniversal
$14 billion
$5.6 billion
$42 billion
$8.4 billion
$42 billion
0.2
=
−
=
’
GE s ownership of NBCUniversal
1
0.2
0.8

	
Resolving Business Alliance Deal-Structuring Issues	
573
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
Control
Control is distinguishable from ownership by the use of agreements among investors or 
voting rights or by issuing different classes of shares. In some instances, the majority owner 
may not have effective control of the alliance due to the need to get approval to do certain 
things from other shareholders. Effective control can be held by minority investors if the class 
of stock they hold or if clauses stipulated in the alliance agreement provide them with certain 
veto rights over key aspects of the business. For example, a minority shareholder could have 
veto rights over such issues as changes in the alliance’s purpose and scope, overall strategy, 
capital expenditures over a certain amount of money, key management promotions, salary in­
creases applying to individual managers or to the general employee population, the amount 
and timing of dividend payments, buyout conditions, and restructuring. Such veto rights 
may be given to minority shareholders in order to get a cash infusion or access to a critical 
resource such as proprietary software, brand name, or distribution channel.
The most successful JVs are those in which one party is responsible for most routine man­
agement decisions, with the other parties participating in decision making only when the 
issue is fundamental to the business alliance. The alliance agreement must define what issues 
are to be considered fundamental to the alliance and address how they are to be resolved, 
either by majority votes or by veto rights given to one or more of the parties. Operational 
control should be placed with the owner best able to manage the JV. The owner who has the 
largest equity share but not operational control is likely to insist on being involved in the 
operation of the business alliance by having a seat on the board of directors or steering com­
mittee as well as some of the veto rights mentioned earlier.
Distribution Issues
Such issues relate to dividend policies and how profits and losses are allocated among the 
owners. The dividend policy determines the cash return each partner should receive. How 
the cash flows of the venture will be divided generally depends on the initial equity contribu­
tion of each partner, ongoing equity contributions, and noncash contributions in the form of 
technical and managerial resources. Allocation of profits and losses normally follows directly 
from the allocation of shares or partnership interests.14
Performance Criteria
The lack of adequate performance-measurement criteria can result in significant disputes 
among the partners and eventually contribute to the termination of the venture. Perfor­
mance criteria should be both measurable and simple enough to be understood and used 
by the partners and managers at all levels and spelled out clearly in the business alliance 
agreement.
14When the profits come from intellectual property rights contributed by one of the parties, royalties may be used 
to compensate the party providing the property rights. When profits are attributable to distribution or marketing 
efforts of a partner, fees and commission can be used to compensate the partners. Similarly, rental payments can be 
used to allocate profits attributable to specific equipment or facilities contributed by a partner.

574	
15.  Business Alliances
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
Dispute Resolution
How disputes are resolved reflects the choice of law provision, the definition of what con­
stitutes an impasse, and the arbitration clause provided in the alliance agreement. The choice 
of law provision in the agreement indicates which state’s or country’s laws have jurisdiction 
in settling disputes. This provision should be drafted with an understanding of the likely 
outcome of litigation in any of the participants’ home countries or states and the attitude of 
these countries’ or states’ courts in enforcing choice-of-law provisions in the JV agreements. 
The deadlock or impasse clause defines events triggering dispute-resolution procedures. Such 
events should not be defined so narrowly that minor disagreements are subject to the dispute 
mechanism. Finally, an arbitration clause addresses disagreements by defining the type of dis­
pute subject to arbitration and how the arbitrator will be selected.
Revision
If one party to the agreement wishes to withdraw, the participants should have agreed in 
advance how the withdrawing party’s ownership interest would be divided among the re­
maining parties. Moreover, a product or technology may be developed that was not foreseen 
when the alliance first was conceived. The alliance agreement should indicate that the rights 
to manufacture and distribute the product or technology might be purchased by a specific 
alliance participant.
Termination
A business alliance may be terminated due to the completion of a project, successful opera­
tions resulting in merger of the partners, diverging partner objectives, or failure of the alliance 
to achieve stated objectives. Termination provisions in the alliance agreement should include 
buyout clauses enabling one party to purchase another’s ownership interests, prices of the 
buyout, and how assets and liabilities are to be divided if the venture fails or the partners elect 
to dissolve the operation. A JV may convert to a simple licensing arrangement, allowing the 
partner to leave without losing all benefits by purchasing rights to the product or technology.
Transfer of Interests
Alliance agreements often limit how and to whom parties to the agreements can transfer 
their interests. This is justified by noting that each party entered the agreement with the un­
derstanding of who its partners would be. In agreements that permit transfers under certain 
conditions, the partners or the JV itself may have right of first refusal (i.e., the party wishing to 
leave the JV first must offer its interests to other participants in the JV). Parties to the agree­
ment may have the right to “put” (or sell) their interests to the venture and the venture may 
have a call option (or right to purchase such interests). There also may be tag-along and drag-
along provisions, which have the effect of a third-party purchaser’s acquiring not only the 
interest of the JV party whose interest it seeks to acquire but also the interests of other parties. 
A drag-along provision requires a party not otherwise interested in selling its ownership inter­
est to the third party to do so. A tag-along provision gives a party to the alliance who was not 

	
Resolving Business Alliance Deal-Structuring Issues	
575
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
originally targeted by the third party the option to join the targeted party in selling its interest 
to the third party.
Taxes
The primary tax concerns of the JV partners are to avoid the recognition of taxable gains 
on the formation of the venture and to minimize taxes on the distribution of its earnings. In 
addition to the double taxation of dividends discussed earlier, the corporate structure may 
have other adverse tax consequences. If the partner owns less than 80% of the alliance, its 
share of the alliance’s results cannot be included in its consolidated income tax return. This 
has two effects. First, when earnings are distributed, they are subject to an intercorporate 
dividend tax, which can be 7% if the partner’s ownership interest in the venture is 20% or 
more. Second, losses of the business alliance cannot be used to offset other income earned by 
the participant. For tax purposes, the preferred alternative to a corporate legal structure is to 
use a pass-through legal structure, such as a LLC or a partnership.
A partnership can be structured in such a way that some partners receive a larger share 
of the profits, whereas others receive a larger share of the losses. This flexibility in tax plan­
ning is an important factor stimulating the use of partnerships and LLCs. These entities can 
allocate to each JV partner a portion of a particular class of revenue, income, gain, loss, or ex­
pense. Services provided to the JV, such as accounting, auditing, legal, human resource, and 
treasury services, are not viewed by the IRS as being “at risk” if the JV fails. The JV should pay 
prevailing market fees for such services; otherwise such services may be taxable.
Business entities may change their legal form when the tax rate differences are significant. 
For example, if corporate tax rates are reduced to 15% (i.e., US President Donald Trump’s 
proposal in early 2017) and personal tax rates were to remain at higher levels, corporations 
would have an incentive to change their legal form from pass-through entities to a corporate 
structure.
Management and Organizational Issues
Control of business alliances most often is accomplished through a steering committee, 
which has the ultimate authority for ensuring that the venture stays focused on the stra­
tegic objectives agreed to by the partners. To maintain good communication, coordination, 
and teamwork, the committee should meet at least monthly. The committee should provide 
operations managers with sufficient autonomy so that they can take responsibility for their 
actions and be rewarded for their initiative.
A common method of control is the majority–minority framework, which relies on identify­
ing a clearly dominant partner, usually the one having at least a 50.1% ownership stake. In 
this scenario, the equity, control, and distribution of rewards reflect the majority–minority 
relationship. This type of structure promotes the ability to make rapid corrections, defines 
who is in charge, and is most appropriate for high-risk ventures, where quick decisions often 
are required. The major disadvantage of this approach is that the minority partner may feel 
powerless and become passive or alienated.
Another method of control is the equal division of power framework, which usually means 
that equity is split equally. This assumes that the initial contribution, distribution, decision 

576	
15.  Business Alliances
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
making, and control are split equally. This approach helps keep the partners actively engaged 
in the management of the venture. It is best suited for partners sharing a strong common vi­
sion for the venture and possessing similar corporate cultures. However, the approach can 
lead to deadlocks and the eventual dissolution of the alliance.
Under the majority rules framework, the equity distribution may involve three partners. 
Two of the partners have large equal shares, whereas the third partner may have less than 
10%. The minority partner is used to break deadlocks. This approach enables the primary 
partners to remain engaged in the enterprise without stalemating the decision-making 
process.
In the multiple party framework, no partner has control; instead, control resides with the 
management of the venture. Consequently, decision making can be nimble and made by 
those who understand the issues best. This framework is well suited for international ven­
tures, where a country’s laws may prohibit a foreign firm from having a controlling interest 
in a domestic firm. It is common for a domestic company to own the majority of the equity 
but for the operational control of the venture to reside with the foreign partner. In addition to 
a proportional split of the dividends paid, the foreign company may receive additional pay­
ments in the form of management fees and bonuses.
Regulatory Restrictions and Notifications
JVs may be subject to Hart–Scott–Rodino filing requirements because the parties to the JV 
are viewed as acquirers and the JV as a target. For JVs between competitors, to get regulatory 
approval, competitors should be able to do something together that they could not do alone. 
Competitors can be relatively confident that a partnership will be acceptable to regulators 
if, in combination, they control no more than 20% of the market. Project-oriented ventures 
are looked at most favorably. Collaborative research is encouraged, particularly when the 
research is shared among all the parties to the alliance. Alliances among competitors are likely 
to spark a review by the regulators because they have the potential to result in price fixing 
and dividing up the market.
EMPIRICAL FINDINGS
Reflecting their flexibility and relatively low capital requirements, business alliances are 
popular ways to implement business strategies. Under the right conditions, alliances can gen­
erate significant abnormal financial returns. Empirical evidence shows that JVs and strategic 
alliances often create value for their participants, with average announcement-date positive 
abnormal returns varying from 1 to 3%.15 There is some evidence that JVs involving financial 
services firms are more likely to show positive abnormal returns than strategic alliances, be­
cause they often result in a separate legal entity enabling a greater degree of integration and 
synergy realization.16
15Das et al. (1998), Johnson et al. (2000), and Kale et al. (2002).
16Amici et al. (2013).

	
Empirical Findings	
577
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
Partners in JVs who are in the same industry (horizontal JVs) tend to share equally in 
wealth creation. The wealth increase is often much greater for horizontal alliances involving 
the transfer of technical knowledge than for nontechnical alliances.17 For vertical JVs, suppli­
ers experience a greater portion of the wealth created.18 Firms with greater alliance experi­
ence enjoy a greater likelihood of success and greater wealth creation than those with little 
experience.19
Strategic alliances can have a salutary effect on the share prices of their suppliers and cus­
tomers and a negative impact on the share prices of competitors. For alliances created to share 
technologies or develop new technical capabilities, suppliers benefit from increased sales to 
the alliance and customers benefit from using the enhanced technology developed by the alli­
ance in their products. Competitors’ share prices decline due to lost sales and earnings to the 
alliance.20 Despite rapid growth in part reflecting a loosening of antitrust regulatory policies,21 
a majority of all business alliances fail to meet expectations.22
Alliances may also increase firm value by alleviating agency conflicts. For example, in 
highly diversified firms, operating mangers know that future capital allocations made by se­
nior management will depend on the relative performance of investment projects undertaken 
among the various business units. Such managers may be less committed to implementing 
a project if they feel there is a significant chance that it will not be adequately funded due to 
limitations on the future availability of capital. Projects involving alliances that contractually 
commit the firm to making future capital investments may provide an incentive for operating 
managers to be more fully committed to their eventual success. In addition, firms capable of 
good governance practices such as treating diverse stakeholder interests fairly also may be 
better able to mitigate agency issues between alliance partners as dominant alliance partners 
are more likely to agree to a more equal sharing of power with other partners.23
While there is substantial evidence that business alliances can create shareholder value 
for the participating firms, bondholders also benefit. JVs and strategic alliances have been 
documented to realize positive abnormal returns for bondholders of almost 1%.24 Why? Be­
cause they alleviate cash constraints when partners contribute cash or make a loan or when 
the alliance has sufficient assets to serve as collateral to borrow on its own. Sometimes this 
may require the alliance partners to guarantee the loan. Synergy between partners to the al­
liance or JV also reduces costs and increases operating cash flow to cover the repayment of 
interest and principal. Finally, JVs and alliances often provide an array of “real” options (see 
Chapter 8) giving the participants the flexibility to manage the rate at which they invest in the 
JV and conditions defined in the alliance agreement under which they can exit.
17Das et al. (1998).
18Johnson et al. (2000).
19Kale et al. (2002).
20Chang (2008).
21Robinson (2002a).
22Klein (2004) reports that 55% of alliances fall apart within 3 years of their formation.
23Bodnaruk et al. (2013).
24Chen et al. (2015).

578	
15.  Business Alliances
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
SOME THINGS TO REMEMBER
Business alliances may offer attractive alternatives to M&As. Motivations for alliances in­
clude risk sharing, access to new markets, new-product introduction, technology sharing, 
globalization, a desire to acquire (or exit) a business, and the perception that they are often 
more acceptable to regulators than M&As. Business alliances may assume a variety of legal 
structures: corporate, LLCs, partnership, franchise, equity partnership, and written contract. 
Key deal-structuring issues include the alliance’s scope, duration, legal form, governance, 
and control mechanism.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
15.1	 What is a LLC? What are its advantages and disadvantages?
15.2	 Why is defining the scope of a business alliance important?
15.3	 Discuss ways of valuing tangible and intangible contributions to a JV.
15.4	 What are the advantages and disadvantages of the various organizational structures 
that could be used to manage a business alliance?
15.5	 What are the common reasons for the termination of a business alliance?
15.6	 Google invested $1 billion for a 5% stake in America Online as part of a partnership 
that expands the firm’s existing search engine deal to include collaboration on advertis­
ing, instant messaging, and video. Under the deal, Google would have the customary 
rights afforded a minority investor. What rights or terms do you believe Google would 
have negotiated in this transaction? What rights do you believe AOL might want?
15.7	 Conoco Phillips announced the purchase of 7.6% of Lukoil’s (a largely government-
owned Russian oil and gas company) stock for $2.36 billion during a government 
auction of Lukoil’s stock. Conoco would have one seat on Lukoil’s board. As a minor­
ity investor, how could Conoco protect its interests?
15.8	 J&J sued Amgen over their 14-year alliance to sell a blood-enhancing treatment called 
erythropoietin. The partners ended up squabbling over sales rights and a spin-off 
drug and could not agree on future products for the JV. Amgen won the right in 
arbitration to sell a chemically similar medicine that can be taken weekly rather than 
daily. What could these companies have done before forming the alliance to have 
mitigated the problems that arose after the alliance was formed? Why do you believe 
they may have avoided addressing these issues at the outset?
15.9	 GM, a United States–based global auto manufacturer, agreed to purchase 20% of Japan’s 
Fuji Heavy Industries, Ltd., the manufacturer of Subaru vehicles, for $1.4 billion. Why 
do you believe that GM initially may have wanted to limit its investment to 20%?
15.10	 Through its alliance with Best Buy, Microsoft is selling its products—including Mi­
crosoft Network (MSN) Internet access services and handheld devices, such as digital 
telephones, handheld organizers, and WebTV, that connect to the web—through kiosks 
in Best Buy’s 354 stores nationwide. In exchange, Microsoft has invested $200 million in 
Best Buy. What do you believe were the motivations for this strategic alliance?
Answers to these Discussion Questions are available in the Online Instructor’s Manual for 
instructors using this book (https://textbooks.elsevier.com/web/Manuals.aspx?isbn=9780128016091).

	
Discussion Questions	
579
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
END OF CHAPTER CASE STUDY: GENERAL MOTORS HEDGES 
ITS BETS WITH AN INVESTMENT IN RIDE-HAILING FIRM LYFT
Case Study Objectives: To Illustrate How Business Alliances Can
•	 Manage risk
•	 Leverage financial and nonfinancial resources
In an era in which rapid changes in technologies are reshaping the long-standing business mod­
els of most companies, senior managers find themselves having to gaze into the future to anticipate 
rather than simply react to market changes. The automotive industry is no exception. Those that 
will survive long term must make educated guesses about what lies ahead in terms of how people 
will chose private versus public modes of transportation. While the latter has long represented an 
alternative in areas of high population density, new trends are emerging that represent both a threat 
and an opportunity to the traditional passenger vehicle.
Among the economic and social developments likely to impact the mode of transportation in 
high-density affluent areas is the advent of autonomous (or self-driving) cars and ride-hailing ser­
vices (like Uber and Lyft).25 Consequently, both firms within the car manufacturing industry and 
major technology companies are seeking ways to exploit changes in the giant automotive transpor­
tation market. Ride-hailing companies using autonomous driving car technology have the potential 
to substantially erode consumers’ desire to own motor vehicles, particularly in urban areas, and in 
turn to reduce automakers’ sales and profits.
Automotive executives are keenly aware of the potential for ride-hailing services to reduce the 
demand for owning or leasing cars in urban areas. However, opportunities for automakers do exist. 
Even if the industry’s passenger car sales decline, the number of miles driven by cars can actually 
increase as cars remain the preferred mode of transportation nationwide. Car companies see the 
potential to offer paid services to take advantage of all the miles driven by the current fleet of cars, 
which in the United States exceeds 100 million vehicles. Such paid services could provide a signifi­
cant source of future income in addition to the more traditional sale of cars and replacement parts.
The future may consist of company-owned autonomous cars constantly shuttling people back 
and forth rather than simply cars owned by individuals remaining in garages or parking lots a large 
percentage of each day. Car companies with paid mobility services see themselves earning money 
on the number of miles driven rather than simply on the actual sale of cars. In recognition of this 
emerging trend, Ford announced in 2015 that it was increasingly thinking of itself as a mobility 
company rather than an automotive company.
The growing popularity among consumers of ride-hailing indeed portends a major paradigm shift 
in the way we travel. But the capital requirements to make it happen are proving to be huge. Uber 
has been unable to sustain its rapid growth through internal financing. In mid-2016, Uber announced 
publicly plans to raise billions of dollars from investors and creditors. Smaller competitors such as 
Lyft acutely aware of the amount of capital required to compete with Uber pursued various options 
ranging from partnerships to seeking minority investors to sale of the business.
25Firms like Uber and Lyft often referred to themselves as ride-sharing services. Others prefer to use the term 
ride-hailing services. In practice, most of what Uber and Lyft provide to users is the ability to hail a private car 
using a mobile phone app. In most instances, you are not actually sharing a ride with other paying customers. 
Consequently, in this case study, firms like Uber and Lyft are referred to as ride-hailing services.

580	
15.  Business Alliances
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
After having tried unsuccessfully to sell itself to GM, Apple, Google, Amazon, Uber, and 
Chinese ride-hailing firm Didi Chuxing, United States–based Lyft Inc. initiated a new round of 
funding in early 2016 raising more than $1 billion. This included a $500 million investment by 
GM. Other investors in the equity offering included Saudi Arabia’s Kingdom Holding Co., Janus 
Capital Management LLC, and Japanese e-commerce firm Rakuten. The financing valued Lyft at 
$5.5 billion, more than double its valuation in its prior financing round in early 2015.
The deal marks the first time a major car maker has joined with a ride-hailing company. GM and 
Ford are among a cadre of car makers interested in developing their own “alternative” autonomous 
driving capabilities either alone or in partnership with other firms. This comes at a time when large 
technology firms including Uber, Alphabet (Google’s parent), and Apple Inc. are seeking to increase 
their role in the personal transportation market.
Founded in 2012, Lyft helped promote the popularity of the ride-hailing craze in the United States. 
Lyft users can summon a private car using a mobile phone app. Lyft says it now completes 7 million 
rides per month across more than 190 cities in the United States. In October, it announced an annual 
gross run rate (total bookings through the Lyft app, before the driver’s commission) of $1 billion.
Despite the new round of funding in early 2016, Lyft has only a fraction of the capital available to 
its larger competitor, Uber, which has raised more than $13 billion, six times more than Lyft. More­
over, Uber, which is also developing its own autonomous-vehicle technology, is valued at $64.6 
billion, a figure larger than GM’s $53 billion market value. To leverage its relatively limited financial 
resources, Lyft has been working to catch up to Uber by teaming up with ride-hailing competitors 
in Asia like Kuaidi, Ola, and GrabTaxi to expand. It has also struck deals with major brands like 
Starbucks and pop stars like Justin Bieber to broaden its appeal. Lyft also teamed with Hertz to offer 
rental cars to drivers who do not own vehicles, and it has reached an agreement with Shell Oil that 
gives gasoline discounts to Lyft drivers in a handful of cities.
By investing in Lyft, GM also gets a seat on Lyft’s board to gain influence on Lyft’s decisions. 
While it’s too early to say whether it will be taking a hands-on role, GM’s investment in Lyft is a big 
step beyond the in-house R&D that many automakers have been pouring into vehicle automation. 
In the short term, the partnership will look similar to one Lyft already has with Hertz. That is, GM 
will establish rental hubs around the country that will make vehicles owned by GM available to Lyft 
drivers on a short-term rental basis.
The longer-term vision for the partnership is that the two companies can combine GM’s experience 
in manufacturing and autonomous technology with Lyft’s mobile software and infrastructure to create a 
self-driving car network that might be cheaper and more ubiquitous than any existing ride-hailing busi­
ness models. Such a network would be similar to the way Uber and Lyft operate today. Each offers a fleet 
of cars that respond to a request from a consumer’s mobile phone request. However, the key difference 
would be the use of autonomous driving cars to replace drivers and slash labor costs while improving 
productivity by allowing a company to keep cars in service constantly. In concept, a company owning 
the proprietary technology from the artificial intelligence to make the network function efficiently to car 
manufacturing to consumer software and fleet ownership could have a huge advantage over other play­
ers. How? Owning all aspects of the network improves the likelihood they are operationally compatible.
GM has been developing its own autonomous car technology for several years in anticipation of 
launching a fleet of self-driving Chevrolet Volt plug-in hybrid cars. The investment in Lyft will pro­
vide GM with a practical means of understanding the ride-hailing market and offers an important 
platform for generating fees for the firm by facilitating a more cost-efficient car sharing network. It 
also gives GM an extra market for its vehicles. For Lyft, GM’s support includes more than financial 

	
Discussion Questions	
581
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
backing. As part of the investment, GM and Lyft will work on developing an on-demand network 
of self-driving cars, an area of research that companies like Google, Tesla, and Uber have all devoted 
enormous resources to in recent years.
While the proposed network has considerable conceptual appeal, there are numerous roadblocks 
that must be overcome: some regulatory, some technical, some human behavior, and some cultural. 
Regulatory considerations entail concerns about the safety of autonomous driving cars and the 
potential for liability. In late 2015, California passed legislation requiring a driver to be behind the 
wheel of a self-driving vehicle at all times. This would preclude the labor cost reduction presumed 
in the GM–Lyft network concept. Like any new technology, it is likely to take years for consumers to 
accept the driverless car concept putting the realization of the proposed network years into the fu­
ture. Finally, the behemoth GM has a large and often ponderous bureaucracy as compared to Lyft’s. 
Lyft’s corporate culture is more likely to reflect nimbleness and informality in contrast to GM’s more 
structured and risk-averse way of decision making.
GM’s $500 million interest in Lyft is the single largest direct investment by an auto manufac­
turer into a ride-hailing company in the United States. But it is by no means the first attempt to 
partner with others to tap into the ride-hailing market. In 2011, GM teamed up with RelayRides, 
a website that lets GM car owners rent out their idle vehicles. Ford reached a similar agreement 
with Getaround. Daimler has been experimenting with Car2Go, a Zipcar-like service26 that offers 
Daimler smart car rentals in urban areas like Brooklyn, Berlin, and Toronto.
What began as a race to turn driverless cars into a form of mainstream transportation is now moving 
on to its next stage. This is occurring even before the first stage has been completed. This next stage is a 
business model based on personal mobility in which consumers have instant access to cars you don’t have 
to own. Will the shift to autonomously driven car networks hurt GM’s traditional business? GM argues 
it will not as it represents a broadening of the choices for consumers not wanting to own their own cars. 
It is viewed as complementary to its core car manufacturing business: GM can generate a revenue stream 
by owning a ride-hailing operation as well as by selling cars to those who choose to own them. GM notes 
that the most profitable part of its business has been for years its truck and SUV business whose sales are 
made primarily to people living in less densely populated areas. In contrast, ride-hailing/sharing is likely 
to be mostly an urban phenomenon and offers a new revenue stream for the company.
Discussion Questions
1.	 What alternatives to a partnership with Lyft did GM have? Why was a partnership selected as 
the means of implementing the firm’s strategy to enter the ride-hailing business?
2.	 Who do you believe benefited most from the partnership (GM or Lyft) and why?
3.	 In addition to risk sharing, what other motivations existed for GM and Lyft to partner?
4.	 Speculate as to why GM invested in Lyft rather than other ride-hailing services such as Uber?
5.	 Of the risk factors mentioned in the case study, which do you believe is the most likely to 
prevent the realization of the partnership’s vision of achieving a car-hailing network of 
autonomous driving cars? Explain your answer.
Solutions to these case study questions are found in the Online Instructor’s Manual for instructors using 
this book (https://textbooks.elsevier.com/web/Manuals.aspx?isbn=9780128016091).
26Zipcar is an American-owned subsidiary of Avis Budget Group, which provides automobile reservations to its 
members, billable by the hour or day. Zipcar members pay a monthly or annual membership fee in addition to car 
reservation charges.

582	
15.  Business Alliances
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
A D D I T I O N A L  C A S E  S T U D Y  R E C O M M E N D AT I O N S 
( S E A R C H  H A RVA R D  B U S I N E S S  S C H O O L 
P U B L I S H I N G  S I T E  B Y  N A M E  O F  C A S E : 
h b s p . h a r v a r d . e d u )
Alliance Management at Forbes Marshall, 
Naga Lakshmi Damaraju, Harshdeep Singh, 
January 20, 2012, Source: Ivey Publishing, 
Product Number: W11618-PDF-ENG, hbsp.
harvard.edu.
Subjects Covered: Joint Ventures, 
Managing Business Alliances, Value Chains.
Lisco Acquisition of a Minority Interest of 
Orion, Richard Howard and Kimberley 
Howard, Revision Date: May 15, 2013, 
Product Number: W13232-PDF-ENG, hbsp.
harvard.edu.
Subjects Covered: Minority Investments, 
Valuation, Cross-Border Deals, 
Entrepreneurship.
Innovation Without Walls: Alliance 
Management at Eli Lilly and Company, 
Charles Dhanaraj, Marjorie Lyles, YuPeng 
Lai, Publication Date: April 25, 2007, Product 
Number: 907M15-PDF-ENG, Source: Ivey 
Publishing, hbsp.harvard.edu.
Subjects Covered: Managing Alliances, 
Business Strategy, International Business.
CIBC Mellon: Managing a Cross-Border Joint 
Venture, Paul W. Beamish, Michael Sartor, 
Publication Date: October 8, 2010, Product 
Number: 910M91-PDF-ENG, Source: Ivey 
Publishing, hbsp.harvard.edu.
Subjects Covered: Joint Ventures, Risk 
Management, Decision-Making.

C H A P T E R
583
Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring Activities. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-801609-1.00016-6
Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
16
Alternative Exit and 
Restructuring Strategies
Divestitures, Spin-Offs, Carve-Outs, 
Split-Offs, and Tracking Stocks
O U T L I N E
Inside M&A: General Electric 
Returns to its Industrial Roots	
584
Chapter Overview	
585
Why DO Firms Exit Businesses?	
586
Increasing Corporate Focus	
586
Underperforming Businesses	
587
Regulatory Concerns	
587
Lack of Fit	
587
Tax Considerations	
587
Raising Funds	
587
Worth More to Others	
588
Risk Reduction	
588
Discarding Unwanted Businesses 
from Prior Acquisitions	
588
Avoiding Conflicts with Customers	
588
Increasing Transparency	
588
Divestitures	
589
Motives for Divestitures	
589
Corporate Portfolio Reviews	
589
To Sell or Not to Sell	
589
Timing of the Sale	
591
The Selling Process	
591
Choosing the Right Selling Process	
592
Tax and Accounting Considerations 
for Divestitures	
596
Spin-Offs	
596
Motives for Spin-Offs	
597
Tax and Accounting Considerations 
for Spin-Offs	
597
Equity Carve-Outs	
599
Motives for Equity Carve-Outs	
599
Initial Public Offerings and Subsidiary 
Equity Carve-Outs	
599
Tax and Accounting Considerations 
for Equity Carve-Outs	
600
Split-Offs and Split-Ups	
601
Motives for Split-Offs	
602
Cash-Rich Split-Offs	
602
Spin-Offs Combined With M&A 
Transactions	
604

584	
16.  ALTERNATIVE EXIT AND RESTRUCTURING STRATEGIES
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
Experience is the name everyone gives to their mistakes —Oscar Wilde
INSIDE M&A: GENERAL ELECTRIC RETURNS 
TO ITS INDUSTRIAL ROOTS
KEY POINTS
•	 Firms often restructure to realign their business focus.
•	 Restructuring strategies can range from divestitures to spin-offs to split-offs of unwanted 
businesses.
•	 Companies interested in divesting specific operating units often undertake “controlled 
auctions” to minimize disruption to the business.
As part of GE’s strategy to focus the conglomerate on its industrial businesses, the firm 
announced in late 2015 that it had sold the bulk of its private equity lending business to the 
Canada Pension Plan Investment Board (CPPIB) for $12 billion. Known within GE as the 
Financial Sponsor Group (FSG), FSG finances leveraged buyouts. FSG consists of Antares 
Capital (a private equity lender) and a $3 billion bank loan portfolio. The unit for years had 
been considered a “crown jewel” within GE’s financial services business. Under the terms 
of the deal, Antares Capital will retain its name and operate as a standalone business within 
Tracking, Targeted, and Letter Stocks	
604
Motives for Tracking Stocks	
605
Tax and Accounting Considerations 
for Tracking Stocks	
605
Problems with Tracking Stocks	
606
Restructuing Implementation Issues	
606
What Stays and What Goes	
606
Target Capital Structure	
607
Allocation of Nonlong-Term 
Debt Liabilities	
607
Solvency	
607
Board Governance	
608
Human Resource Management	
608
Key Restructure Legal Documents	
608
Separation and Distribution Agreement	
609
Transition Agreement	
609
Tax Matters Agreement	
609
Comparing Alternative Exit and 
Restructuring Strategies	
609
Choosing Among Divestiture, 
Carve-Out, and Spin-Off 
Restructuring Strategies	
610
Determinants of Returns to 
Shareholders Resulting From 
Restructuring Strategies	
611
Preannouncement Abnormal Returns	
612
Post-Carve-Out and Post-Spin-Off 
Returns to Shareholders	
617
Some Things to Remember	
618
Chapter Discussion Questions	
618
Case Study: The Anatomy of a 
Reverse Morris Trust Transaction—
The Coty Cosmetics Saga 	
619
Key Points	
619
Chapter Discussion Questions	
620
Additional Case Study 
Recommendations	
622

	
Chapter Overview	
585
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
CPPIB. The sale represents a substantial part of GE’s campaign to withdraw from its financial 
services arm known as GE Capital.
GE had relied on profits generated by GE Capital for the bulk of its earnings growth for 
more than 3 decades. However, since the financial crisis surrounding the 2007–09 recession, 
which savaged the conglomerate’s profits, and the increase in regulation of financial services 
firms, GE’s CEO Jeffrey Immelt has moved to restructure the firm. The goal was to create a 
“simpler, more valuable company” focused on its less opaque industrial operations. GE ex­
pects to retain only financial services businesses that are closely related to its core industrial 
businesses such as equipment leasing or financing, which often helps in selling large pieces of 
industrial equipment. Investors welcomed the move by bidding up its shares.
GE had a number of bidders in its “controlled auction” for FSG in which it approached 
potential buyers to determine if they were interested in participating in the bidding process. 
GE utilized this method in order to include only firms likely to realize synergy if they were 
to acquire FSG and firms which were perceived as qualified buyers (i.e., those with the finan­
cial ability to pay what GE believed was a fair price). Moreover, GE was not interested in a 
lengthy process involving numerous bidders conducting exhaustive due diligence on FSG for 
fear that key employees might leave for competitors during a lengthy auction process.
The deal appeared to satisfy key strategic objectives for both the seller and buyer of FSG. 
For GE, the sale represented a significant step in exiting much of its financial services group. 
For CPPIB, the acquisition enabled it to become a major lender to buyout firms that are invest­
ing in midsize US businesses. The pension fund has been increasingly active in private-equity 
investing and ranks as one of the most aggressive private equity lenders today. As a pension 
fund, CPPIB is focused on investments that generate steady returns over the long term to help 
fund its future pension obligations. The GE loan portfolio aligns with that goal by providing 
it with a bigger source of recurring interest rate income from the outstanding loans, and An­
tares Capital provides the infrastructure to increase substantially its origination of new loans.
CPPIB, which invests the retirement funds of 18 million Canadians, won the bidding for 
GE’s private-equity lending business by substantially outbidding such well-regarded private 
equity firms as Apollo Global Management and KKR. The Canadian pension board’s ability 
to harness the predictable flow of funds it receives from the country’s workers has enabled it 
to have a substantial advantage over rival bidders to win big deals in real estate and private 
equity. Unlike US pension funds, CFPPIB’s strategy involves more direct investing rather than 
hiring private equity funds to invest on their behalf. In doing so, CFPPIB will save millions of 
dollars in fees paid to third party private equity funds.
CHAPTER OVERVIEW
In recent years, many firms have mirrored General Electric’s efforts to move away from 
managing a complex, diverse set of businesses to a coherent business portfolio more easily un­
derstood by investors. Most businesses, particularly large, highly diversified organizations, 
are constantly looking for ways in which they can enhance shareholder value by changing 
the composition of their assets, liabilities, equity, and operations. These activities generally 
are referred to as restructuring strategies. Restructuring may embody both growth strategies 
and exit strategies. Growth strategies have been discussed elsewhere in this book. The focus 

586	
16.  ALTERNATIVE EXIT AND RESTRUCTURING STRATEGIES
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
in this chapter is on those strategic options allowing the firm to maximize shareholder value 
by redeploying assets through downsizing or refocusing the parent company. As such, this 
chapter discusses the myriad motives for existing businesses, the various restructuring strate­
gies for doing so, and why firms select one strategy over other options.
In this context, equity carve-outs, spin-offs, divestitures, and split-offs are discussed 
separately rather than as a specialized form of a carve-out.1 The chapter concludes with a 
discussion of what empirical studies say are the primary determinants of financial returns 
to shareholders resulting from undertaking the various restructuring strategies. Voluntary 
and involuntary restructuring and reorganization (both inside and outside the protection 
of bankruptcy court) also represent exit strategies for firms and are discussed in detail in 
Chapter  17. A review of Chapter  16 (including practice questions with answers) is avail­
able in the file folder entitled “Student Study Guide” on the companion website to this book 
(https://www.elsevier.com/books-and-journals/book-companion/9780128016091).
WHY DO FIRMS EXIT BUSINESSES?
Theories abound as to why corporations choose to exit certain businesses. While not an 
exhaustive list, some of the most common are discussed next.
Increasing Corporate Focus
Managing highly diverse and complex portfolios of businesses is both time consuming 
and distracting and may result in funding those businesses with relatively unattractive in­
vestment opportunities with cash flows generated by units offering more favorable oppor­
tunities. Firms often choose to simplify their business portfolio by focusing on those units 
with the highest growth potential and by exiting those businesses that are not germane to the 
firm’s core business strategy. Increasing focus often improves firm value by allocating lim­
ited resources better and by reducing competition for such resources within multidivisional 
firms.2 CEOs managing firms with numerous diverse businesses are more likely to exit those 
businesses in industries in which they have less experience.3 Moreover, new CEOs are more 
likely to engage in restructuring but the scale and scope of the change tends to differ if the 
new CEO comes from within the firm rather than is an outsider. While new inside CEOs tend 
to sell more businesses (usually those not meeting the firm’s profit targets), they often refrain 
from radically altering the firm’s current business strategy, perhaps because they played a 
key role in developing the strategy. In contrast, new outside CEOs sell fewer businesses and 
tend to exit those that are unrelated.4
1In some accounting texts, divestitures (referred to as sell-offs), spin-offs, and split-offs are all viewed as different 
forms of equity carve-outs and discussed in terms of how they affect the parent firm’s shareholders’ equity for 
financial-reporting purposes. Alternatively, some analysts describe these restructuring activities as separation strat­
egies in which the parent is able to separate from itself all or a portion of an operating business.
2Fulghieri and Sevilir, 2011.
3Huang, 2014.
4Chiu et al., 2016.

	
Why DO Firms Exit Businesses?	
587
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
Underperforming Businesses
Parent firms often exit businesses failing to meet or exceed the parent’s hurdle-rate require­
ments. Amid plummeting readership and advertising revenues, Gannet, Tribune Company, 
and E.W. Scripps, firms that had historically grown as print newspapers but which had ex­
panded into other forms of media, dumped in 2015 their print businesses through a series of 
spin-offs. That same year, in the wake of softening commodity prices, global metals, and min­
ing company BHP Billion spun off underperforming assets that contributed only 4% of the 
consolidated firm’s profitability. The spinoff essentially undid the 2001 merger that created 
the global commodities firm.
Regulatory Concerns
A firm with substantial market share purchasing a direct competitor may create antitrust 
concerns. The combination of such firms may be viewed as anticompetitive if the combined 
firms’ market share exceeds some threshold. Regulatory agencies still may approve the merg­
er if the acquirer divests some of its operations, the target’s, or some combination of the two, 
in order to establish other competitors in the industry.
Lack of Fit
Synergies anticipated by the parent among its businesses may not materialize. TRW’s deci­
sion to sell its commercial and consumer information services businesses came after years of 
trying to find a significant fit with its space and defense businesses.
Tax Considerations
Tax benefits may be realized through a restructuring of the business. Nursing home op­
erator Sun Healthcare Systems (Sun) contributed its nursing home real estate operations to 
a Real Estate Investment Trust (REIT) in 2010 through a spin-off. Because REITs do not pay 
taxes on income that is distributed to shareholders, Sun was able to enhance shareholder 
value by eliminating the double taxation of income, once by the parent and again by inves­
tors when dividends are paid. For these reasons, shareholders celebrated American retailer 
Sears Holdings by driving up its share price by 31% in late 2014 when the firm announced the 
creation of a REIT to hold its real estate assets.
Raising Funds
Parent firms may choose to fund new initiatives or reduce leverage or other financial 
obligations through the sale or partial sale of units no longer considered strategic. Pres­
sured by activist shareholders, Chesapeake Energy Group announced in 2012 its intention 
to sell $11.5 billion to $14 billion in assets to reduce its leverage. Tobacco giant Reynolds 
American acquired its smaller rival Lorillard in late 2014 for $27.4 billion, selling specific 
product lines at closing for $7.1 billion to the Imperial Tobacco Group to help finance 
the deal.

588	
16.  ALTERNATIVE EXIT AND RESTRUCTURING STRATEGIES
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
Worth More to Others
Others may view a firm’s operating assets as much more valuable than the parent firm. 
In early 2017, tool maker Stanley Black & Decker acquired financially ailing retailer Sears’ 
Craftsman tool trademark for $900 million (including $250 million in future payments). 
Sears expects to use the proceeds to augment working capital and reduce indebtedness 
while Stanley intends to expand sales in the United States under the widely recognized 
Craftsman brand.
Risk Reduction
A firm may reduce risk associated with a unit by selling or spinning-off the business. For 
example, major tobacco companies have been under pressure for years to divest or spin off 
their food businesses because of the litigation risk associated with their tobacco subsidiaries. 
Altria bowed to such pressure in 2007 with the spin-off of its Kraft Food operations.
Discarding Unwanted Businesses from Prior Acquisitions
Acquirers often find themselves with certain target firm assets that do not fit their primary 
strategy. These redundant assets may be divested to raise funds to help pay for the acquisition 
and to enable management to focus on integrating the remaining businesses into the parent 
without the distraction of having to manage nonstrategic assets. When Northrop Grumman 
acquired TRW, it announced it would retain TRW’s space and defense businesses and divest 
operations not germane to Northrop’s core defense business. Nestlé acquired Adams, Pfizer’s 
chewing gum and confectionery business, in early for $4.6 billion, which Pfizer viewed as a 
noncore business acquired as part of its acquisition of Warner–Lambert in 2000.
Avoiding Conflicts with Customers
For years, many of the regional Bell operating companies (i.e., RBOCs) that AT&T spun 
off in 1984 have been interested in competing in the long-distance market, which would put 
them in direct competition with their former parent. Similarly, AT&T sought to penetrate 
the regional telephone markets by gaining access to millions of households by acquiring ca­
ble TV companies. In preparation for the implementation of these plans, AT&T announced 
in 1995 that it would divide the company into three publicly traded global companies, to 
avoid conflicts between AT&T’s former equipment manufacturer and its main customers, 
the RBOCs.
Increasing Transparency
Firms may be opaque to investors due to their diverse operations. General Electric is an 
example, operating dozens of separate businesses in many countries. Even with access to 
financial and competitive information on each business, it is challenging for any analyst or 
investor to value properly such a diversified firm. By reducing its complexity, a firm may 
make it easier for investors to assess accurately its true value.

	
Divestitures	
589
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
DIVESTITURES
A divestiture is the sale of a portion of a firm’s assets to an outside party, generally result­
ing in a cash infusion to the parent. Such assets may include a product line, a subsidiary, or 
a division.
Motives for Divestitures
Divestitures often represent a way of raising cash. A firm may choose to sell an underval­
ued or underperforming operation that it determined to be nonstrategic or unrelated to the 
core business and to use the proceeds of the sale to fund investments in potentially higher-
return opportunities, including paying off debt. Alternatively, the firm may choose to divest 
the undervalued business and return the cash to shareholders through either a liquidating 
dividend5 or share repurchase. Moreover, an operating unit may simply be worth more if sold 
than if retained by the parent.
Corporate Portfolio Reviews
A parent firm conducts a financial analysis to determine if its businesses are worth more 
to shareholders if sold and the proceeds returned to the shareholders or reinvested in more 
profitable opportunities. Comparing the future of certain businesses with other opportuni­
ties, GE has completed transactions valued at more than $250 billion in buying and selling 
various operating units since Jeffrey Immelt became CEO in 2001.
To Sell or Not to Sell
An analysis undertaken to determine if a business should be sold involves a multistep 
process. These steps include determining the after-tax cash flows generated by the unit, an 
appropriate discount rate reflecting the risk of the business, the after-tax market value of 
the business, and the after-tax value of the business to the parent. The decision to sell or 
retain the business depends on a comparison of the after-tax value of the business to the 
parent with the after-tax proceeds from the sale of the business. These steps are outlined in 
more detail next.
Step 1: Calculating After-Tax Cash Flows
To decide if a business is worth more to the shareholder if sold, the parent must first esti­
mate the after-tax cash flows of the business viewed on a stand-alone basis. This requires ad­
justing the cash flows for intercompany sales and the cost of services (e.g., legal, treasury, and 
audit) provided by the parent. Intercompany sales refer to operating unit revenue generated by 
selling products or services to another unit owned by the same parent. Intercompany sales 
5A liquidating dividend is a type of payment made by a corporation to its shareholders during its partial or full 
liquidation. They represent a return of capital to shareholders since such payments exceed the firm’s net income 
and as a return of capital are typically not taxable to shareholders. This distinguishes a liquidating dividend from 
regular dividends, which are issued from the company’s operating profits or retained earnings.

590	
16.  ALTERNATIVE EXIT AND RESTRUCTURING STRATEGIES
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
should be restated to ensure they are valued at market prices.6 Moreover, services provided 
by the parent to the business may be subsidized or at a markup over actual cost. Operating 
profits should be reduced by the amount of any subsidies and increased by any markup over 
what the business would have to pay if it purchased comparable services outside of the par­
ent firm.
Step 2: Estimating the Discount Rate
Once cash flows have been determined, a discount rate should be estimated that reflects 
the risk characteristics of the industry in which the business competes. The cost of capital of 
other firms in the same industry (or firms in other industries exhibiting similar profitability, 
growth, and risk characteristics) is often a good proxy for the discount rate of the business 
being analyzed.
Step 3: Estimating the After-Tax Market Value of the Business
The discount rate from Step 2 then is used to estimate the market value of the projected 
after-tax cash flows of the business determined in Step 1. Step 3 also requires the estimation 
of an appropriate terminal value for the business (see Chapter 7).
Step 4: Estimating the Value of the Business to the Parent
The after-tax equity value (EV) of the business as part of the parent is estimated by sub­
tracting the market value of the business’s liabilities (L) from its after-tax market value (MV) 
as a stand-alone operation. This relationship can be expressed as follows:
=
−L
EV
MV
EV is a measure of the after-tax market value of the shareholder equity of the business, 
where the shareholder is the parent firm.
Step 5: Deciding to Sell
The decision to sell or retain the business is made by comparing the EV with the after-tax 
sale value (SV) of the business. Assuming other considerations do not outweigh any after-tax 
gain on the sale of the business, the decision to sell or retain can be summarized as follows:
If SV > EV, divest.
If SV < EV, retain.
Although the sale value may exceed the equity value of the business, the parent may choose 
to retain the business for strategic reasons. The parent may believe that the business’s products 
facilitate the sale of other products the firm offers. Amazon.com breaks even on the sale of 
Kindle e-book readers while expecting to make money on electronic books that will be down­
loaded via the Kindle. In another instance, the divestiture of one subsidiary of a diversified 
parent may increase operating expenses for other parent operations. In 2011, one reason given 
6In vertically integrated firms such as steelmakers, much of the revenue generated by a firm’s iron ore and coal 
operations comes from sales to the parent firm’s steelmaking unit. The parent may value this revenue for financial-
reporting purposes using transfer prices. If such prices do not reflect market prices, intercompany revenue may be 
artificially high or low, depending on whether the transfer prices are higher or lower than market prices.

	
Divestitures	
591
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
for Hewlett-Packard’s decision not to sell its PC unit after publicly announcing its intention 
to do so was the potential for a one-time increase in expenses following the selloff of the unit.7
Timing of the Sale
Obviously, the best time to sell a business is when the owner does not need to sell or the de­
mand for the business is greatest. The decision to sell also should reflect the broader financial 
environment. Selling when business confidence is high, stock prices are rising, and interest 
rates are low is likely to fetch a higher price for the unit. If the business to be sold is highly 
cyclical, the sale should be timed to coincide with the firm’s peak-year earnings.
The Selling Process
Selling firms choose that selling process best serving their objectives and influences the 
types of buyers that are attracted (e.g., strategic versus private equity).8 The selling process 
may be reactive or proactive (Fig. 16.1). Reactive sales occur when the parent is unexpectedly 
approached by a buyer, either for the entire firm or for a portion of the firm such as a product 
line or subsidiary. If the bid is sufficiently attractive, the parent firm may choose to reach a 
negotiated settlement with the bidder without investigating other options. This may occur if 
8Fidrmuc et al., 2012.
7Such expenses included the need to establish new infrastructure and systems for information technology, support, 
sales, and distribution channels for other businesses that had been using the PC unit’s infrastructure. In addition, 
other HP operating businesses would lose volume discounts on purchases of components enjoyed as a result of the 
huge volume of such purchases made by the PC business.
FIGURE 16.1  The selling process.

592	
16.  ALTERNATIVE EXIT AND RESTRUCTURING STRATEGIES
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
the parent is concerned about potential degradation of its business, or that of a subsidiary, if 
its interest in selling becomes public knowledge. In contrast, proactive sales may be character­
ized as public or private solicitations. In a public sale or auction, a firm announces publicly that 
it is putting itself, a subsidiary, or a product line up for sale. In this instance, potential buyers 
contact the seller. This is a way to identify easily interested parties; however, this approach 
can also attract unqualified bidders (i.e., those lacking the resources necessary to complete the 
deal) or those seeking to obtain proprietary information through the due diligence process. 
In a private or controlled sale, the parent firm may hire an investment banker or undertake on 
its own to identify potential buyers to be contacted. Once a preferred potential buyer or list of 
what are believed to be qualified buyers has been compiled, contact is made.9
In either a public or a private sale, interested parties are asked to sign confidentiality agree­
ments before being given access to proprietary information. Such information can include a 
financial forecast provided by the selling firm. Experienced buyers know that such forecasts 
tend to overly optimistic and often will discount them by 25%–30%. The challenge for the 
selling firm is to manage efficiently this information, which can grow into thousands of pages 
of documents and spreadsheets, and to provide easy and secure access to all interested par­
ties. Such information frequently is offered online through so-called virtual data rooms (VDRs), 
particularly when the seller is represented by an investment bank.10 Because so much infor­
mation is released to interested parties including competitors, there is a significant cost to the 
selling firm if a sale does not take place. That is, even though they are required according to 
the confidentiality agreement to return any proprietary information in their positions and not 
to use it for competitive purposes, competitors have knowledge that they can (and often do) 
use to gain a competitive advantage.
In private sales, bidders may be asked to sign a standstill agreement requiring them not 
to make an unsolicited bid. Parties willing to sign these agreements are then asked to sub­
mit preliminary, nonbinding “indications of interest” (i.e., a single number or a bid within a 
range). Those parties submitting preliminary bids are then ranked by the selling company 
by size of the bid, form of payment, the ability of the bidder to finance the transaction, form 
of acquisition, and anticipated ease of doing the deal. A small number of those submitting 
preliminary bids are then asked to submit a legally binding best and final offers. At this point, 
the seller may choose to initiate an auction among the most attractive bids or to go directly 
into negotiating a purchase agreement with a single party.
Choosing the Right Selling Process
Selling firms attempt to manage the selling process to realize the highest possible pur­
chase price while maintaining the interest of potential acquirers. Selling firms may choose 
9See the discussion of the screening and contacting process in Chapter 5 for more details.
10The VDR is intended to replace the traditional paper-based data room and the challenges of keeping such infor­
mation current and secure. Because the VDR is searchable electronically, bidders have easier and more rapid access 
to the specific information they are seeking. Since multiple parties can access the information simultaneously from 
anywhere in the world unaware of the presence of others, the VDR provides for more efficient and thorough due 
diligence. VDRs also allow for online questions and answers. The major limitations of the VDR are the expense and 
technical expertise required and the inability to meet in person the management of the unit to be sold.

	
Divestitures	
593
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
to negotiate with a single firm, to control the number of potential bidders, or to engage in a 
public auction (Table 16.1). Large firms often choose to sell themselves, major product lines, 
or subsidiaries through “one-on-one” negotiations with a single bidder deemed to have the 
greatest synergy with the selling firm. Sellers are concerned about the deleterious effects of 
making the sale public and the disruptive effects of allowing many firms to perform due dili­
gence and to receive proprietary information even though it is “protected” by confidentiality 
agreements. This approach also may be adopted to limit the potential for losing bidders who 
may also be competitors from obtaining proprietary information as a result of due diligence.
An auction may be undertaken to elicit the highest offer when selling smaller firms11 that 
are more difficult to value and because there may be more bidders. Moreover, money-losing 
startups that are perceived as potential threats to current competitors may initiate an auction 
because an existing competitor may bid for the startup to prevent others from acquiring the 
firm. The winning bidder may substantially overpay fully aware that the startup is likely to 
continue to lose money. Examples include Newscorp’s purchase of Myspace for $580 mil­
lion, Facebook’s $1 billion takeover of Instagram, Yahoo’s $1.1 billion purchase of Tumblir, 
Google’s $1.65 billion investment in Youtube, and eBay’s $2.6 billion buyout of Skype.12
Paradoxically, in some instances, public auctions may actually discourage some firms from 
bidding due to the potential for overly aggressive bidding by relatively uninformed bidders 
to boost the bid price to excessive levels. The private or controlled sale among a small number 
of carefully selected bidders may spark competition to boost the selling price while minimiz­
ing the deleterious effects of public auctions.
Pfizer’s 2012 auction of its fast-growing baby food business is a recent example of a controlled 
auction. Pfizer sought bids from those it knew could benefit from the unit’s exposure to emerging 
markets and had the financial wherewithal to pay a substantial premium. The auction process 
involving Swiss-based Nestlé and France’s Groupe Danone went through several rounds before 
Nestlé’s $11.85 billion bid was accepted by Pfizer. At 19.8 times EBITDA, the bid was consider­
ably higher than that of the 15.7 multiple Nestlé paid for Gerber’s baby food operations in 2007.
11Schlingemann and Wu (2015).
12Becker et al., 2016.
TABLE 16.1  Choosing the Right Selling Process
Selling process
Advantages/disadvantages
One-on-One negotiations 
(single bidder)
Enables seller to select the buyer with the greatest synergy.
Minimizes disruptive due diligence.
Limits the potential for loss of proprietary information to competitors.
May exclude potentially attractive bidders.
Public auction (no limit on number of 
bidders)
Most appropriate for small, private, or hard-to-value firms.
May discourage bidders concerned about undisciplined bidding by 
uninformed bidders.
Potentially disruptive due to multiple due diligences.
Controlled auction (limited number 
of bidders)
Enables seller to select potential buyers with the greatest synergy.
Sparks competition without the disruptive effects of public auctions.
May exclude potentially attractive bidders.

594	
16.  ALTERNATIVE EXIT AND RESTRUCTURING STRATEGIES
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
Approximately one-half of corporate M&A transactions involve “one-on-one” negotia­
tions. The remaining transactions involve public or controlled auctions in which the sellers 
contacted an average of 10 potential bidders, with some contacting as many as 150. The fi­
nancial returns to the selling firm’s shareholders appear to be about the same regardless of 
the way in which the business is sold. However, for larger target firms, one-on-one negotia­
tion is more common.13 One-on-one negotiation may be superior to auctions when the target 
is large, because there are likely to be fewer potential buyers, which may result in a higher 
purchase price because the selling firm is able to share more proprietary information with the 
potential buyer. In an auction involving many bidders, the likelihood that such information 
could leak to competitors and be used to the competitive disadvantage of the selling firm is 
much higher.14
These findings seem at odds with the conventional wisdom that auctions should result, on 
average, in higher returns for selling-company shareholders assuming that more bidders are 
usually better than fewer bidders.15 This conclusion presumes that all bidders have access to 
the same information and have the financial ability to finance their bids. As previously noted, 
some qualified bidders may choose to refrain from bidding in an auction, concerned about 
overpaying for the target firm. Another risk to a seller of an auction is that it may attract a 
single viable bidder. If the potential buyer becomes aware that there are no other interested 
parties, negotiating leverage shifts from the seller to the buyer. This usually results in a lower 
premium paid for the target firm (and higher acquirer returns) than may have been achieved 
had the seller undertaken a one-on-one negotiation.16
The mere fact that most transactions involve relatively few bidders does not suggest that 
the bidding process is not competitive.17 The seller must maintain the perception throughout 
a one-on-one negotiation that other potential bidders exist but were not included in the pro­
cess for reasons ranging from their exhibiting less potential synergy to concerns about loss 
of competitive information during due diligence to the potential for not receiving regulatory 
approval. In most cases, simply the threat of rival bids is sufficient to increase bids, even in 
“one-on-one” negotiations. Such latent competition tends to influence bid prices the most 
when market liquidity is greatest such that potential bidders have relatively inexpensive ac­
cess to funds through borrowing or new equity issues. Ultimately, the premium a target firm 
receives is influenced by a variety of factors relating to the deal and industry characteristics.
The purchase premium is usually defined in the popular press as the excess of the offer 
price over the target firm’s share price immediately prior to the deal announcement date. 
However, a more accurate estimate of the purchase premium includes the sum of the increase 
in the target firm’s share price prior to the announcement (i.e., the run-up) plus the excess 
of the offer price over the run-up (i.e., the mark-up). The run-up in the target’s share price 
reflects anticipated synergy resulting from the combination of the target and acquiring firms. 
The bidder may be willing to mark-up the offer price above the run-up if it believes the pre­
announcement date target price increase did not fully reflect anticipated synergies. Table 16.2 
13Boone and Mulherin, 2009.
14Subramanian, 2010.
15Bulow and Klemperer, 2009.
16Volkov, 2016.
17Aktas et al., 2010.

	
Divestitures	
595
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
TABLE 16.2  Factors Affecting Purchase Price Premiums
Factor
Explanation
Net synergy potential
Purchase premiums are likely to increase the greater the magnitude of 
perceived net synergy (see Chapter 9). Net synergy often is the greatest in 
highly related firms.a Moreover, premiums are likely to be larger if most 
of the synergy is provided by the target.
Desire for control
Buyers may pay more to gain control of firms exhibiting weak financial 
performance because of potential gains from making better business 
decisions (see Chapter 10).
Growth potential
Targets displaying greater growth potential relative to competitors 
generally command higher premiums.b
Information asymmetry (i.e., one 
bidder has more information than 
other bidders)
Informed bidders are likely to pay lower premiums because less informed 
bidders fear overpaying and either withdraw from or do not participate 
in the bidding process.c
Target Size
Buyers pay more for smaller targets due to the anticipated ease of 
integration.d
Target’s Eagerness to Sell
Targets with a strong desire to sell typically receive lower premiums due 
to their relatively weak negotiating positions.e
Run-up in preannouncement 
target share price
While the run-up may cause bidders unsure of having adequate 
information to increase their offer price,f there is little evidence that 
bidders pay for anticipated synergies twice. That is, when the target’s 
share price increases in advance of the deal’s announcement plus the 
excess of the offer price over the run-up.g
Type of purchase
Hostile transactions (or the credible threat of hostile transactions) tend to 
command higher premiums than friendly transactions.h
Hubris
Excessive confidence may lead bidders to overpay.i
Type of payment
Cash purchases usually require an increased premium to compensate 
target shareholders for the immediate tax liability they incur.j Bidders 
using overvalued shares often overpay for target firms.
Financial leverage (debt/equity)
Highly leveraged buyers are disciplined by their lenders not to overpay; 
relatively unleveraged buyers often are prone to pay excessive premiums.k
Customer–supplier relationships
In vertical mergers, buyers substantially reliant on a target that is either a 
customer or a supplier and that has few alternatives will be forced to pay 
higher premiums than otherwise.l
Board connections
Acquirers realize higher announcement-date returns in transactions in 
which the target and the acquirer’s boards share a common director, 
perhaps reflecting more consistent and candid communication.m
Investor consensus around target 
share price
Acquisition premiums tend to be higher whenever there is considerable 
disagreement among bidders as to the value of the target, possibly 
reflecting more active bidding for the target firm.n
Industry growth prospects
The magnitude of premiums varies substantially across industries, reflect­
ing differences in expected growth rates.o
Credit rating
Rated firms on average pay a 3.3% higher premium reflecting their lower 
cost of capital than nonrated acquirers.p
(Continued)

596	
16.  ALTERNATIVE EXIT AND RESTRUCTURING STRATEGIES
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
provides a summary of those factors that have been found to be significant determinants of 
the magnitude of purchase price premiums.
Tax and Accounting Considerations for Divestitures
The divesting firm recognizes a gain or loss for financial-reporting purposes equal to the 
difference between the fair value of the payment received for the divested operation and its 
book value. For tax purposes, the gain or loss is the difference between the proceeds and the 
parent’s tax basis in the stock or assets. Capital gains are taxed at the same rate as other busi­
ness income.
SPIN-OFFS
A spin-off is a stock dividend paid by a firm to its current shareholders consisting of shares 
in an existing or newly created subsidiary. No shareholder approval is required since only the 
board of directors may decide the amount, type and timing of dividends. Such distributions 
are made in direct proportion to the shareholders’ current holdings of the parent’s stock. As 
such, the proportional ownership of shares in the subsidiary is the same as the stockholders’ 
proportional ownership of shares in the parent firm. The new entity has its own management 
Factor
Explanation
Industry structure
Targets in industries undergoing consolidation command higher pre­
miums than other industries as acquirers attempt to eliminate industry 
excess capacity.q
Value of potential target tax 
attributes (e.g. NOLs)
Acquirers are willing to pay more for target tax attributes if they believe 
the potential tax savings can realized relatively quickly.r
aBetton et al., 2009.
bBetton et al., 2008.
cDionne et al., 2010.
dMoeller, 2005.
eAktas et al., 2010.
fBetton et al., 2009.
gBetton et al., 2015.
hCalcagno and Falconieri, 2014; Moeller, 2005.
iHayward and Hambrick, 1997.
jBetton et al., 2008.
kGondhalekar et al. (2004) argue that highly levered buyers are monitored closely by their lenders and are less likely to overpay. Morellec and 
Zhdanov find that relatively unleveraged buyers often pay more for targets.
lAhern, 2012.
mCai and Sevilir, 2012. Having a board connection often improves the information flow such that the acquirer is less likely to overpay for the 
target firm.
nChatterjee et al., 2012.
oMadura et al., 2012.
pHarford and Uysal, 2014.
qSimonyan, 2014.
rAng et al., 2014b.
TABLE 16.2  Factors Affecting Purchase Price Premiums (cont.)

	
Spin-Offs	
597
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
and operates independent of the parent company. Unlike the divestiture or equity carve-
out (explained later in this chapter), the spin-off does not result in an infusion of cash to the 
parent company. Following the spin-off, the firm’s shareholders own both parent company 
shares and shares in the unit involved in the spin-off.
While spin-offs may be less cumbersome than divestitures, they are by no means simple to 
execute. The parent firm must make sure that the unit to be spun off is fully viable on a stand­
alone basis and legally disentangled from other parent operations and that the parent has no 
ongoing liabilities associated with the spun-off unit. If the spun-off unit goes into bankruptcy 
shortly after having been separated from the parent, the parent may be held responsible for 
the unit’s liabilities. Once the spin-off has been implemented, the former parent continues to 
provide “transitional” services. More than one year after Baxter International completed its 
spin-off of biopharmaceutical business Baxalta, Inc. the parent was still managing many of 
Baxalta’s back office operations such as finance and IT. While receiving $100 million annually 
for such services, the former parent is limited in its ability to make other changes in its ongo­
ing operations since it needs to maintain this support infrastructure.
Motives for Spin-Offs
In addition to the motives for existing businesses discussed earlier, spin-offs provide a 
means of rewarding shareholders with a nontaxable dividend (if properly structured). Parent 
firms with a low tax basis in a business may choose to spin off the unit as a tax-free distribu­
tion to shareholders rather than sell the business and incur a substantial tax liability. Indepen­
dent of the parent, the unit has its own stock to use for possible acquisitions and can focus on 
a growth strategy without interference from the parent’s board which may not fully under­
stand the unit’s operations. The managers of the business that is to be spun off have a greater 
incentive to improve the unit’s performance if they own stock in the unit. Now more focused 
and transparent to investors than when it was part of a larger diversified firm, the unit can 
become an attractive takeover opportunity thereby potentially creating far more value for 
parent shareholders holding stock in the unit than when it was part of the parent. Spin-offs 
also represent an easy alternative to divesting a difficult to sell business.
While there are compelling reasons for implementing spin-offs, there are significant disad­
vantages including the loss of both revenue and synergies associated with the unit spun off 
by the parent. For publicly traded firms, the elimination of a large portion of a firm through 
a spin-off to shareholders can result in less stock analyst coverage, removal from stock indi­
ces, and an increased likelihood of takeover of the former parent if the spin off substantially 
reduces the size of the parent. Finally, the costs associated with separating a unit from the 
parent can become substantial if the unit is well integrated into other parts of the firm.
Tax and Accounting Considerations for Spin-Offs
If properly structured, a corporation can make a tax-free distribution to its shareholders 
of stock in a subsidiary in which it holds a controlling interest (i.e., a controlled subsidiary). 
Neither the distributing corporation (i.e., parent) nor its shareholders recognize any taxable 
gain or loss on the distribution. Such distributions can involve a spin-off, a split-up (a series 
of corporate spin-offs often resulting in the dissolution of the firm), or a split-off (an exchange 

598	
16.  ALTERNATIVE EXIT AND RESTRUCTURING STRATEGIES
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
offer of subsidiary stock for parent stock). Split-ups and split-offs are explained in more detail 
later in this chapter.
To be tax free to both the parent and its shareholders, spin-offs must satisfy certain condi­
tions stipulated in Section 35 of the Internal Revenue Tax Code. These conditions apply to the 
separation of two operating businesses and not to transactions involving the distribution of 
cash or liquid assets or those resembling sales (a spin-off followed by an immediate acquisi­
tion of the unit). These conditions include the following:
1.	 the parent must control the subsidiary(ies) to be spun off, split up, or split off by owning 
at least 80% of each class of the unit’s voting and nonvoting stock;
2.	 the distributing firm must distribute all of the stock of the controlled subsidiary;
3.	 both the parent and the controlled subsidiary must remain in the same business fol­
lowing the distribution in which they were actively engaged for the 5 years prior to the 
distribution; and
4.	 the transaction must be for a sound business purpose, such as to improve profitability, in­
crease access to the capital markets for either the parent or the unit to be spun off, or enhance 
management focus by reducing the number of lines of business, and not for tax avoidance.18
Internet media company, Yahoo, failed to receive IRS approval for its intended tax-free 
spin-off of its approximate $23 billion stake in China’s biggest online commerce company, 
Alibaba, in late 2015. The IRS stated it was most concerned about the “balance between in­
vestment assets such as stock and operating businesses in spin-off corporations.” Without 
such approval, any effort by Yahoo to distribute the Alibaba shares to Yahoo shareholders 
could result in as much as a $9 billion tax liability to Yahoo. Why? If it simply sold the stock 
and returned the cash to its shareholders as a dividend because of its low tax basis in the 
shares, Yahoo would be taxed at a 40% rate (35% federal corporate tax rate plus an average 
5% state tax rate) and its shareholders would potentially be taxed at a capital gains tax rate as 
high as 20% depending on their income tax bracket.
Yahoo had intended to include its small business services division along with its Alibaba 
shareholdings in the subsidiary called Aabaco Holdings whose shares were to be spun off to 
Yahoo’s shareholders. While this structure has worked in other instances, the IRS decided the 
size of the operating unit included in Aabaco was too small to satisfy the requirements for a 
spin-off to be tax free. As structured the spin-off of Aabaco appeared to be primarily for tax 
avoidance and not for a sound business purpose. After considerable deliberation, Yahoo’s 
board succumbed to pressure from activist investors who argued that the risk of not receiving 
IRS recognition that the spinoff would be nontaxable decided not to spinoff the firm’s invest­
ment in Alibaba in December 2015.
For financial-reporting purposes, the parent firm should account for the spin-off of a sub­
sidiary’s stock to its shareholders at book value, with no gain or loss recognized, other than 
any reduction in value due to impairment.19 The reason for this treatment is that the owner­
ship interests are essentially the same before and after the spin-off.
18A spin-off cannot be used to avoid the payment of taxes on capital gains that might have been incurred if the par­
ent had chosen to sell a subsidiary in which it had a low tax basis.
19Impairment in an accounting context refers to degradation of the value of assets due to loss of key customers, pat­
ent or copyright protection, product obsolescence, and so forth.

	
Equity Carve-Outs	
599
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
EQUITY CARVE-OUTS
Equity carve-outs exhibit characteristics similar to spin-offs. Both result in the subsidiary’s 
stock’s being traded separately from the parent’s stock. They also are similar to divestitures 
and IPOs, in that they provide cash to the parent. However, unlike the spin-off or the divesti­
ture, the parent generally retains control of the subsidiary in a carve-out transaction. A poten­
tially significant drawback to the carve-out is the creation of minority shareholders.
Motives for Equity Carve-Outs
Like divestitures, equity carve-outs provide an opportunity to raise funds for reinvestment 
in the subsidiary, paying off debt, or paying a dividend to the parent firm. Carve-outs also 
may be used if the parent has significant contractual obligations, such as supply agreements, 
with its subsidiary.20 Moreover, a carve-out frequently is a prelude to a divestiture, since it 
provides an opportunity to value the business by selling stock on a public stock exchange. 
The stock created for purposes of the carve-out often is used in incentive programs for the 
unit’s management and as an acquisition currency (i.e., form of payment) if the parent later 
decides to grow the subsidiary. By creating a market for the formerly largely illiquid subsid­
iary shares, the carve-out also provides a market in which shareholders can more easily sell 
their shares. The two basic forms of an equity carve-out are the initial public offering and the 
subsidiary equity carve-out.
Initial Public Offerings and Subsidiary Equity Carve-Outs
An initial public offering is the first offering to the public of common stock of a formerly 
privately held firm. The sale of the stock provides an infusion of cash to the parent and an 
opportunity for pre-IPO shareholders to convert their shares to cash. The cash proceeds from 
the IPO may be retained by the parent or returned to shareholders. Alibaba, the Chinese e-
commerce giant, went public in a record setting IPO in late 2014 raising more than $25 billion 
and valuing the firm at more than $200 billion. The proceeds of the Alibaba IPO will be used 
to allow investors to cash out, to make acquisitions, and to build brand awareness outside of 
China. See Table 16.3 for the timeline associated with a typical IPO.
The subsidiary carve-out is a transaction in which the parent creates a wholly owned, inde­
pendent subsidiary, with stock and a management team that are different from the parent’s, 
and issues a portion of the subsidiary’s stock to the public. Usually, only a minority share of 
the parent’s ownership in the subsidiary is issued to the public. Although the parent retains 
control, the subsidiary’s shareholder base may be different than that of the parent due to the 
public sale of equity. The cash raised may be retained in the subsidiary or transferred to the 
parent as a dividend, a stock repurchase, or an intercompany loan. An example of a subsid­
iary carve-out is the sale to the public by Phillip Morris in 2001 of 15% of its wholly owned 
Kraft subsidiary. Phillip Morris’ voting power over Kraft was reduced only to 97.7% because 
20By retaining a controlling interest in the subsidiary, a parent can better manage its contractual commitments (Jain 
et al., 2011). For example, for supply contracts, as the controlling owner in the subsidiary, the parent represents 
both sides of the contract: as supplier and buyer.

600	
16.  ALTERNATIVE EXIT AND RESTRUCTURING STRATEGIES
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
Kraft had a dual-class share structure in which only low-voting shares were issued in the 
public stock offering.
Before issuing shares to the public, the parent usually estimates the size of the post-IPO 
public or free float. Float represents shares trading on exchanges that can be bought and sold 
without restrictions, consisting of those held both by institutions and individuals. Free float 
excludes restricted shares or those issued by a firm that cannot be bought or sold for a certain 
period of time without permission by the SEC. Restricted stock is a type of stock given to in­
siders as part of their compensation. Why is free float important? Because the size of the float 
affects the degree of the parent’s post-IPO control, its ability to consolidate the unit for tax 
purposes, the cost to the parent to reacquire its subsidiary at a later date if it chooses to do so, 
and the accuracy of the valuation of the shares issued.
Tax and Accounting Considerations for Equity Carve-Outs
Retention of at least 80% of the unit enables consolidation for tax purposes, and retention 
of more than 50% enables consolidation for financial-reporting purposes.21 If the parent owns 
21Allen and McConnell (1998) found a median retention of subsidiary shares of 69%, while Vijh (2002) found a 
median ownership stake of 72%.
TABLE 16.3  The IPO Timeline
Steps
Comments
Step 1: Decide to go public
Why? To raise money to grow the firm, for liquidity, to reduce 
indebtedness, to make acquisitions, to recruit talented managers, and 
so on.
Step 2: Hire an investment bank(s) to 
guide and to underwrite the equity 
issue
Investment banks:
•	Create legal documents and satisfy regulatory requirements
•	Advise the client during the process
•	Underwrite the offering by buying up all the initial shares and 
selling them to the public at a predetermined price
Step 3: Register with the Securities 
and Exchange Commission (SEC)
Requires filing an S-1 form with the SEC which entails listing 
the company’s plans for the funds raised, its business model, the 
competition, its corporate governance, and executive compensationa
Step 4: “Road show”
The offering is promoted to potential investors, as early as 21 days after 
the S-1 is approved. Prior to the “road show,” the number of shares to 
be offered and the price per share (often within a narrow range) are 
announced.b Those attending the “road show” include hedge funds, 
mutual funds, banks, pension funds, endowments, and individuals.c
Step 5: Issue equity
Based on “road show” results, a final price and deal size are announced. 
Investors having submitted final bids find out if they can buy the stock.
aMany firms are uncomfortable with a public filing since it makes sensitive data available to their competition. Now, under the JOBS Act of 
2012, many firms (except the largest) can file confidentially. See Chapter 2 for more detail.
bFirms often issue 10% to 25% of their stock. The amount issued should be large enough to ensure a liquid market for the stock.
cInvestment bankers conducting the “road show” record offers made for the stock at various prices and adjust the price up or down depending on 
demand prior to the sale of the stock.

	
Split-Offs and Split-Ups	
601
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
less than 50% but more than 20%, it must use the equity method for financial reporting. Below 
20%, it must use the cost method.22
For a spin-off of the remaining stock in a business following an IPO to qualify as tax-free, 
the parent must have retained at least 80% of the voting power of the shares of the subsid­
iary. Why? Because tax rules require the parent to distribute control of the subsidiary, where 
control for tax purposes is generally defined as 80% of the voting stock. The proceeds of an 
IPO distributed to the parent are tax free to the parent if the amount of the cash distributed is 
less than the value of the parent’s investment in the stock of the controlled subsidiary (i.e., its 
basis) as it is considered a return of capital.
SPLIT-OFFS AND SPLIT-UPS
A split-off involves the parent firm making an offer to its shareholders to exchange their 
parent stock for all or a portion of the shares of the firm’s subsidiary. It is equivalent to a 
share repurchase by the parent of its stock using stock in the subsidiary instead of cash. Like 
a spin-off, the split-off results in the parent’s subsidiary becoming an independent firm and 
the parent firm does not generate any new cash. Unlike spin-offs, which result in the same 
proportionate ownership distribution before and after the spin-off, split-offs generally result 
in disproportionate changes in the ownership of parent shares. Split-offs normally are non–
prorata stock distributions, in contrast to spin-offs, which generally are pro rata (or propor­
tional) distributions of shares. In a pro rata distribution, a shareholder owning 10% of the out­
standing parent company stock would receive 10% of the subsidiary shares. A non–prorata 
distribution takes the form of a tender or exchange offer in which shareholders can accept 
or reject the distribution generally resulting in a disproportionate change in the ownership 
of parent shares outstanding. For example, if 50% of the parent shareholders exchange their 
parent shares for subsidiary shares the remaining half of parent shareholders will hold 100% 
of whatever parent shares remain outstanding.
A split-up refers to a restructuring strategy in which a single company splits into two or 
more separately managed firms. Through a series of split-offs or spin-offs, shareholders of the 
original or parent firm may choose to exchange their shares in the parent firm for shares in 
the new companies. Following the split, the original firm’s shares are cancelled, and it ceases 
to exist.
Recent examples include United States aluminum company, Alcoa Inc., and business ser­
vices firm Xerox Corp. Alcoa split the firm into separate entities in late 2016 to isolate the 
firm’s more profitable “value added” upstream fabrication operations from its floundering 
downstream raw aluminum operations, which have been battered by falling raw aluminum 
prices. The upstream company consists of rolled sheet products, engineered products, and 
transportation and construction businesses. The downstream business includes the firm’s 
bauxite-mining and aluminum ingot production operations. The decision was made to give 
22When the equity method is used to account for ownership in a company, the investor records the initial invest­
ment at cost and then periodically adjusts the value to reflect its proportionate share of income or losses generated 
by the company. The cost method requires recording the investment at cost, and dividends received are included in 
investment income.

602	
16.  ALTERNATIVE EXIT AND RESTRUCTURING STRATEGIES
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
investors the opportunity to invest in companies with a narrower product focus in an effort 
to boost shareholder value. Xerox reversed its effort to combine business services with copiers 
and printers when it split into two publicly traded companies in 2017: one contained its office 
machines and another contained its services operations. The split undoes the firm’s largest 
ever acquisition in 2010 of Affiliated Computer Services Inc. (ACS) for $6 billion.
Motives for Split-Offs
A split-offs is most appropriate when the parent firm owns less than 100% of a subsidiary’s 
stock. This may occur when the parent acquires less than 100% of the outstanding shares of 
another firm or when the parent undertakes an IPO of a portion of the stock of a controlled 
subsidiary. Divestiture may not be an option for disposing of businesses in which the parent 
owns less than 100% of outstanding shares, because potential buyers often want to acquire all 
of a firm’s outstanding stock. By acquiring less than 100%, a buyer inherits minority share­
holders, who may disagree with the new owner’s future business decisions.
Split-offs are commonly undertaken after a portion of the shares in a controlled subsid­
iary has been issued to the public in an IPO so that the value of the subsidiary’s shares can 
be determined. Once their trading value has been established, it is used in determining the 
exchange ratio between subsidiary and parent shares (i.e., the split-off exchange ratio). That 
is, the number of subsidiary shares (which could be less than one if the trading value of the 
subsidiary shares exceeds that of the parent’s shares) to be exchanged for each parent share. 
Typically, the parent offers to purchase parent stock at a premium compared to the subsid­
iary’s trading price established following the IPO of a portion of the subsidiary’s stock as an 
incentive for parent shareholders to exchange their shares for subsidiary shares. Split-offs are 
most successful when parent shareholders show a strong preference for the subsidiary’s stock 
over the parent’s stock. Any subsidiary shares not tendered during the exchange offer period 
may be distributed to parent shareholders through a spin-off, resulting in the subsidiary be­
coming totally independent of its former parent.
A split-off reduces the pressure on the spun-off firm’s share price because shareholders 
who exchange their stock are less likely to sell the new stock. Presumably, a shareholder will­
ing to make the exchange believes the stock in the subsidiary has greater appreciation poten­
tial than the parent’s stock. The exchange also increases the earnings per share of the parent 
firm by reducing the number of its shares outstanding, as long as the impact of the reduction 
in the number of shares outstanding exceeds the loss of the subsidiary’s earnings. A split-off 
is generally tax free to shareholders as long as it conforms to the IRS requirements previously 
described for spin-offs. Finally, the split-off gives the parent shareholder the option to decide 
whether the shareholder wants to hold parent stock, split-off company stock, or a combina­
tion of both.
Cash-Rich Split-Offs
Cash-rich split-offs are variations of a conventional split-off and commonly occur when 
a firm wants to reacquire stock from a large shareholder, often another firm. In this type of 
transaction/ the parent firm creates a new subsidiary and contributes an operating business 
that the parent has owned and operated for at least five years to the subsidiary as well as cash. 

	
Split-Offs and Split-Ups	
603
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
The business must comprise at least 5% to 10% of the subsidiary’s enterprise value and the 
subsidiary cannot contain more than 66% cash or other investment securities. Assuming the 
there is a valid business purpose for the transaction, the parent can then exchange stock in 
the new subsidiary for the patent’s stock held by the large investor in a deal that is tax free.
How a cash-rich split-off may be structured is illustrated in Fig. 16.2. Assume Buyer Corp 
owns stock in Seller Corp and Seller Corp wishes to buy back its stock. To do so in a tax-free 
transaction, Seller Corp forms a new subsidiary (Split-Co) and transfers operating assets and 
liabilities and cash into the subsidiary in exchange for subsidiary stock. The subsidiary’s as­
sets can consist of up to 66% cash and 33% operating assets. The fair market value of the sub­
sidiary must be approximately equal to the market value of Seller Corp’s stock held by Buyer 
Corp. Seller Corp enters into a split-off in which it exchanges Split-Co stock for Seller stock 
held by Buyer Corp. Following the transaction, Split-Co becomes a wholly owned subsidiary 
of Buyer Corp. The transaction is tax free to both Seller Corp shareholders and Buyer Corp 
shareholders. The disadvantages of this deal are that it is complicated to execute and Buyer 
Corp must operate the acquired business for at least 2 years following closing.
In 2015, Warren Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway bought Proctor & Gamble’s Duracell battery 
business in a deal valued at about $3 billion and structured as a tax-free cash rich split-off. 
P&G received shares of its own stock held by Berkshire Hathaway with a market value of $4.7 
billion. To make the fair market value of the P&G stock and the Duracell business equal, P&G 
contributed $1.7 billion in cash to the Duracell business prior to closing. News Corp. also 
employed a tax-free cash-rich split-off in reaching an agreement in early 2007 to buy Liberty 
Media’s 19%—or $11 billion—stake in the media giant in exchange for News Corp.’s 38.6% 
stake in satellite TV firm DirecTV Group, $550 million in cash, and three sports TV channels. 
The cash and media assets were added to ensure that Liberty Media was exchanging its stake 
in News Corp. for “like-kind” assets of an equivalent or higher value to qualify as a tax-free 
exchange. Had the assets been divested, the two firms would have had to pay $4.5 billion in 
taxes due to likely gains on the sale.23 Other recent “cash-rich” split-offs include Comcast/
23Angwin and Drucker, 2006.
FIGURE 16.2  “Cash-Rich” split-off.

604	
16.  ALTERNATIVE EXIT AND RESTRUCTURING STRATEGIES
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
Time Warner Cable, Comcast/Liberty, KeySpan/Houston Exploration, Cox Communica­
tions/Discovery Communications, and DST Systems/Janus Capital Group.
Spin-Offs Combined With M&A Transactions
Spin-offs may be combined with a concurrent merger deal. Called “Morris Trust” and “Re­
verse Morris Trusts,” these structures allow the parent to transfer a business to another firm 
(i.e., merger partner) in a stock deal that is tax-free. In a Morris Trust deal, all of the parent’s 
assets, except those to be combined with the merger partner, are spun off or split off into a 
new public company and then the parent merges with the merger partner. In a Reverse Mor­
ris Trust, all assets to be combined with the merger partner are spun off or split off into a new 
public company, with the new company combining with the merger partner.
To be tax-free, the Morris and Reverse Morris Trust structures require the merger part­
ner to be smaller than the business to be combined with the merger partner resulting in the 
shareholders of the parent owing a majority of the stock of the combined firms. That is, the 
spun-off subsidiary is the “buyer” if its shareholders (the original parent company sharehold­
ers who received the stock spun off by the parent) own more than 50% the merged firms. The 
former subsidiary will usually have a bigger market value than the target firm into which it 
is merged. This effectively reduces the number of potential merger partners. This limitation 
was imposed by the IRS to make such structures less attractive.
An advantage the Reverse Morris Trust is that it does not require approval by the parent 
shareholders for the spin-off or merger. This is so because the spin-off firm is merging or com­
bining with the merger partner and the parent approves this merger at the time the parent 
is the sole shareholder of the subsidiary to be spun off. In contrast, the Morris Trust requires 
approval by the parent’s shareholders because the merging party (i.e., the parent) is already 
a public firm owned by its public shareholders at the time the merger is proposed. The major 
drawback of these types of deals is their complexity as each deal is dependent of the comple­
tion of the other. In addition, such transactions require lengthy predeal negotiation so that 
both parties understand which assets and liabilities will be spun-off in the parent’s subsidiary 
and which will be retained.
In June 2016, Hewlett Packard Enterprises, itself the product of the 2015 split of Hewlett 
Packard Corporation, announced it would spin off its business which manages client call 
centers and networks to its shareholders. The business will then be merged with Computer 
Sciences Corporation in an all-stock deal creating a new firm (to be named Computer Sciences 
Corp.) valued at more than $9 billion. The deal would be tax free to both Hewlett Packard 
Enterprise and Computer Sciences shareholders. See the case study at the end of this chapter 
for a detailed discussion of both the mechanics and implications of a recent reverse Morris 
Trust deal involving Proctor & Gamble and Coty Cosmetics.
TRACKING, TARGETED, AND LETTER STOCKS
Such stocks are separate classes of common stock of the parent firm. The parent divides 
its operations into two or more subsidiaries and assigns a common stock to each. Track­
ing stock is a class of common stock that links the shareholders’ return to the subsidiary’s 

	
Tracking, Targeted, and Letter Stocks	
605
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
operating performance. Tracking stock dividends rise or fall with the subsidiary’s perfor­
mance. Such stock represents an ownership interest in the parent rather than an ownership 
interest in the subsidiary. For voting purposes, holders of tracking stock with voting rights 
may vote their shares on issues related to the parent and not the subsidiary. The parent’s 
board of directors and top management retain control of the subsidiary for which a track­
ing stock has been issued, since it is still legally part of the parent. Tracking stocks may be 
issued to current parent shareholders as a dividend, used as payment for an acquisition, or 
issued in a public offering.
Motives for Tracking Stocks
Tracking stock enables investors to value the different operations within a corporation 
based on their own performance. There is little empirical evidence that issuing a tracking 
stock for a subsidiary creates pure-play investment opportunities for investors, since the 
tracking stock tends to be correlated more with the parent’s other outstanding stocks than 
with the stocks in the industry in which the subsidiary competes.24 Tracking stocks provide 
the parent with another way of raising capital for a specific operation by selling a portion of 
the stock to the public and an alternative “currency” for making acquisitions. Stock-based 
incentive programs to attract and retain key managers also can be implemented for each op­
eration with its own tracking stock.
Firms that have created disparate asset structures sometimes use a combination of spin-
offs and tracking stocks in an effort to deliver shareholder value. In 2016, Liberty Interactive 
Corporation, known for its digital commerce businesses spun off two units: Commerce Hub, 
a service provider to e-commerce firms, and Liberty Expedia Holdings, which includes the 
firm’s 18 percent stake in the travel booking site and Bodybuilding .com, a fitness site. The 
firm also reclassified its common stock into three tracking stocks: The Liberty Braves Group, 
which owns the Atlanta Braves baseball team; the Liberty Sirius group, which includes the 
satellite radio provider Sirius XM Holdings; and the Liberty Media Group, which includes 
the firm’s remaining assets such as stakes in Live Nation Entertainment, Time Warner, and 
Viacom. The transactions were tax free to the firm’s shareholders and were intended to give 
investors greater choice in which assets they wanted to invest.
Tax and Accounting Considerations for Tracking Stocks
For financial-reporting purposes, a distribution of tracking stock divides the parent 
firm’s equity structure into separate classes of stock without a legal split-up of the firm. 
Unlike spin-offs, the IRS currently does not require that the business for which the track­
ing stock is created be at least five years old and that the parent retain a controlling interest 
in the business for the stock to be exempt from capital gains taxes. Unlike a spin-off or a 
carve-out, the parent retains complete ownership of the business. In general, a propor­
tionate distribution by a company to its shareholders of the company’s stock is tax free to 
shareholders.
24D’Souza and Jacob, 2000.

606	
16.  ALTERNATIVE EXIT AND RESTRUCTURING STRATEGIES
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
Problems with Tracking Stocks
Few tracking stocks have been issued in recent years, perhaps due to inherent governance 
issues and their poor long-term performance. Conflicts among the parent’s operating units 
often arise in determining how the parent’s overhead expenses are allocated to the business 
units and what price one business unit is paid for selling products to other business units. 
Tracking stocks can stimulate shareholder lawsuits. The parent’s board approves overall op­
erating unit and capital budgets. Decisions made in support of one operating unit may ap­
pear to be unfair to those holding a tracking stock in another unit. Thus, tracking stocks can 
pit classes of shareholders against one another and lead to lawsuits. Tracking stocks also may 
not have voting rights. Further, the chances of a hostile takeover of a firm with a tracking 
stock are virtually zero because the firm is controlled by the parent.
In addition, tracking stocks often have inferior voting rights or none at all when compared to 
a firm’s other common stock outstanding. Also, holders of tracking stock usually do not receive 
dividends and in liquidation owners of tracking shares typically do not have a legal claim on 
the parent firm’s assets. Tracking stocks can be particularly problematic when issued by private 
firms such as Dell Inc.’s use of tracking shares as part of the compensation paid to shareholders 
in its 2016 takeover of storage company EMC. Why? Because governance issues can be greater 
when ownership is heavily concentrated and financial reporting may be more opaque.
RESTRUCTUING IMPLEMENTATION ISSUES
Separating a business from the parent requires the board to establish clear strategic objec­
tives and the appropriate restructuring strategy for meeting these objectives. These decisions 
initiate an internal process for implementing the restructuring strategy. What follows is a 
partial list of some of the more important issues that should be addressed early in the process 
in the context of a spin-off to illustrate how they are commonly resolved. The unit to be sepa­
rated from the parent will be referred to as the “spin-off company.”
Once a unit has been identified for separation, the parent must determine what assets will 
be retained and what will go with the unit. Finance-related issues include determining the 
desired debt to total capital ratio, deciding which nonlong-term debt related liabilities will go 
with the spin-off company and which will be retained by the parent, and how best to main­
tain the solvency of the newly independent business. Other critical execution issues are de­
termining the appropriate governance mechanism for the new unit and how best to address 
human resource issues. Each of these issues is discussed next.
What Stays and What Goes
For a subsidiary operated as a standalone unit, separating the business from the parent 
may be relatively straight-forward as the assets and liabilities associated with the business 
are easily identified. Complexities arise when the unit has formal relationships with the par­
ent or other operating units owned by the parent including sharing common support func­
tions such as finance, human resources, and accounting and intracompany purchase or sale 
arrangements. These will have to be divided, reproduced, or provided by the parent to the 

	
Restructuing Implementation Issues	
607
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
spin-off company on an interim or transitional basis before the unit will be ready to operate as 
a standalone, publicly traded company. Spinning off a portion of business through an equity 
carve-out having operations that are to remain with the parent may be far more complicated 
as the assets to be retained by the parent must be clearly identified and a mechanism for trans­
ferring them from the spin-off company to the parent established. Such mechanisms could 
include a merger with or sale of assets to another business owned by the parent or an internal 
spin-off of selected spin-off company assets to other parent operating units.
Target Capital Structure
Target capital structure, in this context, refers to the spin-off company’s and parent’s mix of 
debt and equity immediately following the spin-off. The parent generally wants to reallocate 
its existing cash and debt between itself and the spin-off company and to raise additional 
cash if possible. A common strategy is for the spin-off company to issue new debt prior to the 
spin-off with the cash proceeds distributed to the parent. The parent may then use the cash 
to retire its outstanding debt. For example, Hewlett-Packard Enterprise raised $14.6 billion 
just prior to its being spun off by its parent Hewlett-Packard Co. in late 2015, with the cash 
transferred to the parent. The parent used the proceeds to redeem $8.85 billion in debt and the 
remainder to refinance other obligations at lower interest rates.
The mechanism for transferring the cash to the parent may involve the spin-off company 
making a cash distribution to the parent, buying back some of its own shares held by the 
parent for cash, paying off intercompany loans owed to the parent, or buying assets owned 
by the parent for cash. Alternatively, the spin-off company may assume some of the parent’s 
outstanding debt. Care must be taken in selecting the right mechanism for transferring cash 
in order not to trigger taxable gains to the extent the cash payment for stock or assets or the 
assumption of debt exceeds the parent’s book value in the spin-off company’s stock or assets 
or the parent’s long-term debt.
Allocation of Nonlong-Term Debt Liabilities
Which liabilities logically belong with the parent or the spin-off company? Warranty 
claims relating to spin-off company sales and pension fund obligations would be liabilities of 
the spin-off company. General corporate liabilities or shared liabilities not relating specifically 
to the parent or the spin-off company such as shareholder litigation could remain with the 
parent or other parent operating units. It is customary to include indemnification clauses in 
the separation and distribution agreement defining the rights and obligations of the parties 
to the separation. Such clauses require that the party assuming responsibility for a liability is 
to be reimbursed by the other party if the future actual cash cost of the liability exceeds the 
amount of the liability at the time it was assumed.
Solvency
Actions taken in allocating long-term debt and other liabilities should consider the im­
pact on the solvency of the spin-off company. If the spin-off company quickly proves not to 
be financially viable, the parent may be compelled to cover the firm’s liabilities because of 

608	
16.  ALTERNATIVE EXIT AND RESTRUCTURING STRATEGIES
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
possible fraudulent conveyance or transfer. That is, the parent may be accused of attempt­
ing to avoid the payment of debt or other obligations by transferring them to the spin-off 
company.
In 2013, a judge ruled that Kerr–McGee had fraudulently transferred profitable oil and 
gas assets from its wholly owned subsidiary, Tronox, to the parent in 2004 reorganiza­
tion, leaving the subsidiary undercapitalized. Tronox was later spun off by Kerr-McGee 
in 2005; 3 months later, Andarko acquired Kerr–McGee’s oil and gas assets. Tronox 
went bankrupt in 2009 unable to meet its environmental cleanup and healthcare obliga­
tions. That same year, Tronox sued both Kerr–McGee (its former parent) and Andarko. 
Andarko eventually had to pay $5.2 billion in 2014 to settle outstanding environmental 
claims.
Board Governance
The directors of the parent’s board do not have a fiduciary obligation to the spin-off 
company. In structuring a spin-off transaction, directors of a solvent corporation have a 
fiduciary responsibility to the shareholders of the prespin company and may structure the 
transaction to maximize value for those shareholders. The parent board may unilaterally 
allocate assets and liabilities between the parent and spin-off company prior to executing 
the spin-off subject to insolvency and tax considerations. Such decisions often are honored 
by the courts as long as it can be demonstrated the board’s decision was made for legitimate 
business purposes.
Human Resource Management
When a subsidiary has been operated as a standalone business, its current management 
usually becomes the management team after the spin-off and its employees generally re­
main with the spin-off company. In spin-offs of divisions that have not been operated on a 
standalone basis, management issues are more challenging. Existing managers of the spin-off 
company often have responsibilities that overlap with businesses to be retained by the parent 
or are valuable to both the parent and the spin-off company. In determining the roles of such 
managers, it is critical to consider their desires in assigning them to the parent or to the spin-
off company. Other challenges in separating employee populations involve the division of 
pension and benefit plans and assets funding such plans, the treatment of stock options, and 
the impact of union contracts, which may restrict how employees and benefit plan assets are 
assigned between the parent and the spin-off company.
KEY RESTRUCTURE LEGAL DOCUMENTS
These typically include a separation and distribution agreement, a transition agreement 
(including employee matters), and tax matters agreement negotiated between the parent and 
spin-off companies. Additional agreements may include patent, trademark, and other intel­
lectual property license arrangements.

	
Comparing Alternative Exit and Restructuring Strategies	
609
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
Separation and Distribution Agreement
Outlining how the separation of the spin-off unit from the parent will be implemented, 
this agreement identifies assets to be transferred, liabilities to be assumed and contracts to be 
assigned to the spin-off firm and the parent. It also explains how and when transfers, liabil­
ity assignments, and contract assignments will occur and governs the rights and obligations 
of the parent and the spin-off company regarding the distribution of the spin-off company’s 
shares.
Transition Agreement
This agreement covers services shared by the parent and the spin-off company. These may 
include legal, payroll, accounting, information technology or benefits, which may have to be 
continued on an interim basis after the separation has taken place. The services may be pro­
vided by the parent to the spin-off company, the spin-off company to the parent or by both, 
with such services valued at market prices.
Tax Matters Agreement
This agreement defines the rights and obligations of the parent and the spin-off company 
if tax liabilities are created due to internal transactions undertaken to implement the spin-off 
(e.g., sale of specific spin-off company assets to other parent subsidiaries). The tax matters 
agreement also allocates tax liabilities between the parent and the spin-off company often by 
making the parent responsible for all taxes incurred before closing and the spin-off company 
responsible for taxes after closing.
To protect the tax-free status of the transaction, the agreement usually contains restric­
tions on the spin-off’s ability to take actions during the two year period following closing 
without obtaining either the parent’s consent or an IRS ruling or opinion of legal counsel 
that the action will not impact the tax treatment of the spin-off. Such restrictions include 
limitations on any transaction that would result in a significant change in ownership of 
the spin-off company (e.g., via merger), a liquidation of the spin-off firm, a sale of a major 
percentage of the spin-off company’s assets, and certain repurchases of stock of the spin-off 
company.
COMPARING ALTERNATIVE EXIT AND RESTRUCTURING 
STRATEGIES
Table 16.4 summarizes the primary characteristics of each of the restructuring strategies 
discussed in this chapter. Note that divestitures and carve-outs provide cash to the parent, 
whereas spin-offs and split-ups do not. The parent remains in existence in all restructuring 
strategies. A new legal entity generally is created with each restructuring strategy. With the 
exception of the carve-out, the parent generally loses control of the division involved in the 
restructuring strategy. Only spin-offs, split-ups, and split-offs are generally not taxable to 
shareholders, if properly structured.

610	
16.  ALTERNATIVE EXIT AND RESTRUCTURING STRATEGIES
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
CHOOSING AMONG DIVESTITURE, CARVE-OUT, AND SPIN-OFF 
RESTRUCTURING STRATEGIES
Parent firms that engage in divestitures often are highly diversified in largely unrelated 
businesses and have a desire to achieve greater focus or to raise cash.25 Those that use carve-
out strategies usually operate businesses in related industries exhibiting some degree of syn­
ergy and have significant contractual obligations to the business and a desire to raise cash.26 
Consequently, the parent firm may pursue a carve-out rather than a divestiture or spin-off 
strategy to retain perceived synergy. Evidence shows that the timing of the carve-out is in­
fluenced by when management sees its subsidiary’s assets as overvalued.27 Firms engaging 
in spin-offs often are diversified, but less so than those that are prone to pursue divestiture 
strategies and have little need to raise cash.28 Table 16.5 identifies characteristics of parent 
firm operating units that are subject to certain types of restructuring activities.
The decision to exit a business is a two-stage process. The first stage involves the firm’s de­
ciding to exit a line of business or product line. The second stage entails selecting the appropri­
ate exit strategy. Divestitures, carve-outs, and spin-offs are the most commonly used restructur­
ing strategy when a parent corporation is considering exiting a business partially or entirely. 
The decision as to which of these three strategies to use is often heavily influenced by the parent 
firm’s need for cash, the degree of synergy between the business to be divested or spun off and 
the parent’s other operating units, and the potential selling price of the division. However, these 
factors are not independent. Parent firms needing cash are more likely to divest or engage in 
an equity carve-out for operations exhibiting high selling prices relative to their synergy value. 
Parent firms not needing cash are more likely to spin off units exhibiting low selling prices and 
synergy with the parent. Parent firms with moderate cash needs are likely to engage in equity 
carve-outs when the unit’s selling price is low relative to perceived synergy.
25Bergh et al., 2007.
26Jain et al., 2011.
27Powers, 2003; Chen and Guo, 2005.
28John and Ofek, 1995; Kaplan and Weisbach, 1992.
TABLE 16.4  Key Characteristics of Alternative Exit and Restructuring Strategies
Alternative Strategies
Characteristics
Divestitures
Equity 
Carve-Outs/IPOs
Spin-Offs
Split-Ups
Split-Offs
Tracking 
Stocks
Cash Infusion to Parent
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Parent Ceases to Exist
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
New Legal Entity Created
Sometimes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
New Shares Issued
Sometimes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Parent Remains in Control
No
Generally
No
No
No
Yes
Taxable to Shareholders
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No

	
Determinants of Returns to Shareholders Resulting From Restructuring Strategies	
611
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
It may seem that a divestiture or carve-out would be preferable to a spin-off if the after-tax 
proceeds from the sale of an operating unit exceed its after-tax equity value to the firm. Unlike 
a spin-off, a divestiture or carve-out generates a cash infusion to the firm. However, a spin-off 
may create greater shareholder wealth, for several reasons. First, a spin-off is tax free to the 
shareholders if it is properly structured. The cash proceeds from an outright sale may be tax­
able to the parent to the extent a gain is realized. Also, management must be able to reinvest 
the after-tax proceeds at or above the firm’s cost of capital. If management chooses to return the 
cash proceeds to shareholders, the shareholders incur a tax liability. Second, a spin-off enables 
the shareholders to decide when to sell their shares. Third, a spin-off may be less traumatic than 
a divestiture for an operating unit. The divestiture process can degrade value if it is lengthy: 
employees leave, worker productivity suffers, and customers may not renew contracts.
DETERMINANTS OF RETURNS TO SHAREHOLDERS RESULTING 
FROM RESTRUCTURING STRATEGIES
Restructuring strategies can create value by increasing parent firm focus, transferring as­
sets to those who can operate them more efficiently, and mitigating agency conflicts and fi­
nancial distress. The empirical support for this statement is discussed next in terms of pre- 
and postannouncement financial returns to shareholders by type of restructuring strategy.
TABLE 16.5  Characteristics of Parent Company Operating Units That Undergo Divestiture, Carve-Out, 
or Spin-Off
Exit/Restructuring Strategy
Characteristics of Operating Unit Subject to Exit/Restructuring Strategy
Divestitures
•	Usually unrelated to other businesses owned by the parent
•	Operating performance generally worse than the parent’s performance
•	Slightly underperform their peers in the year before the announcement date
•	Generally sell at a lower price than carve-outs, as measured by the ratio of 
market value to book assets
Carve-outs
•	Generally more profitable and faster growing than spun-off or divested 
businesses
•	Operating performance often exceeds parent’s
•	Usually operate in industries characterized by the high ratio of market to 
book values
•	Generally outperform peers in the year before the announcement date
Spin-offs
•	Generally faster growing and more profitable than divested businesses
•	Most often operate in industries related to other industries in which the par­
ent operates
•	Operating performance worse than parent’s
•	Slightly underperform peers in the year before the announcement date
From Ravenscraft, D.J., Scherer, F.M., 1991. Divisional sell-off: a hazard function analysis. Manag. Dec. Econ. 12 429–438; Cho, M.H., Cohen, 
M.A.. 1997. The economic causes and consequences of corporate divestiture. Manag. Dec. Econ. 18 367–374; Kang, J.K., Shivdasani, A., 1997. 
Corporate restructuring during performance declines in Japan. J. Fin. Econ. 46, 29–65; Powers, E.A., 2003. Deciphering the motives for equity 
carve-outs. J. Fin. Res. 26 (1), 31–50; Chen, H.L., Guo, R.J., 2005. On corporate divestitures. Rev. Quant. Fin. Acc. 25, 399–421; Bergh, D., 
Johnson, R. Dewitt, R.L., 2007. Restructuring through spin-off or sell-off: transforming information asymmetries into financial gain. Strat. 
Manag. J. 29, 133–148; Prezas, A., Simmonyan, K., 2015. Corporate divestitures: spin-offs v. sell-offs. J. Corp. Fin. 34, 83–107.

612	
16.  ALTERNATIVE EXIT AND RESTRUCTURING STRATEGIES
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
Preannouncement Abnormal Returns
Empirical studies indicate that the alternative restructure and exit strategies discussed in 
this chapter generally provide positive abnormal returns to the shareholders of the company 
implementing the strategy prior to and including the announcement date of such strategies. 
This should not be surprising, since such actions often are undertaken to correct many of 
the problems associated with highly diversified firms, such as having invested in underper­
forming businesses, having failed to link executive compensation to the performance of the 
operations directly under their control, and being too difficult for investors and analysts to 
evaluate. In addition, restructuring strategies involving a divisional or asset sale may create 
value simply because the asset is worth more to another investor. Table 16.6 provides a sum­
mary of the results of selected empirical studies of restructuring activities.
Divestitures
Positive abnormal returns around the announcement date of the restructure strategy aver­
age 1.5% for sellers. Buyers average positive abnormal returns of about 0.5%.29 While both 
sellers and buyers gain from a divestiture, most of the gain appears to accrue to the seller. 
How the total gain is divided ultimately depends on the relative bargaining strength, nego­
tiating skills, and knowledge of the seller and the buyer. Selling firm CEOs are less likely to 
divest businesses in industries with which they are more familiar. When they do, their greater 
familiarity seems to give them an edge in negotiating with buyers. If the seller is highly famil­
iar with the asset to be divested, they are better able to accurately value the asset and to earn 
greater positive abnormal financial returns to seller shareholders, as much as 1.2% more.30
29Hanson and Song, 2000; John and Ofek, 1995.
30Ang et al., 2014a.
TABLE 16.6  Returns to Shareholders of Firms Undertaking Restructuring 
Strategies
Restructuring Strategy
Average Preannouncement 
Abnormal Returns (%)
Divestituresa
1.5
Spin-offsb
3.8
Tracking stocksc
3.0
Equity carve-outsd
3.9
aAllen (2000); Mulherin and Boone (2000); Clubb and Stouraitis (2002); Bates (2005); Slovin et al. (2005); 
Kengelbach et al. (2014); Prezas and Simmonyan (2015).
bLoh et al. (1995); de Vroom and van Frederikslust, 1999; Mulherin and Boone (2000); Davis and Leblond 
(2002); Maxwell and Rao (2003); Veld and Veld-Merkoulova (2004); McNeil and Moore (2005); Harris and 
Glegg (2007); Khorana et al. (2011); Kengelbach et al. (2014); Prezas and Simmonyan (2015).
cLogue et al. (1996); D’Souza and Jacob (2000); Elder and Westra (2000); Chemmanur and Paeglis, 2001; 
Billett and Vijh (2004).
dAllen and McConnell (1998); Vijh (1999); Mulherin and Boone (2000); Prezas et al. (2000); Hogan and 
Olson (2004); Wagner (2004); Kengelbach et al. (2014).

	
Determinants of Returns to Shareholders Resulting From Restructuring Strategies	
613
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
When domestic capital markets are illiquid, domestic firms may find selling assets to for­
eign firms more lucrative than selling them to other domestic firms. Foreign firms may be 
willing to pay a higher purchase price than domestic firms if they have access to cheaper 
sources of funds, a stronger currency, or because they view the purchase as a means of enter­
ing the domestic market. Financial returns to firms selling domestic assets may be as much 
as .55% higher than domestic firms selling foreign assets as information leakage to domestic 
investors prior to the sale often is greater than for investors in foreign countries.31 The magni­
tude of the difference tends to decline for larger asset sales as such divestitures tend to attract 
more domestic and international attention.
INCREASING FOCUS OF THE DIVESTING FIRM
In late 2015, Google Inc. unveiled a sweeping reorganization separating its highly profit­
able search and advertising business from its fledgling research and development invest­
ments including robotics and self-driving cars. The resulting holding company was named 
Alphabet Inc. The search and advertising operations contribute almost 90% of the firm’s total 
revenue and all of its profits. The so-called “moon-shot” investments are intended to identify 
the “next big thing” to propel the firm’s future growth. While billed as an effort to give inves­
tors greater visibility into the cost of these investments and to facilitate managing the increas­
ingly complex firm, the new structure will allow the firm to divest or spin-off the noncore 
businesses in the future.
Google is not alone in its effort to manage complexity. The difficulty in managing diverse 
portfolios of businesses and in valuing accurately these portfolios contributed to the breakup 
of conglomerates in the 1970s and 1980s. Of the acquisitions made between 1970 and 1982 by 
companies in industries unrelated to the acquirer’s primary industry focus, 60% were divest­
ed by 1989. Abnormal returns earned by the shareholders of a firm divesting a business result 
largely from improved management of the assets that remain after the divestiture.32 Divesting 
firms tend also to improve their investment decisions in their remaining businesses following 
divestitures by achieving levels of investment in core businesses comparable to those of their 
more focused peers.33
Some firms seem to prosper despite the growing complexity of their business portfolio. 
Berkshire Hathaway is a prime example. The firm has successfully managed for decades a high­
ly diverse portfolio ranging from cowboy boots, floor enamel and Ginsu knives to ear-piercing 
tools, diamond rings, encyclopedias, candelabras, and refrigerated trailers. The firm also owns 
a variety of insurance businesses and ketchup and other condiments products. Demonstrating 
the firm’s ongoing commitment to managing a diverse business portfolio, Berkshire Hathaway 
made its largest acquisition in 2015 taking control of Precision Castparts, an aerospace equip­
ment supplier, for $32 billion. The firm’s success is perhaps a testimony more to the superb 
investment and management skills of Warren Buffett and the firm’s management culture than 
to the conglomerate as a sustainable business organization. Few have been able to even come 
close to Berkshire Hathaway’s success in managing highly diverse firms.
31Kaprielyan, 2016.
32Petty et al., 1993; John and Ofek, 1995.
33Dittmar and Shivdasani, 2003.

614	
16.  ALTERNATIVE EXIT AND RESTRUCTURING STRATEGIES
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
TRANSFERRING ASSETS TO THOSE WHO CAN USE THEM MORE EFFICIENTLY
Divestitures result in productivity gains by transferring assets from poorly managed sell­
ers to acquirers that are on average better managed. Investors thus have a reasonable expecta­
tion that the acquirer can generate a higher financial return and bid up its share price.34
RESOLVING DIFFERENCES BETWEEN MANAGEMENT AND SHAREHOLDERS (AGENCY 
CONFLICTS)
Conflicts arise when management and shareholders disagree about major corporate deci­
sions. What to do with the proceeds of the sale of assets can result in such a conflict, since they 
can be reinvested in the seller’s remaining operations, distributed to shareholders, or used to 
reduce the firm’s outstanding debt. Abnormal returns on divestiture announcement dates tend 
to be positive when the proceeds are used to pay off debt35 or are distributed to the sharehold­
ers.36 Such results suggest shareholders mistrust management’s ability to invest intelligently.
MITIGATING FINANCIAL DISTRESS
Not surprisingly, empirical studies indicate that firms sell assets when they need cash. The 
period before a firm announces asset sales often is characterized by deteriorating operating 
performance.37 Firms that divest assets often have lower cash balances, cash flow, and bond 
credit ratings than firms exhibiting similar growth, risk, and profitability characteristics.38 
Firms experiencing financial distress are more likely to utilize divestitures as part of their 
restructuring programs than other options, because they generate cash.39
Spin-Offs
At 3.8%, the average abnormal return to parent firm shareholders associated with spin-
off announcements is more than twice the average excess return on divestitures. The dif­
ference in returns is smaller than it appears if we note that some portion of the total gain 
in wealth created by divestitures is shared with the buying firm’s shareholders, who real­
ize synergy in integrating the acquired firm into the buyer. In contrast, the jump in the 
parent firm’s share price following the announcement of a spin-off reflects the total gain 
due to the spin-off. The gap between abnormal returns to shareholders from spin-offs 
versus divestitures also may be attributable to tax considerations. Spin-offs generally are 
tax free, while any gains on divested assets can be subject to double taxation. With spin-
offs, shareholder value is created by increasing the focus of the parent by spinning off un­
related units, providing greater transparency, and transferring wealth from bondholders 
to shareholders.
37Lang et al., 1995; Schlingemann and Wu, 2015.
38Officer, 2007.
39Nixon et al., 2000; Ofek, 1993.
35Kaiser and Stouraitis, 2001; Lang et al., 1995.
36Slovin et al., 2005.
34Using Tobin q-ratios (i.e., the ratio of the market value of a firm to the cost of replacing the firm’s assets) as a 
proxy for better-managed firms, Datta et al. (2003) found that announcement-period returns are highest for transac­
tions in which the buyer’s q-ratio is higher than the seller’s. This implies that the assets are being transferred to a 
better-managed firm. Maksimovic and Phillips (2001) support this conclusion.

	
Determinants of Returns to Shareholders Resulting From Restructuring Strategies	
615
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
INCREASING FOCUS
Spin-offs that increase parent focus (i.e., those that involve unrelated businesses) improve ex­
cess financial returns more than spin-offs that do not increase focus.40 There is also a reduction 
in the diversification discount when a spin-off increases corporate focus, but not for those that 
do not.41 Spin-offs of subsidiaries that are in the same industry as the parent firm do not result 
in positive announcement-date returns because they do little to enhance corporate focus.42 Like 
divestitures, spin-offs contribute to better investment decisions by eliminating the tendency to 
use the cash flows of efficient businesses to finance investment in less efficient business units; 
parent firms also are more likely to invest in their attractive businesses after the spin-off.43
ACHIEVING GREATER TRANSPARENCY (ELIMINATING INFORMATION ASYMMETRIES)
Divestitures and spin-offs that tend to reduce a firm’s complexity help to improve inves­
tors’ ability to evaluate the firm’s operating performance. By reducing complexity, financial 
analysts are better able to forecast earnings accurately.44 Analysts tend to revise upward their 
earnings forecasts of the parent in response to a spin-off.45
WEALTH TRANSFERS
Evidence shows that spin-offs transfer wealth from bondholders to parent stockholders, 
for several reasons.46 First, spin-offs reduce the assets available for liquidation in the event of 
business failure: investors may view the firm’s existing debt as riskier.47 Second, the loss of the 
cash flow generated by the spin-off may result in less total parent cash flow to cover interest 
and principal repayments on the parent’s current debt. In contrast, stockholders benefit from 
holding shares in the parent firm and shares in the unit spun off by the parent, with the latter 
now separate from the parent, having the potential to appreciate in value.
Equity Carve-Outs
Investors view the announcement of a carve-out as the beginning of a series of restructuring 
activities, such as a reacquisition of the unit by the parent, a spin-off, a secondary offering, or 
an M&A. The sizeable announcement-date abnormal returns to parent firm shareholders av­
eraging 3.9% reflect investor anticipated profit from these subsequent events. These abnormal 
positive returns are realized when the parent firm retains a controlling interest after a carve-
out announcement, allowing the parent to initiate these secondary actions.48 Furthermore, 
these returns tend to increase with the size of the carve-out.49 Announcement-date returns are 
40Desai and Jain, 1997.
41Burch and Nanda, 2001; Seoungpil and Denis, 2004.
42Daley et al., 1997.
43Gertner et al., 2002.
44Gilson et al., 2001.
45Huson and MacKinnon, 2003.
46Maxwell and Rao (2003) note that bondholders on average suffer a negative abnormal return of 0.8% in the month 
of the spin-off announcement. Stockholders experience an increase of about 3.6% during the same period.
47Assets actually pledged as collateral to current debt may not be spun off without violating loan covenants.
48Otsubo, 2009.
49Allen and McConnell, 1998; Vijh, 2002.

616	
16.  ALTERNATIVE EXIT AND RESTRUCTURING STRATEGIES
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
significant for both parent firm stock50 and bond51 investors when the parent indicates that the 
majority of the proceeds resulting from the carve-out will be used to redeem debt.
Managers use their inside information about the subsidiary’s growth prospects to decide 
how much of the subsidiary to issue to the public. They are more inclined to retain a larger 
percentage of the business if they feel the unit’s growth prospects are favorable.52 Carve-outs 
may show poorer operating performance than their peers when their parents keep less than 
50% of the subsidiary’s equity. Either the parent chooses not to consolidate the carved-out 
unit due to its expected poor performance or it intends to transfer cash from minority-owned 
businesses through intercompany loans or dividends.53 Value is created by increased parent 
focus, providing a source of financing, and resolving differences between the parent firm’s 
management and shareholders (i.e., agency issues).
INCREASING FOCUS
Parents and subsidiaries involved in carve-outs often are in different industries. Positive 
announcement-date returns tend to be higher for carve-outs of unrelated subsidiaries. This is 
consistent with the common observation that carve-outs are undertaken for businesses that 
do not fit with the parent’s business strategy. It is unclear if operating performance improves 
following equity carve-outs.54 Evidence has shown that both parents and carved-out sub­
sidiaries tend to improve their operating performance relative to their industry peers in the 
year following the carve-out. However, other studies have shown that operating performance 
deteriorates.55
PROVIDING A SOURCE OF FINANCING
Equity carve-outs can help to finance the needs of the parent or the subsidiary. Corpora­
tions tend to choose equity carve-outs and divestitures over spin-offs when the ratio of mar­
ket value to book value and revenue growth of the carved-out unit are high to maximize the 
amount of cash raised.56
RESOLVING AGENCY ISSUES
There is evidence that investor reaction to the announcement of a carve-out is determined 
by how the proceeds are used. Firms announcing that the proceeds will be used to repay 
debt or pay dividends earn a 7% abnormal return, compared to minimal returns for those an­
nouncing that the proceeds will be reinvested in the firm.57
57Allen and McConnell, 1998.
56Chen and Guo, 2005.
50Otsubo, 2013.
51The carve-out proceeds boost bondholder returns as current debt is repurchased. The reduction in outstanding 
debt means less interest expense is incurred and more cash is available for dividend payments and share repur­
chases of stock held by current shareholders. See Thompson and Apilado (2009).
52Powers, 2003.
53Atanasov et al., 2010.
54Vijh, 2002.
55Boone et al., 2003; Powers, 2003.

	
Determinants of Returns to Shareholders Resulting From Restructuring Strategies	
617
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
Tracking Stocks
Reflecting initial investor enthusiasm, a number of studies show that tracking stocks ex­
perience significant positive abnormal returns around their announcement date. Studies ad­
dressing the issue of whether the existence of publicly listed tracking shares increases the 
demand for other stock issued by the parent give mixed results.58 However, there is some 
evidence that investors become disenchanted with tracking stocks over time, with excess 
shareholder returns averaging 13.9% around the date of the announcement that firms would 
eliminate their target stock issues.59
Post-Carve-Out and Post-Spin-Off Returns to Shareholders
Carve-outs and spin-offs are more likely to outperform the broader stock market indices 
because their share prices reflect speculation that they will be acquired rather than any im­
provement in the operating performance of the units. One-third of spin-offs are acquired 
within 3 years after the unit is spun off by the parent. Once those spin-offs that have been 
acquired are removed from the sample, the remaining spin-offs generally perform no better 
than their peers.60 Spin-offs may create value by simply providing an efficient method of 
transferring assets to acquiring companies.61
Spin-offs involving parents and subsidiaries in different countries often show significant pos­
itive abnormal returns. The magnitude of the wealth gain accruing to holders of stock in the unit 
spun off by the parent is higher in countries where takeover activity is high. This reflects the in­
creased likelihood that the spun-off units will become takeover targets.62 There is some evidence 
that spun-off units show productivity gains as a result of a reduction in total wage costs and 
employment, perhaps reflecting improved management attention and discipline. Such gains 
start immediately following the spin-off and tend to persist of as much as 5 years.63
Smaller spin-offs (i.e., those with a market cap of less than $200 million) tend to outperform 
larger ones (i.e., those with a market cap greater than $200 million).64 This may be a result of 
a tendency of investors who are relatively unfamiliar with the business that is spun off by the 
parent to undervalue the spin-off. Carve-outs that are largely independent of the parent (i.e., 
in which the parent tended to own less than 50% of the equity) tended to outperform the S&P 
500 significantly.65 The evidence for the long-term performance of tracking stocks is mixed.66
58Clayton and Qian (2004) found evidence that parent shares rise following the issuance of publicly listed tracking 
stocks. However, Elder and Westra (2000) find no evidence that tracking shares lead to greater interest in the par­
ent’s and other subsidiary shares.
59Billett and Vijh, 2004.
60Cusatis et al., 1993.
61McConnell et al., 2001.
62Harris and Glegg, 2007.
63Chemmanur et al., 2014.
64Morgan, 1999.
65Annema et al., 2002.
66Chemmanur and Paeglis (2001) found that the stock of parent firms tends to underperform the major stock indi­
ces, while the average tracking stock outperforms its industry stock index. However, Billett and Vijh (2004) found 
negative financial returns following the issue date for tracking stocks and positive but statistically insignificant 
returns for parents.

618	
16.  ALTERNATIVE EXIT AND RESTRUCTURING STRATEGIES
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
SOME THINGS TO REMEMBER
Divestitures, spin-offs, equity carve-outs, split-ups, and split-offs are commonly used re­
structuring strategies to redeploy assets by returning cash or noncash assets through a spe­
cial dividend to shareholders or to use cash proceeds to pay off debt. On average, these re­
structuring strategies create positive abnormal financial returns for shareholders around the 
announcement date because they tend to correct problems facing the parent. However, the 
longer-term performance of spin-offs, carve-outs, and tracking stocks is problematic.
CHAPTER DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
16.1	 What are the advantages and disadvantages of tracking stocks to investors and the firm?
16.2	 How would you decide when to sell a business?
16.3	 What factors influence a parent firm’s decision to undertake a spin-off rather than a 
divestiture or equity carve-out?
16.4	 How might the form of payment affect the abnormal return to sellers and buyers?
16.5	 How might spin-offs result in a transfer of wealth from bondholders to shareholders?
16.6	 Explain how executing successfully a large-scale divestiture can be highly complex. 
This is especially true when the divested unit is integrated with the parent’s functional 
departments and other units operated by the parent. Consider the challenges of timing, 
interdependencies, regulatory requirements, and customer and employee perceptions.
16.7	 In an effort to increase shareholder value, USX announced its intention to split US 
Steel and Marathon Oil into two separately traded companies. The breakup gives 
holders of Marathon Oil stock an opportunity to participate in the ongoing consoli­
dation within the global oil and gas industry. Holders of USX–US Steel Group com­
mon stock (target stock) would become holders of newly formed Pittsburgh-based 
United States Steel Corporation. What other alternatives could USX have pursued to 
increase shareholder value? Why do you believe they pursued the breakup strategy 
rather than some of the alternatives?
16.8	 Hewlett-Packard announced in 1999 the spin-off of its Agilent Technologies unit to 
focus on its main business of computers and printers. HP retained a controlling inter­
est until mid-2000, when it spun off the rest of its shares in Agilent to HP sharehold­
ers as a tax-free transaction. Discuss the reasons why HP may have chosen a staged 
transaction rather than an outright divestiture or spin-off of the business.
16.9	 After months of trying to sell its 81% stake in Blockbuster Inc., Viacom undertook 
a spin-off in mid-2004. Why would Viacom choose to spin off rather than divest its 
Blockbuster unit? Explain your answer.
16.10	 Since 2001, GE, the world’s largest conglomerate, had been underperforming the 
S&P 500 stock index. In late 2008, the firm announced that it would spin off its con­
sumer and industrial unit. What do you believe are GE’s motives for their proposed 
restructuring? Why do you believe they chose a spin-off rather than an alternative 
restructuring strategy?
Answers to these Chapter Discussion Questions are found in the Online Instructor’s Manual for 
instructors using this book (https://textbooks.elsevier.com/web/Manuals.aspx?isbn=9780128016091).

	
Chapter Discussion Questions	
619
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
END OF CHAPTER CASE STUDY: THE ANATOMY OF A 
REVERSE MORRIS TRUST TRANSACTION—THE COTY 
COSMETICS SAGA
Key Points
•	 Greater shareholder value may be created by exiting rather than operating a business.
•	 How? By increasing the focus of the parent firm exiting the business.
•	 How the deal is structured also can create shareholder value.
Consumer product giant Proctor & Gamble (P&G) agreed to sell its portfolio of 43 beauty brands 
to beauty products maker Coty Inc. (Coty) for $12.5 billion on July 8, 2015. Included in the deal are 
professional salon and retail hair products like Nice & Easy and VS Salonist, as well as cosmetics 
and fine fragrances from Gucci and Dolce & Gabbana. The deal is part of P&G’s strategy to shed 
more than 100 brands and focus on 10 core product lines, like Tide, that tend to grow faster than the 
beauty brands.
Coty, owned by European firm JAB Cosmetis B. V., sells fragrances, skin products and cosmet­
ics from brands including Calvin Klein, Marc Jacobs and Chloe. This transaction creates one of 
the world’s largest beauty products companies. Coty hopes its global marketing and distribution 
network and widely recognized brand will reinvigorate growth for many of the beauty products 
acquired from P&G.
The deal was structured as a reverse Morris Trust in which P&G created a separate subsid­
iary spun off to its shareholders through a split-off to become a public company and subse­
quently merged with Coty Cosmetics. P&G shareholders post deal will own 52% of the com­
bined company with Coty’s current shareholders owning the remainder. The new firm will 
have $10 billion in annual revenue. Under the Reverse Morris Trust split off, P&G shareholders 
could elect to participate in an offer to exchange P&G common shares they hold for common 
shares of a newly created subsidiary. The company’s shareholders would have the option of 
exchanging all, some or none of their shares. Any shares not exchanged through the split-off 
exchange offer were transferred to P&G’s current shareholders on a pro rata basis through a 
spin-off.
Neither the split-off nor the spin-off creates an immediate tax liability for the firm’s sharehold­
ers, as any taxes owed would be deferred until shareholders sold their shares in the newly created 
subsidiary. The new entity created by the split off is immediately merged with a new wholly-owned 
merger subsidiary created by Coty. The Reverse Morris Trust acquisition combines a divisive reor­
ganization (e.g., a spin-off or split-off) with an acquisitive reorganization (e.g., a statutory merger) 
to allow a tax-free transfer of a subsidiary under US law. The use of a divisive reorganization results 
in the creation of a public company which is subsequently merged into a shell subsidiary of another 
firm, with the shell surviving.
Had P&G sold these 43 brands through an asset sale, the firm would have been subject to an 
immediate tax liability on the difference between their sale and book values. If the proceeds of the 
sale had been distributed to shareholders as a special dividend, the shareholders would have been 
required to pay taxes on the dividend at their personal tax rates resulting in double taxation on any 
gains on the sale of these brands: once by P&G and again by the firm’s shareholders.

620	
16.  ALTERNATIVE EXIT AND RESTRUCTURING STRATEGIES
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
The purchase price or enterprise value of $12.5 billion included Coty’s assumption of debt total­
ing $1.9 billion. The $10.6 billion ($12.5–$1.9) equity portion of the purchase price negotiated for the 
43 P&G beauty brands reflected the present value of projected net cash flows of the brands plus an 
appropriate premium to justify the transfer of ownership to Coty. Based on Coty’s common stock 
price at the time of the announcement, Coty would have to issue 411 million new shares valued at 
$25.79 per share (i.e., $10.6 billion/Coty’s then share price = 411 million shares). The Coty share 
price was allowed to fluctuate within a $22.06 and $27.06 collar based on the trading price of Coty’s 
stock prior to the close of the transaction.
The tax-efficient nature of the $12.5 billion offer maximizes value for P&G shareholders and 
minimizes annual earnings dilution. P&G’s earnings per share will be impacted by two offsetting 
factors. The loss of the earnings per share associated with the divested beauty brands will be more 
than offset on an annualized basis following the closing of the transaction through a combination of 
P&G shares retired via the split-off and a reduction in overhead expenses associated with the P&G 
subsidiary containing the divested brands.
Fig 16.3 illustrates the three stages of the deal: (1) the creation of the wholly owned sub­
sidiary of P&G called RMT Brands into which the assets and liabilities associated with the 43 
brands are transferred in exchange for the common stock of the subsidiary, (2) the exchange 
offer to P&G shareholders allowing them to exchange P&G shares for RMT Brands common 
shares (split-off), and (3) the reverse merger of RMT Brands into Coty’s Merger Sub with Merg­
er Sub surviving the deal. Note the numbers in parentheses in Fig. 16.3 refer to each stage of 
the transaction. To implement the reverse merger, the RMT Brands common shares distributed 
in connection with the split-off exchange offer automatically convert into the right to receive 
common shares of Coty Cosmetics on a one for one basis. After the reverse merger, Coty Cos­
metics owned RMT Brands through its Merger Sub. P&G shareholders not exchanging their 
RMT Brand shares for Coty shares could be “squeezed out” by Coty through a backend merger 
at a later date.
Chapter Discussion Questions
16.1	 The merger of Coty and the P&G subsidiary RMT Brands could have been achieved 
as a result of a P&G spin-off of RMT Brands. Explain the details of how this might have 
happened.
16.2	 Speculate as to why P&G chose to split-off rather than spin-off RMT Brands as part its plan 
to merge RMT Brands with Coty. Be specific.
16.3	 What are the Morris Trust tax regulations? How did they affect how this deal was 
structured?
16.4	 How is value created for the P&G and Coty shareholders in this type of transaction?
16.5	 Why is the percentage distribution of ownership in the newly created firm following closing 
important in a Reverse Morris Trust transaction?
16.6	 What was the purpose of the collar arrangement used in this deal? How could it protect both 
P&G and Coty shareholders?
Solutions to this case study are found in the Online Instructors Manual for instructors using this 
book (https://textbooks.elsevier.com/web/Manuals.aspx?isbn=9780128016091).

	
Chapter Discussion Questions	
621
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
Postmerger structure
P&G shareholders 
Merger Sub 
(RMT brands)
Coty cosmetics
RMT brands 
subsidiary
Proctor & gamble 
46 Beauty 
brands (1)
RMT common 
equity (1)
Coty Inc.
Coty Merger Sub
(Merger Sub 
survives)
P&G assets and
liabilities
(excl. divested
brands)   
P&G assets and
liabilities (excl.
divested brands)  
Coty shareholders
RMT common 
equity (2)
P&G
common 
equity (2)
Coty common
equity (3)
RMT brands merges 
into Merger Sub
P&G
shareholders
Coty 
shareholders
Proctor & gamble 
Coty cosmetics 
Premerger and presplit-off
structure 
Reverse morris trust split-off structure
P&G shareholders
Coty 
shareholders
RMT common 
equity (3)
FIGURE 16.3  Reverse Morris trust split-off transaction.

622	
16.  ALTERNATIVE EXIT AND RESTRUCTURING STRATEGIES
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
A D D I T I O N A L  C A S E  S T U D Y  R E C O M M E N D AT I O N S , 
S E A R C H  H A RVA R D  B U S I N E S S  S C H O O L 
P U B L I S H I N G  S I T E ,  B Y  N A M E  O F  C A S E : 
h b s p . h a r v a r d . e d u )
E.I. du Pont de Nemours and Co.: The 
Conoco Split-off, Stuart C. Gilson, Perry L. 
Fagan, Revision Date: July 25, 2005, Product 
Number: 202005-PDF-ENG, Source: Harvard 
Business School, hbsp.harvard.edu
Subjects Covered: Split-offs, Business 
Strategy, Corporate Restructuring, Strategic 
Options including Spin Offs, Asset Sales, 
Tracking Stocks, and Split Offs
Debate Over Unbundling General Motors: 
The Delphi Divestiture and Other Possible 
Transactions, Malcolm S Salter, Revision 
Date: June 12, 2002, Product Number: 
800196-PDF-ENG, Source: Harvard Business 
School, hbsp.harvard.edu
Subjects Covered: Divestitures, Spin-Offs, 
Corporate Strategy
Deal Making in Troubled Waters: The 
ABN AMRO Takeover, Didier Cossin, 
Luc Keuleneer, Revision Date: Jun 3, 2010, 
Product Number: IMD255-PDF-ENG, 
Source: IMD, hbsp.harvard.edu
Subjects Covered: Restructuring, Spin-
Offs, Divestitures, Integration Planning

C H A P T E R
623
Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring Activities. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-801609-1.00017-8
Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
17
Alternative Exit and 
Restructuring Strategies
Bankruptcy Reorganization and Liquidation
O U T L I N E
Inside M&A: Hercules Offshore Inc. 
Emerges From Court Protection 
Through a Prepackaged 
Bankruptcy	
624
Chapter Overview	
625
Business Failure	
626
Voluntary Settlement Outside of 
Bankruptcy Court	
627
Voluntary Settlements Resulting 
in Continued Operation	
627
Voluntary Settlement Resulting 
in Liquidation	
629
Reorganization and Liquidation in 
Bankruptcy	
629
The Evolution of US Bankruptcy 
Laws and Practices	
629
Filing for Chapter 11 Reorganization	
631
Implementing Chapter 7 Liquidation	
632
“Section 363 Sales” from Chapter 11	
633
Chapter 15: Dealing with Cross-Border 
Bankruptcy	
636
Motivations for Filing for Bankruptcy	
636
The High Cost of Bankruptcy	
637
Prepackaged Bankruptcies	
637
Alternative Options for Failing Firms	
638
Merging with Another Firm	
638
Reaching an Out-of-Court Voluntary 
Settlement with Creditors	
639
Voluntary and Involuntary Liquidations	 640
The Increasing Role of Hedge Funds 
in the Bankruptcy Process	
640
Failing Firms and Systemic Risk	
641
Predicting Corporate Default and 
Bankruptcy	
642
Empirical Studies of Financial 
Distress	
645
Attractive Returns to Firms Emerging 
from Bankruptcy Are Often 
Temporary	
645
Returns to Financially Distressed 
Stocks Are Unexpectedly Low	
645

624	
17.  ALTERNATIVE EXIT AND RESTRUCTURING STRATEGIES
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
Success breeds disregard for the possibility of failure. —Hyman P. Minsky
INSIDE M&A: HERCULES OFFSHORE INC. EMERGES FROM COURT 
PROTECTION THROUGH A PREPACKAGED BANKRUPTCY
KEY POINTS
•	 Chapter 11 provides an opportunity for debtor firms to reorganize, restructure their liabilities, 
and to emerge as financially viable firms
•	 Debt-for-equity swaps are often used by creditors to recover all or a portion of what they are 
owed
•	 “Prepackaged” bankruptcy offers the potential for expediting the bankruptcy process saving 
millions of dollars in legal expenses.
With crude prices plunging to a seven year low, energy exploration and production com­
panies reduced dramatically spending on costly off shore drilling projects given narrowing 
profit margins. Consequently, offshore oil and gas exploration came to a virtual standstill 
in 2015. Moreover, with the global economy showing few signs of economic growth, OPEC 
members continuing to pump at capacity, and oil inventories worldwide brimming, there 
was little prospect that oil prices would improve significantly in the foreseeable future.
Cash strapped offshore drillers were running out of options. Seeking protection from their 
creditors by filing for Chapter 11 bankruptcy reorganization may be the only option for many. 
Chapter 11 is that section of the US Bankruptcy Code that allows debtors to cease payment 
to their creditors while developing a plan to restructure the business in such a way that it can 
again be financially viable. While shareholders and bondholders may incur losses, jobs are 
saved, damage to communities minimized, and the firm often continues as a tax paying entity 
once its operating income improves.
It is against this backdrop that Hercules Offshore Drilling Inc. (Hercules) announced that 
it was filing a “prepackaged” Chapter 11 bankruptcy in August 2015. Chapter 11 reorganiza­
tions often are lengthy and very expensive in terms of legal and consulting fees and in no way 
guarantee that the firm will in fact achieve financial health. The length of time in bankruptcy 
protection can often undermine the capability of the firm because key employees, customers, 
and suppliers leave.
IPOs are More Likely to Experience 
Bankruptcy than are Established Firms	 646
Financially Ailing Firms Can 
Be Contagious	
646
Some Things to Remember	
647
Chapter Discussion Questions	
647
Case Study: Arch Coal Files for 
Chapter 11 Bankruptcy Protection	
648
Key Points	
648
Chapter Discussion Questions	
651
Additional Case Study 
Recommendations	
651

	
Chapter Overview	
625
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
Accelerating the process can often increase the likelihood of saving a financially belea­
guered firm. This is where a “prepackaged” bankruptcy can be helpful as the debtor gets a 
consensus among its major creditors to restructure outstanding debt before filing for Chap­
ter 11. Prepackaged bankruptcies can shave 9 months or more off the length of time the firm 
remains in bankruptcy, saving 10 millions of dollars in bankruptcy related expenses.
For Hercules, this strategy proved successful as it was able to emerge from Chapter 11, 
2 months after filing. At the time of filing the firm had $546 million in assets and $1.32 million 
in total liabilities, of which $1.2 billion was long-term debt. The firm had $81 million in cash 
on hand. During the several months preceding filing, the firm had terminated more than 40% 
of its employees and cut the number of drilling rigs it operates by half. The firm also sold four 
of its Gulf of Mexico rigs and “moth-balled” several more. Revenue tumbled by two-thirds 
during the first 6 months of 2015 over the same period the prior year.
In a so-called debt for equity swap negotiated before filing, Hercules was able to get nearly 
all of its senior bondholders to agree to exchange $1.2 billion in debt for equity in the new 
Hercules that would emerge from Chapter 11 bankruptcy. This would dramatically improve 
the firm’s operating cash flow but would nearly wipe out existing shareholders. As part of 
the restructuring process, Hercules obtained $450 million in new financing backed by an ex­
isting contract. This money was used to complete the construction of a new offshore drilling 
rig which has a 5 year drilling contract with Maersk Sealand. Current liabilities were paid in 
full. The firm’s shareholders prior to the Chapter 11 filing were offered only 3% of the equity 
in the reorganized company emerging from bankruptcy. It is rare in Chapter 11 bankruptcies 
that existing common shareholders are recover much of their investment.
CHAPTER OVERVIEW
In a case of ambitions outpacing reality, renewable energy giant SunEdison filed for bank­
ruptcy in 2016 bringing to a close its determination to become the world’s leading renewable 
energy business. The firm’s financial situation had become perilous following a series of ac­
quisitions of firms, financed largely with debt, in the wind and residential solar industries in 
the United States and abroad designed to hype growth.
Sun Edison was not alone in running on financial hard times in 2016. Elon Musk, CEO and 
major stockholder in both firms, merged electric car maker Tesla with solar panel manufac­
turer and installer Solarcity to avoid the latter from defaulting on its outstanding debt. Other 
well-known renewable energy firms were at various stages of restructuring including mul­
tinational solar and biofuel giant Spanish based Abengoa; Solazyme, a maker of algae based 
biofuels, which abandoned the energy markets by changing its name to focus on personal 
care and food products; and NRG, which withdrew from what had been a headlong rush into 
alternative fuels.
Several years ago solar module maker, Solyndra, despite more than one-half billion dol­
lars in government loans, was forced into bankruptcy. Dozens of solar companies around the 
globe have disappeared in recent years or are on the verge of doing so. Despite heavy govern­
ment subsidies in the form of tax credits to customers or subsidized government loans, green 
energy companies have yet to find enough customers to support the costly infrastructures 
needed to support anticipated growth. Many of them have turned to bankruptcy.

626	
17.  ALTERNATIVE EXIT AND RESTRUCTURING STRATEGIES
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
The purpose of this chapter is to explore the mechanics of the bankruptcy process and when 
and how it may be used to restructure firms such as Hercules Offshore and the myriad green 
energy companies currently in bankruptcy. Bankruptcy and liquidation can be viewed as 
alternative restructuring and exit strategies for failing firms. How reorganization and liquida­
tion take place both inside and outside the protection of the bankruptcy court are examined in 
detail. This chapter also discusses common strategic options for failing firms, the current state 
of bankruptcy prediction models, and empirical studies of the performance of firms experi­
encing financial distress. A review of this chapter (including practice questions with answers) 
is available in the file folder entitled “Student Study Guide” on the companion website to this 
book (https://www.elsevier.com/books-and-journals/book-companion/9780128016091).
BUSINESS FAILURE
Failing firms may be subject to financial distress, as measured by declining asset values, 
liquidity, and cash flow. The term financial distress does not have a strict technical or legal defi­
nition. The term applies to a firm that is unable to meet its obligations or to a specific security 
on which the issuer has defaulted.1 Technical insolvency arises when a firm is unable to pay its 
liabilities when due. Legal insolvency occurs when a firm’s liabilities exceed the fair market 
value of its assets, since creditors’ claims cannot be satisfied unless the firm’s assets can be 
liquidated for more than the book value of the firm’s liabilities. A federal legal proceeding de­
signed to protect the technically or legally insolvent firm from lawsuits by its creditors until 
a decision can be made to close or continue to operate the firm is called bankruptcy. A firm is 
not bankrupt or in bankruptcy until it files, or its creditors file, a petition for reorganization or 
liquidation with the federal bankruptcy courts.2
Receivership can be an alternative to bankruptcy in which a court- or government-appointed 
individual (i.e., a receiver) takes control of the assets and affairs of a business to administer 
them according to the court’s or government’s directives. The purpose of a receiver may be 
to serve as a custodian while disputes between officers, directors, or stockholders are settled 
or to liquidate the firm’s assets. Under no circumstances can the firm’s debt be discharged 
without the approval of the bankruptcy court. In most states, receivership cannot take effect 
unless a lawsuit is under way and the court has determined that receivership is appropriate.
Conservatorship represents a less restrictive alternative to receivership. While the receiver 
is expected to terminate the rights of shareholders and managers, a conservator is expected 
merely to assume these rights temporarily. For example, in July 2008, the failing IndyMac Bank 
was taken into administrative receivership by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, 
1Default is defined by Moody’s Credit Rating Agency as any delinquent payout of interest or principal, bankruptcy, 
receivership, or an exchange that reduces the value of what is owed; e.g., the issuer might offer bondholders a new 
security or combination of securities, such as preferred or common stock, or debt with a lower coupon worth less 
than what they are owed.
2The terms liquidity and solvency often are used inappropriately. Liquidity is the ability of a business to have suf­
ficient cash on hand (as opposed to tied up in receivables and inventory) to meet its immediate obligations without 
having to incur significant losses in selling assets. Insolvency means that a firm cannot pay its bills under any 
circumstances. A liquid business is more likely to be solvent (i.e., able to pay its bills); however, not all businesses 
that are liquid are solvent, and not all solvent businesses have adequate liquidity.

	
Voluntary Settlement Outside of Bankruptcy Court	
627
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
and the bank’s assets and secured liabilities were transferred into a “bridge bank” called 
IndyMac Federal Bank until the assets could be liquidated. Also in September 2008, the CEO 
and the boards of the Federal National Mortgage Association and the Federal Home Loan 
Mortgage Corporation were dismissed, and the firms were put under the conservatorship of 
the Federal Housing Finance Agency while their asset portfolios were reduced.
A debtor firm and its creditors may choose to reach a negotiated settlement outside of bank­
ruptcy, within the protection of the court, or through a prepackaged bankruptcy, which rep­
resents a blend of the first two options. The following sections discuss each of these options.
VOLUNTARY SETTLEMENT OUTSIDE OF BANKRUPTCY COURT
An insolvent firm and its creditors may agree to restructure the firm’s obligations out of 
court to avoid the costs of bankruptcy proceedings, because this generally offers the best 
chance for creditors to recover the largest percentage of what they are owed and owners some 
portion of their investment in the firm.3 This process normally involves the debtor firm’s 
requesting a meeting with its creditors. A committee of creditors is selected to analyze the 
debtor firm’s financial position and recommend a course of action: whether the firm contin­
ues to operate or is liquidated.
Voluntary Settlements Resulting in Continued Operation
Plans to restructure the debtor firm developed cooperatively with creditors commonly 
are called workouts, arrangements outside of bankruptcy by a debtor and its creditors for 
payment or rescheduling of payment of the debtor’s obligations. Because of the firm’s weak 
financial position, the creditors must be willing to restructure the insolvent firm’s debts to en­
able it to sustain its operations. Lenders with preexisting relationships with the debtor may be 
more willing to renegotiate loan terms (i.e., restructure debt) due to their greater familiarity 
with the firm’s management and financial statements.4
Debt restructuring involves concessions by creditors that lower an insolvent firm’s pay­
ments so that it may remain in business. Restructuring normally is accomplished in three 
ways: via an extension, a composition, or a debt-for-equity swap. An extension occurs when 
creditors agree to lengthen the period during which the debtor firm can repay its debt. Credi­
tors often agree to suspend temporarily both interest and principal repayments. A composition 
is an agreement in which creditors agree to receive less than the full amount they are owed. 
A debt-for-equity swap occurs when creditors surrender a portion of their claims on the firm in 
exchange for an ownership position in the firm. If the reduced debt service payments enable 
the firm to prosper, the value of the stock in the long run may far exceed the amount of debt 
the creditors were willing to forgive.
Exhibit 17.1 depicts a debt restructure that enables the firm to continue operation by con­
verting debt to equity. Although the firm, Survivor Inc., has positive earnings before interest 
and taxes, they are not enough to meet its interest payments. When principal payments are 
3Jankowitsch et al., 2014
4Rosenfeld, 2014

628	
17.  ALTERNATIVE EXIT AND RESTRUCTURING STRATEGIES
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
considered, cash flow becomes negative, rendering the firm technically insolvent. As a result 
of the restructuring of the firm’s debt, Survivor Inc. is able to continue to operate; however, 
the firm’s lenders now have a controlling interest in the firm. Note that the same type of 
restructuring could take place either voluntarily outside the courts or as a result of reorganiz­
ing under the protection of the bankruptcy court. The latter scenario is discussed later in this 
chapter Tables 17.1 and 17.2.
EXHIBIT 17.1  SURVIVOR INC. RESTRUCTURES ITS DEBT
Survivor Inc. currently has 400,000 shares of common equity outstanding at a par value of $10 per 
share. The current rate of interest on its debt is 8%, and the debt is amortized over 20 years. The com­
bined federal, state, and local tax rate is 40%. The firm’s cash flow and capital position are shown in 
Table 17.1. Assume that bondholders are willing to convert $5 million of debt to equity at the current 
par value of $10 per share. This necessitates that Survivor Inc. issue 500,000 new shares. These actions 
result in positive cash flow, a substantial reduction in the firm’s debt-to-total capital ratio, and a trans­
fer of control to the bondholders. The former stockholders now own only 44.4% (4 million/9 million) 
of the company. The revised cash flow and capital position are shown in Table 17.2.
TABLE 17.1  Cash Flow and Capital Position
Income and cash flow
Total capital
Earnings before interest and taxes
$500,000
Debt
$10,000,000
Interest
$800,000
Equity
$4,000,000
Earnings before taxes
$(300,000)
  Total
$14,000,000
Taxes
$120,000
Earnings after taxes
$(180,000)
Debt/total capital
71.4%
Depreciation
$400,000
Principal repayment
$(500,000)
Cash flow
$(280,000)
TABLE 17.2  Revised Cash Flow and Capital Position
Income and cash flow
Total capital
Earnings before interest and taxes
$500,000
Debt
$5,000,000
Interest
$400,000
Equity
$9,000,000
Earnings before taxes
$100,000
  Total
$14,000,000
Taxes
$40,000
Earnings after taxes
$60,000
Debt/total capital
35.7%
Depreciation
$400,000
Principal repayment
$(250,000)
Cash flow
$210,000

	
Reorganization and Liquidation in Bankruptcy	
629
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
Voluntary Settlement Resulting in Liquidation
If the creditors conclude that the insolvent firm’s situation cannot be resolved, liquidation 
may be the only acceptable course of action. Liquidation can be conducted outside the court 
in a private liquidation or through the United States bankruptcy court. If the insolvent firm is 
willing to accept liquidation and all creditors agree, legal proceedings are not necessary. Credi­
tors normally prefer private liquidations to avoid lengthy and costly litigation. Through a pro­
cess called an assignment, a committee representing creditors grants the power to liquidate the 
firm’s assets to a third party, called an assignee or trustee. The responsibility of the assignee is to 
sell the assets as quickly as possible while obtaining the best possible price. The assignee distrib­
utes the proceeds of the asset sales to the creditors and the firm’s owners if any monies remain.
REORGANIZATION AND LIQUIDATION IN BANKRUPTCY
In the absence of a voluntary settlement out of court, the debtor firm may seek protection 
from its creditors by initiating bankruptcy or may be forced into bankruptcy by its creditors. 
When the debtor firm files the petition with the bankruptcy court, the bankruptcy is said to be 
voluntary. When creditors do the filing, the action is said to be involuntary. Once a bankruptcy 
petition is filed, the debtor firm is protected from any further legal action related to its debts 
until the bankruptcy proceedings are completed. The filing of a petition triggers an automatic 
stay once the court accepts the request, which provides a period suspending all judgments, 
collection activities, foreclosures, and repossessions of property by the creditors on any debt 
or claim that arose before the filing of the bankruptcy petition.
Whether a firm in bankruptcy is reorganized or liquidated depends on a number of factors. 
These include the viability of the plan proposed for reorganization, the relative leverage of the 
constituent groups having claims on the firm’s assets, and the perceived competence of the firm’s 
management. While difficult to measure, there also is evidence the perceived integrity of a bank­
rupt firm’s management affects the likelihood the firm will be reorganized. Firms in bankruptcy 
whose managers have not misstated earnings in the past are more likely to be reorganized than 
those that have.5 Managers having misstated earnings may want to hide bad financial decisions 
by compromising the accuracy of financial data. While bankruptcy court judges may replace 
such management with a court-appointed trustee, they are still faced with a dilemma: Is the true 
financial state of the firm knowable if extensive manipulation of financial data has taken place? 
Consequently, when the data underlying reorganization plans submitted by the bankrupt firm 
to the court is dubious, judges are inclined to rule that the firm be liquidated.
The Evolution of US Bankruptcy Laws and Practices
US bankruptcy laws focus on rehabilitating and reorganizing debtors in distress. Modern 
bankruptcy laws are intended to create a mechanism for creditors to deal with an insolvent 
debtor, to whenever possible provide an opportunity for debtors to start over, and to pre­
serve whenever possible the going-concern value of firms in financial distress by reorganiz­
ing rather liquidating them.
5Milano and Campa, 2014

630	
17.  ALTERNATIVE EXIT AND RESTRUCTURING STRATEGIES
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
These laws endeavor to balance the rights of creditors and borrowers in a manner that 
treats both parties in a uniform and fair manner. Creditor rights include the ability of a lender 
to file a lawsuit in the court system to recover what they are owed in a manner prescribed by 
law. Borrower rights include full disclosure of their legal protections from unreasonable and 
unfair treatment by creditors.
The equitable treatment of both creditors and borrowers impacts the availability and cost 
of credit as well as the extent to which it is used. Giving borrowers fair and equal access to 
credit can fuel economic growth by stimulating consumption and business investment. By 
providing creditors with the right to recover at least a portion of what they are owed through 
the court system, interest rates on loans tend to be lower in line with the reduction in risk 
to lenders. Such creditor protections also influence the amount of debt used by corporate 
borrowers. There is evidence that firms in countries granting creditors strong legal rights to 
recover what they are owed tend to be less leveraged than those in countries with weaker 
creditor rights. Why? Managers and shareholders are concerned about losing control if forced 
by lenders to reorganize their firms, and this concern can outweigh the lower cost of borrow­
ing in countries with stronger creditor protections.6
While there are clear benefits to allowing ailing firms to reorganize under the protection of 
the bankruptcy court, the bankruptcy process can slow the pace at which redundant capacity is 
eliminated. For example, in the fossil fuels markets declining oil and coal prices were expected 
to cause a significant reduction in production capacity allowing available supply to adjust to 
meet lower demand. In practice, despite more than 70 oil and gas companies having filed for 
bankruptcy by the end of 2016, these companies collectively continued to produce about one 
million barrels per day or about 5% of US oil output. In the coal industry, the five largest coal 
mining firms accounting for 36% of US coal production have declared bankruptcy since mid-
2015. According to IHS Global Energy, while their collective output did decline slightly in line 
with the total industry, their share of total industry output exceeded one third by the end of 2016, 
reflecting their ability to maintain production levels. Lenders, reluctant to actually take control 
of assets that have been used as collateral since there often are few buyers due to depressed 
oil and coal prices, have been willing to renegotiate loan terms and forgive a portion of what 
they are owed in order to recover as much as they can. As long as oil and coal extraction firms 
are able to operate such that their revenue exceeds their operating expenses they will be able to 
pay a portion of their fixed expenses, such as interest and principal on outstanding debt.
Rules and practices governing bankruptcy before the 20th century generally favored the 
creditor and were more severe with respect to the bankrupt party. More recent bankruptcy 
laws and practices emphasize rehabilitating debtors in distress by requiring them to reorga­
nize with less emphasis on punishing the debtor.
Article I, Section 8, of the US Constitution authorizes Congress to enact laws pertaining to 
bankruptcy. Based on this authority, Congress passed the “bankruptcy code” in 1978, which 
is codified as Title 11 of the United States Legal Code. This law is the uniform federal law that 
governs all bankruptcy cases. Since 1978, this law has been amended several times. Except 
for Chapter 12, all the chapters of the present Bankruptcy Code are odd-numbered. Chap­
ters. 1, 3, and 5 cover matters of general application, while Chapters. 7, 9, 11, 12, and 13 con­
cern liquidation (business or nonbusiness), municipality bankruptcy, business reorganiza­
6Cho et al., 2014.

	
Reorganization and Liquidation in Bankruptcy	
631
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
tion, family farm debt adjustment, and wage-earner or personal reorganization, respectively. 
Chapter 15 applies to international cases.
The Bankruptcy Reform Act of 1978 changed the bankruptcy laws substantially by adding 
a strong business reorganization mechanism, referred to as Chapter 11 of the US Bankruptcy 
Code. The 1978 law also broadened the conditions under which companies could file so that a 
firm could declare bankruptcy without waiting until it was insolvent. The Bankruptcy Reform 
Act of 1994 contained provisions to expedite bankruptcy proceedings and to encourage indi­
vidual debtors to use Chapter 13 to reschedule their debts rather than use Chapter 7 to liquidate.
On April 19, 2005, the Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act (BAP­
CPA) became law. While the new legislation affects primarily consumer filings, BAPCPA af­
fects business filers as well, with the heaviest influence on smaller businesses (i.e., those with 
less than $2 million in debt). BAPCPA changed this process by (1) reducing the maximum 
length of time during which debtors have an exclusive right to submit a plan; (2) shortening 
the time that debtors have to accept or reject leases; and (3) limiting compensation under key 
employee retention programs. Prior to BAPCPA, a debtor corporation had the opportunity to 
request a bankruptcy judge to extend the period for submission of the plan of reorganization 
as long as it could justify its request. Once the judge ruled that the debtor has been given suffi­
cient time, any creditor could submit a reorganization plan. The new law caps the exclusivity 
period at 18 months from the day of the bankruptcy filing. The debtor then has an additional 
2 months to win the creditors’ acceptance of the plan, thereby providing a debtor-in-position a 
maximum of 20 months before creditors can submit their reorganization plans.
Finally, Chapter 15 was added to the U.S. Bankruptcy Code by BAPCPA of 2005 to reflect 
the adoption of the Model Law on Cross-Border Insolvency passed by the United Nations 
Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) in 1997. The purpose of UNCITRAL 
is to provide for better coordination among legal systems for cross-border bankruptcy cases. 
Chapter 15 is discussed in more detail later in this chapter.
Filing for Chapter 11 Reorganization
Chapter 11 reorganization may involve a corporation, a sole proprietorship, or a partner­
ship. Since a corporation is viewed as separate from its owners (i.e., the shareholders), the 
Chapter 11 bankruptcy of a corporation does not put the personal assets of the stockholders 
at risk, other than the value of their investment in the firm’s stock.
In contrast, sole proprietorships and owners are not separate; a bankruptcy case involving 
a sole proprietorship includes both the business and personal assets of the owner–debtor. 
Like a corporation, a partnership exists as an entity separate from its partners. In a general 
partnership bankruptcy case, since the partners are personally responsible for the debts and 
obligations of the partnership, they may be sued such that their personal assets are used to 
pay creditors, forcing the partners to file for bankruptcy.
Fig. 17.1 summarizes the process for filing for reorganization under Chapter 11. The process 
begins by filing in a federal bankruptcy court. In the case of an involuntary petition, a hearing 
must be held to determine whether the firm is insolvent. If the firm is found to be insolvent, 
the court enters an order for relief, which initiates the bankruptcy proceedings. On the filing of a 
reorganization petition, the filing firm becomes the debtor-in-possession of all the assets and has a 
maximum of 20 months to convince creditors to accept its reorganization plan, after which the 

632	
17.  ALTERNATIVE EXIT AND RESTRUCTURING STRATEGIES
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
creditors can submit their own proposal. In the case of fraud, creditors may request that the court 
appoints a trustee instead of the debtor to manage the firm during the reorganization period.
The US Trustee (the bankruptcy department of the US Justice Department) appoints one 
or more committees to represent the interests of creditors and shareholders. The purpose of 
these committees is to work with the debtor-in-possession to develop a reorganization plan 
for exiting Chapter 11. Creditors and shareholders are grouped according to the similarity of 
claims. In the case of creditors, the plan must be approved by holders of at least two-thirds of 
the dollar value of the claims as well as by a simple majority of the creditors in each group. 
In the case of shareholders, two-thirds of those in each group (e.g., common and preferred 
shareholders) must approve the plan.
Following acceptance by creditors, bondholders, and stockholders, the bankruptcy court 
also must approve the reorganization plan. Even if creditors or shareholders vote to reject the 
plan, the court is empowered to ignore the vote and approve the plan if it finds the plan fair to 
creditors and shareholders as well as feasible. Finally, the debtor-in-possession is responsible 
for paying the expenses approved by the court of all parties whose services contributed to the 
approval or disapproval of the plan.
Implementing Chapter 7 Liquidation
If the bankruptcy court determines that reorganization is infeasible, the failing firm may be 
forced to liquidate. According to the Administrative Office of US Courts, about 70% of bank­
ruptcy filings are Chapter 7 filings rather than Chapter 11 reorganization. The prevalence of 
Chapter 7 liquidations may be a result of the tendency of secured creditors to force debtor 
firms into liquidation to recover what they are owed by selling off the collateral underlying 
their loans, often at the expense of unsecured creditors, and equity investors.
Under Chapter 7, a trustee is given the responsibility to liquidate the firm’s assets, keep 
records, examine creditors’ claims, disburse the proceeds, and submit a final report on the liq­
uidation. The priority in which the claims are paid is stipulated in Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy 
Reform Act, which must be followed by the trustee when the firm is liquidated.7 All secured 
creditors are paid when the firm’s assets that were pledged as collateral are liquidated.8 If 
7Chapter 7 distributes the liquidation proceeds according to the following priorities: (1) administrative claims (e.g., 
lawyers’ fees, court costs, accountants’ fees, trustees’ fees, and other costs necessary to liquidate the firm’s assets), 
(2) statutory claims (e.g., tax obligations, rent, consumer deposits, and unpaid wages and benefits owed before the 
filing, up to some threshold), (3) secured creditors’ claims, (4) unsecured creditors’ claims, and (5) equity claims.
8Fully secured creditors, such as bondholders and mortgage lenders, have a legally enforceable right to the collat­
eral securing their loans or the equivalent value. A creditor is fully secured if the value of the collateral for its loan 
to the debtor equals or exceeds the amount of the debt. For this reason, fully secured creditors are not entitled to 
participate in any distribution of liquidated assets that the bankruptcy trustee might make.
FIGURE 17.1  Procedures for reorganizing during bankruptcy.

	
Reorganization and Liquidation in Bankruptcy	
633
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
the proceeds of the sale of these assets are inadequate to satisfy all of the secured creditors’ 
claims, they become unsecured (general) creditors for the amount that was not recovered. If 
the proceeds of the sale of pledged assets exceed secured creditors’ claims, the excess pro­
ceeds are used to pay general creditors.
The amount and timing of cash payments to unsecured creditors varies widely and depends 
on the ease with which the trustee can substantiate the legitimacy of claims and how liquid are 
the bankrupt firm’s assets. In late 2014, the trustee managing the liquidation of Lehman Broth­
ers, whose bankruptcy filing in September 2008 is believed to have set off the global financial 
crisis at that time, announced that unsecured creditors would receive $4.62 billion. This came af­
ter secured creditors had already received $105 billion. While the pay-out to unsecured creditors 
represented only 17% of their claims, the trustee heralded the cash distribution to unsecured 
creditors as an “extraordinary achievement” in view of the complexity of the bankruptcy.
Liquidation under Chapter 7 does not mean that all employees lose their jobs. When a 
large firm enters Chapter 7 bankruptcy, a division of the company may be sold intact to other 
companies during the liquidation. In many instances this results in much of the firm’s work­
force being given the option to work for the acquiring firm, although not necessarily at the 
same levels of compensation.
Exhibit 17.2 describes how a legally bankrupt company could be liquidated. In this il­
lustration, the bankruptcy court, owners, and creditors could not agree on an appropriate 
reorganization plan for DOA Inc. Consequently, the court ordered that the firm be liquidat­
ed in accordance with Chapter 7. Note that this illustration would differ from a private or 
voluntary out-of-court liquidation in two important respects. First, the expenses associated 
with conducting the liquidation would be lower because the liquidation would not involve 
extended legal proceedings. Second, the distribution of proceeds could reflect the priority 
of claims negotiated between the creditors and the owners that differs from that set forth in 
Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Reform Act Tables 17.3–17.5
“Section 363 Sales” from Chapter 11
So-called 363 sales have become popular in recent years when time is critical. Section 363 
bankruptcies allow a firm to enter a court-supervised sale of assets—usually an auction—as 
EXHIBIT 17.2  LIQU IDATION OF DOA INC. UNDER CHAPTER 7
DOA has the balance sheet in Table 17.3. The only liability that is not shown on the balance sheet is 
the cost of the bankruptcy proceedings, which is treated as an expense and is not capitalized (i.e., not 
shown as a balance sheet item). The sale of DOA’s assets generates $5.4 million in cash. The distribu­
tion of the proceeds is displayed in Table 17.4. Note that the proceeds are distributed in accordance 
with the priorities stipulated in the current commercial bankruptcy law and that the cost of adminis­
tering the bankruptcy totals 18% (i.e., $972,000/$5,400,000) of the proceeds from liquidation. Once all 
prior claims have been satisfied, the remaining proceeds are distributed to the unsecured creditors. 
The pro rata (proportional) settlement percentage of 27.64% is calculated by dividing funds available 
for unsecured creditors by the amount of unsecured creditor claims (i.e., $1,368/$4,950). The share­
holders receive nothing because not all unsecured creditor claims have been satisfied (Table 17.5).

634	
17.  ALTERNATIVE EXIT AND RESTRUCTURING STRATEGIES
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
TABLE 17.3  DOA Balance Sheet
Assets
Liabilities
Cash
$35,000
Accounts payable
$750,000
Accounts receivable
2,300,000
Bank notes payable
3,000,000
Inventories
2,100.000
Accrued salaries
720,000
  Total current assets
$4,435,000
Unpaid benefits
140,000
Land
1,500,000
Unsecured customer deposits
300,000
Net plant and equipment
2,000,000
Taxes payable
400,000
  Total fixed assets
$3,500,000
  Total current liabilities
$5,310,000
    Total assets
$7,935,000
First mortgage
2,500,000
Unsecured debt
200,000
  Total long-term debt
$2,700,000
Preferred stock
50,000
Common stock
100,000
Paid in surplus
500,000
Retained earnings
(725,000)
Total stockholders’ equity
$(75,000)
Total shareholders’ equity 
and total liabilities
$7,935,000
TABLE 17.4  Distribution of Liquidation Proceeds
Proceeds from liquidation
$5,400,000
Expenses of administering bankruptcy
972,000
Salaries owed employees
720,000
Unpaid employee benefits
140,000
Unsecured customer deposits
300,000
Taxes
400,000
Funds available for creditors
$2,868,000
First mortgage (from sale of fixed assets)
1,500,000
Funds available for unsecured creditors
$1,368,000

	
Reorganization and Liquidation in Bankruptcy	
635
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
the best means of protecting the value of such assets. Unlike typical bankruptcies, firms may 
emerge in as little as 30–60 days.
The auction process starts with a prospective buyer’s setting the initial purchase price and 
terms, as well as negotiating a topping fee to be paid if it is not successful in buying the assets. 
Often referred to as a stalking horse, the identity of the initial bidder may be concealed. The 
purpose of the stalking horse is to set a value for the business and to generate interest in the 
coming auction. Credit bids occur when secured creditors propose to buy the assets. Such bid­
ders can bid up to the amount of the debt they are owed before offering any cash.9 Creditors 
opposing the sale have only 10–20 days to file objections to the court, although the period 
may be shortened to as little as a few days by the bankruptcy judge. The bankruptcy judge 
decides how the proceeds of the auction are distributed among secured creditors.
The Chapter 11 bankruptcy proceedings of automakers General Motors (GM) and Chrysler 
in 2009 are among the most controversial 363 sales. Chrysler LLC was sold to a new company 
managed by Italian carmaker Fiat that would operate as Chrysler Group LLC and consist of 
Chrysler, Jeep, Dodge, and Mopar brands. The ownership distribution of the new company 
emerging from Chapter 11 was as follows: United Auto Workers (55%), Fiat (20% growing to 
35% once certain milestones had been reached), the US government (8%), and the Canadian 
government (2%).
The outcome of this proceeding was particularly controversial in that the absolute priority 
rule appears to have been violated. Under this federal bankruptcy code rule, no unsecured 
creditor can receive an interest in a reorganized firm before secured creditors are paid in full 
or are provided a fair distribution. However, in this instance, the UAW received for its pen­
sion obligations—an unsecured claim—a much higher ownership stake than the value of the 
cash received by secured creditors.10
The resolution of the GM 363 sale involved splitting the firm into two companies. The 
US and Canadian operations only were included in the GM bankruptcy filing. “New GM” 
contained the “good assets,” while all the other assets were retained in “Old GM.” “New 
GM” represented a new corporation containing only the attractive assets held by the US and 
Canadian operations and is primarily owned by the US and Canadian governments, a UAW 
10In early 2014, Fiat acquired the remainder of Chrysler that it did not already own.
9In 2010, creditors outbid an investor group to acquire the Philadelphia Inquirer for an amount equal to $318 million, 
about one-half of what they were owed by the newspaper.
TABLE 17.5  Pro Rata Distributions of Funds Among Unsecured Creditors
Unsecured creditor claims
Amount
Settlement at 27.64%
Unpaid balance from first mortgage
$1,000,000
$276,400
Accounts payable
750,000
207,300
Notes payable
3,000,000
829,200
Unsecured debt
200,000
55,280
  Total
$4,950,000
$1,368,000

636	
17.  ALTERNATIVE EXIT AND RESTRUCTURING STRATEGIES
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
healthcare trust, and the creditors of “Old GM.” Following approval of the Chapter 11 plan of 
reorganization, a postliquidating trust directed by a court-appointed trustee was established 
to dispose of the “Old GM” assets, with the proceeds going to creditors.
In 2014, GM recalled more than 1 million cars because of faulty ignition switches which 
contributed allegedly to the deaths of 13 people. If these deaths occurred prior to the 2009 
bankruptcy agreement, it is possible that GM could be shielded from consumer claims per­
taining to these fatalities since they would be the responsibility of “Old GM.” If so, claimants 
are unlikely to receive much compensation due to the low value of “Old GM” assets. In many 
cases, the trust’ assets may be worthless.
Chapter 15: Dealing with Cross-Border Bankruptcy
The purpose of Chapter 15 of the US Bankruptcy Code is to provide mechanisms for re­
solving insolvency cases involving assets, lenders, and other parties in various countries. A 
Chapter 15 case is secondary to the primary proceeding brought in another country, which is 
typically the debtor’s home country. As an alternative to Chapter 15, the debtor may proceed 
with a Chapter 7 or Chapter 11 case in the United States. As part of a Chapter 15 proceeding, 
the US Bankruptcy Court may authorize a trustee to act in a foreign country on its behalf.
The foreign trustee has the right to petition the US court system for resolving insolvency 
issues. The petition gives the court the authority to issue an order recognizing the foreign pro­
ceeding as either a “foreign main proceeding” or a “foreign nonmain proceeding.” A foreign 
main proceeding is a proceeding in a country where the debtor’s main interests are located; a 
foreign nonmain proceeding is a proceeding in a country where the debtor has a business not 
representing their primary holdings. If the proceeding is recognized as a foreign main pro­
ceeding, the court imposes an automatic stay on assets in dispute in the United States and 
authorizes the foreign representative to operate the debtor’s business.11
Motivations for Filing for Bankruptcy
Although most companies that file for bankruptcy do so because of their deteriorating 
financial position, companies also seek bankruptcy protection to shed or limit exposure to 
future liabilities, enhance negotiating leverage, or to break onerous contracts. In 2001, LTV 
sold its plants while in bankruptcy to W.L. Ross and Company, which restarted the plants in 
2002 in a new company named the International Steel Group. By simply buying assets, ISI 
eliminated its obligation to pay pension, healthcare, or insurance liabilities, which remained 
with LTV. A bankruptcy judge in late 2004 approved a settlement enabling two subsidiaries of 
the energy giant Halliburton to emerge from bankruptcy and to limit their exposure to poten­
tial future asbestos claims and litigation by establishing a $4.2 billion trust fund to pay such 
claims. Delphi, the ailing auto parts manufacturer, used its bankrupt status to threaten to re­
scind union contracts, to gain wage and benefit reductions from employees in 2007. More re­
cently, a bankruptcy court judge allowed Texas-based Sabine Oil and Gas in mid-2016 to shed 
11Chapter 15 also gives foreign creditors the right to participate in US bankruptcy cases and prohibits discrimina­
tion against foreign creditors. Chapter 15 proceeding attempts to promote collaboration between US and foreign 
courts, since the participants in the proceeding must cooperate fully.

	
Reorganization and Liquidation in Bankruptcy	
637
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
expensive contracts made with oil and gas pipeline firms when energy prices were booming. 
Such contracts routinely require producers to ship minimum volumes of oil and gas or to be 
subject to penalties if they fail to do so. With global oil and gas prices having fallen to their 
lowest levels in more than a decade, producers were unable to ship enough oil and gas profit­
ably to meet their obligations. With energy prices expected to remain depressed, the judge 
ruled that the ongoing penalty payments required by such contracts would prevent Sabine 
from being reorganized into a viable company.
The High Cost of Bankruptcy
Efforts to contain costs have prompted a greater use of auctions and other market-based 
techniques. These include prepackaged bankruptcies with a reorganization plan in place at 
the time of the bankruptcy filing, acquisition of distressed debt by investors willing to sup­
port the proposed plan of reorganization, and voluntary auction-based sales while a firm is 
under the protection of Chapter 11. Despite the increasing use of innovative ways of expe­
diting the bankruptcy process, the cost of professional services remains high. While large 
and complex, fees paid to bankruptcy advisors, such as appraisers, investment bankers, and 
lawyers, since the Lehman Brothers liquidation began in 2008 are estimated to have exceeded 
$2 billion by the end of 2012.12
Prepackaged Bankruptcies
Under a prepackaged bankruptcy, the debtor negotiates with creditors well in advance of fil­
ing for a Chapter 11 bankruptcy. Because there is general approval of the plan before the filing, 
the formal Chapter 11 reorganization that follows generally averages only a few months and 
results in substantially lower legal and administrative expenses.13 Prepackaged bankruptcies 
are often a result of major creditors’ willingness to make concessions prior to the debtor fil­
ing for bankruptcy if they anticipate the debtor firm being liquidated at “fire sale” prices as 
a result of the bankruptcy process.14 Such bankruptcy proceedings work best when a limited 
number of sophisticated secured creditors, such as hedge funds are involved, enabling the 
negotiations to proceed rapidly, and with a greater likelihood of greater debt reduction.15
In a true prepackaged bankruptcy, creditors approve a reorganization plan before filing for 
bankruptcy. The bankruptcy court then approves the plan and the company emerges from 
bankruptcy quickly. Minority creditors often are required by the court to accept a plan of 
reorganization. The confirmation of such a plan over the objections of one or more classes of 
creditors sometimes is referred as a cram down.
On November 4, 2010, US movie studio Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer filed a prepackaged Chap­
ter 11 bankruptcy in New York that had the approval of nearly all of its creditors. The week 
before, creditors had approved a plan to forgive more than $4 billion in debt for ownership 
stakes in the restructured studio and to replace existing management. The bankruptcy was 
12Sandler, 2013
13Tashjian et al., 1996
14Eckbo and Thorburn, 2008
15Lim, 2015

638	
17.  ALTERNATIVE EXIT AND RESTRUCTURING STRATEGIES
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
approved the following month, with the reorganized firm emerging from court protection 
having raised $600 million in new financing.
ALTERNATIVE OPTIONS FOR FAILING FIRMS
A failing firm’s strategic options are to merge with another firm, reach an out-of-court vol­
untary settlement with creditors, or file for Chapter 11 bankruptcy. Note that the prepackaged 
bankruptcy discussed earlier in this chapter constitutes a blend of the second and third options. 
The firm may liquidate voluntarily as part of an out-of-court settlement or be forced to liquidate 
under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code. Table 17.6 summarizes the implications of each op­
tion. The choice of which option to pursue is critically dependent on which provides the great­
est net present value for creditors and shareholders. To evaluate these options, the firm’s man­
agement needs to estimate the going-concern, selling price, and liquidation values of the firm.
Merging with Another Firm
If the failing firm’s management estimates that the sale price of the firm is greater than the 
going-concern or liquidation value, management should seek to be acquired by or to merge 
with another firm. In an essentially “make versus buy” decision,16 firms in the same industry 
may be inclined to acquire the failing firm, especially if they are able to acquire assets at dis­
tressed prices that can be used in their operations.17 The size of the discount from book value of 
such assets is likely to be greater if there are industry and economy wide liquidity problems. If 
the seller’s direct competitors are unable to make a bid for the assets to be divested, nontradi­
tional buyers, such as private equity firms are likely to express interest. Such buyers generally 
do not value such assets based on potential synergy but rather on their eventual sale value. 
Consequently, they often are looking to buy assets only at bargain prices. The problem is exac­
erbated further when the economy is depressed as there are likely to be few potential buyers.
If there is a strategic buyer, management must convince the firm’s creditors that they will be 
more likely to receive what they are owed and shareholders are more likely to preserve share 
value if the firm is acquired rather than liquidated or allowed to remain independent. In some 
instances, buyers are willing to acquire failing firms only if their liabilities are reduced through 
the bankruptcy process. Hence, it may make sense to force the firm into bankruptcy to have 
some portion of its liabilities discharged during the process of Chapter 11 reorganization.18 Al­
ternatively, the potential buyer could reach agreement in advance of bankruptcy reorganization 
18To protect it from litigation, Washington Construction Group required Morrison Knudsen Corporation to file for 
bankruptcy as a closing condition in the agreement of purchase and sale in 2000.
16“Make versus buy” decisions reflect the option of a firm to develop an asset on its own or to obtain it by acquiring 
another firm that already owns the desired asset.
17Almeida et al., 2011.

	
Alternative Options for Failing Firms	
639
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
with the primary creditors (i.e., a prepackaged bankruptcy) and employ the bankruptcy pro­
cess to achieve compliance from the minority creditors.
Sales within the protection of Chapter 11 reorganization may be accomplished either by 
a negotiated private sale to a particular purchaser or through a public auction. The latter is 
often favored by the court, since the purchase price is more likely to reflect the true market 
value of the assets. Generally, a public auction can withstand any court challenge by creditors 
questioning whether the purchaser has paid fair market value for the failing firm’s assets. In 
2005, Time Warner Inc. and Comcast Corp reached an agreement to buy bankrupt cable oper­
ator Adelphia Communications Corp while in Chapter 11 for nearly $18 billion. Time Warner 
and Comcast paid Adelphia bondholders and other creditors in cash and warrants for stock 
in a new company formed by combining Time Warner’s cable business and Adelphia. Bid­
ders tend to overpay for firms purchased out of Chapter 11, with such strategies benefiting 
the target firm but not acquirer shareholders. In most cases, the acquirers fail to restructure 
the target firms successfully.
Reaching an Out-of-Court Voluntary Settlement with Creditors
The going-concern value of the firm may exceed the sale or liquidation value. Management 
must be able to demonstrate to creditors that a restructured or downsized firm would be able 
to repay its debts if creditors were willing to accept less, extend the maturity of the debt, or 
exchange debt for equity. In what is known as the holdout problem, smaller creditors have an 
incentive to attempt to hold up the agreement unless they receive special treatment, making 
an out-of-court voluntary settlement difficult to achieve. Consensus may be accomplished by 
TABLE 17.6  Alternative Strategies for Failing Firms
Assumptions
Options: failing firm
Outcome: failing firm
Selling price is greater 
than the going-concern or 
liquidation value
1.	Is acquired by or
2.	Merges with another firm
1.	Continues as subsidiary of acquirer
2.	Merged into acquirer and ceases to 
exist
Going-concern value is 
greater than the sale or 
liquidation value
1.	Reaches out-of-court settlement 
with creditors
2.	Seeks bankruptcy protection under 
Chapter 11
3.	Seeks prepackaged settlement with 
primary creditors before entering 
Chapter 11
1.	Continues with debt-for-equity 
swap, extension, and composition
2.	Continues in reorganization
Liquidation value is 
greater than the sale or 
going-concern value
1.	Reaches out-of-court settlement 
with creditors
2.	Liquidates under Chapter 7
1.	Ceases to exist; assignee liquidates 
assets and distributes proceeds, 
reflecting the terms of the negotiated 
settlement with creditors
2.	Ceases to exist; trustee supervises 
liquidation and distributes proceeds 
according to statutory priorities

640	
17.  ALTERNATIVE EXIT AND RESTRUCTURING STRATEGIES
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
paying all small creditors 100% of what they are owed and the larger creditors an agreed-on 
percentage.
Other factors limiting voluntary settlements, such as a debt-for-equity swap, include a 
preference by some creditors for debt rather than equity and the lack of the necessary infor­
mation to enable proper valuation of the equity offered to the creditors. Because of these fac­
tors, there is some evidence that firms attempting to restructure outside of Chapter 11 bank­
ruptcy have more difficulty in reducing their indebtedness than those that negotiate with 
creditors while under the protection of Chapter 11.
Voluntary and Involuntary Liquidations
The failing firm’s management, shareholders, and creditors may agree that the firm is worth 
more in liquidation than in sale or as a continuing operation. If management cannot reach agree­
ment with its creditors on a private liquidation, the firm may seek Chapter 7 liquidation. The 
proceeds of a private liquidation are distributed in accordance with the agreement negotiated 
with creditors, while the order in which claimants are paid under Chapter 7 is set by statute.
THE INCREASING ROLE OF HEDGE FUNDS IN THE 
BANKRUPTCY PROCESS
Debtor-in-possession (DIP) financing refers to loans made to a firm in Chapter 11 to satisfy 
working capital needs while being reorganized. Such financing is considered senior in liqui­
dation to all other forms of debt held by the bankrupt firm. Bank lenders are more likely to 
provide such financing for firms in Chapter 11 when their prebankruptcy petition loans to the 
firm are at risk, the firm exhibits significant potential to reorganize successfully, and the firm 
has long standing relationships with the lender. They usually have little interest in taking an 
equity stake in the firm. In contrast, activist lenders, such as hedge funds are more likely to 
provide DIP financing when debtor firms are small and their existing loans are over collater­
alized. Their motive is to loan in order to own the firm.19
Hedge funds can pursue activist strategies because of their focus on achieving high financial 
returns and because they are not limited by having other business relationships with the debtor 
firm. Banks, mutual funds, and pension funds often have potential conflicts of interest with the 
debtor firm ranging from meeting their capital needs to managing the firm’s pension fund as­
sets. Unlike pension and mutual funds, hedge funds also are able to hold large concentrations 
of illiquid investments that strengthen their influence in negotiating with secured creditors.
Hedge funds play a key role in financing debtor firms in Chapter 11 by providing DIP 
financing and acquiring equity stakes in such businesses. Hedge funds use the offer of DIP 
financing to bargain for seats on the debtor firm’s board of directors and for receiving an 
ownership stake when the firm emerges from bankruptcy. DIP loans often convert to equity 
ownership, because they frequently allow for debt-for-equity swaps. Hedge funds also can 
acquire a controlling interest through so-called “loan-to-own” strategies and by acquiring 
unsecured debt in order to serve on the unsecured creditor or equity committees.
19Li and Wang, 2016.

	
Failing Firms and Systemic Risk	
641
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
Under a “loan-to-own” strategy, a hedge fund acquires the debt of a failing firm and con­
verts the debt into a controlling equity stake. That is, the hedge fund buys the debt at de­
pressed prices, forces the distressed firm into Chapter 11, and converts the debt at book value 
to equity in a debt-for-equity swap, resulting in a controlling stake in the firm when the firm 
emerges from bankruptcy. The emergence from Chapter 11 is accomplished under Section 
363(k) of the Bankruptcy Code, which gives debtors the right to bid on the firm in a public 
auction sale. During the auction, the firm’s debt is valued at face value rather than market 
value, discouraging other bidders other than the hedge fund, which acquired the debt prior 
to bankruptcy at distressed levels.
By buying unsecured debt, hedge funds play an important role in affecting the balance of 
power between the debtor firm and secured creditors. Reorganizations in which hedge funds 
have substantial representation on unsecured creditor committees exhibit higher recovery 
rates for unsecured creditors and equity owners due to the ability of hedge funds to offset the 
tendency of secured creditors to push for liquidation.20
FAILING FIRMS AND SYSTEMIC RISK
In response to the meltdown in global financial markets in 2008 and 2009, the US Congress 
passed the Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protections Act of 2010 (Dodd–
Frank). Among other things, the act created a new government authority to dismantle fi­
nancial services firms whose demise would endanger the US financial system and economy. 
The objectives of this new authority, called the Orderly Liquidation Authority (OLA), are to 
ensure that losses resulting from the speedy liquidation of a firm are borne primarily by the 
firm’s shareholders and creditors, to minimize the loss of taxpayer funds, and to penalize cur­
rent management. The OLA is solely a liquidation remedy and, unlike Chapter 11 of the US 
Bankruptcy Code, does not allow for reorganization or rehabilitation as an option. The order 
in which claimants are paid during liquidation is similar to that defined under Chapter 7, 
except that the government puts itself first.
The OLA applies to US bank holding companies and nonbank financial firms supervised 
by the Federal Reserve Board of Governors (the Fed). The OLA also applies to companies en­
gaged predominantly in activities that the Fed determines are financial in nature, subsidiaries 
of such companies (other than insured depository institutions or insurance companies), and 
brokers and dealers registered with the SEC and a member of the Securities Investor Protec­
tion Corporation (SIPC), a fund designed to insure clients against broker/dealer fraud. The 
liquidation of insured depository institutions will continue to be the responsibility of the FDIC 
under the agency’s current mandate. While insurance companies will continue to be subject to 
state regulation, their holding companies and unregulated affiliates are covered by the OLA.
The advantages of the OLA are that it provides the government with both the authority and 
a clear process for expeditiously winding down failing firms that are deemed a risk to the finan­
cial system. However, the resolution process for dealing with failing, systemically risky firms 
can itself destabilize the financial system, since the process could panic investors and lenders. 
Furthermore, the OLA is applicable only to firms whose operations are wholly domestic, since 
20Jiang et al., 2012

642	
17.  ALTERNATIVE EXIT AND RESTRUCTURING STRATEGIES
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
there is currently no cross-border mechanism for resolving issues involving banks operating 
in multiple countries. Consequently, large multinational banks will be unaffected by the OLA.
In late 2015, The Federal Reserve Board of Governors adopted a rule stopping it from 
bailing out individual firms. The rule stemmed from the controversial decision in 2008 to res­
cue American International Group (AIG) and others, while deciding not to bail out Lehman 
Brothers, during the 2008–09 financial crisis. The rule is intended to end the notion of indi­
vidual financial companies being too big to fail by allowing the Fed to rescue only the broader 
financial system rather than individual companies. Under the rule, the Fed can make emer­
gency loans available that can potentially be used by at least five companies but it cannot 
selectively choose which firms to save individually.
But are we really safer today from another collapse of the global financial markets? Recent 
evidence suggests that despite the Dodd–Frank legislation passed in 2010, increasing bank 
capital requirements, and periodic “stress testing” of banks to determine the degree of finan­
cial distress they can withstand, the big financial institutions are no safer today than before 
the 2008 financial market meltdown.21 Since banks are better capitalized today, measures of 
risk and financial returns on their common and preferred stock required by investors and 
interest rates on their debt should be lower than prior to 2008 because they are less likely to 
experience financial distress and bankruptcy.22 In fact, required returns and measures of risk, 
such as share price volatility are higher. Why? The increase in bank capital requires banks 
to concentrate an increasing share of their cash in low earning investments such as Treasury 
securities reducing profitability, operating cash flow, dividend paying capability, interest cov­
erage ratios, and ability to reinvest in current operations. Severe loan losses in an economic 
downturn could push already-stretched operating cash flow into the red, straining bank li­
quidity and potentially bank solvency. Consequently, while banks have more cash/liquid 
assets on hand to weather financial turmoil, their ability to generate cash from operations is 
lessened leaving their perceived current risk about the same as before the 2008 financial crisis.
By some measures the danger of systemic risk could even be greater if the financial mar­
kets show signs of investor panic. The top five US banks controlled 45% of total US banking 
assets in 2016 compared to 25% in 2000 making such banks more likely to be bailed out by the 
taxpayer as “too big to fail.”23 Protected by an implied government safety net, bank managers 
may be prone to making risky bets unseen by regulators unable to monitor all aspects of the 
diversity and complexity of these megabanks.
PREDICTING CORPORATE DEFAULT AND BANKRUPTCY
Data mining software allows model builders to churn large quantities of data to iden­
tify patterns relevant to bankruptcy prediction. Analysts with substantial knowledge in spe­
cialized disciplines, such as accounting and finance add value in interpreting relevant data. 
21Sarin and Summers, 2016. Andriosopoulos et al., 2017 conclude that Dodd–Frank may have resulted in some redistri­
bution of wealth from small to larger financial institutions without reducing the financial industry’s overall riskiness.
22Increased capital requirements relative to debt should in theory reduce a bank’s levered beta resulting in a reduc­
tion in investor required returns estimated using the capital asset pricing model (see Chapter 7) and share price 
volatility relative to overall stock market changes.
23The Economist, The Superstar Company: A Giant Problem, September 17, 2016

	
Predicting Corporate Default and Bankruptcy	
643
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
However, neither data mining nor specialized knowledge has proven consistently superior 
in forecasting accurately default. Why? Both are backward looking generally relying on his­
torical data. Each new credit cycle tends to be somewhat different from past cycles. What has 
proven to be the most useful is the judicious application of both data mining software and 
specialized knowledge.24 The latter allows the analyst to determine whether data patterns 
uncovered through data mining are an anomaly or do actually improve model predictive 
accuracy.
Discriminant analysis was the primary method used to develop models in the 1960s and 
1970s. Modeling shifted by the 1980s to logit analysis (probability based predictions) and 
neural networks (artificial intelligence). While the number of factors used in building models 
varied by decade, the average model used about 10 variables. In analyzing model accuracy, 
multivariate discriminant analysis and neural networks seem to be the most promising.25 
Interestingly, increasing the number of variables in the model does not guarantee greater ac­
curacy. Two-factor models often are as accurate as models with as many as 21 factors.26
The predictive accuracy of the various types of models tends to be similar, correctly identi­
fying failing firms about 80% of the time when applied to firms used in the historical sample 
(so-called in-sample predictions) to estimate the models. However, accuracy drops substan­
tially (to as low as 50%–60%) in predicting failing firms not used in constructing the models, 
so-called out-of-sample predictions.27
Documenting potential problems with bankruptcy prediction models, researchers have 
found that model accuracy not only declines when applied to out-of-sample predictions but 
results often vary widely by industry and time period. Moreover, applying models to in­
dustries other than those used to develop the models often results in greatly diminished 
accuracy.28 The widespread use of securitization (i.e., packaging of loans and selling them to 
investors) also tends to bias models. Securitization encourages lenders to downplay the bor­
rower’s credit repayment risk knowing they can securitize loan portfolios and sell them to 
investors. Bankruptcy prediction models often are constructed using the more favorable data 
reported by lenders thereby potentially undermining their predictive accuracy.29
The earliest quantitative efforts to predict bankruptcy involved so-called credit scoring mod­
els, which relied on discriminant analysis to distinguish between bankrupt and nonbankrupt 
firms. Discriminant analysis uses a combination of independent variables to assign a score 
(i.e., a Z score) to a particular firm. This score then is used to distinguish between bankrupt 
and nonbankrupt firms by using a cut-off point. The likelihood of bankruptcy for firms with 
low Z scores is less than for firms with high Z scores. The most significant financial ratios for 
predicting default are earnings before income and taxes as a percent of total assets and the 
27Statistical methodologies employed to construct bankruptcy models will settle on a set of variables that exhibit 
the highest correlation with failing firms during the historical period used to estimate such models. The degree of 
model reliability is tested severely when such models are used to predict failing firms not used in constructing the 
models. The significant drop in accuracy of out-of-sample predictions raises serious concerns about the reliability 
of such models (Aziz and Dar, 2006).
28Grice and Dugan, 2001
29Rajan et al., 2014
24Zhou et al., 2015
25Mousavi et al., 2015
26Bellovary et al., 2007

644	
17.  ALTERNATIVE EXIT AND RESTRUCTURING STRATEGIES
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
ratio of sales to total assets. More recently, the inclusion of cash flow in the calculation of the 
Z score has been found to improve the model’s predictive accuracy.30 The limitation of this 
approach is that it captures a firm’s financial health at a moment in time and does not reflect 
changes in a company’s financial ratios over time. Tests of this methodology applied to more 
recent samples found that the earlier model’s ability to classify bankrupt companies correctly 
fell from 83.5% to 57.8%.31
Structural models of credit risk assume that firms default when they violate a debt covenant, 
cash flow falls short of required debt payments, or shareholders choose to pursue bankruptcy. 
Such models employ logit or probit regression analyses that provide a conditional probability 
that an observation belongs to a specific category and do not require assumptions as restric­
tive as discriminant analysis. The logit model yields a score between 0 and 1, which gives the 
probability that the firm will default.32 Reduced form models use market prices of the distressed 
firm’s debt as the only source of information about the firm’s risk. Such prices are a proxy for 
the variables used in the structural models. Although easier to estimate, such models lack a 
specific link between credit risk and the firm’s assets and liabilities and assume that the tim­
ing of default is random, in that investors with incomplete data do not know how far the firm 
is from default.33
Neural networks use artificial intelligence that attempts to mimic the way a human brain 
works and are particularly effective when a large database of prior examples exists.34 The 
cumulative sums (CUSUM) method represents a class of models that account for serial cor­
relation (i.e., interdependencies) in the data and that incorporate information from more than 
one period.35 The options-based approach to bankruptcy prediction builds on option-pricing 
theory to explain business bankruptcy, relying on such variables as firm volatility to predict 
default.
Accounting data are sometimes used to predict credit ratings, which serve as proxies for the 
probability of default.36 Other analysts argue that the probability of failure depends on the length 
of the time horizon considered37 or demonstrate a correlation between default rates and loss in 
the event of default and the business cycle.38 “Shocks,” such as recession and credit crunches, 
contribute to default by affecting firm assets or cash flow negatively.39 Other studies use net 
worth as a key factor affecting a firm’s ability to raise funds in a liquidity crisis40 or equity returns 
and debt service ratios as measures of distress.41 Of these factors, financial or accounting mea­
sures of liquidity, solvency, leverage, profitability, asset composition, firm size, and growth rate 
30Almamy et al., 2016.
31Grice and Ingram, 2001.
32Hsu et al., 2002.
33See Jarrow and Turnbull (1995) for examples of reduced form models.
34Platt et al., 1999.
35Kahya and Theodosiou, 1999.
36Blume et al., 1998; Molina, 2006; Avramov et al., 2009.
37Duffie et al., 2007.
38Altman et al., 2005.
39Hennessy and Whited, 2007; Anderson and Coverhill, 2007.
40White, 1989.
41Gilson et al., 1990; Asquith et al., 1994.

	
Empirical Studies of Financial Distress	
645
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
are the best predictors of the incidence of default,42 followed by market-based variables, such as 
interest rates and credit default swap rates, with macroeconomic variables, such as GDP adding 
relatively little to improving predictive accuracy.43 Of these variables, those most common to 
international models of financial distress include of measures solvency and profitability.44
EMPIRICAL STUDIES OF FINANCIAL DISTRESS
Quantitative studies of firms in financial distress analyze investor returns on firms emerg­
ing from bankruptcy and on financially distressed stocks, the likelihood of business failure 
by stage of maturity, and the extent to which one firm’s financial distress can be transmitted 
to other firms. These are discussed next.
Attractive Returns to Firms Emerging from Bankruptcy Are Often Temporary
When firms emerge from bankruptcy, they often cancel the old stock and issue new com­
mon stock. Empirical studies show that such firms often experience attractive financial re­
turns to holders of the new stock immediately following the announcement that the firm is 
emerging from bankruptcy.45 However, long-term performance often deteriorates with some 
studies showing that 40% of the firms studied experienced operating losses in 3 years after 
emerging from Chapter 11. Almost one-third subsequently filed for bankruptcy or had to 
restructure their debt. After 5 years, about one-quarter of all firms that reorganized were liq­
uidated or merged or refiled for bankruptcy.46 The most common reason for firms having to 
file for bankruptcy again is excessive debt.
Returns to Financially Distressed Stocks Are Unexpectedly Low
As a class, distressed stocks offer low financial rates of return despite their high risk of 
business failure.47 In theory, one would expect such risky assets to offer financial returns com­
mensurate with risk. The low financial return for distressed stocks tends to be worse for 
stocks with low analyst coverage, institutional ownership, and price per share. Factors poten­
tially contributing to these low returns could include unexpected events, valuation errors by 
uninformed investors, and the characteristics of distressed stocks.
Unexpected events include the economy’s being worse than expected. Valuation errors 
include investors’ not understanding the true risk of failure of distressed firms and not fully 
discounting the value of these stocks to reflect this risk. The characteristics of failing firms are 
such that some investors may have an incentive to hold such stocks despite their low returns. 
For example, majority owners of distressed stocks can benefit by having other firms in which 
they have an ownership stake buy the firm’s output or assets at bargain prices or sell to the 
42Liang et al., 2016.
43Tinoco and Wilson, 2013
44Laitinen and Suvas, 2016
45Alderson and Betker,1999; Eberhart et al., 1999
46France, 2002
47Campbell et al., 2008

646	
17.  ALTERNATIVE EXIT AND RESTRUCTURING STRATEGIES
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
firm at above market prices. Consequently, the low financial returns for these majority inves­
tors in distressed firms are more than offset by the returns on their investments in other firms 
that are either customers of or suppliers to the distressed firm.
Low returns to financially distressed stocks also may be related to the future potential for 
asset recovery. If expected recovery rates are high, the distressed firm’s shareholders may 
deliberately trigger default by missing payments if they believe they can recover a signifi­
cant portion of the value of their shares through renegotiation of credit terms with lenders. 
Consequently, the lower perceived risk of such shares would result in commensurately lower 
financial returns.48
IPOs are More Likely to Experience Bankruptcy than are Established Firms
Firms that have recently undergone IPOs tend to experience a much higher incidence of 
financial distress and bankruptcy than more established firms.49 These findings are consistent 
with other studies showing that a portfolio of IPOs performs well below the return on the 
S&P 500 stock index for up to 5 years after the firms go public.50 Some observers attribute this 
underperformance to the limited amount of information available on these firms.51
Financially Ailing Firms Can Be Contagious
A contagion in this context describes the spread of financial distress of one firm to other 
firms. A declaration of bankruptcy by one firm can impact rival firms and suppliers nega­
tively. The extent to which this may happen depends on whether the factors contributing 
to financial distress are affecting all firms within an industry or relate to a specific firm. The 
effects of financial distress may also differ depending on the degree to which an industry is 
concentrated. Studies show that stock prices of peers react negatively to a competitor’s bank­
ruptcy in most industries; however, peer share prices may increase whenever a competitor 
declares bankruptcy in highly concentrated industries. The latter reflects the likelihood that 
the remaining competitors in concentrated industries will gain market share, enabling them 
to benefit from increased economies of scale and pricing power.52 Furthermore, firms experi­
encing financial distress or in Chapter 11 are likely to experience declining sales and in turn 
to reduce their demand for raw materials and services from suppliers. When such firms rep­
resent important customers, suppliers often experience significant declines in valuations.53
There also is evidence that bankruptcies of large industry participants can raise the cost of 
borrowing and reduce the access to credit of other industry participants by reducing the value 
of the collateral used to secure debt financing.54 Specifically, firms experiencing financial dis­
tress are forced to sell assets and reduce their purchases of similar assets, putting downward 
48Garlappi and Yan, 2011
49Beneda, 2007
50Ritter, 1991; Loughran et al., 1994
51Grinblatt and Titman, 2002
52Lang and Stulz, 1992
53Hertzel et al., 2008
54Benmelech and Bergman, 2011

	
Chapter Discussion Questions	
647
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
pressure on the value of such assets. Consequently, firms owning similar assets whose value 
has fallen will be forced to borrow less, pay more for credit, or both.
SOME THINGS TO REMEMBER
Bankruptcy is designed to protect the technically or legally insolvent firm from lawsuits by 
its creditors until a decision is made to liquidate or reorganize the firm. Absent a voluntary 
settlement out of court, the debtor firm may voluntarily seek protection from its creditors by 
initiating bankruptcy or be forced involuntarily into bankruptcy by its creditors.
CHAPTER DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
17.1	 Why would creditors make concessions to a debtor firm? Give examples of common 
types of concessions. Describe how these concessions affect the debtor firm.
17.2	 Although most companies that file for bankruptcy do so because of their deteriorating 
financial position, companies increasingly are seeking bankruptcy protection to avoid 
litigation. Give examples of how bankruptcy can be used to avoid litigation.
17.3	 What are the primary options available to a failing firm? What criteria might the firm 
use to select a particular option? Be specific.
17.4	 Describe the probable trend in financial returns to shareholders of firms that emerge 
from bankruptcy. To what do you attribute these trends? Explain your answer.
17.5	 Identify at least two financial or nonfinancial variables that have been shown to affect 
firm defaults and bankruptcies. Explain how each might affect the likelihood the firm 
will default or seek Chapter 11 protection.
17.6	 On June 25, 2008, JHT Holdings, Inc., a Kenosha, Wisconsin-based package delivery 
service, filed for bankruptcy. The firm had annual revenues of $500 million. What would 
the firm have to demonstrate for its petition to be accepted by the bankruptcy court?
17.7	 Dura Automotive emerged from Chapter 11 protection in mid-2008. The firm obtained 
exit financing consisting of a $110 million revolving-credit facility, a $50 million European 
first-lien term loan, and an $84 million US second-lien loan. The reorganization plan 
specified how a portion of the proceeds of these loans would be used. What do you believe 
might be typical stipulations in reorganization plans for using such funds? Be specific.
17.8	 What are the primary factors contributing to business failure? Be specific.
17.9	 In recent years, hedge funds engaged in so-called loan-to-own prebankruptcy 
investments, in which they acquired debt from distressed firms at a fraction of face 
value. Subsequently, they moved the company into Chapter 11, intent on converting 
the acquired debt to equity in a firm with sharply reduced liabilities. The hedge 
fund also provided financing to secure its interest in the business. The emergence 
from Chapter 11 was typically accomplished under Section 363(k) of the Bankruptcy 
Code, which gives debtors the right to bid on the firm in a public auction sale. During 
the auction, the firm’s debt was valued at face value rather than market value, 
discouraging bidders other than the hedge fund, which acquired the debt prior to 
bankruptcy at distressed levels. Without competitive bidding, there was little chance of 

648	
17.  ALTERNATIVE EXIT AND RESTRUCTURING STRATEGIES
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
generating additional cash for the general creditors. Is this an abuse of the Chapter 11 
bankruptcy process? Explain your answer.
17.10	American Home Mortgage Investments filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy in late 2008. 
The company indicated that it chose this course of action because it represented the 
best means of preserving the firm’s assets. W.L. Ross and Company agreed to provide 
the firm $50 million in debtor-in-possession financing to meet its anticipated cash 
needs while in Chapter 11. Comment on the statement that bankruptcy provides the 
best means of asset preservation. Why would W.L. Ross and Company lend money to 
a firm that had just filed for bankruptcy?
Answers to these Chapter Discussion Questions are found in the Online Instructor’s Manual for 
instructors using this book (https://textbooks.elsevier.com/web/Manuals.aspx?isbn=9780128016091).
END OF CHAPTER CASE STUDY: ARCH COAL FILES 
FOR CHAPTER 11 BANKRUPTCY PROTECTION
Key Points
•	 Chapter 11 provides an opportunity for debtor firms to reorganize into financially viable firms 
and for creditors to recover a portion of what they are owed.
•	 Distressed industries such as the US coal industry often become prime targets for private 
equity investors to acquire deeply discounted assets (e.g., coal reserves and profitable mines).
To paraphrase the American humorist Mark Twain, reports of the coal industry’s death have 
been greatly exaggerated. The coal industry is clearly in decline but appears to be far from dead. 
Globally, coal is used to fuel more than 40% of power generation. In addition, metallurgical coal 
is used to produce about 70% of the world’s steel production (the remainder comes from recycled 
scrap). Despite concerns about pollution, coal is abundant, making it affordable. It is also easy to 
transport, store, and use. Equally important is that it is not subject to geopolitical tensions.
According to the 2015 global energy report by the International Energy Agency, the use of coal 
among Western European countries and the United States and Canada, peaked about 2008 and has 
been flat to declining in these countries since then. Even though the demand for coal is expected to 
increase at less than half of its historical 2.4% compound annual average growth rate during the last 
25 years, it is projected to still account for more than 30% of global electricity output by 2040. Why? 
Because India and Asian Pacific countries have hundreds of new coal fired electrical power generat­
ing plants under construction or on the drawing boards to bring electricity to millions in these coun­
tries that do not currently have power. The logic is that it is better to provide electricity to millions 
in poverty and to deal with the potential pollution problems later. According to the Instituted for 
Energy Research, China is adding coal fired power plants at the rate of one every 7–10 days, despite 
have horrible air pollution in its major cities. Japan plans to build 43 coal fired plants to replace its 
shuttered nuclear power operations.
While US coal demand is expected to grow modestly long-term, the industry has been particu­
larly hard hit in recent years. Nationwide, coal production at 895 million tons sank to the lowest 
levels in three decades in 2015. The vast majority of that drop was in Appalachia, but production 

	
Chapter Discussion Questions	
649
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
in the west was down as well according to the US Energy Information Agency. Many utilities have 
been switching from coal to natural gas to generate electricity. Besides being cheaper, natural gas 
emits less greenhouse gas, a major consideration as utilities look to comply with tough new govern­
ment regulations. The Clean Power Plan, which takes effect in 2022, requires states to cut carbon 
emissions by using less coal and more solar, wind and gas power. Finally, prices of metallurgical 
coal remained depressed throughout 2016 amid the slowdown in China’s economic growth. Despite 
these developments, the US Environmental Protection Agency predicts US coal production will de­
cline to 685 million tons in 2016 increasing to about 800 million tons in 2050, comprising about 30% 
of US electricity output down from about 50% in 2008.
Throughout 2015 and 2016, the shares of US coal companies cratered reflecting the widely held 
belief that cheaper energy sources such as natural gas, sluggish economic growth, and stricter environ­
mental regulations would reduce the demand for coal, depressing prices and profit margins. Although 
the inevitable shakeout is underway, market forces and bankruptcy laws are at work to restructure the 
industry. With 50 coal mining companies in bankruptcy by February 2016, the option to sell coal assets 
is limited in the near term. However, such assets could become attractive to “distressed debt” inves­
tors once the bankruptcy process enables mining firms to negotiate lower debt levels and labor costs. 
So-called distressed debt investors have a history of profiting by acquiring deeply discounted assets.
Among the options available to failing coal firms is to downsize by selling assets to raise cash and 
reduce debt, reach an out of court settlement with creditors, seek to merge with a financially stronger 
firm, or to reorganize under the protection of the US bankruptcy court. Apparently, many coal firms 
have chosen the latter option. The most notable coal mining firms that sought such protection in 2015 
were Alpha Natural Resources Inc., Patriot Coal Corp. and Walter Energy Inc. This has spurred asset 
sales and consolidations, as well as widespread employment and wage reductions at these firms and 
other coal companies. States most directly impacted by these events include the five largest coal pro­
ducing states in 2015 which include Wyoming, West Virginia, Kentucky, Illinois, and Pennsylvania.
The pressure to seek bankruptcy protection continued in 2016 as Arch Coal Corporation, the sec­
ond largest coal supplier behind industry leader Peabody Energy,55 filed for Chapter 11 protection in 
January 2016. Having lost money since 2012, the firm had been in negotiation with its creditors seek­
ing relief from its bone-crushing $4.5 billion in outstanding debt. The debt consisted of $1.9 billion 
in senior collateralized debt with the remaining $2.6 billion subordinated debt. In the negotiation, 
the firm had sought to get debt relief through partial forgiveness, deferral of interest payments and 
even a debt for equity swap.
In the filing, Arch’s proposal offers senior lenders a combination of cash, new senior debt and 
most of the reorganized company’s stock in a debt for equity swap. Junior creditors could choose 
between a minority equity interest and the proceeds of assets that had not been pledged as collat­
eral for senior loans if the firm were eventually liquidated. While many senior lenders supported 
the Arch proposal prior to the bankruptcy filing, infighting broke out among hedge funds holding 
different layers (secured and unsecured) of Arch Coal debt. GSO Special Situations Master Fund LP, 
a Blackstone Group LP affiliate, even filed a lawsuit seeking to clear the way for a debt exchange 
55Peabody succumbed to industry wide pressures and filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection on April 13, 2016. 
Peabody is expected to use the bankruptcy process to reduce its debt and to restructure its operations. Many of its 
mines are profitable on an operating basis. The bankruptcy filing was necessitated by the firm’s inability to pay 
interest and principal payments on debt incurred in the firm’s recent acquisitions.

650	
17.  ALTERNATIVE EXIT AND RESTRUCTURING STRATEGIES
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
rather than a debt for equity swap favored by Arch. Continued uncertainty about the level of ac­
ceptance of the agreement by major lenders is what ultimately caused Arch to file for Chapter 11 
bankruptcy protection from its creditors.
Following a flurry of acquisitions, Arch’s share price had declined since 2011. Much of its current 
debt load is attributable to its 2011 acquisition of International Coal Corporation. Those acquisitions 
were based on the presumption that the coal industry would see rapid overseas growth in the coming 
years, which has yet to materialize as the global economy continues its anemic growth. In early 2011, 
the firm’s share price peaked at $260 per share. On January 11, 2016, its stock traded at less than a dollar.
At the time of filing, Arch Coal had $600 million in cash and short term investments, and had 
negotiated $275 million in “debtor in possession” (DIP) financing from lenders to help sustain the 
firm’s mining operations through the bankruptcy process. Lenders made sure that a portion of their 
DIP financing was secured and also that it was made by a bank syndicate consisting of multiple 
lenders. As of the end of 2014, Arch estimated that its pension benefit obligations were $353 million 
and since they were well funded should not be affected by the bankruptcy filing.
Arch Coal, with about 4,600 employees, expects mining operations and customer shipments to 
continue uninterrupted and the impact on total employment and worker compensation to be lim­
ited. Unlike other bankrupt miners, the union-free miner said it has no labor issues to be resolved 
in Chapter 11. Arch, a supplier to both domestic and foreign customers, receives 84% of its coal 
from Wyoming’s Powder River Basin with the remainder coming from Central Appalachia and the 
Illinois Basin. The Wyoming operations are profitable on an operating basis, while mines outside of 
Wyoming may have to be shutdown.
The Arch bankruptcy filing could jeopardize the firm’s interests on the West Coast, where there 
has been some interest in building fossil fuel export terminals in recent years. Arch Coal is coowner 
of the proposed coal export terminal at the Millennium Bulk Terminals site in Longview, Wash­
ington. But the Arch Coal bankruptcy follows financial troubles by another investor in the project, 
Ambre Energy, and threatens the financial feasibility of the project.
Land reclamation may be another casualty of bankruptcy. Federal law requires coal companies 
to guarantee that, in the event that the company goes bankrupt, mines will be cleaned up. The law 
requires so called “reclamation bonds” before any mining permit is granted. But Arch has not put 
in escrow any funds for this purpose or purchased insurance to cover land reclamation. Congress 
has allowed coal firms to satisfy their obligations by self-insuring, which amounts to relying on the 
financial health and reputation of the coal company to raise the monies needed to restore terrain 
impacted by mining operations.
As recently as September 2015, Wyoming allowed Arch Coal to “self-bond” to cover its reclama­
tion requirements. If the company cannot cover its reclamation requirements, the state will shoulder 
the burden as the states in which the firm has mines requiring land reclamation will simply be con­
sidered general creditors in the bankruptcy process. Thus, there is the danger the state will receive 
only a fraction of the total reclamation cost if the firm is liquidated and the proceeds distributed.
With over ninety square miles of coal mines in Wyoming’s Powder River Basin, Arch has a $458 
million reclamation liability. The firm’s court filing listed $5.8 billion in assets and $6.5 billion in 
debt making it unlikely that liquidation of assets would be sufficient to cover reclamation expenses 
after the required payments defined by the federal bankruptcy law have been made. The debtor in 
possession loan includes a $75 million carve-out for environmental reclamation obligations. The 
balance of the reclamation costs may ultimately be borne by taxpayers.

	
Chapter Discussion Questions	
651
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
A D D I T I O N A L  C A S E  S T U D Y  R E C O M M E N D AT I O N S
Enron Collapse, Stewart Hamilton, Inna 
Francis, April 14, 2004, Source: IMD, Product 
Number: IMD 164-PDF-ENG, https://
cb.hbsp.harvard.edu/
	
Subjects covered: Bankruptcy, Business 
Failures, Accounting, Auditing, Corporate 
Governance, Business Ethics.
Adelphia Communication Corp.’s 
Bankruptcy, Stuart C. Gilson, Belen 
Villalonga, Revision Date: February 19, 2010, 
Product Number: 208271-PDF-ENG,  
Source: Harvard Business School, hbsp.
harvard.edu.
	
Subjects covered: Bankruptcy, Conflicts of 
Interest, Fraud, Restructuring.
Bankruptcy and Restructuring at Marvel 
Entertainment Group, Benjamin C. Esty, Jason 
S. Auerbach, Revision Date: August 13, 2007, 
Product Number: 298059-PDF-ENG, Source: 
Harvard Business School, hbsp.harvard.edu.
	
Subjects covered: Bankruptcy, 
Liquidation, and Restructuring.
The coal industry survivors will be low-cost producers across the country, including most of the 
eleven mines in Arch Coal’s portfolio. Major US mining firms have many profitable mines, but have 
racked up too much debt. Their mines are now expected to fall into the hands of new owners and 
operators dominated by creditors and private equity firms willing to buy deeply distressed debt. 
Once purchased, such debt can be swapped at face value for coal mining assets. While the indus­
try’s future is cloudy, predictions of its demise are likely to prove highly premature.
Chapter Discussion Questions
17.1	 To what extent do you believe the factors contributing to the Arch Coal’s bankruptcy were 
beyond the control of management? To what extent do you believe past mismanagement may 
have contributed to the bankruptcy?
17.2	 Comment on the fairness of the bankruptcy process to shareholders, lenders, employees, 
communities, government, and so forth. Be specific.
17.3	 Why would lenders be willing to lend to a firm emerging from Chapter 11? How did the 
lenders attempt to manage their risks? Be specific.
17.4	 How does Chapter 11 potentially affect adversely competitors of firms emerging from 
bankruptcy? Explain your answer.
17.5	 Discuss whether Arch Coal’s lenders would have been better off in Chapter 11 
reorganization, from a liquidation, or a Section 363 sale?
17.6	 The Arch Coal case study illustrates options available to the creditors and owners of a failing 
firm. How do you believe creditors and owners might choose from among the range of 
available options?
Solutions to these case study questions are found in the Online Instructor’s Manual for instructors us­
ing this book (https://textbooks.elsevier.com/web/Manuals.aspx?isbn=9780128016091).


C H A P T E R
653
Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring Activities. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-801609-1.00018-X
Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
18
Cross-Border Mergers 
and Acquisitions
Analysis and Valuation
O U T L I N E
Inside M&A: Chip Industry 
Consolidation	
654
Chapter Overview	
655
Globalization: The Elephant 
in the Room?	
656
Motives for International Expansion	
658
Geographic and Industrial 
Diversification	
658
Accelerating Growth	
658
Industry Consolidation	
658
Utilization of Lower Raw Material 
and Labor Costs	
658
Leveraging Intangible Assets	
659
Minimizing Tax Liabilities	
659
Seeking More Management 
Friendly Environments	
660
Avoiding Entry Barriers	
660
Fluctuating Exchange Rates	
660
Following Customers	
660
Common International Market 
Entry Strategies	
660
Structuring Crossborder Deals	
661
Friendly Versus Hostile Deals	
662
Bidding Strategies	
662
Acquisition Vehicles	
662
Form of Payment	
663
Form of Acquisition	
664
Tax Strategies	
664
Financing Crossborder Deals	
665
Debt Markets	
665
Equity Markets	
665
Sovereign Wealth Funds	
665
Planning and Implementing 
Crossborder Transactions 
in Emerging Countries	
666
Political and Economic Risks	
666
Sources of Information for Assessing 
Political and Economic Risk	
667
Using Insurance to Manage Risk	
667
Using Options and Contract Language 
to Manage Risk	
667
How are Crossborder Transactions 
Valued?	
667
Converting Foreign Target Cash Flows 
to Acquirer Domestic Cash Flows	
667
Selecting the Correct Marginal 
Tax Rate	
670

654	
18.  Cross-Border Mergers and Acquisitions
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
Courage is not the absence of fear. It is doing the thing you fear the most. —Rick Warren
INSIDE M&A: CHIP INDUSTRY CONSOLIDATION
KEY POINTS
•	 Industry consolidation often is an important factor in triggering merger waves.
•	 Market value can be grown dramatically through an aggressive and well executed acquisition 
strategy
•	 Differences in corporate tax rates among countries can give foreign acquirers an edge in 
acquiring domestic firms
With a market value of less than $3.5 billion, chip maker Avago Technologies (Avago) was 
viewed as a modest competitor in the semiconductor industry when it went public in 2009. 
By 2015, the firm’s market value exploded to $35 billion. The rapid expansion of the firm’s 
market value in 6 years reflected its successful growth through acquisition strategy.
Avago’s strategy emphasizes acquiring complementary businesses, quickly paring over­
lapping costs, and selling off businesses no longer critical to its growth plan. In the past 
4 years, Avago acquired five companies that helped it further its motion control encoder tech­
nology and optical fiber technology. During the same period, Avago sold several noncore 
businesses enabling it to focus on strengthening its remaining businesses and to pay off debt 
incurred in making prior acquisitions.
The aggressive pace of acquisitions was fueled by historically low cost debt financing dur­
ing this period, a rapidly appreciating share price, and low tax rates. Avago’s share price has 
grown at an approximate 39% compound annual average rate since its 2009 IPO when it traded 
Estimating the Cost of Equity 
in Crossborder Transactions	
671
Applying the Fisher Effect	
673
Estimating the Local Firm’s Cost 
of Debt in Emerging Markets	
677
Evaluating Risk Using Scenario 
Planning	
678
Empirical Studies of Cross-Border 
Transactions	
680
International Diversification 
May Contribute to Higher 
Financial Returns	
681
Returns for Crossborder Deals Consistent 
with Those for Domestic Deals	
682
Improving Corporate Governance Creates 
Significant Shareholder Value	
683
Foreign Institutional Ownership May 
Promote Crossborder M&A Activity	 684
M&As in “Frontier Economies” 
May Result in the Highest Acquirer 
Financial Returns	
684
Some Things to Remember	
684
Chapter Discussion Questions	
685
Case Study Major Regulatory and 
Integration Hurdles for the Anheuser-
Busch InBev and Sabmiller Merger	
685
Case Objectives	
685
Chapter Discussion Questions	
689
Additional Case Study: 
Recommendations	
690

	
Chapter Overview	
655
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
at $17.38 per share before rising to $128.48 in mid-2015. The rapid growth in its share price has 
made its stock attractive to target firm shareholders and as such a solid acquisition currency.
On May 28, 2015, Avago announced its biggest deal ever and the largest in the history of 
the semiconductor industry when it purchased Broadcom Technologies (Broadcom) for $37 
billion offering the firm’s shareholders a combination of cash and stock. The combined firm 
will be named Broadcom Ltd. and will have annual revenue of $15 billion. This deal propelled 
the newly formed company to the top ranks of semiconductor makers, although it will still be 
behind Intel and Qualcomm in terms of revenue. Synergies are estimated at $750 million an­
nually. The strategic fit appears greatest between Broadcom’s broadband, infrastructure and 
networking businesses and Avago’s handset business. Some portion of the purchase price can 
be recovered by the divestiture of such Broadcom units as its connectivity division.
The latest acquisition by Avago illustrates the wave of consolidation that swept over the com­
puter chip industry. In recent years chip makers have turned to buying growth to cut costs using 
mergers to combine sales forces and back end operations. By achieving larger scale, the chip 
makers can remain attractive to customers wanting to reduce the number of their suppliers. 
The deal also enables the new company to free up billions in cash that was previously trapped 
overseas and helps to eliminate potential US tax liabilities. Many multinational US firms have 
been reluctant to repatriate their foreign earnings to the US due to the 35% applicable tax rate, 
the highest among developed countries. According to SEC filings, Broadcom is no exception. As 
of 2014, Broadcom had $3.13 billion of cash and cash equivalents held by its foreign subsidiaries.
The Broadcom and Avago merger closed in March 2016. Since Broadcom was acquired by 
a foreign incorporated business, the combined firms can have tax free access to Broadcom’s 
foreign cash holdings and earnings and the ability to reduce the tax rate through “earnings 
stripping.” Earnings stripping refers to a US subsidiary of a foreign firm paying excessively 
high interest on loans from its parent or selling its output to the parent at below market prices. 
Both tactics reduce taxable earnings reported to US taxing authorities. While technically not 
a tax inversion in which a US firm acquires a foreign firm and then incorporates in the for­
eign firm’s tax jurisdiction, this transaction in which a foreign firm acquires a US firm offers 
many of the same tax benefits. Corporate consolidated earnings in Singapore (where Avago 
is domiciled) are taxed at a modest 5% rate, well below US corporate tax rate. The resultant 
lower effective tax rate for the consolidated Avago and Broadcom businesses gave Avago a 
decided advantage in what it could justify paying for Broadcom over other potential suitors 
not having similar tax advantages.1
CHAPTER OVERVIEW
Crossborder M&A’s have become increasingly important in recent years increasing their 
share of global M&A activity. This chapter addresses the implications for crossborder deals 
of the backlash against globalization in recent years, as well as deal structures, financing, 
valuation, and execution in both developed and emerging countries. Throughout the chapter, 
1On April 5, 2016, the US treasury introduced new regulations giving the government more authority to treat inter­
est payments on intercompany cash transfers as dividend payments, not deductible under US law. The new rules 
apply to intercompany loans after that date. How this will impact this and future deals will depend on how the 
rules are applied. For more detail, see Chapter 12.

656	
18.  Cross-Border Mergers and Acquisitions
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
the term local country refers to the target’s country of residence, while home country refers 
to the acquirer’s country of residence. Developed countries are those having significant and 
sustainable per capita economic growth, globally integrated capital markets, a well-defined 
legal system, transparent financial statements, currency convertibility, and a stable govern­
ment. According to the World Bank, emerging countries have a growth rate in per capita gross 
domestic product significantly below that of developed countries and often lack many of the 
characteristics of developed countries.
Foreign investment has traditionally flowed from developed to developing countries; how­
ever, in recent years there has been a trend toward capital flowing from emerging market in­
vestors to developed countries.2 The portion of foreign direct investment consisting of M&A’s 
flowing from emerging market countries to developed countries has exceeded M&A’s share 
of capital moving into emerging markets.3 Consequently, special attention in this chapter is 
given to dealing with crossborder M&A’s involving emerging countries. A chapter review 
(including practice questions with answers) is available in the file folder entitled “Student 
Study Guide” on the companion website to this book (https://www.elsevier.com/books-
and-journals/book-companion/9780128016091).
GLOBALIZATION: THE ELEPHANT IN THE ROOM?
Globalization refers to the economic integration of the world economy characterized by 
the increasingly unfettered flow of products and services among countries. Since WWII, mul­
tilateral trade agreements have resulted in a reduction in barriers to entering both developed 
and emerging domestic economies and the subsequent increase in global trade. Financial 
markets have displayed similar global integration such that fluctuations in financial returns in 
one country’s equity and bond markets impact returns in similar markets in other countries.
So-called globally integrated capital markets provide foreigners with unfettered access to local 
capital markets and provide local residents access to foreign capital markets and ultimately a 
lower cost of capital. Unlike globally integrated capital markets, segmented capital markets ex­
hibit different bond and equity prices in different geographic areas for identical assets in 
terms of risk and maturity. Arbitrage should drive the prices in different markets to be the 
same (differing only by transaction and hedging costs), since investors sell those assets that 
are overvalued to buy those that are undervalued. Segmentation arises when investors are 
unable to move capital from one market to another due to capital controls, prefer to invest in 
their local markets, or have better information about local rather than more remote firms.4 In­
vestors in segmented markets bear a higher level of risk by holding a disproportionately large 
share of their investments in their local market as opposed to the level of risk if they invested 
in a globally diversified portfolio. Investors and lenders in such markets require a higher rate 
of return on local market investments than if investing in a globally diversified portfolio of 
stocks and bonds. As such, the cost of capital for firms in segmented markets, having limited 
access to global capital markets, often is higher than the global cost of capital.
2Chari et al., 2012.
3Rabbiosi et al., 2012.
4Kang and Kim, 2008.

	
Globalization: The Elephant in the Room?	
657
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
Proponents of globalization argue that it has raised standards of living in both developed 
and emerging nations and helped emerging nations to catch up to developed economies by 
increasing employment, per capita income, as well as technological and cultural exchange. 
Critics argue that globalization weakens country sovereignty and enables developed econo­
mies to outsource domestic jobs to areas where the cost of doing business is cheaper in terms 
of labor costs and regulations. Critics also contend that it has disproportionately benefitted 
firms in Western countries at the expense of developing economies. Global capital markets, so 
their argument goes, also transmit disruptions rapidly in capital markets in major economies 
throughout the world, as evidenced by the global meltdown in the equity and bond markets 
in 2008 and 2009.
Between 1988 and 2008, gains in inflation adjusted income appear to be greatest in emerg­
ing market countries (mostly Asian and some Eastern European, South American, and Latin 
American countries) benefitting the poor, middle class, and the highest income earners. 
Unlike their counterparts in emerging nations, middle class income earners in developed 
countries have shown little growth (and in some cases declines) in real income since the late 
1980s. Some observers use this information to illustrate what they view as the ills of global­
ization without establishing a causal link between globalization and income redistribution.
Individual country social economic policies are likely to explain the changing global in­
come distribution more than simply the growth in international trade and the greater integra­
tion of the global economies.5 Blaming globalization is an oft used excuse to reduce pressure 
on governments to make the appropriate decisions to alleviate growing income disparities.
Whether globalization is an important factor in redistributing income or not perception is 
what matters. The rise in populism in the United States culminating in the election of Donald 
Trump as president in 2016 and efforts to restrict labor mobility among some European Union 
countries in the wake of mass migration from the Middle East and elsewhere underscore the 
extent of public unrest. The resulting backlash against globalization is likely to make coun­
tries more wary of liberalizing trade agreements. The European Union and the United States 
have run into major difficulties in the passage of the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Part­
nership (TTIP). While many governments have approved the TTIP, the United States has 
refused to approve the trade pact. The failure to approve this agreement could slow future 
trade induced global economic growth.
The impact of these developments on M&A’s is less certain. Slower global growth is likely 
to undermine gains in foreign direct investment, including M&A’s. However, with growth 
rates among countries varying widely, the pressure to pursue crossborder deals will remain 
high in the absence of factors that make such deals less attractive. Such factors could include 
“exit” taxes (taxes imposed on firms wanting to relocate outside a country) and limitations on 
earnings repatriation. However, the motives for international expansion are numerous and will 
continue to drive foreign direct investment in the foreseeable future. These are discussed next.
5The focus by the world’s major central banks on suppressing interest rates to zero or negative levels has penalized 
the poor who are more likely to invest in fixed income securities while inflating equity markets to the benefit of the 
wealthy. Differences in educational attainment represent another factor looming large in explaining differences in 
labor force quality and in turn income distribution. US test scores in math and reading continue to decline relative 
to major developed countries despite the United States spending more per pupil than many other countries.

658	
18.  Cross-Border Mergers and Acquisitions
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
MOTIVES FOR INTERNATIONAL EXPANSION
Firms expand internationally for a variety of reasons. While some are similar to those moti­
vating M&A’s between firms within a country’s borders (see Chapter 1), factors contributing 
to crossborder M&A’s in some instance may be quite different.
Geographic and Industrial Diversification
Firms may diversify by investing in different industries in the same country, the same 
industries in different countries, or different industries in different countries. Firms invest­
ing in industries or countries whose economic cycles are not highly correlated may lower the 
overall volatility (i.e., risk) in their consolidated earnings and cash flows and, in turn, reduce 
their cost of capital6 and also their risk of default.7 This is something that a firm may not be 
able to achieve by diversifying within its home country.
Accelerating Growth
Foreign markets represent an opportunity for domestic firms to grow. Large firms experi­
encing slower growth in their domestic markets have a greater likelihood of making foreign 
acquisitions, particularly in rapidly growing emerging markets.8 US firms have historically 
invested in potentially higher-growth foreign markets. Similarly, the United States represents 
a large, growing, and politically stable market. Consequently, foreign firms have increased 
their exports to and direct investment (including M&A’s) in the United States.
Industry Consolidation
Industries which are global in scope often require crossborder M&A’s to consolidate. 
Excess capacity in many industries often drives M&A activity, as firms strive to achieve great­
er economies of scale and scope as well as pricing power with customers and suppliers. The 
highly active consolidation in recent years in the metals industries (e.g., steel, nickel, and 
copper) represents an excellent example of this global trend. Global consolidation also is com­
mon in the financial services, media, oil and gas, telecommunications, and pharmaceuticals 
industries.
Utilization of Lower Raw Material and Labor Costs
Labor cost differences are likely to be larger between countries and regions, since labor 
and other resources often tend to be less mobile across political boundaries. Emerging mar­
kets offer low labor costs, access to inexpensive raw materials, and low levels of regulation. 
6Studies show that diversified international firms often exhibit a lower cost of capital than do firms whose invest­
ments are not well diversified (Stulz, 1995a, 1995b; Stulz and Wasserfallen, 1995. In contrast, Krapl (2015) finds little 
empirical support for risk reduction through international diversification.
7Koerniadi et al., 2015.
8Graham et al., 2008.

	
Motives for International Expansion	
659
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
Shifting production overseas allows firms to reduce operating expenses and become more 
competitive globally. The benefit of lower labor costs is overstated because worker pro­
ductivity in emerging countries tends to be significantly lower than in more developed 
countries.
Leveraging Intangible Assets
Firms with expertise, brands, patents, copyrights, and proprietary technologies seek to 
grow by exploiting these advantages in emerging markets. Foreign buyers may seek to acquire 
firms with intellectual property so that they can employ such assets in their own domestic 
markets.9 Firms with a reputation for superior products in their home markets might find that 
they can apply this reputation successfully in foreign markets (e.g., Coke and McDonald’s). 
Firms seeking to leverage their capabilities are likely to acquire controlling interests in foreign 
firms.
However, as Wal-Mart discovered, sometimes even a widely recognized brand name is 
insufficient to overcome the challenges of foreign markets. Shortly after selling its 16 stores 
in South Korea in 2006 due to their poor profitability, the firm announced it was selling its 
operations in Germany to German retailer Metro AG. Wal-Mart had been unable to adapt 
to the ferocity of German competitors, the frugality of German shoppers, and the extent to 
which regulations, cultural differences, and labor unions would impede its ability to apply in 
Germany what had worked so well in the United States.
Minimizing Tax Liabilities
Firms in high-tax countries may shift production and reported profits by building or 
acquiring operations in countries with more favorable tax laws. Evidence supporting the 
notion that such strategies are common is mixed, with more recent studies showing a greater 
tendency of firms to shift their investments from high-tax countries to lower-tax countries 
and to pursue M&A transactions, in part due to their favorable tax consequences.10 In par­
ticular, domestic firms with large cash holdings held in their foreign subsidiaries are more 
inclined to make acquisitions in foreign countries, if tax rates in their home country exceed 
significantly foreign tax rates. However, abnormal returns on the announcement date for 
such acquirers often are lower than for similar acquisitions made in their home countries as 
investors may feel that tax considerations rather than synergy was the primary motivation 
for such takeovers.11 So called corporate tax inversions (companies relocating their head­
quarters to take advantage of more favorable country tax rates) are discussed in detail in 
Chapter 12.
9Eun et al., 1996.
10Salihu et al. (2015), Zodrow (2010), Overesch (2009), and Servaes and Zenner (1994) found a positive correlation 
between cross-border investment (including mergers and acquisitions) and differences in tax laws. However, 
Dewenter (1995) found little correlation.
11Hanlon et al., 2015.

660	
18.  Cross-Border Mergers and Acquisitions
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
Seeking More Management Friendly Environments
While corporate tax inversions are generally driven by potential tax savings, senior 
management may see additional benefits of changing the country in which the firm is 
incorporated. Dutch politicians have been touting the benefits of Dutch corporate law 
to global corporations in an effort to turn the Netherlands into a management-friendly 
environment. Mylan Labs set up a Dutch foundation known as a “Stichting” which is a 
takeover defense comparable to a US style poison pill. The foundation has the right to 
receive preferred shares with multiple voting rights that allow it to block any deal by 
outvoting other shareholders. Mylan’s board triggered the foundation’s special voting 
rights to oppose an unwanted takeover bid by Israel’s Teva Corp in 2015. Cable firm Altice 
switched its domicile in 2015 through a merger from Luxembourg to the Netherlands so 
that it could introduce a dual class share structure (which is barred in Luxembourg) giv­
ing the firm’s chairman Patrick Drahi 92% of the firm’s voting power while owning 58.5% 
of the firm.
Avoiding Entry Barriers
Market entry barriers often are less onerous within a country’s borders than between coun­
tries. Quotas and tariffs on imports imposed by governments to protect domestic industries 
often encourage foreign direct investment. Foreign firms may acquire existing facilities or start 
new operations in the country imposing the quotas and tariffs to circumvent such measures.
Fluctuating Exchange Rates
Changes in currency values have a significant impact on where and when foreign direct 
investments are made. The appreciation of foreign currencies relative to the dollar reduces 
the overall cost of investing in the United States. The impact of exchange rates on crossborder 
transactions has been substantiated in a number of studies.12
Following Customers
Often suppliers are encouraged to invest abroad to satisfy better the immediate needs of 
their customers. For example, auto parts suppliers worldwide have set up operations next to 
large auto manufacturing companies in China.
COMMON INTERNATIONAL MARKET ENTRY STRATEGIES
The method of market entry chosen by a firm reflects the firm’s risk tolerance, perceived 
risk, competitive conditions, and overall resources. Common entry strategies include mergers 
and acquisitions, greenfield, or solo ventures, joint ventures, export, and licensing.
12Boateng et al., 2014; Erel et al., 2012; Georgopoulos, 2008; and Vasconcellos and Kish, 1998.

	
Structuring Crossborder Deals	
661
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
In a greenfield or solo venture, a foreign firm starts a new business in the local country, en­
abling the firm to control technology, production, marketing, and product distribution. Firms 
with significant intangible assets (e.g., proprietary know-how) are frequently able to earn 
above-average returns, which can be leveraged in a greenfield or start-up venture.13 However, 
the firm’s total investment is at risk. M&A’s can provide quick access to a new market; howev­
er, they often are expensive, complex to negotiate, subject to myriad regulatory requirements, 
and beset by intractable cultural issues. Joint ventures allow firms to share the risks and costs 
of international expansion, develop new capabilities, and gain access to important resources 
but often fail due to conflict between partners.14 Firms often choose a joint venture over an 
acquisition as the preferred market entry strategy when the risk of loss of intellectual property 
to a JV partner is less than the potential for expropriation by the local country’s government.15
Multinational corporations headquartered in emerging markets often use cross border ac­
quisitions as a means of entering developed country markets. Such acquisitions allow these 
companies to rapidly become more competitive against dominant firms in developed countries 
by acquiring brands, technologies, management know how, and other skills they may lack.16
Exporting does not require the expense of establishing local operations; however, export­
ers must establish some means of marketing and distributing their products at the local level. 
The disadvantages of exporting include high transportation costs, exchange rate fluctuations, 
and possible tariffs placed on imports into the local country. Moreover, the exporter has lim­
ited control over the marketing and distribution of its products in the local market.
Licensing allows a firm to purchase the right to manufacture and sell another firm’s prod­
ucts within a specific country or set of countries, with the licensor paid an upfront sum plus 
a royalty on each unit sold. Licensing also may involve firms interested in extracting natural 
resources within specific countries.17 The licensee takes the risks and makes the investments 
in facilities for manufacturing, marketing, and distribution of goods and services, making 
licensing possibly the least costly form of international expansion. Licensing is a popular 
entry mode for smaller firms with insufficient capital and limited brand recognition.18 Dis­
advantages include the lack of control over the manufacture and marketing of the firm’s 
products in other countries. Licensing often is the least profitable entry strategy because the 
profits must be shared between the licensor and the licensee. Finally, the licensee may learn 
the technology and sell a similar competitive product after the license expires.
STRUCTURING CROSSBORDER DEALS
This section provides an abbreviated discussion of those aspects of deal structuring dis­
cussed in Chapters 11 and 12 most applicable to crossborder transactions.
16Anderson and Sutherland, 2015.
17In early 2017, British Petroleum traded a 2% stake in the company plus a fee on each barrel of oil or oil equivalent 
produced to license the right to extract oil and gas from onshore oil fields in the United Arab Emirates over a 40 
year period.
18Hitt and Ireland, 2000.
13Brouthers and Brouthers, 2000.
14Zahra and Elhagrasey, 1994.
15Bodnaruk et al., 2016.

662	
18.  Cross-Border Mergers and Acquisitions
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
Friendly Versus Hostile Deals
Crossborder takeovers are most often friendly transactions. This reflects a combination of 
factors including cultural antipathy toward hostile takeovers and government protectionism. 
Government intervention in hostile deals is more likely if a foreign bidder is involved, if it 
is a large transaction, and if the target firm’s country is experiencing high unemployment.19
Bidding Strategies
As with domestic deals, international mergers and acquisitions commonly employ toehold 
investment tactics and termination fees to reduce the likelihood of competition in bidding 
for a target. If a bidding contest does occur, the use of these tactics increases the probability 
that the initial bidder will be successful. There is little evidence that high initial bids prevent 
bidding competition. The successful participant in a bidding contest is generally the one who 
includes the most cash in the offer price. Serial acquirers are more likely not to participant in 
bidding contests and are more likely to complete transactions.20 Finally, US bidders tend to of­
fer lower purchase price premiums when they are relatively unfamiliar with the culture of the 
target firm’s country. Why? Because the greater uncertainty that anticipated synergies cannot 
be realized due to cultural factors on a timely basis or at all reduces the acquirer’s confidence 
it can earn back the premium paid. However, this uncertainty does not appear present when 
foreign firms acquire US targets.21
Acquisition Vehicles
Non-US firms seeking to acquire US companies often use C corporations rather than lim­
ited liability companies or partnerships to acquire the shares or assets of US targets. They 
are relatively easy to organize quickly, since all states permit such structures and no prior 
government approval is required. There is no limitation on non-US persons or entities acting 
as shareholders in US corporations, except for certain regulated industries. A limited liability 
company is attractive for JVs in which the target would be owned by two or more unrelated 
parties, corporations, or nonresident investors. While not traded on public stock exchanges, 
LLC shares can be sold freely to members. This facilitates the parent firm’s operating the 
acquired firm as a subsidiary or JV. A partnership may have advantages for investors from 
certain countries (e.g., Germany), where income earned from a US partnership is not subject 
to taxation. A holding company structure enables a foreign parent to offset gains from one 
subsidiary with losses generated by another, serves as a platform for future acquisitions, and 
provides the parent with additional legal protection in the event of lawsuits.
US companies acquiring businesses outside the United States encounter obstacles atypi­
cal of domestic acquisitions. These include investment and exchange control approvals, tax 
clearances, clearances under local competition (i.e., antitrust) laws, and unusual due diligence 
problems. Other problems involve the necessity of agreeing on an allocation of the purchase 
19Rowoldt and Starke, 2016.
20Bessler et al., 2015.
21Lim et al., 2016.

	
Structuring Crossborder Deals	
663
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
price among assets located in various jurisdictions and compliance with local law relating to 
the documentation necessary to complete the transaction. Much of what follows also applies 
to non-US firms acquiring foreign firms.
The laws governing foreign firms have an important impact on the choice of acquisition 
vehicle, since the buyer must organize a local company to hold acquired shares or assets in 
a way that meets local-country law. In common-law countries (e.g., the United Kingdom, 
Canada, Australia, India, Pakistan, Hong Kong, Singapore, and other former British colo­
nies), the acquisition vehicle will be a corporation-like structure, which is similar to those 
in the United States. In civil-law countries (which include Western Europe, South America, 
Japan, and Korea), the acquisition will be in the form of a share company or limited liability 
company. Civil law is synonymous with codified law, continental law, or the Napoleonic Code. 
Practiced in some Middle Eastern Muslim countries and some countries in Southeast Asia 
(e.g., Indonesia and Malaysia), Islamic law is based on the Koran.
In the European Union, there is no overarching law or EU directive requiring a specific 
corporate form. Rather, corporate law is the responsibility of each member nation. There is 
evidence that differences in corporate law across member nations have hindered progress to­
ward a more active European M&A market, since both individual country and EU level laws 
must be considered.22 In an effort to adapt to this complexity, smaller enterprises often use a 
limited liability company, while larger enterprises, particularly those with public sharehold­
ers, are referred to as share companies. The rules applicable to limited liability companies tend 
to be flexible and are particularly useful for wholly owned subsidiaries. In contrast, share 
companies are subject to numerous restrictions and securities laws. However, their shares 
trade freely on public exchanges.
Share companies are more regulated than US corporations. They must register with the 
commercial registrar in the location of their principal place of business. Bureaucratic delays 
from several weeks to several months between the filing of the appropriate documents and 
the organization of the company may occur. Most civil-law countries require that there be 
more than one shareholder. Usually there is no limitation on foreigners acting as sharehold­
ers. Limited liability companies outside the United States are generally subject to fewer re­
strictions than share companies. A limited liability company typically is required to have 
more than one quota holder (i.e., investor). In general, either domestic or foreign corporations 
or individuals may be quota holders in the LLC.23
Form of Payment
US target shareholders often receive cash rather than shares in crossborder deals.24 Shares 
and other securities require registration with the Securities and Exchange Commission and 
compliance with all local securities (including state) laws if they are resold in the United 
States. Acquirer shares often are less attractive to potential target shareholders because of the 
absence of a liquid market for resale or because the acquirer is not recognized by the target 
firm’s shareholders. In buying non-US firms, target shareholders of public companies are 
23For an excellent discussion of corporate structures in common-law and civil-law countries, see Truitt (2006).
24Ceneboyan et al., 1991.
22Moschieri and Campa, 2014.

664	
18.  Cross-Border Mergers and Acquisitions
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
more likely to receive cash while equity is more commonly paid to shareholders of private 
firms.25 Acquirer equity often is used in deals involving private targets because of the diffi­
culty in valuing such firms. Target shareholders will provide more accurate information since 
the eventual value of their acquirer shares will reflect the acquirer’s success or failure.
Form of Acquisition
Share acquisitions are generally the simplest form of acquisition in cross-border deals, be­
cause all target assets and liabilities transfer to the acquirer by “rule of law.” Acquirers tend to 
opt for owning 100% of the target’s equity when the target is in a related industry and the ac­
quirer is highly familiar with the country in which the target resides.26 Asset purchases result 
in the transference of all or some of the assets of the target firm to the acquirer. The major dis­
advantage of a share purchase is that all the target’s known and unknown liabilities transfer 
to the buyer. When the target is in a foreign country, full disclosure of liabilities is limited and 
some target assets transfer with tax liens or other associated liabilities. Asset sales often are 
more complicated in foreign countries when the local law requires that the target firm’s em­
ployees automatically become the acquirer’s employees. Mergers are not legal or practical in 
all countries, often due to the requirement that minority shareholders agree with the will of 
the majority vote. There is some evidence that acquirers able to purchase selected target assets 
in cross-border deals fare better as measured by financial returns than those that undertake 
mergers or stock purchases.27 Why? Perhaps because of the difficulty of performing adequate 
due diligence when the acquirer is less familiar with the culture and financial transparency 
may be limited.
Tax Strategies
Tax-free reorganizations, or mergers, are often used by foreign acquirers of US firms. The 
target firm merges with a US subsidiary of the foreign acquirer in a statutory merger under 
state laws. To qualify as a US corporation for tax purposes, the foreign firm must own at least 
80% of the stock of the domestic subsidiary. As such, the transaction can qualify as a Type-A 
tax-free reorganization (see Chapter 12).
Another form of deal structure is the taxable purchase, which involves the acquisition by 
one company of the shares or assets of another, usually in exchange for cash or debt. Target 
firm shareholders recognize a taxable gain or loss on the exchange. The forward triangular 
merger is the most common form of taxable transaction. The target company merges with a 
US subsidiary of the foreign acquirer, with shareholders of the target firm receiving acquirer 
shares, as well as cash, although cash is the predominant form of payment. This structure is 
useful when some target company shareholders want shares while others want cash.
Hybrid transactions represent a third form of transaction used in crossborder transactions. 
This type of structure affords the US target corporation and its shareholders tax-free treat­
ment while avoiding the issuance of shares of the foreign acquirer. A hybrid transaction may 
25Bae et al., 2013.
26Chiara Di Guardo et al., 2016.
27Jory et al., 2016.

	
Financing Crossborder Deals	
665
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
be taxable to some target shareholders and tax free to others. To structure hybrid transactions, 
some target company shareholders may exchange their common shares for a nonvoting pre­
ferred stock while the foreign acquirer or its US subsidiary buys the remaining common stock 
for cash. This transaction is tax free to target company shareholders taking preferred stock 
and taxable to those selling their shares for cash.28
FINANCING CROSSBORDER DEALS
Debt is most often used to finance crossborder transactions. Sources of financing exist in 
capital markets in the acquirer’s home, the target’s local country, or in some third country. 
Domestic capital sources available to crossborder acquirers include banks willing to provide 
bridge financing and lines of credit, bond markets, and equity markets.
Debt Markets
Commonly used to finance crossborder deals, Eurobonds are debt instruments expressed in 
terms of US dollars or other currencies and sold to investors outside the country in whose cur­
rency they are denominated. A typical Eurobond transaction could be a dollar-denominated 
bond issued by a French firm through an underwriting group. The underwriting group could 
comprise the overseas affiliate of a New York commercial bank, a German commercial bank, 
and a consortium of London banks. Bonds issued by foreign firms and governments in local 
markets have existed for many years. Such bonds are issued in another country’s domestic 
bond market, denominated in its currency, and subject to that country’s regulations.29
Equity Markets
The American Depository Receipt (ADR) market evolved as a means of enabling foreign 
firms to raise funds in US equity markets. ADRs represent the receipt for the shares of a foreign-
based corporation held in a US bank, entitling the holder to all dividends and capital gains. The 
acronyms ADS and ADR often are used interchangeably. The Euroequity market reflects equity 
issues by a foreign firm tapping a larger investor base than the firm’s home equity market.30
Sovereign Wealth Funds
Sovereign wealth funds (SWFs) are government-backed or government-sponsored invest­
ment funds whose function is to invest accumulated reserves of foreign currencies. For years, 
30If the acquirer is not well known in the target’s home market, target shareholders may be able to sell the shares 
only at a discount in their home market. The buyer may have to issue shares in its home market or possibly in the 
international equities market and use the proceeds to acquire the target for cash. Alternatively, the acquirer may 
issue shares in the target’s market to create a resale market for target shareholders or offer target shareholders the 
opportunity to sell the shares in the buyer’s home market through an investment banker.
28For an excellent discussion of the different tax laws in various countries, see PriceWaterhouseCoopers (2015).
29Bonds of a non-US issuer registered with the SEC for sale in the US public bond markets are called yankee bonds. 
Similarly, a US company issuing a bond in Japan would be issuing a “samurai” bond.

666	
18.  Cross-Border Mergers and Acquisitions
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
such funds, in countries that had accumulated huge quantities of dollars, would reinvest 
these funds in US Treasury securities. However, in recent years, such funds have become more 
sophisticated, increasingly taking equity positions in foreign firms and diversifying their cur­
rency holdings. Empirical studies show that the motives for making such investments are 
to earn high financial returns rather than to steal intellectual property or to threaten the na­
tional security of countries in which they invest.31 Moreover, SWFs tend to target “strategic 
industries,” such as telecommunications, financial, natural resource, and utilities in countries 
displaying sustainable economic growth and whose governments are relatively unlikely to 
prevent such investments for political reasons.32 In addition to providing a source of capi­
tal, SWFs, as politically connected large investors, may contribute to the value of a firm in 
which they invest by providing access to the SWF’s home market and to government-related 
contracts.33
PLANNING AND IMPLEMENTING CROSSBORDER 
TRANSACTIONS IN EMERGING COUNTRIES
Entering emerging economies poses challenges not generally encountered in developed 
countries. What follows is a discussion of how to deal with the inherent political and economic 
risks in such endeavors.
Political and Economic Risks
Political and economic risks are often interrelated. Examples of political and economic 
risk include excessive local government regulation, confiscatory tax policies, restrictions on 
cash remittances, currency inconvertibility, restrictive employment policies, expropriation 
of assets of foreign firms, civil war, or local insurgencies, and corruption. Another, some­
times overlooked, challenge is the failure of the legal system in an emerging country to honor 
contracts.34
Unexpected changes in exchange rates can influence the competitiveness of goods pro­
duced in the local market for export to the global marketplace. Changes in exchange rates 
alter the value of assets invested in the local country and earnings repatriated from the local 
operations to the parent firm in the home country. Not surprisingly, the degree of economic 
and political freedom correlates positively with foreign direct investment. When property 
rights are respected and earnings repatriation is unrestricted, foreigners are inclined to invest 
in the local country.35
31Alhashel, 2015.
32Boubaki et al., 2016.
33Sojli and Tham, 2010.
34Khanna et al., 2005.
35Berggren and Jordahl (2005) demonstrate a strong positive relationship between foreign direct investment and the 
Heritage Foundation’s Freedom Index. This index contains about 50 variables divided into 10 categories, measur­
ing various aspects of economic and political freedoms.

	
How are Crossborder Transactions Valued?	
667
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
Sources of Information for Assessing Political and Economic Risk
Information sources include consultants in the local country, joint venture partners, a local 
legal counsel, or appropriate government agency, such as the US Department of State. Other 
sources of information include the major credit-rating agencies, such as Standard & Poor’s, 
Moody’s, and Fitch IBCA. Trade magazines, such as Euromoney and Institutional Investor, pro­
vide overall country-risk ratings updated semiannually. The Economic Intelligence Unit also 
provides numerical risk scores for individual countries. The International Country Risk Guide, 
published by the Political Risk Services Group, offers overall numerical risk scores for indi­
vidual countries as well as separate scores for political, financial, and economic risks.
Using Insurance to Manage Risk
The decision to buy insurance depends on the size of the investment and the level of risk. 
Parties have a variety of sources from which to choose. For instance, the export credit agen­
cy in a variety of countries, such as Export Import Bank (United States), SACE (Italy), and 
Hermes (Germany), may offer coverage for companies based within their jurisdictions. The 
Overseas Private Investment Corporation is available to firms based in the United States, 
while the World Bank’s Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency is available to all firms.
Using Options and Contract Language to Manage Risk
When adequate due diligence is impractical, acquirers may include a put option in the 
purchase agreement, enabling the buyer to require the seller to repurchase shares from the 
buyer at a predetermined price under certain circumstances. Alternatively, the agreement 
could include a clause requiring a purchase price adjustment.
HOW ARE CROSSBORDER TRANSACTIONS VALUED?
Crossborder deals require converting cash flows from one currency to another. Also, discount 
rates may be adjusted for risks not found when the acquirer and target are in the same country.
Converting Foreign Target Cash Flows to Acquirer Domestic Cash Flows
Cash flows of the target firm can be expressed in its own currency, including expected infla­
tion (i.e., nominal terms), its own currency without inflation (i.e., real terms), or the acquirer’s 
currency. Real cash flow valuation adjusts all cash flows for inflation and uses real discount 
rates. M&A practitioners utilize nominal cash flows, except when inflation rates are high. 
Under these circumstances, real cash flows are preferable. Real cash flows are determined by 
dividing the nominal cash flows by the country’s gross domestic product deflator or some 
other broad measure of inflation. Future real cash flows are estimated by dividing future 
nominal cash flows by the current GDP deflator,36 increased by the expected rate of inflation. 
36The GDP deflator is the ratio of current dollar GDP to real or constant-dollar GDP and measures the percent 
change in prices between the current period and some prior “base” period.

668	
18.  Cross-Border Mergers and Acquisitions
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
Real discount rates are determined by subtracting the expected rate of inflation from nominal 
discount rates.37
It is simpler to project the target’s aggregate cash flows (rather than each component sepa­
rately) in terms in its own currency and then convert the cash flows into the acquirer’s cur­
rency. This requires estimating future exchange rates between the target (local) and the acquir­
er’s (home) currencies, which are affected by interest rates and expected inflation in the two 
countries. The current rate at which one currency can be exchanged for another is called the 
spot exchange rate. Conversion to the acquirer’s currency can be achieved by using future spot 
exchange rates, estimated either from relative interest rates (the interest rate parity theory) in 
each country or by the relative rates of expected inflation (the purchasing power parity theory).
When Target Firms Are in Developed (Globally Integrated) Capital Market Countries
For developed countries, the interest rate parity theory provides a useful framework for 
estimating forward currency exchange rates (i.e., future spot exchange rates). Consider a US ac­
quirer’s valuation of a firm in the European Union (EU), with projected cash flows expressed 
in terms of Euros. The target’s cash flows can be converted into dollars by using a forecast 
of future dollar-to-euro spot rates. The interest rate parity theory relates forward (future) spot 
exchange rates to differences in interest rates between two countries adjusted by the spot rate. 
Therefore, the dollar/euro exchange rate ($/€)n (i.e., the future, or forward, exchange rate), 
n periods into the future, is expected to appreciate (depreciate) according to the following 
relationship:
=
+
+
×
R
R
($/ )
{(1
) /(1
) }
($/ )
n
n
n
n
n
$
0
€
€
€
	
(18.1)
Similarly, the Euro-to-Dollar exchange rate (€/$)n, n periods into the future, would be ex­
pected to appreciate (depreciate) according to the following relationship:
=
+
+
×
R
R
( /$)
{(1
) /(1
) }
( /$)
n
n
n
n
n
0
€
€
€
$
	
(18.2)
Note that ($/€)0 and (€/$)0 represent the spot rate for the Dollar-to-Euro and Euro-to-
dollar exchange rates, respectively; R$n and R€n represent the interest rate in the United States 
and the European Union, respectively. Eqs. (18.1) and (18.2) imply that if US interest rates rise 
relative to those in the European Union, investors will buy dollars with Euros at the current 
spot rate and sell an equivalent amount of dollars for Euros in the forward (future) market n 
periods into the future in anticipation of converting their dollar holdings back into euros. Ac­
cording to this theory, the dollar-to-euro spot rate will appreciate and the dollar-to-euro for­
ward rate will depreciate until any profit due to the difference in interest rates is eliminated.38 
Exhibit 18.1 illustrates how to convert a target company’s nominal free cash flows to the firm 
37Nominal (real) cash flows should give the same NPVs if the expected rate of inflation used to convert future cash 
flows to real terms is the same inflation rate used to estimate the real discount rate.
38Equilibrium between forward exchange rates and spot rates adjusted for the ratio of US interest rates to those in 
Eurozone countries will in practice be restored by a combination of appreciating dollar-to-Euro spot rates, depreci­
ating dollar-to-Euro forward rates, and declining US interest rates and increasing Eurozone interest rates. Interest 
rates on US bonds decline as the investors bid up their prices, and interest rates on comparable Eurozone bonds 
increase as investors sell these bonds and invest the proceeds in the United States.

	
How are Crossborder Transactions Valued?	
669
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
(FCFF) expressed in Euros (i.e., the local country or target’s currency) to those expressed in 
dollars (i.e., home country or acquirer’s currency).
When Target Firms Are in Emerging (Segmented) Capital Market Countries
Cash flows are converted, as before, using the interest rate parity theory or the purchas­
ing power parity theory. The latter is used if there is insufficient information about interest 
rates in the emerging market. The purchasing power parity theory states that the percentage 
difference in the forward rate relative to the spot rate should over time equal the difference 
in expected inflation rates between countries. That is, one currency appreciates (depreciates) 
with respect to another currency according to the expected relative rates of inflation between 
the two countries such that an identical good in each country will have the same price. To il­
lustrate, the Dollar/Mexican peso exchange rate, ($/Peso)n, and the Mexican Peso/Dollar ex­
change rate, (Peso/$)n, n periods from now (i.e., future exchange rates) is expected to change 
according to the following relationships:
=
+
+
×
P
P
($/Peso)
[(1
) /(1
) ] ($/Peso)
n
n
n
US
MEX
0
	
(18.3)
and
=
+
+
×
P
P
(Peso/$)
[(1
) /(1
) ] (Peso/$)
n
n
n
MEX
US
0
	
(18.4)
where PUS and PMEX are the expected inflation rates in the United States and Mexico, respec­
tively, and ($/Peso)0 and (Peso/$)0 are the dollar-to-peso and peso-to-dollar spot exchange 
rates, respectively. If prices in the United States are expected to rise faster than those in 
Mexico for the same goods and services, other things equal, holders of pesos will buy dollars 
EXHIBIT 18.1  CONVERTING EURO-DENOMINATED INTO 
DOLLAR-DENOMINATED FREE CASH FLOWS TO THE FIRM 
USING THE INTEREST RATE PARITY THEORY
2012
2013
2014
Target’s Euro-Denominated FCFF Cash Flows (Millions)
€124.5
€130.7
€136.0
Target Country’s Interest Rate (%)
4.50
4.70
5.30
US Interest Rate (%)
4.25
4.35
4.55
Current Spot Rate ($/€) = 1.2044
Projected Spot Rate ($/€)
1.2015
1.1964
1.1788
Target’s Dollar-Denominated FCFF Cash Flows (Millions)
$149.59
$156.37
$160.32
Note: Calculating the projected spot rate using Eq. (18.1):
($/€)2012 = {(1.0425)/(1.0450)} × 1.2044 = 1.2015
($/€)2013 = {(1.0435)2/(1.0470)2} × 1.2044 = 1.1964
($/€)2014 = {(1.0455)3/(1.0530)3} × 1.2044 = 1.1788

670	
18.  Cross-Border Mergers and Acquisitions
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
to purchase US goods and services before they rise in price and sell an equivalent amount of 
Dollars for Pesos in the forward exchange market before the dollar depreciates. This causes 
the Dollar/Peso spot rate to decline (i.e., the Dollar to appreciate against the Peso) and the 
forward Dollar/Peso exchange rate to increase (i.e., the Dollar to depreciate against the Peso).
See Exhibit 18.2 for an illustration of how this might work in practice.
Selecting the Correct Marginal Tax Rate
Global businesses generally pay taxes using either the worldwide or territorial tax re­
gimes. The current worldwide or global tax system taxes businesses on income earned in their 
home country and on the income they earn in foreign countries. In contrast, the territorial tax 
system taxes income earned by both domestic and foreign firms operating within a country’s 
borders only on what they earn in that country and excludes most foreign-earned income. 
That is, only profits earned by domestic and foreign firms in that country are taxed under the 
territorial tax system.
Multinational firms headquartered in countries with a worldwide tax system can be put at 
a significant competitive disadvantage to those incorporated in countries using a territorial 
tax system. For example, Proctor & Gamble and Unilever both sell soap worldwide but their 
profits are taxed quite differently. US based P&G has to pay taxes on its worldwide profits 
while Unilever pays taxes mostly in the United Kingdom and the Netherlands, where it has 
coheadquarters. Consequently, P&G is at a competitive disadvantage since its tax burden is 
significantly higher.
EXHIBIT 18.2  CONVERTING PESO-DENOMINATED INTO 
DOLLAR-DENOMINATED FREE CASH FLOWS TO THE FIRM 
USING THE PURCHASING POWER PARITY THEORY
2012
2013
2014
Target’s Peso-Denominated FCFF Cash Flows (Millions of Pesos)
P1050.5
P1124.7
P1202.7
Current Mexican Expected Inflation Rate = 6%
Current US Expected Inflation Rate = 4%
Current Spot Rate ($/Peso) = 0.0877
Projected Spot Rate ($/Peso)
0.0860
0.0844
0.0828
Target’s Dollar-Denominated FCFF Cash Flows (Millions of $)
$90.34
$94.92
$99.58
Note: Calculating the projected spot rate using Eq. (18.3):
($/Peso)2012 = {(1.04)/(1.06)} × 0.0877 = 0.0860
($/Peso)2013 = {(1.04)2/(1.06)2} × 0.0877 = 0.0844
($/Peso)2014 = {(1.04)3/(1.06)3} × 0.0877 = 0.0828

	
How are Crossborder Transactions Valued?	
671
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
The US worldwide system taxes the domestic and foreign income of businesses with US 
headquarters. Businesses can claim a “foreign tax credit” for taxes that their foreign subsid­
iaries pay in other countries. This credit limits double taxation. Where the foreign tax rate 
exceeds the US rate, no US liability is generated. In the more common circumstances where 
the US tax rate is greater, US businesses owe a residual tax on their foreign earnings equal to 
the difference between the US tax rate (35% at the time of this writing)39 and the tax that their 
subsidiaries paid in the foreign country where they earned the income.
Instead of a pure territorial system, most countries use an exemption system under which 
foreign income is mostly exempt from taxation. The exemption is generally 95% of foreign 
earnings. Consequently, most foreign firms pay only a small token tax if they bring their 
after-tax profits back to their home country. US firms must pay the difference between the US 
tax rate and the tax that they have already paid. For example, French and US firms investing 
in Ireland pay a corporate tax of only 12.5%. The French firm can then repatriate its after-tax 
profit to France by paying 5% on those repatriated profits. The US firm has to pay an effective 
marginal tax rate of 22.5% equal to the difference between the US 35% corporate tax and the 
12.5% Irish tax. The huge difference provides a major incentive for US firms to retain foreign 
earned profits outside the United States.
The selection of the right marginal tax rate for valuation purposes thus depends on where 
most of the taxes are actually paid. If the acquirer’s country exempts foreign income from 
further taxes (or applies only a token tax rate) once taxed in the foreign country, the correct 
tax rate would be the marginal tax rate in the foreign country because that is where taxes are 
paid. If the marginal tax rate in the acquirer’s country is higher than the target’s country rate 
and taxes paid in a foreign country are deductible from the taxes owed by the acquirer in its 
home country, the correct tax rate would be the acquirer’s marginal effective tax rate. That is, 
the difference between the acquirer’s marginal tax rate in its home country less the tax rate 
paid in a foreign country.
Estimating the Cost of Equity in Crossborder Transactions
The capital asset pricing model or a multifactor model (e.g., CAPM plus a firm size ad­
justment) often are used in developed countries with liquid capital markets.40 For emerging 
nations, estimating the cost of equity is more complex, with at least 12 separate approaches 
employed.41 Each method attempts to adjust the discount rate for potential capital market seg­
mentation and specific country risks. Still other methods attempt to include emerging-country 
risk by adjusting projected cash flows. In either case, the adjustments often appear arbitrary.
Developed economies seem to exhibit little differences in the cost of equity, due to the 
relatively high integration of their capital markets with the global capital market. Thus, ad­
justing the cost of equity for specific country risk does not seem to make any significant 
difference.42 For emerging-market countries, the existence of segmented capital markets, 
39The election of Donald Trump as US president may mean that US corporate tax rates could be cut substantially in 
2017, perhaps as low as 15%.
40Graham and Harvey, 2001.
41Harvey, 2005.
42Koedijk et al., 2002; Bodnar et al., 2003.

672	
18.  Cross-Border Mergers and Acquisitions
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
political instability, limited liquidity, currency fluctuations, and currency inconvertibility 
seems to make adjusting the target firm’s cost of equity for these factors desirable but often 
impractical.43
The following discussion incorporates the basic elements of valuing cross-border transac­
tions, distinguishing between the different adjustments made when investing in developed 
and emerging countries. Nonetheless, considerable debate continues in this area.
Estimating the Cost of Equity in Developed (Globally Integrated) Countries
What follows is a discussion of how to adjust the basic CAPM formulation for valuing 
cross-border transactions when the target is located in a developed country. The discussion is 
similar to the capital asset pricing model formulation (CAPM) outlined in Chapter 7, except 
for the use of either national or globally diversified stock market indices in estimating beta 
and calculating the equity market risk premium.
Estimating the Risk-Free Rate of Return (Developed Countries)
The risk-free rate generally is the local country’s government (or sovereign) bond rate 
whenever the projected cash flows for the target firm are expressed in local currency.44 Risk-
free rates usually are US Treasury bond rates if projected cash flows are in dollars.
Adjusting CAPM for Risk (Developed Countries)
The equity premium, the difference between the return on a well-diversified portfolio and 
the risk-free return, is the additional return required by investors to buy stock. When capital 
markets are fully integrated, equity investors hold globally diversified portfolios, resulting in 
high a correlation between individual country equity indices and global indices. Therefore, 
an equity premium may be estimated by regressing the firm’s share price against a well-
diversified portfolio of US equities, another developed country’s equity portfolio, or a global 
equity portfolio.45
The CAPM also should be adjusted for the size of the firm, which serves as a proxy 
for factors such as smaller firms being subject to higher default risk and generally being 
less liquid than large capitalization firms. See Table 7.1 in Chapter 7 for estimates of the 
amount of the adjustment to the cost of equity to correct for firm size, as measured by 
market value.
43Bodnar et al. (2003).
44The debt crises in many developed countries in 2010 and 2011 suggest that using a government bond rate as a 
risk-free rate in countries not having their own currencies (e.g., Eurozone countries) is questionable. Such countries 
cannot repay their debt by simply “printing” money. In July 2012, the Spanish government’s 10-year bond rate was 
6.95% and the cost of default insurance (i.e., the amount investors pay others to insure against default) was 564 
basis points, or 5.64%. Known as the credit default swap (CDS) rate, this figure is the difference between a bond rate 
and a presumed risk-free rate, which in Europe was the German government bond rate. To investors, the implied 
risk-free return on 10-year Spanish debt was 1.31% (i.e., 6.95%–5.64%), assuming the German government will not 
default. Alternatively, either the US Treasury bond rate adjusted for differences in inflation between countries [see 
Eq. (18.6)] or a large corporation’s borrowing rate within the local country could be used as a risk-free rate.
45In the United States, an example of a well-diversified portfolio is the Standard & Poor’s 500 stock index (S&P 500); 
in the global capital markets, the Morgan Stanley Capital International World Index (MSCI) is commonly used as a 
proxy for a well-diversified global equity portfolio.

	
How are Crossborder Transactions Valued?	
673
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
Global CAPM Formulation (Developed Countries)
In globally integrated markets, systematic risk is defined relative to the rest of the world. 
An asset has systematic risk only to the extent that the performance of the asset correlates with 
the overall world economy. When using a global equity index, the CAPM often is called the 
global or international capital asset pricing model. If the target firm’s risk is similar to that faced 
by the acquirer, the acquirer’s cost of equity may be used to discount the target’s cash flows.
The global capital asset pricing model for the target firm may be expressed as follows:
β
=
+
−
+
k
R
R
R
(
)
FSP
e
f
,dev
devfirm,global
m
f
	
(18.5)
where
ke,dev = required return on equity for a firm operating in a developed country
Rf = local country’s risk-free financial rate of return if cash flows are measured in the local 
country’s currency or the US Treasury bond rate if in dollars
(Rm–Rf) = difference between the expected return on the global market portfolio (i.e., MSCI), 
the US equity index (S&P 500), or a broadly defined index in the target’s local country and 
Rf. This difference is the equity premium, which should be approximately the same when 
expressed in the same currency for countries with globally integrated capital markets.
βdevfirm,global = measure of nondiversifiable risk with respect to a globally diversified equity 
portfolio or a well-diversified country portfolio highly correlated with the global index 
Alternatively, βdevfirm,global may be estimated indirectly, as illustrated in Eq. (18.7).
FSP = firm size premium, reflecting the additional return smaller firms must earn relative 
to larger firms to attract investors
An analyst may wish to value the target’s future cash flows in both the local and home 
currencies. The Fisher effect allows the analyst to convert a nominal cost of equity from one 
currency to another. Assuming the expected inflation rates in the two countries are accurate, 
the real cost of equity should be the same in both countries.
Applying the Fisher Effect
The so-called Fisher effect states that nominal interest rates can be expressed as the sum of 
the real interest rate (i.e., interest rates excluding inflation) and the anticipated rate of infla­
tion. The Fisher effect can be shown for the United States and Mexico as follows:
i
r
P
r
i
P
i
r
P
r
i
P
(1
)
(1
)(1
)
and
(1
)
(1
)/(1
)
(1
)
(1
)(1
) and (1
)
(1
)/(1
)
US
US
US
US
US
US
MEX
MEX
MEX
MEX
MEX
MEX
+
=
+
+
+
=
+
+
+
=
+
+
+
=
+
+
If real interest rates are constant among all countries, nominal interest rates among coun­
tries will vary only by the difference in the anticipated inflation rates. Therefore,
+
+
=
+
+
i
P
i
P
(1
)/(1
)
(1
)/(1
)
US
US
MEX
MEX
	
(18.6)
where
iUS and iMEX = nominal interest rates in the United States and Mexico, respectively
rUS and rMEX = real interest rates in the United States and Mexico, respectively
PUS and PMEX = anticipated inflation rates in the United States and Mexico, respectively

674	
18.  Cross-Border Mergers and Acquisitions
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
If the analyst knows the Mexican interest rate and the anticipated inflation rates in Mexico 
and the United States, solving Eq. (18.6) provides an estimate of the US interest rate (i.e., 
iUS = [(1 + iMEX) × (1 + PUS)/(1 + PMEX)]–1). Exhibit 18.3 illustrates how the cost of equity esti­
mated in one currency is converted easily to the cost in another using Eq. (18.6). Although 
the historical equity premium in the United States is used in calculating the cost of equity, the 
historical United Kingdom or MSCI premium also could have been employed.
Estimating the Cost of Equity in Emerging (Segmented) Capital Market Countries
If capital markets are segmented, the global capital asset pricing model must reflect the 
tendency of investors in individual countries to hold local country rather than globally diver­
sified equity portfolios. Consequently, equity premiums differ among countries, reflecting the 
nondiversifiable risk associated with each country’s equity market index. What follows is a 
discussion of how to adjust the basic CAPM formulation for valuing cross-border deals when 
the target is located in an emerging country.
Estimating the Risk-Free Rate of Return (Emerging Countries)
Data limitations and the absence of a legal procedure to deal with sovereign debt 
(i.e., government issued debt) in default often preclude using the local country’s govern­
ment bond rate as the risk-free rate. There is no court to approve a debt restructuring plan 
to reduce, wipe out, or convert debt to equity as with commercial bankruptcies. Troubled 
countries negotiate directly with lenders to restructure debt by reducing the amount owed, 
lowering the interest rate, and extending the maturity of the debt or some combination 
EXHIBIT 18.3  CALCULATING THE TARGET FIRM’S COST OF 
EQU ITY IN BOTH HOME AND LOCAL CURRENCIES
Acquirer, a US multinational firm, is interested in purchasing Target, a small UK-based competi­
tor, with a market value of £550 million, or about $1 billion. The current risk-free rate of return for 
United Kingdom 10-year government bonds is 4.2%. The anticipated inflation rates in the United 
States and the United Kingdom are 3% and 4%, respectively. The size premium is estimated at 1.2%. 
The historical equity risk premium in the United States is 5.5%.a Acquirer estimates Target’s β to 
be 0.8, by regressing Target’s historical financial returns against the S&P 500. What is the cost of 
equity (ke,UK) that should be used to discount Target’s projected cash flows when they are expressed 
in terms of British pounds (i.e., local currency)? What is the cost of equity (ke,US) that should be used 
to discount Target’s projected cash flows when they are expressed in terms of US dollars (i.e., home 
currency)?b
k
k
[seeEq.(18.5)]
0.042
0.8
(0.055)
0.012
0.098
9.80%
[seeEq.(18.6)]
[(1
0.098)
(1
0.03)/(1
0.04)] 1
0.0875 100
8.75%
e
e
,UK
,US
=
+
×
+
=
=
=
+
×
+
+
−=
×
=
aThe US equity premium or the UK equity premium could have been used, since equity markets in 
either country are highly correlated.
bThe real rate of return is the same in the United Kingdom (rUK) and the United States (rUS). 
rUK = 9.8%–4.0% = 5.8%, and rUS = 8.8%–3.0% = 5.8%.

	
How are Crossborder Transactions Valued?	
675
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
of all three. Recent rulings by US courts may make the restructuring of sovereign debt 
increasingly difficult.46
As an alternative to the local country government bond rate, the US Treasury bond rate 
often is used to estimate the risk-free rate if the target firm’s cash flows are in terms of local cur­
rency. To create a local nominal interest rate, the Treasury bond rate should be adjusted for the 
difference in the anticipated inflation rates in the two countries using Eq. (18.6). Alternatively, 
the risk-free rate can be estimated using the buildup method as the sum of the expected in­
flation rate and the expected real rate. The analyst can add the expected inflation rate for the 
country to the US Treasury inflation-adjusted bond rate (i.e., Treasury inflation-protected secu­
rities, or TIPS). For example, the expected inflation rate for Angola in June 2012 was 12%, and 
the five-year rate on 10-year US treasury inflation-indexed securities (the real rate) was 2.38%.47 
Therefore, the estimated risk-free rate for Angolan government bonds at that time was 14.38%.
Adjusting CAPM for Risk (Emerging Countries)
Systematic risk for a firm operating primarily in its emerging country’s home market, 
whose capital market is segmented,48 is measured mainly with respect to the country’s equity 
market index (βemfirm,country) and to a lesser extent with respect to a globally diversified equity 
portfolio (βcountry,global). The emerging-country firm’s global beta (βemfirm,global) can be adjusted to 
reflect the relationship with the global capital market as follows:
β
β
β
=
×
emfirm,global
emfirm,country
country,global
	
(18.7)
The value of βemfirm,country is estimated by regressing historical returns for the local firm 
against returns for the country’s equity index.49 The value of βcountry,global can be estimated by 
regressing the financial returns for the local-country equity index (or for an index in a similar 
country) against the historical financial returns for a global equity index.50 Due to the absence 
of historical data in many emerging economies, the equity risk premium often is estimated 
using the “prospective method” implied in the constant-growth valuation model. As shown 
in Chapter 7, Eq. (7.14) in Chapter 7, this formulation provides an estimate of the present 
value of dividends growing at a constant rate in perpetuity. That is, dividends paid in the 
current period (d0) are grown at a constant rate of growth (g) such that d1 equals d0(1 + g).
49Absent sufficient data, βemfirm,country may be estimated using the beta for a similar local or foreign firm.
46The International Monetary Fund often provides loans to countries similar to debtor in possession financing, with 
the IMF repaid before other lenders. Bondholders agreeing to restructure plans often receive partial payment of 
what they are owed while lenders who hold out may receive nothing. In late 2014, US courts ruled in the case of 
debts owed by the Argentine government that holdouts cannot fare worse than those who agree to a restructure 
plan, making reaching negotiated settlements with governments in default extremely difficult.
47The 5-year TIPS rate is used because the TIPS rate in June 2012 was an artificially low –1.5% (a 0.98% nominal rate 
less the 2.48% change in the CPI) due to efforts by the US Federal Reserve to reduce .S Treasury bond rates through 
“Operation Twist.”
48An analyst can determine if a country’s equity market is segmented from the global equity market if the two mar­
kets are relatively uncorrelated. This implies that the local country’s equity premium differs from the global equity 
premium, reflecting the local country’s systematic risk.
50Alternatively, a more direct approach is to regress the local firm’s historical returns against the financial returns 
for a globally diversified portfolio of stocks to estimate βemfirm,global. Furthermore, the β between a similar local or 
foreign firm and the global index could be used for this purpose.

676	
18.  Cross-Border Mergers and Acquisitions
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
Assuming the stock market values stocks correctly and we know the present value of a 
broadly defined index in the target firm’s country (Pcountry) or in a similar country, dividends 
paid annually on this index in the next period (d1), and the expected dividend growth (g), we 
can estimate the expected return (Rcountry) on the stock index as follows:
=
−
=
+
P
d
R
g
R
d
P
g
/(
)
and
(
/
)
country
1
country
country
1
country
	
(18.8)
From Eq. (18.8), the equity risk premium for the local country’s equity market is Rcountry – Rf, 
where Rf is the local country’s risk-free rate of return. Exhibit 18.4 illustrates how to calculate 
the cost of equity for a firm in an emerging country in the absence of perceived significant 
country or political risk not captured in the beta or equity risk premium. Note that the local 
country’s risk-free rate of return is estimated using the US Treasury bond rate adjusted for 
the expected inflation in the local country relative to the United States. This converts the US 
Treasury bond rate into a local-country nominal interest rate.
Adjusting the CAPM for Country or Political Risk (Emerging Countries)
A country’s equity premium may not capture all the events that could jeopardize a firm’s 
ability to operate, such as political instability, limits on repatriation of earnings, capital con­
trols, and the levying of confiscatory or discriminatory taxes. Such factors could increase 
the firm’s likelihood of default. Unless the analyst includes the risk of default by the firm in 
projecting a local firm’s cash flows, the expected cash flow stream would be overstated to the 
extent that it does not reflect the costs of financial distress.
If the US Treasury bond rate is used as the risk-free rate in calculating the CAPM, add­
ing a country risk premium to the basic CAPM estimate is appropriate. The country risk 
premium (CRP) often is measured as the difference between the yield on the country’s 
EXHIBIT 18.4  CALCULATING THE TARGET FIRM’S COST OF 
EQU ITY FOR FIRMS IN EMERGING COUNTRIES
Assume next year’s dividend yield on an emerging country’s stock market is 5% and that earn­
ings for the companies in the stock market index are expected to grow by 6% annually in the fore­
seeable future. The country’s global beta (βcountry,global) is 1.1. The US Treasury bond rate is 4%, and the 
expected inflation rate in the emerging country is 4%, compared to 3% in the United States. Estimate 
the country’s risk-free rate (Rf), the return on a diversified portfolio of equities in the emerging 
country (Rcountry), and the country’s equity risk premium (Rcountry–Rf). What is the cost of equity in the 
local currency for a local firm (ke,em) whose country beta (βemfirm,country) is 1.3?
Solution
R
R
R
R
k
[(1
0.04)((1
0.04)/(1
0.03))
1]
0.0501 100
5.01%
 [seeEq.(18.8)]
5.00
6.00
11.00%
11.00
5.01
5.99%
[seeEq.(18.7)]
1.3 1.1
1.43
5.01 1.43(5.99)
13.58%
e
f
country
country
f
emfirm,global
,em
β
=
+
+
+
−
=
×
=
=
+
=
−
=
−
=
=
×
=
=
+
=

	
How are Crossborder Transactions Valued?	
677
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
sovereign or government bonds and the US Treasury bond rate of the same maturity. The 
difference, or “spread,” is the additional risk premium that investors demand for holding 
the emerging country’s debt rather than US Treasury bonds.51 Standard & Poor’s (www.
standardardandpoors.com), Moody’s Investors Service (www.moodys.com), and Fitch IBCA 
(www.fitchibca.com) provide sovereign bond spreads. In practice, the sovereign bond spread 
is computed from a bond with the same maturity as the US benchmark 10-year Treasury bond 
used to compute the risk-free rate for calculating the cost of equity.
While political risk has traditionally been associated with emerging countries, there have 
been an increasing number of instances in recent years of political risk associated with equi­
ties and sovereign bonds in developed countries. The sovereign bond crisis in Spain and Italy 
following the global recession in 2008–09 caused government bond rates to rise and stock 
prices to fall until it became clear that the Eurozone would remain intact. Similarly, the deci­
sion by the United Kingdom to exit the European Union in 2016 triggered concern about the 
long-term health of the British economy. Consequently, the adjustments for political risk sug­
gested in this section also can apply to developed countries as well.
Global CAPM Formulation (Emerging Countries)
To estimate the cost of equity for a firm in an emerging economy (ke,em), Eq. (18.5) can be 
modified for specific country risk as follows:
β
=
+
−
+
+
k
R
R
R
(
)
FSP
CRP
e
f
f
,em
emfirm,global
country
	
(18.9)
where
Rf = local risk-free rate or the US Treasury bond rate converted to a local nominal rate if 
cash flows are in the local currency [see Eq. (18.6)] or to the US Treasury bond rate if cash 
flows are in dollars
(Rcountry–Rf) = difference between expected return on a well-diversified equity index in the 
local country or a similar country and the risk-free rate
βemfirm,global = emerging country firm’s global beta [see Eq. (18.7)]
FSP = firm size premium, reflecting the additional return that smaller firms must earn 
relative to larger firms to attract investors
CRP = specific country risk premium, expressed as the difference between the local 
country’s (or a similar country’s) government bond rate and the US Treasury bond rate 
of the same maturity. Add to the CAPM estimate only if the US Treasury bond rate is 
employed as a proxy for the local country’s risk-free rate.
Estimating the Local Firm’s Cost of Debt in Emerging Markets
The cost of debt for an emerging market firm (iemfirm) should be adjusted for default risk due 
to events related to the country and those specific to the firm. When a local corporate bond 
rate is not available, the cost of debt for a specific local firm may be estimated by using an 
interest rate in the home country (ihome) that reflects a level of creditworthiness comparable to 
51A country risk premium should not be added to the cost of equity if the risk-free rate is the country’s sovereign or 
government bond rate, since the effects of specific country or political risk would be reflected already.

678	
18.  Cross-Border Mergers and Acquisitions
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
that of the firm in the emerging country. The country risk premium is added to the appropri­
ate home country interest rate to reflect the impact of such factors as political instability on 
iemfirm. Therefore, the cost of debt can be expressed as follows:
=
+
i
i
CRP
emfirm
home
	
(18.10)
Most firms in emerging markets are not rated; to determine which home-country interest 
rate to select, it is necessary to assign a credit rating to the local firm. This “synthetic” credit 
rating is obtained by comparing financial ratios for the target firm to those used by US rat­
ing agencies. The estimate of the unrated firm’s credit rating may be obtained by comparing 
interest coverage ratios used by Standard & Poor’s to the firm’s interest coverage ratio to 
determine how S&P would rate the firm. Exhibit 18.5 illustrates how to calculate the cost of 
emerging-market debt.
Exhibit 18.6 illustrates the calculation of WACC in cross-border transactions. Note the ad­
justments made to the estimate of the cost of equity for firm size and country risk. Note also 
the adjustment made to the local borrowing cost for country risk. The risk-free rate of return 
is the US Treasury bond rate converted to a local nominal rate of interest.
Table  18.1 summarizes methods commonly used for valuing cross-border M&As for 
developed-country and emerging-country firms. The WACC calculation assumes that the firm 
uses only common equity and debt financing. Note that the country risk premium is added to 
both the cost of equity and the after-tax cost of debt in calculating the WACC for a target firm in 
an emerging country if the US Treasury bond rate is used as the risk-free rate of return. The ana­
lyst should avoid adding the country risk premium to the cost of equity if the risk-free rate used 
to estimate the cost of equity is the local country’s government bond rate. References to home 
and local countries in Table 18.1 refer to the acquirer’s and the target’s countries, respectively.
Evaluating Risk Using Scenario Planning
With countries like China and India growing at near-double-digit rates, the future may 
be too dynamic to rely on discounted cash flows. As an alternative to adjusting the target’s 
EXHIBIT 18.5  ESTIMATING THE COST OF DEBT IN 
EMERGING MARKET COUNTRIES
Assume that a firm in an emerging market has annual operating income before interest and taxes 
of $550 million and annual interest expenses of $18 million. This implies an interest coverage ratio 
of 30.6 (i.e., $550 ÷ $18). For Standard & Poor’s, this corresponds to an AAA rating. According to 
S&P, default spreads for AAA firms are 0.85 currently. The current interest rate on US triple A–rated 
bonds is 6.0%. Assume further that the country’s government bond rate is 10.3% and that the US 
Treasury bond rate is 5%. Assume that the firm’s marginal tax rate is 0.4. What is the firm’s cost of 
debt before and after tax?
Solution
Cost of debt before taxes [seeEq.(18.10)]
6.0
(10.3
5.0)
11.3%
After - tax costofdebt
11.3
(1
0.4)
6.78%
=
+
−
=
=
×
−
=

	
How are Crossborder Transactions Valued?	
679
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
cost of capital, the acquirer may incorporate risk into the valuation by considering different 
economic scenarios for the emerging country. Variables defining alternative scenarios could 
include GDP growth, inflation rates, interest rates, and foreign exchange rates. For example, 
a best-case scenario can be based on projected cash flows, assuming the emerging market’s 
economy grows at a moderate real growth rate of 2% per annum for the next five years. 
Alternative scenarios could assume a 1–2-years recession. A third scenario could assume a 
dramatic devaluation of the country’s currency. The NPVs are weighted by subjectively de­
termined probabilities. The actual valuation of the target firm reflects the expected value of 
the three scenarios.52
52Note that if a scenario approach is used to incorporate risk in the valuation, there is no need to modify the dis­
count rate for perceived political and economic risk in the local country. See Chapter 8 for how to use decision trees.
EXHIBIT 18.6  ESTIMATING THE WEIGHTED AVERAGE COST 
OF CAPITAL IN CROSS-BORDER TRANSACTIONS
Acquirer Inc., a US-based corporation, wants to purchase Target Inc. Acquirer’s management be­
lieves that the country in which Target is located is segmented from global capital markets because 
the beta estimated by regressing the financial returns on the country’s stock market with those of a 
global index is significantly different from one.
Assumptions: The current US Treasury bond rate (RUS) is 5%. The expected inflation rate in the 
target’s country is 6% annually, as compared to 3% in the United States. The country’s risk premium 
(CRP) provided by Standard & Poor’s is estimated to be 2%. Based on Target’s interest coverage ra­
tio, its credit rating is estimated to be AA. The current interest rate on AA-rated US corporate bonds 
is 6.25%. Acquirer Inc. receives a tax credit for taxes paid in a foreign country. Since its marginal 
tax rate is higher than Target’s, Acquirer’s marginal tax rate of 0.4 is used in calculating WACC. 
Acquirer’s pretax cost of debt is 6%. The firm’s total capitalization consists only of common equity 
and debt. Acquirer’s projected debt–to–total capital ratio is 0.3.
Target’s beta and the country beta are estimated to be 1.3 and 0.7, respectively. The equity pre­
mium is estimated to be 6% based on the spread between the prospective return on the country’s 
equity index and the estimated risk-free rate of return. Given Target Inc.’s current market capital­
ization of $3 billion, the firm’s size premium (FSP) is estimated at 1.0 (see Table 7.1 in Chapter 7). 
What is the appropriate weighted average cost of capital Acquirer should use to discount target’s 
projected annual cash flows, expressed in its own local currency?
Solution
ke,em [see Eq. (18.9)] = {[(1 + 0.05) × (1 + 0.06)/(1 + 0.03)]–1} × 100a + 1.3 × 0.7 (6.0) + 1.0 + 2.0 = 16.52%
ilocal [see Eq. (18.10)] = 6.25 + 2.0 = 8.25%
waccem [see Eq. (7.4)] = 16.52 × (1 – 0.3) + 8.25 × (1 – 0.4) × 0.3 = 13.05%
aNote that the expression {[(1 + 0.05) × (1 + 0.06)/(1 + 0.03)]–1} × 100 represents the conversion of 
the US Treasury bond rate to a local nominal rate of interest using Eq. (18.6). Also note that 1.3 × 0.7 
results in the estimation of the target’s global beta, as indicated in Eq. (18.7).

680	
18.  Cross-Border Mergers and Acquisitions
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
While building risk into the projected cash flows is equivalent to adjusting the discount 
rate in applying the DCF method, it also is subject to making arbitrary or highly subjective 
adjustments. What are the appropriate scenarios to be simulated? How many such scenarios 
are needed to incorporate risk adequately into the projections? What is the likelihood that each 
scenario will occur? The primary advantage of adopting a scenario approach is that it forces 
the analyst to evaluate a wider range of possible outcomes. The major disadvantages are the 
substantial additional effort required and the degree of subjectivity in estimating probabilities.
EMPIRICAL STUDIES OF CROSS-BORDER TRANSACTIONS
While cross-border M&As occur for reasons similar to domestic transactions, crossborder 
deals generally involve additional costs and complexities. These are due to geographical and 
cultural differences, differences in corporate governance and stakeholder protections, under­
developed capital markets in emerging economies, and currency fluctuations.
TABLE 18.1  Common Methodologies for Valuing Cross-Border Transactions
Developed Countries (Integrated Capital Markets)
Emerging Countries (Segmented Capital Markets)
Step 1. Project and Convert Cash Flows
a.	Project target’s cash flows in local currency.
b.	Convert local cash flows into acquirer’s home 
currency, employing forward exchange rates 
projected using interest rate parity theory.
Step 1. Project and Convert Cash Flows
a.	Project target’s cash flows in local currency.
b.	Convert local cash flows into acquirer’s home 
currency, using forward exchange rates. Project 
exchange rates, using purchasing power parity 
theory if little reliable data on interest rates available.
Step 2. Adjust Discount Rates
ke,dev = Rf + βdevfirm,global
a(Rm – Rf) + FSP
i = cost of debtc
WACC = keWe + i(1 – t) × Wd
a.	Rf is the long-term government bond rate in the 
home country.
b.	βdevfirm,global is nondiversifiable risk associated with 
a well-diversified global, United States, or local-
country equity index.
c.	Rm is the return on a well-diversified United States, 
local, or global equity index.
d.	FSP is the firm size premium.
e.	t is the appropriate marginal tax rate.
f.	 We is the acquirer’s target equity–to–total capital 
ratio, and Wd is 1 – We.
Step 2. Adjust Discount Rates
ke,em = Rf + βemfirm,global
a(Rcountry – Rf)b + FSP + CRP
ilocal = ihome + CRP
WACC = keWe + ilocal (1 – t) × Wd
a.	Rf is the long-term government bond rate in 
the local country or the US Treasury bond rate 
converted to a local nominal rate if cash flows in 
local currency or if cash flows in dollars, the US 
Treasury bond rate. Note that if the local risk-free 
rate is used, do not add CRP.
b.	βemfirm,global is nondiversifiable risk associated with 
target’s local-country β and local country’s global β.
c.	Rcountry is the return on a diversified local equity 
index or a similar country’s index.
d.	CRP is the country risk premium.
e.	ihome is the home-country cost of debt.
f.	 ilocal is the local-country cost of debt.
aβ may be estimated directly for firms whose business is heavily dependent on exports or operating in either developing or emerging countries by 
regressing directly the firm’s historical financial returns against returns on a well-diversified global equity index. For firms operating primarily 
in their home markets, β may be estimated indirectly by using Eq. (18.7).
b(Rcountry – Rf) also could be the equity premium for well-diversified United States or global equity indices if the degree of local segmentation is 
believed to be small.
cFor developed countries, either the home-country or local-country cost of debt may be used. There is no need to add a country risk premium as 
would be the case in estimating a local emerging country’s cost of debt.

	
Empirical Studies of Cross-Border Transactions	
681
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
Erel et al. (2012) in a sample of 56,978 crossborder M&As between 1990 and 2007 found 
that 80% of completed deals targeted a non-US firm and 75% involved non-US acquirers. 
Moreover, the vast majority of the deals involved private firms as either the target firm or 
the acquiring firm. Private firms made up the preponderance of targets in cross border deals 
due to concern about the lack of transparency (and in turn reliable data) of public firms and 
because private firms often sell at a substantial discount from their true value, especially in 
illiquid markets (i.e., those in which private firms often are difficult to sell).53 Cultural and po­
litical compatibility seemed to be important in determining the geographic location of firms 
involved in crossborder transactions. M&As are more likely to occur between firms located 
in countries that commonly trade with one another and are relatively close geographically. 
Familiarity with a country’s language,54 legal institutions, customs and values contributes 
to higher announcement-date returns in cross-border deals55 due to the greater likelihood of 
realizing potential synergies.56 Reflecting the aforementioned cultural, legal, and language 
differences, the deal completion rate is likely to be less when the acquirer is from a more de­
veloped country and the target is domiciled in an emerging country.57
International Diversification May Contribute to Higher Financial Returns
Empirical studies suggest that international diversification may increase financial returns 
by reducing risk if economies are relatively uncorrelated. Higher financial returns from inter­
national diversification may also be due to economies of scale and scope, geographic location 
advantages associated with being nearer customers, increasing the size of the firm’s served 
market, and learning new technologies.58 Multinational firms also may be able to reduce risk, 
because they can more readily alter investment strategies by exiting poorly performing busi­
nesses in one country and reinvesting in more attractive opportunities in other countries. 
These “real options” to defer, abandon, expand capital projects can be implemented only if 
the firm has the financial resources to pursue such options.59 Shutting down or deferring a 
project is not costless as contracts have to be negotiated and local laws addressing how em­
ployees are treated must be obeyed.
There is significant controversy about whether returns are higher for multinational com­
panies that diversify across countries60 or across industries.61 Buyers of targets in segmented 
markets realize larger abnormal returns than if they were to buy firms in globally integrated 
countries, since targets in segmented markets benefit from the acquirer’s lower cost of 
capital.62
58Zahra et al., 2000.
59Aabo et al., 2016.
60Isakov and Sonney, 2002.
61Diermeier and Solnik, 2001.
62Francis et al., 2008.
53Bae et al., 2013.
54Kedia and Reddy, 2017.
55Ahern et al., 2015.
56Capron and Guillén, 2009.
57Lim et al., 2016.

682	
18.  Cross-Border Mergers and Acquisitions
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
Returns for Crossborder Deals Consistent with Those for Domestic Deals
Both shareholders of target and bidder firms on average benefit from takeovers. Like 
domestic takeovers, shareholders of target firms in crossborder M&As earn substantial 
abnormal returns. Such returns for shareholders of US targets of foreign buyers range from 
about 23%63 to about 40%.64 Domestic bidders on average earn slightly higher positive an­
nouncement date returns than crossborder acquirers.65 However, crossborder deals involv­
ing public acquirers and large public targets often experience abnormal announcement 
date financial returns that are zero to somewhat negative, particularly when such transac­
tions are paid for with acquirer equity.66 Over the long-term, cross-border deals in which 
the form of payment is primarily equity frequently underperform largely cash financed 
transactions.67 This is consistent with the greater complexity of integrating large transac­
tions and the tendency of public acquirers using overvalued stock to overpay for the target 
firm.
However, the use of acquirer stock in cross-border deals may be appropriate when the target 
firm’s governance practices are problematic (i.e., the target firm’s financial statements are sus­
pect and the target is only willing to allow the acquirer to perform limited due diligence) and 
the local country’s shareholder protections are limited or poorly enforced. Offering to exchange 
acquirer shares for target shares gives target shareholders choosing to retain their shares in the 
combined firms an incentive not to over value their shares, because both the acquirer and target 
firm shareholders will share in any postclosing losses if the acquirer overpays.68
Acquirers of targets in emerging countries often earn abnormal returns of 1.65% to 3.1%, 
well in excess of the average cross-border or domestic deal. This improvement may be 
attributable to the achievement of control, improved governance practices, the elimination 
of minority shareholders, and the encouragement of investment in the target by the parent.69 
Gains tend to be larger if the acquirer has significant prior experience in the target’s home 
country.70 Large public companies in particular often show positive announcement date 
returns on takeovers in weak governance countries, contrary to the negative returns they of­
ten realize in countries with strong governance standards. Why? Because such firms often are 
politically connected enabling them to expedite the takeover process. Also, lenders in coun­
tries with weak lender protections may require higher levels of collateral to finance takeovers 
and larger firms are in a better position to satisfy this requirement.71
In a massive study consisting of 263,461 domestic and cross-border deals (both public and 
private) in 47 countries between 1992 and 2011, Yilmaz and Tanyeri (2016) confirmed the find­
ings of earlier extensive global studies72 that on average both target and bidder shareholders 
68Huang et al., 2017.
69Barbopoulos et al., 2013.
70Aybar and Thanakijsombat, 2015.
71Humphery-Jenner and Powell, 2014.
72Ellis et al., 2011; Erel et al., 2012; Netter et al., 2011.
63Kuipers et al., 2009.
64Seth et al., 2000; Eun et al., 1996; Servaes and Zenner, 1994.
65Mateev and Andonov, 2016.
66Ellis et al., 2011.
67Dutta et al., 2013.

	
Empirical Studies of Cross-Border Transactions	
683
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
benefit in takeovers. Specifically, abnormal returns around the announcement date average 
6.9% (13% for public targets) for target shareholders and 1.4% for bidder shareholders.
Improving Corporate Governance Creates Significant Shareholder Value
Abnormal financial returns to acquirers are greater if the acquirer is from a country with 
stronger governance controls and the target is in a country with weaker governance standards. 
Country governance standards in this context often refers to the existence of laws governing 
the property rights of shareholders and bondholders, transparent accounting practices, and 
the extent to which the court systems in these countries enforce such laws. Acquirers located 
in countries having effective governance practices often exhibit superior shareholder protec­
tions, financial transparency, and management practices than those located in countries in 
which corporate governance is not taken as seriously.
Having control enables the acquirer, having the stronger governance standards, to impose 
its stricter management practices and shareholder protections on the target, often resulting 
in better long-term operating performance.73 However, the premium paid for the target firm 
may be substantially reduced if there is a significant risk of government expropriation of the 
acquirer’s investment at a later date. Similarly, cross-border deals made by emerging country 
acquirers are associated with positive abnormal returns of 1.1% on the announcement date 
when the target firm is located in a country whose governance and shareholder protections 
are viewed as stronger than in the acquirer’s home country. Investors see the acquirer adopt­
ing the stronger governance practices of the target firm.74 Investors tend to react more posi­
tively to large cross-border acquisitions in which the emerging market acquirer has prior local 
market experience, is able to exploit a higher growth opportunities, and which is financed 
with debt. The rigors of meeting principal and interest repayments limits management’s abil­
ity to misuse cash.75
For good corporate governance practices (e.g., financial transparency) to affect firm value, 
a country must recognize the importance of the rule of law (e.g., a legal system willing to 
recognize and protect shareholder rights). Aggrieved shareholders should feel a reasonable 
lawsuit would be objectively reviewed in a country’s courts. When firms from developed 
markets acquire firms from emerging markets, the rule of law in the emerging market target 
country has a significant positive impact on the post-acquisition performance.76 Why? The ex­
istence of corporate laws protecting shareholder rights and a court system willing to enforce 
infractions of such laws reduces the risk of expropriation by the emerging country’s govern­
ment. This is turn can lower the firm’s cost of financing future projects.
While cross-border deals represent an important channel for spreading good governance 
practices from countries with strong investor protections to firms in countries with weaker 
protections, the tendency of foreign acquirers to “cheery pick” firms may hinder this pro­
cess. That is, foreign acquirers tend to purchase the better performing firms leaving largely 
76Thenmozhi and Narayanan, 2016.
73Erel et al., 2012; Martynova and Renneboog, 2008b; Moeller et al., 2005; Yen and Andre, 2010.
74Bhagat et al., 2011.
75Aybar and Thanakijsombat, 2015.

684	
18.  Cross-Border Mergers and Acquisitions
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
untouched the poorer performing firms, which may have the greatest need for improved 
corporate governance.77
Foreign Institutional Ownership May Promote Crossborder M&A Activity
Cross-border deals often involve significant foreign institutional ownership intent on fa­
cilitating a change in control in firms located in countries having weak corporate governance 
or legal institutions.78 The foreign institutional investors facilitate change-of-control deals by 
serving as intermediaries between buyers and sellers and by supplying information not pub­
licly available. In doing so, the institutional investors hope to raise the value of investments 
they may have in firms with subpar governance by forcing them to adopt more rigorous 
governance practices because of the change in control.
M&As in “Frontier Economies” May Result in the Highest Acquirer Financial 
Returns
“Frontier economies” are those whose stage of economic development precedes emerging 
economies as described earlier in this chapter. Examples include such economies as Albania, 
Bangladesh, Botswana, Cyprus, Estonia, Lithuana, Romania, and Sri Lanka. Their financial 
markets are viable but tend to be smaller and less liquid than emerging or developed econo­
mies, and they exhibit higher risk due to frequent political unrest, currency risk, and limited 
shareholder protections. However, they do offer acquirers the potential for higher returns due 
to above average growth, a greater ability to dominate markets, and the potential for transfer­
ring their competitive advantage from their home countries. Cross-border merger activity in 
these countries is relatively new having begun in the late 1990s. Target firms in these “frontier 
economies” usually receive the lowest premiums for their shares. Acquirers from the United 
States, United Kingdom, Canada, and other developed and emerging countries can earn the 
high positive abnormal returns when they bid for target firms in frontier markets.79
SOME THINGS TO REMEMBER
Motives for international corporate expansion include a desire to accelerate growth, to 
achieve diversification, to consolidate industries, and to exploit natural resources and low­
er labor costs available elsewhere. Other motives include applying a firm’s brand name or 
intellectual property in new markets, minimizing tax liabilities, following customers, and 
avoiding tariffs and import barriers. Alternative entry strategies include exporting, licensing, 
alliances or joint ventures, solo ventures or greenfield operations, as well as M&As. The ba­
sic differences between within-country and cross-border valuation methods is that the latter 
involves converting cash flows from one currency to another and adjusting the discount rate 
for risks common in cross-border deals.
77Kim and Lu, 2013.
78Andriosopoulos et al., 2015; Ferreira et al., 2010a.
79Vagenas-Nanos, 2016.

	
Chapter Discussion Questions	
685
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
CHAPTER DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
18.1	 Discuss the circumstances under which a non-US buyer may choose as its acquisition 
vehicle a US corporate structure; a limited liability company; or a partnership.
18.2	 What factors influence the selection of which tax rate to use (i.e., the target’s or the 
acquirer’s) in calculating the weighted-average cost of capital in cross-border transac­
tions?
18.3	 Discuss adjustments commonly made in estimating the cost of debt in emerging 
countries.
18.4	 Find an example of a recent cross-border transaction. Discuss the challenges an 
analyst might face in valuing the target firm.
18.5	 Discuss the various types of adjustments for risk that might be made to the global 
CAPM before valuing a target firm in an emerging country. Be specific.
18.6	 Do you see the growth in sovereign wealth funds as important sources of capital to the 
M&A market or as a threat to the sovereignty of the countries in which they invest?
18.7	 What factors contribute to the increasing integration of the global capital markets?
18.8	 Give examples of economic and political risk that you could reasonably expect to 
encounter in acquiring a firm in an emerging economy. Be specific.
18.9	 During the 1980s and 1990s, changes in the S&P 500 (a broadly diversified index of 
US stocks) were about 50% correlated with the MSCI EAFE Index (a broadly diver­
sified index of European and other major industrialized countries’ stock markets). 
In recent years, the correlation has increased to more than 90%. Why? If an analyst 
wishes to calculate the cost of equity, which index should he or she use in estimating 
the equity risk premium?
18.10	 Comment on the following statement: “The conditions for foreign buyers interested 
in US targets could not be more auspicious. The dollar is weak, M&A financing is 
harder to come by for financial sponsors (private equity firms), and many strategic 
buyers in the United States are hard-pressed to make acquisitions at a time when 
earnings targets are being missed.”
Answers to these Chapter Discussion Questions are found in the Online Instructor’s Manual for 
instructors using this book (https://textbooks.elsevier.com/web/Manuals.aspx?isbn=9780128016091).
END OF CHAPTER CASE STUDY MAJOR REGULATORY AND 
INTEGRATION HURDLES FOR THE ANHEUSER-BUSCH 
INBEV AND SABMILLER MERGER
Case Objectives: To illustrate challenges common to cross-border M&As including
•	 Regulatory obstacles;
•	 Challenges of postmerger integration efforts; and
•	 The impact of regulatory and postmerger considerations on recovering the purchase price 
premium.
While the motives that drive cross-border deals may be compelling, the challenges of closing and 
postmerger integration often are underestimated, especially if the participants are doing business in 

686	
18.  Cross-Border Mergers and Acquisitions
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
many different countries. Closing such deals involves getting approval from regulators in multiple 
countries, which can be time-consuming and expensive. In developed countries, antitrust law usu­
ally is well developed but in emerging economies such laws may be new or largely untested in the 
courts. Without historical precedents, how laws are applied often is determined on a case by case 
basis creating a serious potential for unanticipated costs eroding deal value. Moreover, regulatory 
corruption may result in the uneven application of such laws.
Actions required to gain regulatory approval usually involve selling off some portion of the com­
bined business in countries where increased concentration is a concern. In doing so, the economics 
of the deal may be changed profoundly, especially when the assets to be divested represent a signifi­
cant portion of the anticipated synergies resulting from combining the firms. The greatest synergy 
often comes from buying businesses whose operations in a country are complementary to those of 
the acquirer. For example, by buying a competitor, the acquirer gains potential pricing power and 
cost saving opportunities by eliminating duplicate overhead, production facilities, and distribution 
channels. Because the acquirer is under duress to sell the assets stipulated under their agreement 
with the regulators, assets may be sold at less than fair market value.
Once regulatory approval is achieved, integrating the target’s operations with those of the ac­
quirer can be even more challenging than dealing with regulators. Labor laws in developed and 
emerging countries may limit the acquirer’s ability to terminate “redundant” workers or allow 
acquirers to do so only at great expense. Country cultures may also inhibit the ability of the acquirer 
to introduce more modern management, production, and distribution methods. All of these factors 
contribute to delaying and possibly preventing realization of anticipated synergies.
The following narrative describes global beer industry leader Anheuser-Busch InBev’s (AB 
InBev) 2016 takeover of the second largest beer company SABMiller. The combined firms’ leader­
ship position should result in lower relative costs than competitors due to economies of scale, brand 
recognition, and the ability to negotiate lower raw material costs. The new firm could also experi­
ence greater pricing power because of brand recognition and differentiation.
But in closing this deal, AB InBev created a substantial hurdle to overcome. To complete the 
transaction, the firm had to pay an exorbitant 50% premium to SABMiller’s September 14, 2015 
share price, the day prior to initial media speculation about the deal. Even though AB InBev’s man­
agement has a well established reputation for aggressive cost cutting, earning back this premium 
is likely to prove daunting. The focus in this discussion will be on the implications of regulatory 
approval and postmerger integration on deal value.
With market growth tepid overall and declining in some regions, the global beer industry is un­
dergoing major changes as people in many developed countries are turning to locally brewed craft 
beer. Furthermore, future growth globally is expected to come mainly in emerging countries and in 
regions such as Africa.
To prosper in this changing environment, AB InBev sought to enlarge its presence in faster grow­
ing beer consuming regions. On November 11, 2015, AB InBev reached an agreement to acquire rival 
SABMiller for $104 billion in cash ($67 per SABMiller share). The merger combines the world’s two 
largest brewers with annual revenue of $64 billion and an almost one-third share of global beer sales.
Historically, AB InBev has used acquisitions to increase profitability by cutting costs and steering 
customers toward more expensive brands. The firm has acquired regional brewers in China, elimi­
nated regional beer offerings, and then guided customers toward Budweiser, which is three times 

	
Chapter Discussion Questions	
687
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
more expensive than Chinese beers, and to its own higher priced Chinese beer, Harbin. The strategy 
has been so effective that Budweiser is now consumed more outside than inside the US The firm is 
expected to repeat this strategy with its acquisition of SABMiller as the primary means of recover­
ing its purchase price premium and earning the cost of capital.
The size of the premium paid by AB InBev reflected the concentrated ownership of SABMiller 
stock and perceived synergies by AB InBev’s management. SABMiller is 27% owned by Altria (the 
giant American tobacco company) and 14% owned by Colombia’s BevCo., the holding company of 
the Santo Domingo family. These two shareholders agreed to receive a mix of restricted stock and 
cash. By accepting shares and remaining invested in the combined company, Altria and BevCo., 
would avoid the large tax bills they would have otherwise incurred if they had sold their holdings 
entirely for cash. Altria expects to get a 10.5% stake in the combined company and two board seats. 
The Santo Domingo family is expected to receive about a 6% ownership share and one board seat. 
The support of these shareholders is contingent upon no other shareholders opting for the partial 
cash and stock alternative.
The restricted shares are subject to a 5 year lockup, meaning they will not be listed on any pub­
lic exchange for 5 years and that they cannot be traded during that period. At the time the merger 
agreement was signed, the value of the cash and stock combination was priced 5% lower than the 
all-cash option. The purpose of pricing the option to receive shares and cash at a discount to the 
all-cash offer was to make that proposal unattractive to all but the largest shareholders: Altria and 
BevCo.
The deal could have been imperiled by the appreciation of AB InBev’s share price making it 
increasingly attractive to smaller shareholders who would accept the mixed share/cash option re­
ducing the initial 5% discount from the all-cash alternative. This could have become a complicating 
factor since AB InBev’s board had indicated that it was not willing to issue more than 326 million 
new shares to limit dilution to current shareholders. However, anticipating this problem, the merger 
agreement allowed for modifying the offer price either by raising the all-cash offer, lowering the 
cash-portion of the cash and stock alternative, or both.
From the outset, the deal’s size triggered resistance from regulators due to concerns about sti­
fling competition. The global market share of AB InBev and SABMiller together would be about 
31%, dwarfing Heineken’s 9% share, the next closest competitor. In the United States, it would be 
about 70% and in China it would be approximately 40%. How the companies’ dominance might 
ultimately affect prices for consumers is unclear. But the merger would give the combined brew­
ers substantial clout in negotiating deals with suppliers, distributors and retailers. For AB InBev, 
regulatory approval had to be won in the United States, the European Union, China, South Africa, 
Colombia, Australia, and India.
The primary argument for approving the deal rested on the limited geographic overlap of the 
two firm’s markets, but the sale of certain brands was necessary. Resistance was expected to be to 
be greatest in the United States and China. Why? The MillerCoors joint venture in which SABMiller 
owned a 58% stake, formed by SABMiller with Molson Coors in 2008, owned several major brands 
in the United States. SABMiller’s 49% share of the CR Snow joint venture in China, with China Re­
sources Enterprise, was a leader in certain beer categories.
Recognizing these potential regulatory problems, SABMiller announced proactively in late 
2015 that it would sell its interest in MillerCoors joint venture to its JV partner Molson Coors for 

688	
18.  Cross-Border Mergers and Acquisitions
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
$12 billion. The deal included the global rights to the Miller brand and would make Molson Co­
ors the second-largest brewer in the United States behind AB InBev. Molson Coors would retain 
the rights to sell brands it currently owns in the United States The sale was contingent on the 
closing of the AB InBev and SABMiller deal. Following closing, Molson Coors will control about 
26% of the US beer market. AB InBev’s share would remain unchanged at its pre-SABMiller deal 
level of 45%.
In March 2016, SABMiller sold its stake in the China joint venture to its partner China Resources. 
AB InBev in April accepted an offer by Asahi Group Holdings of Japan to buy certain AB InBev 
brands in Europe as well as certain SABMiller operations in Britain, Italy, and the Netherlands. In 
May, the European Union approved the deal contingent upon the two firms selling SABMiller pre­
mium brands in Europe and certain other European operations in the Czech Republic, Hungary, 
Poland, Romania, and Slovakia. US regulatory approval in late 2016 allowed AB InBev to retain 
Budweiser, Beck’s and Stella Artois while selling the Miller’s brand in the United States In June, 
AB InBev resolved one of the more knotty hurdles when it received regulatory approval in South 
Africa conditioned on the sale of certain local brands and setting aside a trust fund to make pay­
ments to workers who could lose their jobs as a result of the merger. Other regulatory issues that 
were resolved included AB InBev’s serving as a bottler for Pepsi in Latin America and SABMiller’s 
bottling Coca Cola in Africa. The firm agreed to keep the two soft drink operations separate. Regu­
latory approval was also received in Australia and India following the divestment of certain local 
brands.
The firm has stated publicly that the integration of SABMiller will follow a process similar to AB 
InBev’s acquisition of Mexican brewer Modelo in 2013. Following closing, dedicated local teams led 
the integration process with senior executives focusing on critical decisions such as how to com­
bine administrative, operations and supply chain networks. While AB InBev sent a few executives 
to integrate the two companies’ operations, “99% of the people” planning and implementing the 
integration were Modelo staff. However, with Modelo and AB InBev, the integration involved com­
bining operations in Mexico and the United States But with SABMiller, the integration will involve 
many countries. AB InBev now will have to bring together operations across multiple continents 
and a host of countries, something it hasn’t done since it was created through a combination of 
Belgium-based InterBrew and Brazil-based AmBev more than a decade ago.
To recover the huge premium paid, AB InBev must be able to realize substantial cost savings on a 
timely basis largely through global procurement of raw materials to achieve greater bulk discounts, 
renegotiating packaging and bottling contracts, and through job cuts by eliminating overlapping 
headquarters and management teams. Anheuser-Busch InBev said that it expected to achieve about 
$1.4 billion in annual pre-tax cost savings by the end of the fourth year after the deal’s completion. 
While the firm has both a reputation and demonstrable track record for being able to effectively 
extract these savings, the magnitude of the challenge remains daunting: SABMiller employs 69,000 
people in 83 countries while AB InBev has 155,000 workers in 25 countries. Cultures and laws can 
differ widely across these geographic areas often requiring lengthier integration than originally 
anticipated.
SABMiller’s operations in Africa may be the crown jewel of the takeover. However, the risks are 
high. Labor problems in South Africa could be significant. AB InBev has little experience in Africa 
and it must retain key former SABMiller executives and support staff to minimize local disrup­

	
Chapter Discussion Questions	
689
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
tions. AB InBev says it will keep a regional headquarters in Johannesburg and plans to seek to have 
its shares listed on the on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange as soon as possible. These actions are 
planned to assuage local unions, investors and government officials.
Successfully integrating businesses often comes with a much higher price tag than initially be­
lieved. In applying the business strategy it has successfully used in the past, AB InBev will try to 
eliminate regional brands and move consumers toward more expensive beers. This will require 
significant investment in training, demographic data collection, and sales and marketing programs. 
In addition, the new firm expects to realize additional revenue growth as it would now have access 
to the fast growing Africa beer market and greater dominance in Latin America. The firm’s inexperi­
ence in this region could create a series of missteps.
The combination of AB InBev and SABMiller has to weather successfully the loss of revenues 
and profits due to the sale of lucrative assets to gain regulatory approval and the perils of post­
merger integration. AB InBev may be unable to sell assets required by regulatory approval at their 
fair market value. While an estimate of the financial impact of potential asset sales should have been 
included in AB InBev’s initial valuation of SABMiller, the size, complexity and length (as much as 
four years) of the integration creates substantial uncertainty. Greater capital requirements than an­
ticipated, labor unrest or an economic slowdown could derail the best of plans. While management 
has some influence over these factors, others are clearly beyond their control.
At the time of the 2016 closing, the world economy continued to sputter. Civil war and terrorism 
disrupted much of North and West Africa raising doubts about future growth. China, by far the 
largest beer consuming market, recorded its slowest economic growth rate in more than 25 years. 
By paying such a steep price for SABMiller, AB InBev may find the realization of their objectives far 
more demanding than first thought. Past success is a two edged sword in that it gives management 
a template to follow for future acquisitions but it can also create excessive confidence. Could the 
firm’s past success in making and integrating their acquisitions have caused them to be more opti­
mistic in agreeing to the purchase price for SABMiller than they should have been? Time will tell.
Chapter Discussion Questions
18.1	 What are the key assumptions implicit in Anheuser-Busch InBev’s takeover of SABMiller? 
Which do you believe are the most critical? Be Specific.
18.2	 Why did the deal include restricted stock in AB InBev’s stock and cash options rather than 
unrestricted shares? How does the lockup on the restricted stock included in AB InBev’s 
stock and cash combination affect the value of these shares?
18.3	 What were the primary motives for the merger from AB InBev’s perspective stated in the 
case? Review the common motives for cross-border deals discussed in this chapter; speculate 
as to what other motives for this acquisition other than those indicated in the case might AB 
InBev have had in buying SABMiller.
18.4	 What alternatives to acquisition could AB InBev have pursued? Speculate as to why a 
takeover was the preferred option?
Solutions to these questions are found in the Online Instructor’s Manual available to instructors using 
this book (https://textbooks.elsevier.com/web/Manuals.aspx?isbn=9780128016091).

690	
18.  Cross-Border Mergers and Acquisitions
V.  Alternative Business and Restructuring Strategies
A D D I T I O N A L  C A S E  S T U D Y  R E C O M M E N D AT I O N S 
( S E A R C H  H A RVA R D  B U S I N E S S  S C H O O L  P U B L I S I N G 
S I T E  B Y  N A M E  O F  C A S E : 
h b s p . h a r v a r d . e d )
How China Reset Its Global Acquisition 
Agenda, Peter J. Williamson, Anand P. 
Raman, April 1, 2011, Harvard Business 
Review, Product Number: R1104k-PDF-
ENG, https://cb.hbsp.harvard.edu
	
Subjects Covered: Global Business, Due 
Diligence, Global Strategy, Market Share, 
Mergers & Acquisitions
Cultural Challenges of Integration: Value 
Creation and Daiichi Sankyo’s Indian 
Acquisition, Beng Geok Wee; Wilfred Chua, 
Revised Publication Date: November 20, 
2012, Source: ABCC at Nanyang Tech 
University, Product Number: NTU027-PDF-
ENG, hbsp.harvard.edu
	
Subjects Covered: Organizational 
Behavior, Role of Culture in Cross-Border 
M&A, Post-M&A Integration Process, 
Cross-Cultural Relations
Alliance Management at Forbes Marshall, 
Naga Lakshmi Damaraju; Harshdeep Singh, 
January 20, 2012, Source: Ivey Publishing, 
Product Number: W11618-PDF-ENG, hbsp.
harvard.edu
	
Subjects Covered: Joint Ventures, 
Managing Business Alliances, Value Chains
Mahindra Satyam-Restoring Corporate 
Governance, Murray J. Bryant, Ramasastry 
Chandrasekhar, February 9, 2011, Product 
Number: 910M86-PDF-ENG, Source: Ivey 
Publishing, hbsp.harvard.edu
	
Subjects Covered: Governance, Setting 
Corporate Priorities, Management Decision 
Making
Hindalco’s Acquisition of Novelis: The 
Making of a Giant, Aastha Sachdeva, 
Madhur Deep, R. Srinivasan, Revision 
Date: January 1, 2010, Product Number: 
IMB303-PDF-ENG, Source: Indian Institute 
of Management-Bangalore, hbsp.harvard.
edu
	
Subjects Covered: Acquirer and Target 
Motives, Cross-Border Deals, Value Creation 
and Value Destruction, Aligning Strategic 
Intents, Cross-Cultural Relations
Orascom Telecom: Risks of 
Internationalization, Marina, Dina Zaki, 
Farah Zahran, Publication Date: April 18, 
2011, Product Number: W11096, hbsp.
harvard.edu
	
Subjects Covered: International Strategy, 
Tax accounting, Financial accounting
Acciona and the Battle for Control of 
Endesa, Belen Villalonga, Rachelle 
Silverberg, Publication Date: November 30, 
2009, Product Number: 210029-PDF-ENG, 
Source: Harvard Business School, hbsp.
harvard.edu
	
Subjects Covered: Cross-border deals, 
governance, diversification, family owned 
businesses, government regulations
Tata Motors’ Acquisition of Daewoo 
Commercial Company, Meera Harish 
Sanjay Singh, Kulwant Singh, Publication 
Date: December 4, 2008, Product Number: 
908M94-PDF-ENG, Source: IVEY Publishing, 
hbsp.harvard.edu
	
Subjects Covered: International 
Expansion, Bidding Process, Cultural 
Barriers, Criteria for a Successful 
Acquisition, Market Entry Strategies
CIBC Mellon: Managing a Cross-Border Joint 
Venture, Paul W. Beamish, Michael Sartor, 
Publication Date: October 8, 2010, Product 
Number: 910M91-PDF-ENG, Source: Ivey 
Publishing, hbsp.harvard.edu
	
Subjects Covered: Joint Ventures, Risk 
Management, Decision-Making

691
Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring Activities. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-801609-1.00024-5
Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
References
Aabo, T., Pantzalis, C., Park, J., 2016. Multinationality as a real option facilitator—illusion or reality? J. Corporate 
Finance 38, 1–17. 
Abudy, M., Benninga, S., Shust, E., 2016. The cost of equity for private firms. J. Corporate Finance 37, 431–443. 
Acharya, V.V., Kehoe, C., 2010. Board directors and experience: a lesson from private equity. In: Perspectives on 
Corporate Finance, Number 35. McKinsey & Company, New York.
Acharya, V., Franks, J., Servaes, H., 2007. Private equity: boom or bust? J. Appl. Corporate Finance 19, 44–53. 
Adams, R., Ferreira, D., 2007. A theory of friendly boards. J. Finance 62, 217–250. 
Adegoke, Y., 2008. YouTube rolls out sponsored videos in revenue drive. Reuters.
Adhikari, H., Sutton, N., 2016. All in the family: the effect of family ownership on acquisition performance. J. Econ. 
Business 88, 65–78. 
Adolph, G., 2006. Mergers: Back to Happily Ever After. Strategy and Business. Booz Allen Hamilton, New York. 
Adut, D., Holder, A., Robin, A., 2016. Restructuring charges and takeover likelihood: evidence from the pre- and 
post-SFAS 146 eras. J. Accounting Public Policy 35, 192–237. 
Aggarwal, R., Erel, I., Stulz, R., Williamson, R., 2007. Differences in governance practices between U.S. and foreign 
firms: measurement, causes, and consequences. NBER Working Paper 13288, August 2008. <www.aggdata.com/
business/fortune_500>.
Aggarwal, R., Schloetzer, J., Williamson, R., 2017. Do corporate mandates impact long-term firm value and 
governance culture? J. Corporate Finance, in press.
Agliardi, E., Amel-Zadeh, A., Koussis, N., 2016. Leverage changes and growth options in mergers and acquisitions. 
J. Empirical Finance 37, 37–58. 
Agrawal, A., Nasser, T., 2012. Insider trading in takeover targets. J. Corporate Finance 18, 598–625. 
Agrawal, A., Jaffe, J.F., Mandelker, G.N., 1992. The post-merger performance of acquiring firms: a reexamination of 
an anomaly. J. Finance 47, 1605–1621. 
Agrawal, A., Ferrer, C., West, A., 2011. When big acquisitions pay off. McKinsey Quarterly, May.
Ahern, K., 2012. Bargaining power and industry dependence in mergers. J. Financial Econ. 103, 530–550. 
Ahern, K., Harford, J., 2014. The importance of industry links in merger waves. J. Finance 69, 527–576. 
Ahern, K., Sosyura, D., 2014. Who writes the news? Corporate press releases during merger negotiations. J. Finance 
69, 241–291. 
Ahern, K., Daminelli, D., Fracassi, C., 2015. Lost in translation? The effect of cultural values on mergers around the 
world. J. Financial Econ. 17, 165–189. 
Ahn, S., Shrestha, K., 2013. The differential effects of classified boards on firm value. J. Banking Finance 37, 3993–4013. 
Akbulut, M., 2013. Do overvaluation-driven stock acquisitions really benefit acquirer shareholders? J. Financial 
Quant. Anal. 48, 637–668. 
Akbulut, M., Matsusaka, J., 2010. 50+ years of diversification announcements. Financial Rev. 45, 231–262. 
Akdogu, E., 2011. Value-maximizing managers, value-increasing mergers, and overbidding. J. Financial Quant. Anal. 
46, 83–110. 
Akhigbe, A., Borde, S.F., Whyte, A.M., 2000. The source of gains to targets and their industry rivals: evidence based 
on terminated merger proposals. Financial Manage. 29, 101–118. 
Aktas, N., de Bodt, E., Roll, R., 2009. Learning, hubris, and corporate serial acquisitions. J. Corporate Finance 15, 
523–626. 
Aktas, N., de Bodt, E., Roll, R., 2010. Negotiations under the threat of an auction. J. Financial Econ. 98, 241–255. 
Aktas, N., de Bodt, E., Roll, R., 2013. Learning from repetitive acquisitions: evidence from the time between deals. J. 
Financial Econ. 108 (1), 99–117. 
Aktas, N., Croci, E., Petmezas, D., 2015. Is working capital management value-enhancing? Evidence from firm per­
formance and investments. J. Corporate Finance 30, 98–113. 
Aktas, N., Cousin, J., Ozdakak, A., Zhang, J., 2016. Industry IPOs, growth opportunities, and private targets 
acquisitions. J. Corporate Finance 37, 193–209. 
Albuquerque, R., Schroth, E., 2015. The value of control and the costs of illiquidity. J. Finance 70, 1405–1455. 

692	
REFERENCES
Alderson, M.J., Betker, B.L., 1999. Assessing post-bankruptcy performance: an analysis of reorganized firms’ cash 
flows. Financial Manage. 28, 68–82. 
Alexandridis, G., Fuller, K., Terhaar, L., Travlos, N., 2013. Deal size, acquisition premia, and shareholder gains. 
J. Corporate Finance 20, 1–13. 
Alhashel, B., 2015. Sovereign wealth funds: a literature review. J. Econ. Business 78, 1–13. 
Alhenawi, Y., Krishnaswami, S., 2015. The long-term impact of merger synergies on performance and value. J. Q. 
Econ. Finance 58, 93–118. 
Allen, P., 2000. Corporate equity ownership, strategic alliances, and product market relationships. J. Finance 55, 
2791–2816. 
Allen, J., 2001. Private information and spin-off performance. J. Business 74, 281–306. 
Allen, J., McConnell, J.J., 1998. Equity carve-outs and managerial discretion. J. Finance 53, 163–186. 
Alli, K.L., Thompson, D.J., 1991. The value of the resale limitation on restricted stock: an option theory approach. 
Valuation 36, 22–34. 
Almamy, J., Aston, J., Ngwa, L., 2016. An evaluation of Altman’s Z-score using a cash flow ratio to predict corporate 
failure and the recent financial crisis: evidence from the UK. J. Corporate Finance 36, 278–285. 
Almeida, H., Philippon, T., 2007. The risk-adjusted cost of financial distress. J. Finance 62, 2557–2586. 
Almeida, H., Campello, M., Hackbarth, D., 2011. Liquidity mergers. J. Financial Econ. 102, 526–558. 
Alperovych, Y., Amess, K., Wright, M., 2013. Private equity firm experience and buyout vendor source: what is the 
impact on efficiency? Eur. J. Operational Res. 228, 601–611. 
Altman, E.I., 2007. Global debt markets in 2007: a new paradigm or great credit bubble. J. Appl. Corporate Finance 
19, 17–31. 
Altman, E.I., Kishore, V.M., 1996. Almost everything you wanted to know about recoveries on defaulted bonds. 
Financial Analysts J. 52, 57–64. 
Altman, E.I., Kishore, V., 2001. The default experience of U.S. bonds. Working Paper. Salomon Center, New York.
Altman, E.I., Brady, B., Resti, A., Sironi, A., 2005. The link between default and recovery rates: theory, empirical evi­
dence and implications. J. Business 78, 2203–2227. 
American Bar Association, 2006. Mergers and Acquisitions: Understanding Antitrust Issues, second ed. American 
Bar Association, Chicago, IL. 
Amici, A., Fiordelisi, F., Masala, F., Ricci, O., Sist, F., 2013. Value creation in banking through strategic alliances and 
joint ventures. J. Banking Finance 37, 1386–1395. 
Ammann, M., Hoechle, D., Schmid, M., 2012. Is there really no conglomerate discount? J. Business Finance Accounting 
39, 264–288. 
Andersen Consulting, 1999. Global Survey Acquisition and Alliance Integration. Andersen Consulting, Chicago. 
Anderson, R.W., Coverhill, A., 2007. Liquidity and capital structure. Working Paper No. 6044. Center for Economic 
Policy Research, Washington, D.C.
Anderson, R., Reeb, M., 2003. Founding-family ownership and firm performance: evidence from the S&P 500. 
J. Finance 58, 1301–1329. 
Anderson, J., Sutherland, D., 2015. Entry mode and emerging market MNES: an analysis of Chinese greenfield and 
acquisition FDI in the United States. Res. Int. Business Finance 35, 88–103. 
Anderson, U., Johanson, J., Vahlne, J.E., 1997. Organic acquisitions in the international process of the business firm. 
Manage. Int. Rev. 37, 67. 
Andreou, P., Doukas, J., Louca, C., Malmendier, U., 2010. Managerial overconfidence and the diversification dis­
count. Working Paper. Cyprus University of Technology, Limmasol, Cyprus.
Andriosopoulos, D., Yang, S., 2015. The impact of institutional investors on mergers and acquisitions in the United 
Kingdom. J. Banking Finance 50, 547–561. 
Andriosopoulos, D., Yang, S., Li, W., 2015. The market valuation of M&A announcements in the United Kingdom. 
Int. Rev. Financial Anal. 48, 350–366. 
Andriosopoulos, K., Chan, K., Dontis-Charitos, P., Staikouras, S., 2017. Wealth and risk implications of the 
Dodd–Frank Act on the U.S. financial intermediaries. J. Financial Stability, in press.
Ang, J., Cheng, Y., 2006. Direct evidence on the market-driven acquisition theory. J. Financial Res. 29, 199–216. 
Ang, J., Ismail, A., 2015. What premiums do target shareholders expect? Explaining negative returns upon offer an­
nouncements. J. Corporate Finance 30, 245–256. 
Ang, J., Colak, G., Zhang, T., 2014a. Decoupling by clienteles and by time in the financial markets: the case of two-
stage stock-financed mergers. J. Corporate Finance 25, 360–375. 

	
REFERENCES	
693
Ang, J., de Jong, A., van der Poel, M., 2014b. Does familiarity with business segments affect CEOs’ divestment 
decisions. J. Corporate Finance 29, 58–74. 
Angwin, J., Drucker, J., 2006. How news corp. and liberty media can save $4.5 billion. Wall Street Journal, p. A3.
Angwin, D., Paroutis, S., Connell, R., 2015. Why good things don’t happen: the micro-foundations of routines in the 
M&A process. J. Business Res. 68, 1367–1381. 
Annema, A., Goedhart, M.H., 2006. Betas: back to normal. McKinsey Quarterly. <https://www.mckinseyquarterly.
com/home.aspx>.
Annema, A., Fallon, W.C., Goedhart, M.H., 2002. When carve-outs make sense. McKinsey Quarterly, p. 2. <https://
www.mckinseyquarterly.com/home.aspx>.
Arcot, S., Fluck, Z., Gaspar, J., Hege, U., 2015. Fund managers under pressure: rationale and determinants of 
secondary buyouts. J. Financial Econ. 115, 102–135. 
Arikan, A., Stulz, R., 2016. Corporate acquisitions, diversification, and the firm’s life cycle. J. Finance 71, 139–194. 
Armstrong, C.S., Core, J.E., Guay, W.R., 2014. Do independent directors cause improvements in firm transparency? 
J. Financial Econ. 113, 383–403. 
Armstrong, C., Blouin, J., Jagolinzer, A., Larccker, D., 2015. Corporate governance, incentives, and tax avoidance. J. 
Accounting Econ. 60, 1–17. 
Asker, J., Farre-Mensa, J., Ljungqvist, A., 2010. Does the stock market harm investment incentives? New York 
University Working Paper.
Asker, J., Farre-Mensa, J., Ljungqvist, A., 2015. Corporate investment and stock market listing: a puzzle? Rev. 
Financial Stud. 28, 342–390. 
Aspatore Staff, 2006. M&A Negotiations: Leading Lawyers on Negotiating Deals: Structuring Contracts and 
Resolving Merger and Acquisition Disputes. Aspatore Books, Boston. 
Asquith, P., Gerther, R., Scharfstein, D., 1994. Anatomy of financial distress: an examination of junk bond issuers. 
Q. J. Econ. 109, 625–658. 
Association for Financial Professionals, 2011. AFP survey of current trends in estimating and applying the cost of 
capital. Report of Survey Results, March. Association for Financial Professionals, Bethesda, MD.
Atanasov, V., Boone, A., Haushalter, D., 2010. Is there shareholder expropriation in the U.S.? An analysis of publicly 
traded subsidiaries. J. Financial Quant. Anal. 5, 1–26. 
Atanassov, J., 2013. Do hostile takeovers stifle innovation? Evidence from antitakeover legislation and corporate 
patenting. J. Finance 68, 1097–1131. 
Auerbach, A.J., Poterba, J., 1987. Tax loss carry-forwards and corporate tax incentives. In: Martin, F. (Ed.), The Effect 
of Taxation on Capital Accumulation. University of Chicago Press, Chicago. 
Avramov, D., Chordia, T., Jostova, G., Philipov, A., 2009. Credit ratings and the cross-section of stock returns. J. 
Financial Markets 12, 469–499. 
Axelson, U., Jenkinson, T., Stromberg, P., Weisbach, M., 2009. Leverage and pricing in buyouts: an empirical analysis. 
<http://ssrn.com/abstract=1344023>.
Aybar, B., Thanakijsombat, T., 2015. Financing decisions and gains from cross-border acquisitions by emerging-
market acquirers. Emerg. Markets Rev. 24, 69–80. 
Aziz, M.A., Dar, H.A., 2006. Predicting corporate bankruptcy: where we stand. Corporate Governance 6 (1), 18–33. 
Bae, S., Chang, K., Kim, D., 2013. Determinants of target selection and acquirer returns: evidence from cross-border 
acquisitions. Int. Rev. Econ. Finance 27, 552–565. 
Bailey, W., Li, H., Mao, C., Zhong, R., 2003. Regulation fair disclosure and earnings information: market, analyst, and 
corporate responses. J. Finance 58, 2487–2514. 
Bajo, E., Barbi, M., Gibelli, M., Hillier, D., 2013. The role of institutional investors in public-to-private transactions. J. 
Banking Finance 37, 4327–4336. 
Baker, E., Niederman, F., 2014. Integrating the IS functions after mergers and acquisitions: analyzing business–IT 
alignment. J. Strategic Inf. Syst. 23 (2), 112–127. 
Baker, G., Smith, G., 1998. The New Financial Capitalists. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. 
Ball, M., 1997. How a Spin-off Could Lift Your Share Value. Corporate Finance, 3, 23–29. 
Bao, J., Edmans, A., 2011. Do investment banks matter for M&A returns? Rev. Financial Stud. 24, 2286–2315. 
Baran, L., Forst, A., 2015. Disproportionate insider control and board of director characteristics. J. Corporate Finance 
35, 62–80. 
Barbopoulos, L., Adra, S., 2016. The earnout structure matters: takeover premia and acquirer gains in earnout 
financed M&As. Int. Rev. Financial Anal. 45, 283–294. 

694	
REFERENCES
Barbopoulos, L., Sudarsanam, S., 2012. Determinants of earnout as acquisition payment currency and bidder’s value 
gains. J. Banking Finance 30, 678–694. 
Barbopoulos, L., Marshall, A., Macinnes, C., McColgan, P., 2013. Foreign direct investment in emerging markets and 
acquirer’s value gains. Int. Business Rev. 23, 604–619. 
Barbopoulos, L., Molyneux, P., Wilson, J., 2016. Earnout financing in the financial services industry. Int. Rev. Financial 
Anal. 47, 119–132. 
Bargeron, L., Lehn, K., Moeller, S., Schlingemann, F., 2014. Disagreement and the information of stock returns: the 
case of acquisition announcements. J. Corporate Finance 25, 155–172. 
Bargeron, L., Lehn, K., Smith, J., 2015. Employee–management trust and M&A activity. J. Corporate Finance 35, 
389–406. 
Barkema, H.G., Schijven, M., 2008. How do firms learn to make acquisitions? A review of past research and an 
agenda for the future. J. Manage. 34, 594–634. 
Barnett, T.R., 2008. Message from the AAG, U.S. Department of Justice. Antitrust Division Update.
Barrett, P., Burton, K., Kishan, S., 2011. The Rajaratnam conviction: how big a victory?. Bloomberg Businessweek, 
May 11, p. 27.
Basu, N., Paeglis, I., Rahnamaei, M., 2016. Multiple block holders, power, and firm value. J. Banking Finance 66, 
66–78. 
Bates, T.W., 2005. Asset sales, investment opportunities, and the use of proceeds. J. Finance 60, 105–135. 
Baugess, S., Slovin, M., Sushka, M., 2012. Large shareholder diversification, corporate risk taking, and the benefits of 
changing to differential voting rights. J. Banking Finance 36, 1244–1253. 
Baulkaran, V., 2014. Management entrenchment and the valuation discount of dual class firms. Q. Rev. Econ. Finance 
54, 70–81. 
Bebchuk, L., Fried, J., 2003. Executive compensation as an agency problem. J. Econ. Perspect. 17, 71–92. 
Bebchuk, L., Fried, J., 2004. Pay Without Performance: The Unfulfilled Promise of Executive Compensation. Harvard 
University Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Bebchuk, L., Coates, J., Subramanian, G., 2002. The powerful anti-takeover force of staggered boards: theory, 
evidence, and policy. Stanford Law Rev. 54, 887–951. 
Bebchuk, L., Coates, IV, J.C., Subramanian, G., 2003. The powerful antitakeover force of staggered boards. Stanford 
Law Rev. 54, 887–951. 
Bebchuk, L., Cohen, A., Ferrell, A., 2009. What matters in corporate governance. Rev. Financial Stud. 22, 783–827. 
Bebchuk, L., Cohen, A., Wang, C., 2010. Learning and the disappearing association between governance and returns. 
J. Financial Econ. 102, 199–221. 
Bebchuk, L., Brav, A., Jiang, W., 2013. The long-term effects of hedge fund activism. Working Paper, July 9. Available 
from: <papers.ssrn.com/paperscfm?abstract_id=2991577>.
Bebchuk, L., Cohen, A., Wang, C., 2014. Golden parachutes and the wealth of shareholders. J. Corporate Finance 25, 
140–154. 
Becker, J., Clement, M., Noth, M., 2016. Startups, incumbents, and the effects of takeover competition. J. Business 
Res. 69, 5925–5933. 
Bekaert, G., Harvey, C.R., 2000. Foreign speculators and emerging equity markets. J. Finance 55, 565–613. 
Bekier, M.M., Bogardus, A.J., Oldham, T., 2001. Why mergers fail. McKinsey Quarterly, vol. 4, p. 3.
Bellovary, J.L., Giacomino, D.E., Akers, M.D., 2007. A review of bankruptcy prediction studies: 1930 to the present. J. 
Financial Educ. 33, 262–298. 
Bena, J., Li, K., 2014. Corporate innovations and mergers and acquisitions. J. Finance 69, 1923–1960. 
Ben-Amar, W., Andre, P., 2006. Separation of ownership from control and acquiring firm performance: the case of 
family ownership in Canada. J. Business Finance Accounting 33, 517–543. 
Ben-David, I., Drake, M., Roulstone, D., 2015. Acquirer valuation and acquisition decisions identifying mispricing 
using short interest. J. Financial Quant. Anal. 50, 1–32. 
Beneda, N., 2007. Performance and distress indicators of new public companies. J. Asset Manage. 8, 24–33. 
Benmelech, E., Bergman, N., 2011. Bankruptcy and the collateral channel. J. Finance 66, 337–378. 
Benoit, D., Monga, V., 2015. Activist investors: helping or hindering? Wall Street Journal, October 6.
Berggren, N., Jordahl, H., 2005. Does free trade reduce growth? Further testing using the economic freedom index. 
Public Choice 22, 99–114. 
Bergh, D., Johnson, R., Dewitt, R.L., 2007. Restructuring through spin-off or sell-off: transforming information asym­
metries into financial gain. Strategic Manage. J. 29, 133–148. 

	
REFERENCES	
695
Berk, J.B., 1995. A critique of size-related anomalies. Rev. Financial Stud. 8, 275–286. 
Berman, D.K., Sender, H., 2006. Back-story of kinder LBO underscores web of ethical issues such deals face. Wall 
Street Journal, p. A6.
Bernard, V., Healy, P., Palepu, K.G., 2000. Business Analysis and Valuation, second ed. Southwestern College Publish­
ing Company, Georgetown, TX. 
Bernstein, S., 2015. Does going public affect innovation? J. Finance 70, 1365–1403. 
Beshears, J., 2013. The performance of corporate alliances: evidence from oil and gas drilling in the Gulf of Mexico. 
J. Financial Econ. 110, 324–346. 
Bessler, W., Schneck, C., Zimmerman, J., 2015. Bidder contests in international mergers and acquisitions: the impact 
of toeholds, preemptive bidding, and termination fees. Int. Rev. Financial Anal. 42, 4–23. 
Best, R., Hodges, C.W., 2004. Does information asymmetry explain the diversification discount? J. Financial Res. 27, 
235–249. 
Betton, S., Eckbo, B., Thorburn, K., 2008. Corporate takeovers. Eckbo, B. (Ed.), Handbook of Corporate Finance: 
Empirical Corporate Finance, vol. 2, Elsevier, North-Holland, Amsterdam, pp. 291–430. 
Betton, S., Eckbo, B., Thorburn, K., 2009. Merger negotiations and the toehold puzzle. J. Financial Econ. 91, 158–178. 
Betton, S., Eckbo, B., Thompson, R., Thorburn, K., 2015. Merger negotiations with stock market feedback. J. Finance 
69, 1705–1745. 
Bhagat, S., Dong, M., Hirshleifer, D., Noah, R., 2005. Do tender offers create value? New methods and evidence. J. 
Financial Econ. 76, 3–60. 
Bhagat, S., Malhotra, S., Zhu, P., 2011. Emerging country cross-border acquisitions: characteristics, acquirer returns, 
and cross-sectional determinants. Emerg. Markets Rev. 12, 250–271. 
Bhargava, R., Faircloth, S., Zeng, H., 2017. Takeover protection and stock price crash risk: evidence from state 
antitakeover laws. J. Business Res. 70, 177–184. 
Bhattacharyya, S., Nain, A., 2011. Horizontal acquisitions and buying power. J. Financial Econ. 99, 97–115. 
Bigelli, M., Mengoli, S., 2004. Sub-optimal acquisition decision under a majority shareholder system. J. Manage. 
Governance 8, 373–403. 
Billett, M.T., Qian, Y., 2008. Are overconfident managers born or made? Evidence of self-attribution bias from frequent 
acquirers. Manage. Sci. 54, 1036–1055. 
Billett, M.T., Vijh, A.M., 2004. The wealth effects of tracking stock restructurings. J. Financial Res. 27, 559–583. 
Billett, M.T., Xue, H., 2007. The takeover deterrent effect of open market share repurchases. J. Finance 62, 
1827–1851. 
Billett, M.T., Yang, K., 2016. Bond tender offers in mergers and acquisitions. J. Corporate Finance 40, 128–141. 
Billett, M.T., King, T.-H.D., Mauer, D.C., 2004. Bondholder wealth effects on mergers and acquisitions: new evidence 
from the 1980s and 1990s. J. Finance 59, 107–135. 
Billett, M.T., Jiang, Z., Lie, E., 2010. The effect of change in control covenants on takeovers: evidence from leveraged 
buyouts. J. Corporate Finance 16, 1–15. 
Black, E.L., Carnes, T.A., Jandik, T., 2007. International accounting diversity and the long-term success of cross-
border mergers and acquisitions. J. Business Finance Accounting 34, 139–168. 
Bloomberg.com, 2000. Glaxo, SmithKline Agree to Merge, January 18.
Blouin, J., Core, J., Guay, W., 2010. Have the tax benefits of debt been overestimated? J. Financial Econ. 98, 195–213. 
Blume, M.E., Lim, F., MacKinlay, A.C., 1998. The declining credit quality of U.S. corporate debt: myth or reality? J. 
Finance 53, 1389–1413. 
Boateng, A., Hua, X., Uddin, M., 2014. Home country macroeconomic factors on outward cross-border mergers and 
acquisitions: evidence from the UK. Res. Int. Business Finance 30, 202–216. 
Bodnar, G., Dumas, B., Marston, R., 2003. Cross-border valuations: the international cost of capital. NBER Working 
Paper Series No. 10115.
Bodnaruk, A., Rossi, M., 2016. Dual ownership, returns, and voting in mergers. J. Financial Econ. 120, 58–80. 
Bodnaruk, A., Massa, M., Simonov, A., 2013. Alliances and corporate governance. J. Financial Econ. 107, 671–693. 
Bodnaruk, A., Manconi, A., Massi, M., 2016. Cross border alliances and risk management. J. Int. Econ. 102, 22–49. 
Bogle, J.C., 2007. Reflections on “toward a common sense and common ground”. J. Corporation Law 31, 31. 
Bogler, D., 1996. Post-takeover stress disorder, summary of a PA consulting study. Financial Times, p. 11.
Boone, A., Mulherin, J.H., 2007. How are firms sold? J. Finance 62, 847–875. 
Boone, A., Mulherin, J.H., 2009. Is there one best way to sell a firm? Auctions versus negotiations and controlled sales. 
J. Appl. Corporate Finance 21, 28–37. 

696	
REFERENCES
Boone, A., Mulherin, J.H., 2011. Do private equity consortiums facilitate collusion in takeover bidding? J. Corporate 
Finance 17, 1475–1495. 
Boone, A., Mulherin, J., 2014. Who monitors the monitor? The use of special committees by target firms in corporate 
takeovers. J. Corporate Finance. 
Boone, A., Haushalter, D., Mikkelson, W., 2003. An investigation of the gains from specialized equity claims. Financial 
Manage. 32, 67–83. 
Boone, A., Lie, E., Liu, Y., 2014. Time trends and determinants of the method of payment. J. Corporate Finance 27, 
296–304. 
Boot, A.W.A., Gopalan, R., Thakor, A.V., 2008. Market liquidity, investor participation, and managerial autonomy: 
why do firms go private. J. Finance 63, 2013–2059. 
Borden, A.M., 1987. Going Private. Law Journal Seminar Press, New York. 
Boston Consulting Group, 1985. The Strategy Development Process. The Boston Consulting Group, Boston. 
Boston Consulting Group, 2003. Weak Economy Is Ideal Time for Mergers and Acquisitions. The Boston Consulting 
Group, Boston, MA, <www.srimedia.com/artman/ppublish/printer_657.shtml>. 
Boubaker, S., Cellier, A., Rouatbi, W., 2014. The sources of shareholder wealth gains from going private transactions: 
the role of controlling shareholders. J. Banking Finance 43, 226–246. 
Boubaki, N., Cosset, J., Grira, J., 2016. Sovereign wealth fund target selection: a comparison with pension funds. J. Int. 
Financial Markets Inst. Money 42, 60–76. 
Boucly, Q., Sraer, D., Thesmar, D., 2011. Growth LBOs. J. Financial Econ. 102, 432–453. 
Boudry, W., Kallberg, J., Liu, C., 2013. Investment opportunities and share repurchases. J. Corporate Finance 23, 
23–38. 
Boulton, T., Smart, S., Zutter, J., 2010. Acquisition activity and IPO underpricing. Financial Manage. 39, 1521–1546. 
Bowe, M., Golesorkhi, S., Yamin, M., 2014. Explaining equity shares in international joint ventures: combining the 
influence of asset characteristics, culture, and institutional differences. Res. Int. Business Finance 31, 21–233. 
Brakman, S., Garretsen, H., Van Marrewijk, C., 2005. Cross-border mergers and acquisitions: on revealed comparative 
advantage and merger waves. SESifo Working Paper No. 1602, Category 10: Empirical and Theoretical Methods.
Branch, B., 2002. The costs of bankruptcy: a review. Int. Rev. Financial Anal. 11, 39–57. 
Brav, A., 2009. Access to capital, capital structure, and the funding of the firm. J. Finance 64, 263–308. 
Brav, A., Jiang, W., Partnoy, F., Thomas, R., 2008. Hedge fund activism, corporate governance, and firm performance. 
J. Finance 63, 1729–1775. 
Brealey, R.A., Myers, S.C., 1996. Principles of Corporate Finance, fifth ed. McGraw-Hill, New York. 
Brealey, R.A., Myers, S.C., 2003. Principles of Corporate Finance, seventh ed. McGraw-Hill, New York. 
Briel, R., 2010. YouTube: profitable in 2010. Broadband TV News, March 3. <www.broadbanktvnew.com/2010/03/05/
youtube-proffitable-in-2010/>.
Brigham, E.F., Ehrhardt, M.C., 2005. Financial Management: Theory and Practice. Thomson-Southwestern Publish­
ing, Mason, OH. 
Brigida, M., Madura, J., 2012. Sources of target stock price run-up prior to acquisitions. J. Econ. Business 64, 185–198. 
Bris, A., Cabolis, C., 2008. Adopting better corporate governance: evidence from cross-border mergers. J. Corporate 
Finance 14, 214–240. 
Brookings Institute, 2000. Antitrust Goes Global. Brookings Institution, Washington, DC. 
Brophy, D.J., Ouimet, P.P., Sialm, C., 2009. Hedge funds as investors of last resort. Rev. Financial Stud. 22, 541–574. 
Broubaker, S., Cellier, A., Rouatbi, W., 2014. The sources of wealth gains from going private transactions: the role of 
controlling shareholders. J. Banking Finance 43, 226–246. 
Brouthers, K.D., 2002. Institutional, cultural, and transaction cost influences on entry mode choice and performance. 
J. Int. Business Stud. 33, 203–221. 
Brouthers, K.D., Brouthers, L.E., 2000. Acquisition, greenfield start-up: institutional, cultural, and transaction cost 
influences. Strategic Manage. J. 21, 89–97. 
Brouthers, K.D., van Hastenburg, P., van de Ven, J., 1998. If most mergers fail, why are they so popular? Long-Range 
Plan. 31, 347–353. 
Brown, L., 2013. Five Years Later, A More Global A-B. stltoday.com, July 7. <http://www.stltoday.com/business/
local/five-years-later-a-more-global-a-b/article_762a69a>.
Browning, L., Byrnes, N., 2011. Motorola deal offers Google tax, patent benefits. Reuters, August 31.
Brueller, N., Ellis, S., Segev, E., Carmeli, A., 2015. Knowing when to acquire: the case of multinational firms. Int. 
Business Rev. 24, 1–10. 

	
REFERENCES	
697
Brunnermeier, M., 2009. Deciphering the liquidity and credit crunch of 2007–2008. J. Econ. Perspect. 23, 77–100. 
Bryan-Low, C., 2005. European telecoms vie for emerging markets. Wall Street Journal, p. B2.
Bulow, J., Klemperer, P., 2009. Why do sellers usually prefer auctions? Am. Econ. Rev. 99, 1544–1575. 
Burch, T.R., Nanda, V., 2001. Divisional diversity and the conglomerate discount: evidence from spin-offs. J. Financial 
Econ. 70, 233–257. 
Burch, T.R., Nanda, V., Silveri, S., 2012. Taking stock or cashing in? Shareholder style preferences, premiums, and 
method of payment. J. Empirical Finance 19, 558–582. 
Burkart, M., Gromb, D., Mueller, H., Panunzi, F., 2014. Legal investor protections and takeovers. J. Finance 69 (3), 
1139–1165. 
Burkhart, M., Gromb, D., Panunzi, F., 1997. Larger shareholders, monitoring and the value of the firm. Q. J. Econ., 
693–728. 
Burrus, A., McNamee, M., 2002. Evaluating the rating agencies. Business Week, vol. 8, pp. 39–40.
Business Week, 2000. Jack’s risky last act. Business Week, pp. 40–45.
Business Week, 2001. A merger’s bitter harvest. Business Week, p. 112.
Business Week, 2008. Easygoing trustbusters. Business Week, p. 8.
Bygrave, W.D., Timmons, J.A., 1992. Venture Capital at the Crossroads. Harvard Business School Press, Boston. 
Cai, Y., Sevilir, M., 2012. Board connections and M&A connections. J. Financial Econ. 103, 327–349. 
Cai, J., Song, M., Walkling, R., 2011. Anticipation, acquisitions, and bidder returns: industry shocks and the transfer 
of information across rivals. Rev. Financial Stud. 24, 2242–2282. 
Cain, M., Denis, D.J., Denis, D.K., 2014. Earnouts: a study of financial contracting in acquisition agreements. J. 
Accounting Econ. 51, 151–170. 
Cakici, N.G., Tandon, K., 1996. Foreign acquisitions in the U.S.: effects on shareholder wealth of foreign acquiring 
firms. J. Banking Finance 20, 307–329. 
Calcagno, R., Falconieri, S., 2014. Competition and dynamics of takeover contests. J. Corporate Finance 26, 36–56. 
Campa, D., Hajbaba, A., 2016. Do targets grab the cash in takeovers: the role of earnings management. Int. Rev. 
Financial Anal. 44, 56–64. 
Campa, J., Simi, K., 1992. Explaining the diversification discount. J. Finance 37, 135–160. 
Campbell, A., Sadler, D., Koch, R., 1997. Breakup! When Companies Are Worth More Dead Than Alive. Capstone, 
Oxford, England. 
Campbell, J.Y., Hilscher, J., Szilagyi, J., 2008. In search of distress risk. J. Finance 63, 2899–2939. 
Campo, D., Hgbaba, A., 2016. Do targets grab the cash in takeovers: the role of earnings management. Int. Rev. 
Financial Anal. 44, 56–64. 
Cao, J.X., 2008. An Empirical Study of LBOs and Takeover Premium, February 10. <http://ssrn.com/
abstrat=1100059>.
Cao, K., Madura, J., 2014. Investment banks as intermediaries in asset sell-offs. J. Econ. Business 74, 40–58. 
Cao, B., Goedhart, M., Koller, T., 2014. Goodwill shunting: how to better manage write-downs. McKinsey Quarterly, 
June 16. <http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/corporate_finance/goodwill_shunting_how_to_better_manage_
write_downs>.
Cao, J.X., Cumming, D., Qian, M., Wang, X., 2015. Cross-border LBOs. J. Banking Finance 50, 69–80. 
Capron, L., Guillén, M., 2009. National corporate governance institutions and post-acquisition target reorganization. 
Strategic Manage. J. 30 (8), 803–833. 
Capron, L., Shen, J.C., 2007. Acquisitions of private versus public firms: private information, target selection, and 
acquirer returns. Strategic Manage. J. 28, 891–911. 
Carleton, J.R., Lineberry, C.S., 2004. Achieving Post-Merger Success. Wiley, New York. 
Carletti, E., Hartmann, P., Ongena, S., 2015. The economic impact of merger control legislation. Int. Rev. Law Econ. 
42, 88–104. 
Carlson, N., 2013. Mark Zuckerberg Lays Out His Vision for the Future and How the Next 5 Billion People Will Use 
Computers, April 5. <http://www.businessinsider.com/mark-zuckerberg-lays-out-his-vision-for-the-future-
and-how-the-next-5-billion-people-will-use-computers-2013-4>.
CCH Tax Law Editors, 2005. U.S. Master Tax Code. Commerce Clearinghouse, New York. 
Ceneboyan, A.S., Papaioannou, G.J., Travlos, N., 1991. Foreign takeover activity in the U.S. and wealth effects for 
target firm shareholders. Financial Manage. 31, 58–68. 
Chaffee, D.B., 1993. Option pricing as a proxy for discount for lack of marketability in private company valua­
tion. Business Valuation Rev. 20, 182–188. 

698	
REFERENCES
Chakrabarti, A., 1990. Organizational factors in post-acquisition performance. IEEE Trans. Eng. Manage. EM-37 135, 
259–266. 
Chakrabarti, R., Jayaraman, N., Mukherjee, S., 2009. Mars–Venus marriages: culture and cross-border M&A. J. Int. 
Business Stud. 40, 216–236. 
Chan, K.C., Karolyi, G.A., Stulz, R.M., 1992. Global financial markets and the risk premium of U.S. equity. J. Financial 
Econ. 32, 137–167. 
Chance, D., Cicon, J., Ferris, S., 2015. Poor performance and the value of corporate honesty. J. Corporate Finance 33, 1–18. 
Chang, S., 1998. Takeovers of privately held targets, methods of payment, and bidder returns. J. Finance 53, 773–784. 
Chang, S.C., 2008. How do strategic alliances affect suppliers, customers, and rivals? Working Paper Series, Social 
Science Research Network, February 1.
Chang, Y., Chou, R., Huang, T., 2015. Corporate governance and the dynamics of capital structure: new evidence. J. 
Banking Finance 48, 374–385. 
Chang, X., Shekhar, C., Tam, L., Yao, J., 2016. The information role of advisors in mergers and acquisitions: evidence 
from acquirers hiring targets’ ex-advisors. J. Banking Finance 70, 247–264. 
Chaochharia, V., Grinstein, Y., 2007. Corporate governance and firm value: the impact of the 2002 governance rules. 
J. Finance 62, 1789–1825. 
Chaplinsky, S., Ramchand, L., 2000. The impact of global equity offers. J. Finance 55, 2767–2789. 
Chapman, T.L., Dempsey, J.J., Ramsdell, G., Bell, T.E., 1998. Purchasing’s big moment—after a merger. McKinsey 
Quarterly, vol. 1, pp. 56–65.
Chari, A., Ouiment, P., Tesar, L., 2010. The value of control in emerging markets. Rev. Financial Stud. 23, 1741–1770. 
Chari, A., Chen, W., Dominquez, K., 2012. Foreign ownership and firm performance: emerging market acquisitions 
in the United States. IMF Econ. Rev. 60, 1–42. 
Chatterjee, R.A., Aw, M.S.B., 2004. The performance of UK: firms acquiring large cross-border and domestic takeover 
targets. Appl. Financial Econ. 14, 337–349. 
Chatterjee, S., Yan, A., 2008. Using innovative securities under asymmetric information: why do some firms pay with 
contingent value rights? J. Financial Quant. Anal. 43, 1001–1035. 
Chatterjee, S., John, K., Yan, A., 2012. Takeovers and divergence of investor opinion. Rev. Financial Stud. 25, 227–276. 
Chemmanur, T., Jiao, Y., 2012. Dual-class IPOs: a theoretical analysis. J. Banking Finance 36, 305–319. 
Chemmanur, T., Paeglis, I., 2001. Why issue tracking stock? Insights from a comparison with spin-offs and carve-
outs. J. Appl. Corporate Finance 14, 102–114. 
Chemmanur, T., Krishnan, K., Nandy, D., 2014. The effects of corporate spin-offs on productivity. J. Corporate Finance 
27, 72–98. 
Chen, L., 2010. The use of independent fairness opinions and the performance of acquiring firms. J. Accounting 
Auditing Finance 25, 323–349. 
Chen, D., 2012. Classified boards, the cost of debt, and firm performance. J. Banking Finance 36, 3346–3365. 
Chen, H.L., Guo, R.J., 2005. On corporate divestitures. Rev. Quant. Finance Accounting 25, 399–421. 
Chen, T., Harford, J., Lin, C., 2014a. Do analysts matter for governance? Evidence from natural experiments. 
J. Financial Econ. 115, 383–410. 
Chen, G., Kang, J., Kim, J., Na, H., 2014b. Sources of value gains in minority equity investments by private equity 
funds: evidence from block share acquisitions. J. Corporate Finance 29, 449–474. 
Chen, J., Dolly King, T., Wen, M., 2015. Do joint ventures and strategic alliances create value for bondholders? 
J. Banking Finance 58, 247–267. 
Chen, S., Hsu, C., Huang, C., 2016. The white squire defense: evidence from private investments in public equity. J. 
Banking Finance 64, 16–35. 
Chiang, W., Stammerjohan, W., Englebrecht, T., 2014. Pricing target NOLs in mergers and acquisitions from the par­
ticipating firms’ perspective. Adv. Accounting 30, 32–42. 
Chiara Di Guardo, M., Marrocu, E., Paci, R., 2016. The effect of local corruption on ownership strategy in cross-border 
mergers and acquisitions. J. Business Res. 69, 4225–4241. 
Child, J., Faulkner, D., Pitkethley, R., 2001. The Management of International Acquisitions. Oxford University Press, 
Oxford, UK. 
Chiu, S., Johnson, R., Hoskisson, R., Pathak, S., 2016. The impact of CEO successor origin on corporate divestiture 
scale and scope. Leadership Q. 27, 617–633. 
Cho, M.H., Cohen, M.A., 1997. The economic causes and consequences of corporate divestiture. Managerial Decis. 
Econ. 18, 367–374. 

	
REFERENCES	
699
Cho, S., El Ghoul, S., Guedhami, O., Suh, J., 2014. Creditor rights and capital structure: evidence from international 
data. J. Corporate Finance 25, 40–60. 
Christofferson, S.A., McNish, R.S., Sias, D.L., 2004. Where mergers go wrong. McKinsey Quarterly. <https://www.
mckinseyquarterly.com/home.aspx>.
Chuang, K., 2017. Corporate life cycle, investment banks, and shareholder wealth in M&As. Q. Rev. Econ. Finance 
63, 122–134. 
Chung, J., 2011. Leveraged Buyouts of Private Companies, August 3. <http://ssrn.com/abstract=1904342>.
Chung, C., Hur, S., Wang, K., 2017. Strategic merger decisions across the business cycle. Int. Rev. Econ. Finance 47, 143–158. 
Circon, J., Clarke, J., Ferris, S., Jayaraman, N., 2014. Managerial expectations of synergy and the performance of 
acquiring firms: the contribution of soft data. The J. Behav. Finance 15, 161–175. 
Clayton, M., Qian, Y., 2004. Wealth gains from tracking stocks: long-run performance and ex-date returns. Financ. 
Manage. 33, 83–106. 
Clifford, C., 2008. Value creation or destruction: hedge funds as shareholder activists. J. Corporate Finance 14, 323–336. 
Clinton, S., Spina Pinella, A., Skaife, H., 2014. The implications of ineffective internal control and SOX 404 reporting 
for financial analysts. J. Accounting Public Policy 33, 303–327. 
Clubb, C., Stouraitis, A., 2002. The significance of sell-off profitability in explaining the market reaction to divestiture 
announcements. J. Banking Finance 26, 671–688. 
Coates, J.C., 2001. Explaining variation in takeover defenses: blame the lawyers. California Law Rev. 89, 1376. 
Cohen, A., Wang, C., 2013. How do staggered boards affect shareholder value? Evidence from a natural experiment. 
J. Financial Econ. 110, 627–641. 
Cohn, J., Mills, L., Towery, E., 2014. The evolution of capital structure and operating performance after leveraged 
buyouts: evidence from U.S. corporate tax returns. J. Financial Econ. 111, 469–494. 
Col, B., Erriumza, V., 2015. Corporate governance and state expropriation risk. J. Corporate Finance 33, 71–84. 
Colak, G., Whited, T., 2007. Spin-offs, divestitures, and conglomerate investment. Rev. Financial Stud. 20, 557–595. 
Coles, J.L., Daniel, N.D., Naveen, L., 2008. Boards: does one size fit all? J. Financial Econ. 87, 329–356. 
Colvin, G., 2014. Four things that worry business. Forbes Magazine, October 27, p. 30.
Comment, R., 2012. Revisiting the illiquidity discount for private companies: a new (and “skeptical”) restricted stock 
study. J. Appl. Corporate Finance 23, 80–92. 
Comment, R., William Schwert, G., 1995. Poison or placebo: evidence on the deterrence and wealth effects of modern 
anti-takeover measures. J. Financial Econ. 39, 3–43. 
Cook, D., Fu, X., Tang, T., 2015. The effects of liquidity and solvency risk on the inclusion of bond covenants. J. Banking 
Finance 48, 120–136. 
Cooper, S., Lybrand, 1996. Most acquisitions fail, C&L study says. Mergers Acquisitions 47 (2), (report 7). 
Corkery, M., 2012. Pension funds increasing their ties. Wall Street Journal, February 12, pp. C1–C2.
Cornaggia, K., Franzen, L., Simin, T., 2013. Bringing leased assets onto the balance sheet. J. Corporate Finance 22, 
345–360. 
Cornelli, F., Kominek, Z., Ljungqvist, A., 2013. Monitoring managers: does it matter? J. Finance 68, 431–481. 
Cornett, M., Tanyeri, B., Tehranian, H., 2011. The effect of merger anticipation on bidder and target firm announcement 
period returns. J. Corporate Finance 17, 595–611. 
Cosset, J., Meknassi, S., 2013. Does cross-listing in the US foster mergers and acquisition and increase target share­
holder wealth? J. Multinational Financial Manage. 23, 54–73. 
Cossey, B., 1991. Systems assessment in acquired subsidiaries. Accountancy, 98–99. 
Craninckx, K., Huyghebaert, N., 2015. Large shareholders and value creation through corporate acquisitions in 
Europe. The identity of the controlling shareholder matters. Eur. Manage. J. 33, 116–131. 
Cremers, M., Ferrell, A., 2014. Thirty years of shareholders rights. J. Finance 69, 1167–1196. 
Cremers, M., Nair, V., 2005. Governance mechanisms and equity prices. J. Finance 60, 2859–2894. 
Cremers, M.K.J., Nair, V.B., Wei, C., 2004. The impact of shareholder control on bondholders. Working Paper. Yale 
University, New York University.
Creswell, J., 2001. Would you give this man your company? Fortune, pp. 127–129.
Cronqvist, H., Nilsson, M., 2003. Agency costs of controlling minority shareholders. J. Financial Quant. Anal. 38, 695–719. 
Cumming, D., Hafs, L., Schweizer, D., 2014. The fast track IPO—success factors for taking firms public with SPACs. 
J. Banking Finance 47, 198–213. 
Cunat, V., Gine, M., Guadalupe, M., 2012. The vote is cast: the effect of corporate governance on shareholder value. 
J. Finance 67, 1943–1977. 

700	
REFERENCES
Cusatis, P.J., Miles, J.A., Randall, J., Woolridge, 1993. Restructuring through spin-offs. J. Financial Econ. 33, 293–311. 
Custodio, C., 2014. Mergers and acquisitions accounting and the diversification discount. J. Finance 69, 219–240. 
Cyree, K.B., Walker, M.M., 2008. The determinants and survival of reverse mergers versus IPOs. J. Econ. Finance 32, 
176–194. 
D’Mello, R., Gniskin, M., 2014. Are the benefits of debt declining? The decreasing propensity of firms to be adequately 
levered. J. Corporate Finance 29, 327–350. 
D’Souza, J., Jacob, J., 2000. Why firms issue targeted stock. J. Financial Econ. 56, 459–483. 
Dahya, J., Golubov, A., Petmezas, D., Travlos, N., 2016. Governance mandates, outside directors, and acquisition 
performance. J. Corporate Finance, in press.
Daley, L., Mehrotra, V., Sivakumar, R., 1997. Corporate focus and value creation, evidence from spin-offs. J. Financial 
Econ. 45, 257–281. 
Dalton, D.R., 2006. CEO tenure, boards of directors, and acquisition performance. J. Business Res. 60, 331–338. 
Dalton, D.R., Dalton, C.M., 2007. Sarbanes–Oxley and the guideline of the listing exchanges: what have we wrought? 
Business Horizons 50, 93–100. 
Dambra, M., Casares Field, L., Gustafson, M., 2015. The JOBS Act and IPO volume: evidence that disclosure costs 
affect IPO decisions. J. Financial Econ. 116, 121–143. 
Damodaran, A., 2001. The Dark Side of Valuation. Prentice-Hall, New York. 
Damodaran, A., 2002. Investment Valuation: Tools and Techniques for Determining the Value of Any Asset, second 
ed. Wiley, New York. 
Danbolt, J., Siganos, A., Vagenas-Nanos, E., 2015. Investor sentiment and bidder announcement abnormal returns. 
J. Corporate Finance 33, 164–179. 
Das, S., Sen, P.K., Sengupta, S., 1998. Impact of strategic alliances on firm valuation. Acad. Manage. J. 41, 27–41. 
Datta, S., Iskandar-Datta, M., Raman, K., 2003. Value creation in corporate asset sales: the role of managerial perfor­
mance and lender monitoring. J. Banking Finance 27, 351–375. 
Datta, S., Gruskin, M., Iskandar-Datta, M., 2015. On post-IPO stock price performance: a comparative analysis of 
RLBOs and IPOs. J. Banking Finance 55, 187–203. 
Davidoff, S., Cain, M., 2014. Takeover Litigation in 2013, January 9. <http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.
cfm?abstract_id=2377001>.
Davidoff, S., Lund, A., Schonlau, R., 2014. Do outside directors face labor market consequences? A natural experi­
ment from the financial crisis. Harv. Business Law Rev. 4, 53. 
Davis, G., Kim, H., 2007. Business ties and proxy voting by mutual funds. J. Financial Econ. 85, 552–570. 
Davis, A., Leblond, M., 2002. A spin-off analysis: evidence from new and old economies. Working Paper. Queen’s 
University. Available by e-mail from: <adavis@business.queensu.ca>.
Davis, S.J., Haltiwanger, J., Jarmin, R., Lerner, J., Miranda, J., 2011. Private equity and employment. Working Paper 
17399. National Bureau of Economic Research.
De La Merced, M., 2011. Dealbook. New York Times, May 6.
De Maeseneire, W., Brinkhuis, S., 2013. What drives leverage in leveraged buyouts? An analysis of European lever­
aged buyouts’ capital structure. Accounting Finance 52, 155–182. 
De Massis, A., Kotlar, J., Campopiano, G., Cassia, L., 2013. Dispersion of family ownership and the performance of 
small-to-medium size private family firms. J. Fam. Business Strategy 4, 166–175. 
De Mdedt, J., Van Hoey, M., 2008. Integrating steel giants: an interview with the Arcelor-Mittal post-merger managers. 
McKinsey Quarterly. <www.mckinseyquarterly.com>.
De Visscher, F.M., Arnoff, C.E., Ward, J.L., 1995. Financing Transitions: Managing Capital and Liquidity in the Family 
Business. Business Owner Resources, Marietta, GA. 
de Vroom, H.J., van Frederikslust, R., 1999. Shareholder wealth effects of corporate spinoffs: the worldwide experi­
ence 1990–1998. SSRN Working Paper Series, August 9.
DeAngelo, H., Roll, R., 2015. How stable are corporate capital structures? J. Finance 70, 373–418. 
DeCesari, A., Gonenc, H., Ozkan, H., 2016. The effects of corporate acquisition on CEO compensation and CEO turn­
over of family firms. J. Corporate Finance 38, 294–317. 
DeFrancq, C., Huyghebaert, N., Luypaert, M., 2016. Influence of family ownership on the industry diversifying nature 
of a firm’s M&A strategy: empirical evidence from continental Europe. J. Fam. Business Strategy 7, 210–226. 
Degeorge, F., Martin, J., Phalippou, L., 2016. On secondary buyouts. J. Financial Econ. 120, 124–145. 
Deloitte Consulting LLP, 2016. The New Organization: Different by Design. Global Human Capital Trends. Deloitte 
University Press, Chicago. 

	
REFERENCES	
701
DeLong, G., 2003. Does long-term performance of mergers match market expectations? Financial Manage. 32, 5–25. 
Demiroglu, C., James, C., 2010. The role of private equity group reputation in LBO financing. J. Financial Econ. 96, 
306–330. 
Demirtas, G., Simsir, S., 2016. The effect of CEO departure on target firm’s post-takeover performance: evidence from 
non-delisting target firms. Finance Res. Lett. 16, 55–65. 
DeMong, R., Harris, I., Williams, S., 2011. Financial and legal advisors in merger and acquisition transactions. Int. J. 
Business Humanit. Technol. 1, 1–13. 
Demsetz, H., Lehn, K., 1996. The structure of corporate ownership: causes and consequences. J. Political Economy 
93, 1155–1177. 
Denes, M., Karpoff, J., McWillims, V., 2016. Thirty years of shareholder activism: a survey of empirical research. J. 
Corporate Finance, in press.
Deng, X., Kang, J., Low, B., 2013. Corporate social responsibility and stakeholder value maximization: evidence from 
mergers. J. Financial Econ. 110, 87–109. 
Denis, D., Wang, J., 2014. Debt covenant renegotiations and creditor control rights. J. Financial Econ. 113, 348–367. 
DePamphilis, D., 2001. Managing growth through acquisition: time-tested techniques for the entrepreneur. Int. J. 
Entrepreneurship Innovation 2 (3), 195–205. 
DePamphilis, D., 2010a. M&A Basics: All You Need to Know. Elsevier, Boston. 
DePamphilis, D., 2010b. M&A Negotiations and Deal Structuring: All You Need to Know. Elsevier, Boston. 
DePamphilis, D., 2011. Upstart graphics: mergers and acquisitions issues. In: Westhead, P., Wright, M., McElwee, G. 
(Eds.), Entrepreneurship: Perspectives and Cases. Prentice Hall, London, pp. 401–410. 
Desai, H., Jain, P., 1997. Firm performance and focus: long-run stock market performance following spin-offs. J. 
Financial Econ. 54, 75–101. 
Deshpende, S., Svetina, M., Zhu, P., 2016. Impact of European Commission merger regulation on U.S. domestic 
M&As. J. Multinational Financial Manage. 36, 1–15. 
Dewenter, K.L., 1995. Does the market react differently to domestic and foreign takeover announcements? Evidence 
from the U.S. chemical and retail industries. J. Financial Econ. 37, 421–441. 
Dhaliwal, D.S., Lamoreaux, P.T., Litov, L.P., Neyland, J.B., 2016. Shared auditors in mergers and acquisitions. J. Accounting 
Econ. 61, 49–76. 
Di Giuli, A., 2013. The effect of stock misvaluation and investment opportunities on the method of payment in merg­
ers. J. Corporate Finance 21, 196–215. 
Dichev, I., 1998. Is the risk of bankruptcy a systematic risk? J. Finance 53, 1141–1148. 
Dichev, I., Gaham, J., Harvey, C., Rajgopal, S., 2013. Earnings quality: evidence from the field. J. Accounting Econ. 
56, 1–33. 
Diermeier, J., Solnik, B., 2001. Global pricing of equity. Financial Analysts J. 57, 17–47. 
Dimitrova, L., 2017. Perverse incentives of special purpose acquisition companies, the “poor man’s private equity 
funds”. J. Accounting Econ. 63, 99–120. 
Dimopoulos, T., Sacchetto, S., 2014. Preemptive bidding, target resistance, and takeover premiums. J. Financial Econ. 
114, 444–480. 
Dimson, E., March, P., Staunton, M., 2002. Triumph of the Optimists. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ. 
Dimson, E., March, P., Staunton, M., 2003. Global evidence on the equity risk premium. J. Appl. Corporate Finance 
15, 27–38. 
Dionne, G., La Haye, M., Bergeres, A., 2010. Does asymmetric information affect the premium in mergers and acqui­
sitions? Interuniversity Research Center on Enterprise Networks, Logistics and Transportation and Department 
of Finance, HEC Montreal, Montreal. 
Dittmar, A., Shivdasani, A., 2003. Divestitures and divisional investment policies. J. Finance 58, 2711–2744. 
Dittmar, A., Li, Di, Nain, A., 2012. It pays to follow the leader: acquiring targets picked by private equity. J. Financial 
Quant. Anal. 47, 901–931. 
Doherty, R., Liu, S., West, A., 2015. How M&A practitioners enable their success. McKinsey Quarterly, October. 
<http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/corporate_finance/how_m_and_a_practitioners_enable_their_success>.
Doidge, C., Dyck, A., 2015. Taxes and corporate policies: evidence from a quasi natural experiment. J. Finance 70, 
45–89. 
Dong, M., Hirshleifer, D., Richardson, S., Teoh, S.H., 2006. Does investor misvaluation drive the takeover market? J. 
Finance 61, 725–762. 
Dow, J., 2013. Boards, CEO entrenchment, and the cost of capital. J. Financial Econ. 110, 680–695. 

702	
REFERENCES
Down, J.W., 1995. The M&A game is often won or lost after the deal. Manage. Rev. Executive Forum 10, 6–9. 
Draper, P., Paudyal, K., 2006. Acquisitions: private versus public. Eur. Financial Manage. 12, 57–80. 
Drucker, J., Silver, S., 2006. Alcatel stands to reap tax benefits on merger. Wall Street Journal, April 26, p. C3.
Duarte, F., Rosa, C., 2015. The equity risk premium: a review of models. Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff 
Report 714.
Duchin, R., Schmidt, B., 2013. Riding the merger wave: uncertainty, reduced monitoring, and bad acquisitions. 
J. Financial Econ. 107, 69–88. 
Duff, X., Phelps, Y., 2010. Risk premium report—risk study. In: Pratt, S., Grabowski, R. (Eds.), Cost of Capital: 
Applications and Examples. fourth ed. John Wiley & Sons, New York. 
Duffie, D., Saita, L., Wang, K., 2007. Multi-period corporate default prediction with stochastic covariates. J. Financial 
Econ. 83, 635–665. 
Dumontier, P., Pecherot, B., 2001. Determinants of returns to acquiring firms around tender offer announcement 
dates: the French evidence. Working Paper. ESA Université de Grenoble.
Durand, M., 2016. Employing cultural incident techniques as one way to display hidden aspects of post merger 
integration. Int. Business Rev. 25, 87–102. 
Duru, A., Wang, D., Zhao, Y., 2013. Staggered boards, corporate opacity, and firm value. J. Banking Finance 37, 
341–360. 
Dutordoir, M., Roosenboom, P., Vasconcellos, M., 2014. Synergy disclosures in mergers and acquisitions. Int. Rev. 
Financial Anal. 31, 88–100. 
Dutta, S., Iskandar-Dutta, M., Raman, K., 2001. Executive compensation and corporate acquisition decisions. 
J. Finance 56, 2299–2396. 
Dutta, S., Shantanu, X., Vijay Jog, Y., 2009. The long-term performance of acquiring firms: a re-examination of an 
anomaly. J. Banking Finance 33, 1400–1412. 
Dutta, S., Saadi, S., Zhu, P., 2013. Does payment matter in cross-border acquisitions? Int. Rev. Econ. Finance 25, 
91–107. 
Dyck, A., Zingales, L., 2004. Control premiums and the effectiveness of corporate governance systems. J. Appl. 
Finance 16, 51–72. 
Eberhart, A.C., Altman, E.I., Aggarwal, R., 1999. The equity performance of firms emerging from bankruptcy. 
J. Finance 54, 1855–1868. 
Eckbo, E., Thorburn, K.S., 2000. Gains to bidder firms revisited: domestic and foreign acquisitions in Canada. 
J. Financial Quant. Anal. 35, 1–25. 
Eckbo, B., Thorburn, K.S., 2008. Automatic bankruptcy auctions and fire-sales. J. Financial Econ. 89, 404–422. 
Economist, 2006a. Battling for Corporate America, pp. XX69–XX71.
Economist, 2006b. A Survey of the World Economy, p. XX12.
Economist, 2011. Why Global Stock Markets Have Become More Correlated, September 22.
Economist, 2014. From Dodo to Phoenix, January 11.
Edmans, A., Goldstein, I., Jiang, W., 2012. The real effects of financial markets: the impact on takeovers. J. Finance 
67, 933–971. 
Elder, J., Westra, P., 2000. The reaction of security prices to tracking stock announcements. J. Econ. Finance 24, 36–55. 
Elkamhi, R., Ericsson, J., Parsons, C., 2012. The cost of financial distress and the timing of default. J. Financial Econ. 
105, 62–81. 
El-Khatib, R., Fogel, K., Jandik, T., 2015. CEO network centrality and merger performance. J. Financial Econ. 110, 
349–382. 
Ellis, J., Moeller, S.B., Schlingemann, F.P., Stulz, R.M., 2011. Globalization, governance, and the returns to cross-
border acquisitions. NBER Working Paper No. 16676.
Ellison, S., 2006. Clash of cultures exacerbates woes for Tribune Co. Wall Street Journal, p. 1.
Elson, C., Ferrere, C., 2013. Peer groups: understanding CEO compensation and a proposal for a new approach. 
Director Notes, The Conference Board, April.
Emory, J.D., 2001. The value of marketability as illustrated in initial public offerings of common stock. Business 
Valuation Rev. 20, 21–24. 
Engel, E., Hayes, R., Xang, X., 2004. The Sarbanes–Oxley Act and firms’ going private decisions. J. Accounting Econ. 
44, 116–145. 
Erel, I., Liao, R., Weisbach, M., 2012. Determinants of cross-border mergers and acquisitions. J. Finance 67, 1045–1082. 
Erel, I., Jang, Y., Weisbach, M., 2015. Do acquisitions relieve target firms’ financial constraints? J. Finance 70, 289–328. 

	
REFERENCES	
703
Ertimur, Y., Ferri, F., Stubben, S., 2010. Board of directors responsiveness to shareholders: evidence from shareholder 
proposals. J. Corporate Finance 16, 53–72. 
Ertugrul, M., 2015. Bargaining power of targets: takeover defenses and top-tier target advisors. J. Econ. Business 78, 48–78. 
Eun, C.S., Kolodny, R., Scherage, C., 1996. Cross-border acquisition and shareholder wealth: tests of the synergy and 
internationalization hypotheses. J. Banking Finance 20, 1559–1582. 
Ewenstein, B., Smith, W., Sologar, A., 2015. Changing Change Management, Insights. McKinsey & Company, New York.
Faccio, M., Lang, L.H.P., 2002. The ultimate ownership of Western European corporations. J. Financial Econ. 65, 
365–395. 
Faccio, M., Masulis, R., 2005. The choice of payment method in European mergers and acquisitions. J. Finance 60, 
1345–1388. 
Faccio, M., Lang, L., Young, L., 2001. Dividends and expropriation. Am. Econ. Rev. 91, 54–78. 
Faccio, M., McConnell, J., Stolin, D., 2006. Returns to acquirers of listed and unlisted companies. J. Financial Quant. 
Anal. 47, 197–220. 
Factset Mergerstat Review, 2011. <http://www.bvresources.com/bvstore/selectbook.asp?pid=PUB259>.
Faleye, O., 2004. Cash and corporate control. J. Finance 59, 2041–2060. 
Fama, E., 1998. Market efficiency, long-term returns, and behavioral finance. J. Financial Econ. 47, 427–465. 
Fama, E., 2013. Does the Fed control interest rates. Rev. Asset Pricing Stud. 3, 180–199. 
Fama, E., French, K., 2015. A five-factor asset pricing model. J. Financial Econ. 116, 1–22. 
Fang, L., Ivashina, V., Lerner, J., 2015. The disintermediation of financial markets: direct investing in private equity. 
J. Financial Econ. 116, 160–178. 
Farzad, R., 2006. Fidelity’s divided loyalties. Business Week, p. 12.
Fauver, L., Houston, J., Narango, A., 2003. Capital market development, international integration, and the value of 
corporate diversification: a cross-country analysis. J. Financial Quant. Anal. 38, 138–155. 
Federal Reserve Bulletin, 2003. Board of Governors, U.S. Federal Reserve System: 33, December.
Federal Trade Commission, 1999a. Merger Guidelines. <www.ftc.com>.
Federal Trade Commission, Bureau of Competition, 1999b. A Study of the Commission’s Divestiture Process.
Fee, C., Hadlock, C., Pierce, J., 2012. What happens in acquisitions? Evidence from brand ownership changes and 
advertising investment. J. Corporate Finance 18, 584–597. 
Fernandez, P., 2014. CAPM: An Absurd Model, November 13. Available from: <http://ssrn.com/abstract=2505597> 
or <http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2505597>.
Fernandez, P., Ortiz, A., Acin, I., 2015. Discount Rate (Risk-Free Rate and Market Risk Premium) Used for 41 Coun­
tries in 2015: A Survey IESE Business School. <http://www.valuewalk.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/
SSRN-id2598104.pdf>.
Ferreira, M., Massa, M., Matos, P., 2010a. Shareholders at the gate? Institutional investors and cross-border mergers 
and acquisitions. Rev. Financial Stud. 23, 601–644. 
Ferreira, M., Ornelas, E., Turner, J., 2010b. Unbundling ownership and control. Working Paper. London School of 
Economics.
Ferreira, M., Santos, J., Almeida, M., Reis, N., 2014. Mergers and acquisitions research: a bibliometric study of top 
strategy and international business journals, 1980–2010. J. Business Res. 67, 2550–2558. 
Ferri, R., 2012. The total economy portfolio. Forbes, June 25, pp. 174–175.
Ferris, S., Houston, R., Javakhadze, D., 2016. Friends in the right places: the impact of political connections on corpo­
rate merger activity. J. Corporate Finance 41, 81–102. 
Fich, E.M., Tran, A.L., Walkling, R.A., 2013. On the importance of golden parachutes. J. Financial Quant. Anal. 48 (6), 
1717–1753. 
Fich, E.M., Starks, L.T., Yore, A.S., 2014. CEO deal making activities and CEO compensation. J. Financial Econ. 114, 
471–492. 
Fich, E.M., Rice, E.M., Tran, A.L., 2016. Contractual revisions in compensation: evidence of merger bonuses to target 
CEOs. J. Accounting Econ. 61, 338–368. 
Fidrmuc, J., Roosenboom, P., Paap, R., Teunissen, T., 2012. One size does not fit all: selling firms to private equity 
versus strategic acquirers. J. Corporate Finance 18, 828–849. 
Field, L.C., Karpoff, J.M., 2002. Takeover defenses of IPO firms. J. Finance 57, 1629–1666. 
Financial Times, 1996. Bugged by Failures. Financial Times, April 8, p. 8.
Finlay, W., Marshall, A., McColgan, P., 2017. Financing, fire sales, and the shareholders’ wealth effects of asset fire 
sales. J. Corporate Finance, in press.

704	
REFERENCES
Finnerty, J., Jiao, J., Yan, A., 2012. Convertible securities in merger transactions. J. Banking Finance 36, 275–289. 
Forte, G., Iannotta, G., Vavone, M., 2010. The banking relationship’s role in the choice of target’s advisor in mergers 
and acquisitions. Eur. Financial Manage. 16, 686–701. 
France, M., 2002. Bankruptcy reform won’t help telecom. Business Week, p. 40.
Francis, T., Knutson, R., 2015. Wave of megadeals tests antitrust limits in U.S. Wall Street Journal, October 19.
Francis, T., Lublin, J., 2016. CEO pay depends on board’s independence, study finds. Wall Street Journal, March 9.
Francis, B., Hasan, I., Sun, X., 2008. Financial market integration and the value of global diversification: evidence for 
U.S. acquirers in cross-border mergers and acquisitions. J. Banking Finance 32, 1522–1540. 
Francis, B., Hasan, I., Sun, X., Waisman, M., 2014a. Can firms learn by observing? Evidence from cross-border M&As. 
J. Corporate Finance 25, 202–215. 
Francis, B., Hasan, I., Sun, X., 2014b. Does relationship matter? The choice of financial advisors. J. Econ. Business 
73, 22–47. 
Frazoni, F., Nowak, E., Phalippou, L., 2012. Private equity performance and liquidity risk. J. Finance 67, 2341–2373. 
Frick, K.A., Torres, A., 2002. Learning from high-tech deals. McKinsey Quarterly, vol. 1, p. 2.
Fu, F., Lin, L., Officer, M., 2013. Acquisitions driven by stock overvaluation: are they good deals? J. Financial Econ. 
109, 24–39. 
Fulghieri, P., Sevilir, M., 2011. Mergers, spin-offs, and employee incentives. Rev. Financial Stud. 24, 2207–2241. 
Fuller, K., Netter, J., Stegemoller, M.A., 2002. What do returns to acquiring firms tell us? Evidence from firms that 
make many acquisitions. J. Finance 57, 1763–1793. 
Gantchev, N., 2013. The costs of shareholder activism: evidence from a sequential decision model. J. Financial Econ. 
107 (3), 610–631. 
Gao, H., Harford, J., Li, K., 2010. Determinants of corporate cash policy: a comparison of private and public firms. 
University of Washington Working Paper.
Garcia-Feijoo, L., Madura, J., Ngo, T., 2012. Impact of industry characteristics on the method of payment in mergers. 
J. Econ. Business 64, 261–274. 
Garlappi, L., Yan, H., 2011. Financial distress and the cross section of equity returns. J. Finance 66, 789–822. 
Gaspara, J.M., Massa, P., 2005. Shareholder investment horizons and the market for corporate control. J. Financial 
Econ. 76, 135–165. 
Gell, J., Kengelbach, J., Roos, A., 2008. The Return of the Strategist: Creating Value with M&A in Downturns. Boston 
Consulting Group, Boston. 
Gelles, D., 2013. Investment strategy rises from obscurity. New York Times, December 22. <http://dealbook.nytimes.
com/2013/12/22/investment-strategy-rises-from-obscurity/>.
Georgopoulos, G., 2008. Cross-border mergers and acquisitions: do exchange rates matter? Some evidence for 
Canada. Can. J. Econ. 41, 450–474. 
Gertner, R., Powers, E., Scharfstein, D., 2002. Learning about internal capital markets from corporate spin-offs. 
J. Finance 57, 2479–2506. 
Ghosh, A., 2004. Increasing market share as a rationale for corporate acquisitions. J. Business Finance Accounting 
31, 78–91. 
Ghosh, A., Lee, C.W.J., 2000. Abnormal returns and expected managerial performance of target firms. Financial Man­
age. 29, 40–52. 
Gillan, S., Starks, L., 2007. The evolution of shareholder activism in the United States. J. Appl. Corporate Finance 19, 
55–73. 
Gillette, F., 2011. The rise and inglorious fall of Myspace. Bloomberg Businessweek, July 3, pp. 54–57.
Gilson, S., John, K., Lang, L.H., 1990. Troubled debt restructuring: an empirical study of private reorganization of 
firms in default. J. Financial Econ. 27, 315–353. 
Gilson, S.C., Healy, P.M., Noe, C.F., Palepu, L.G., 2001. Analyst specialization and conglomerate stock breakups. J. 
Accounting Res. 39, 565–582. 
Giot, P., Hege, U., Schwienacher, A., 2014. Are novice private equity funds risk-takers? Evidence from a comparison 
with established firms. J. Corporate Finance 27, 55–71. 
Goktan, M.S., Kieschnick, R., 2012. A target’s perspective on the effects of ATPs in takeovers after recognizing its 
choice in the process. J. Corporate Finance 18, 1088–1103. 
Golbe, D., Nyman, I., 2013. How do share repurchases affect ownership concentration? J. Corporate Finance 20, 
22–40. 
Goldblatt, H., 1999. Merging at internet speed. Fortune, November 8, pp. 164–165.

	
REFERENCES	
705
Golubov, A., Petmezas, D., Travlos, N., 2012. When it pays to pay your investment banker: new evidence on the role 
of financial advisors in M&As. J. Finance 67, 271–312. 
Golubov, A., Yawson, A., Zhang, H., 2015. Extraordinary acquirers. J. Financial Econ. 116, 314–330. 
Gompers, P., Ishii, J., Metrick, A., 2010. Extreme governance: an analysis of U.S. dual-class companies in the United 
States. Rev. Financial Stud. 23, 1051–1088. 
Gompers, P., Kaplan, S., Mukharlyamov, V., 2016. What do equity firms say they do? J. Financial Econ. 121, 449–476. 
Gondhalekar, V., Sant, R., Ferris, S., 2004. The price of corporate acquisition: determinants of takeover premia. Appl. 
Econ. Lett. 11, 735–739. 
Gonenc, H., Hermes, N., van Sinderen, E., 2013. Bidders’ gains and family control of private target firms. Int. Busi­
ness Rev. 22, 856–867. 
Gorbenko, A., Malenko, A., 2014. Strategic and financial bidders in takeover auctions. J. Finance 69, 2513–2555. 
Gordon, J.N., 2007. The rise of independent directors in the Unites States, 1950–2005: of shareholder value and stock 
market prices. Stanford Law Rev. 1465, 1472–1476. 
Gorton, G., Kahl, M., Rosen, R.J., 2009. Eat or be eaten: a theory of mergers and firm size. J. Finance 64, 1291–1344. 
Gottschalg, O., 2012. Bain or blessing? The Economist, January 28, pp. 73–74.
Goyal, V.K., Park, C.W., 2002. Board leadership structure and CEO turnover. J. Corporate Finance 8, 49–66. 
Graham, J.R., 2000. How big are the tax benefits of debt? J. Finance 55, 1901–1941. 
Graham, J.R., Harvey, C.R., 2001. The theory and practice of corporate finance: evidence from the field. J. Financial 
Econ. 60, 187–243. 
Graham, J., Lemmon, M., Wolf, J., 2002. Does diversification destroy firm value? J. Finance 57, 695–720. 
Graham, M., Martey, E., Yawson, A., 2008. Acquisitions from UK firms into emerging markets. Global Finance J. 19, 
56–71. 
Greene, D., 2016. The wealth of private firm owners following reverse mergers. J. Corporate Finance 37, 56–75. 
Greenwood, R., Schor, M., 2007. Hedge fund investor activism and takeovers. Working Paper. Harvard Business 
School, Cambridge, MA.
Grice, S., Dugan, M., 2001. The limitations of bankruptcy prediction models: some cautions for the researcher. Rev. 
Quant. Finance Accounting 17, 151–166. 
Grice, S., Ingram, R., 2001. Tests of the generalizability of Altman’s bankruptcy prediction model. J. Business Res. 
54, 53–61. 
Grinblatt, M., Titman, S., 2002. Financial Markets and Corporate Strategy, second ed. McGraw-Hill, New York. 
Groh, A., Gottschaig, O., 2006. The Risk-Adjusted Performance of U.S. Buyouts. HEC, Paris. 
Gu, F., Lev, B., 2011. Overpriced shares, ill-advised acquisitions, and goodwill impairment. Accounting Rev. 86, 
1995–2022. 
Gugler, K., Mueller, D.C., Yurtoglu, B.B., Zulehner, C., 2003. The effects of mergers: an international comparison. Int. 
J. Ind. Organ. 21 (5), 625–653. 
Gugler, K., Mueller, D., Weichselbaumer, M., 2012. The determinants of merger waves: an international perspective. 
Int. J. Ind. Organ. 30, 1–15. 
Gunkel, M., Schlaegel, C., Rossteutscher, T., Wolff, B., 2015. The human aspect of cross-border acquisition outcomes: 
the role of management practices, employee emotions, and national culture. Int. Business Rev. 24, 394–408. 
Gunter, A., van Dijk, M., 2016. The impact of European antitrust policy: evidence from the stock market. Int. Rev. 
Law Econ. 46, 20–33. 
Guo, R.J., Kruse, T.A., Nohel, T., 2008. Undoing the powerful anti-takeover force of staggered boards. J. Corporate 
Finance 14, 274–288. 
Guo, S., Hotchkiss, E.S., Song, W., 2011. Do buyouts (still) create value? J. Finance 66, 479–517. 
Gurung, A., Lerner, J., 2008. The Global Economic Impact of Private Equity. World Economic Forum, Harvard Busi­
ness School, Cambridge, MA. 
Guthrie, K., Sokolowsky, J., Wan, K., 2012. Compensation and board structure revisited. J. Finance 67, 1149–1169. 
Hackbarth, D., Morellec, E., 2008. Stock returns in mergers and acquisitions. J. Finance 63, 1213–1252. 
Hall, B., 1992. Investment and research and development at the firm level: does the source of financing matter? 
Working Paper No. 4096. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Hall, L.S., Polacek, T.C., 1994. Strategies for obtaining the largest valuation discounts. Estate Plan., 38–44. 
Hamel, G.C., Prahalad, C.K., 1994. Competing for the Future. Harvard Business School Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Hanlon, M., Lester, R., Verdi, R., 2015. The effect of repatriation tax costs on U.S. multinational investment. J. Financial 
Econ. 116, 179–196. 

706	
REFERENCES
Hann, R., Ogneva, M., Ozbas, O., 2013. Corporate diversification and the cost of capital. J. Finance 68, 1961–1999. 
Hanson, R.C., Song, M.H., 2000. Managerial ownership, board structure, and the division of gains. J. Corporate 
Finance 6, 55–70. 
Hao, K.Y., Jaffe, A.B., 1993. The impact of corporate restructuring on industrial research and development. Brookings 
Pap. Econ. Activity 1, 275–282. 
Harding, D., Rovit, S., 2004. Mastering the Merger: Four Critical Decisions That Make or Break the Deal. Harvard 
Business School Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Harford, J., 2005. What drives merger waves? J. Financial Econ. 77, 529–560. 
Harford, J., Kolasinski, A., 2012. Do Private Equity Sponsors Sacrifice Long-Term Value for Short-Term Profit? 
Evidence From a Comprehensive Sample of Large Buyout and Exit Outcomes, January 20. <http://ssrn.com/
abstract=1785927>.
Harford, J., Schonlau, R., 2013. Does the director labor market offer ex post setting-up for CEOs? The case of acquisition. 
J. Financial Econ. 110, 18–36. 
Harford, J., Uysal, V., 2014. Bond market access and investment. J. Financial Econ. 112, 147–163. 
Harper, N.W., Schneider, A., 2004. Where mergers go wrong. McKinsey Quarterly, number 2.
Harris, O., Glegg, C., 2007. The wealth effects of cross-border spin-offs. J. Multinational Financial Manage. 18, 461–476. 
Harris, R.S., Jenkinson, T., Kaplan, S.N., 2014. Private equity performance: what do we know? J. Finance 113, 
1851–1882. 
Hartman, T.E., 2005. The costs of being public in the era of Sarbanes–Oxley. Foley & Lardner LLP Annual Survey.
Harvey, C.R., 2005. Twelve ways to calculate the international cost of capital. Duke University and National Bureau 
of Economic Research Working Paper, October 14.
Hayes, R.H., 1979. The human side of acquisitions. Manage. Rev. 41, 41–46. 
Hayward, M., Hambrick, D., 1997. Explaining the premiums paid for large acquisitions: evidence of CEO hubris. 
Adm. Sci. Q. 35, 621–633. 
Heflin, F., Subramanyam, K., Zhang, Y., 2001. Regulation FD and the financial information environment: early 
evidence. Accounting Rev. 78, 1–37. 
Hennart, J.F., Park, Y.R., 1993. Location, governance, and strategic determinants of Japanese manufacturing invest­
ment in the United States. J. Strategic Manage. 15, 419–436. 
Hennessy, J.A., Whited, T.M., 2007. How costly is external financing? Evidence from a structural estimation. J. Finance 
62, 1705–1745. 
Henry, D., 2001. The numbers game. Business Week, May 14, pp. 100–103.
Henry, D., 2002. Mergers: why most big deals don’t pay off. Business Week, October 14, pp. 60–64.
Henry, D., 2003. A fair deal—but for whom. Business Week, September 11, pp. 108–109.
Heron, R., Lie, E., 2015. The effect of poison pill adoptions and court rulings on firm entrenchment. J. Corporate 
Finance 35, 286–296. 
Hertzel, B.M., Smith, R.L., 1993. Market discounts and shareholder gains for placing equity privately. J. Finance 48, 
459–485. 
Hertzel, M.G., Li, Z., Officer, M.S., Rodgers, K.J., 2008. Inter-firm linkages and the wealth effects of financial distress 
along the supply chain. J. Financial Econ. 87, 374–387. 
Higgins, H., 2013. Do stock-for-stock merger acquirers manage earnings? Evidence from Japan. J. Accounting Public 
Policy 32, 44–70. 
Hillyer, C., Smolowitz, I., 1996. Why do mergers fail to achieve synergy? Director’s Monthly, January, p. 13.
Hilscher, J., Sisli-Ciamarra, E., 2013. Conflicts of interest on corporate boards: the effect of creditor–directors on ac­
quisitions. J. Corporate Finance 19, 140–158. 
Himmelberg, C.P., Petersen, B.C., 1994. R&D and internal finance: a panel study of small firms in high-tech indus­
tries. Rev. Econ. Stat. 76, 38–51. 
Hitt, J.M.A., Ireland, R.D., 2000. The intersection of entrepreneurship and strategic management research. In: Sexton, 
D., Landstrom, H. (Eds.), The Blackwell Handbook of Entrepreneurship. Blackwell, Oxford, UK. 
Hoechle, D., Schmid, M., Walter, I., Yermack, D., 2012. How much of the diversification discount can be explained by 
poor corporate governance? J. Financial Econ. 103, 41–60. 
Hoffman, L., 2015. Professor takes his issues with merger lawsuits to court. Wall Street Journal, July 28.
Hogan, K.M., Olson, G.T., 2004. The pricing of equity carve-outs during the 1990s. J. Financial Res. 27, 521–537. 
Holthausen, R.W., Larker, D.F., 1996. The financial performance of reverse leveraged buyouts. J. Financial Econ. 42, 
293–332. 

	
REFERENCES	
707
Horn, A., Kjaerland, F., Molnar, P., Wollen Steen, B., 2015. The use of real option theory in Scandinavia’s largest com­
panies. Int. Rev. Financial Anal. 41, 74–81. 
Horton, T., 2011. The new United States horizontal merger guidelines: devolution, evolution, or counterrevolution? 
J. Eur. Competition Law Pract. 2, 158–164. 
Hotchkiss, E., Qian, J., Song, W., 2005. Holdup, renegotiation, and deal protection in mergers. Working Paper. Boston 
College.
Hovakimian, G., 2016. Excess value and restructuring by diversified firms. J. Banking Finance 71, 1–19. 
Howell, J., 2014. The survival of the U.S. dual class share structure. J. Corporate Finance, in press.
Hsu, J.C., Saa-Requejo, J., Santa-Clara, P., 2002. Bond pricing and default risk. UCLA Working Paper.
Hu, M., Yang, J., 2016. The role of leverage in cross-border mergers and acquisitions. Int. Rev. Econ. Finance 43, 
170–199. 
Huang, S., 2014. Managerial expertise, corporate decisions and firm value: evidence from corporate refocusing. J. 
Financial Intermediation 23, 348–375. 
Huang, C., 2015. Takeover vulnerability and the credibility of signaling: the case of open-market share repurchases. J. 
Banking Finance 58, 405–417. 
Huang, J., Pierce, J., Tsyplakov, S., 2011. Post-merger integration duration and leverage dynamics of mergers: theory 
and evidence. <http://ssrn.com/sol3/delivery.cfm?abstractid=1787265>.
Huang, Q., Jiang, F., Lie, E., Yang, K., 2014. The role of investment banker directors in M&A. J. Financial Econ. 112 
(2), 269–286. 
Huang, P., Officer, M., Powell, R., 2017. Method of payment and risk mitigation in cross-border mergers and acquisi­
tions. J. Corporate Finance 40, 216–234. 
Hulburt, H.M., Miles, J.A., Wollridge, J.R., 2002. Value creation from equity carve-outs. Financial Manage. 31, 83–100. 
Humphery-Jenner, M., Powell, R., 2014. Firm size, sovereign governance, and value creation: evidence from the 
acquirer size effect. J. Corporate Finance 26, 57–77. 
Hunt, P., 2003. Structuring Mergers and Acquisitions: A Guide to Creating Shareholder Value. Aspen, New York. 
Hunter, W., Jagtiani, J., 2003. An analysis of advisor choice, fees, and effort in mergers and acquisitions. Rev. Financial 
Econ. 12, 65–81. 
Hurter, W.H., Petersen, J.R., Thompson, K.E., 2005. Merger, Acquisitions, and 1031 Tax Exchanges. Lorman Education 
Services, New York. 
Huson, M.R., MacKinnon, G., 2003. Corporate spin-offs and information asymmetry between investors. J. Econ. 
Manage. Strategy 9, 481–501. 
Ibbotson Associates, 2002. Stock, Bonds, Bills, and Inflation, Valuation Edition Yearbook. Ibbotson Associates Inc., 
Chicago. 
Isakov, D., Sonney, F., 2002. Are parishioners right? On the relative importance of industrial factors in international 
stock returns. Working Paper. HEC-University of Geneva.
Ishii, J., Xuan, Y., 2014. Acquirer–target social ties and merger outcomes. J. Financial Econ. 112, 344–363. 
Ismail, A., 2010. Are good financial advisors really good? The performance of investment banks in the M&A market. 
Rev. Quant. Finance Accounting 35, 411–429. 
Ismail, A., 2011. Does management’s forecast of merger synergies explain the premium paid, method of payment, 
and management motives? Financial Manage. 40, 879–910. 
Ismail, A., Krause, A., 2010. Determinants of the method of payment in mergers and acquisitions. Q. Rev. Econ. 
Finance 50, 471–484. 
Jacobsen, S., 2014. The death of the deal: are withdrawn acquisition deals informative of CEO quality? J. Financial 
Econ. 114, 54–83. 
Jaffe, A.B., Trajtenberg, M., 2002. Patents, Citations, and Innovations: A Window on the Knowledge Economy. MIT 
Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Jaffe, J., Jindra, J., Pedersen, D., Voetmann, T., 2015. Returns to acquirers of public and subsidiary targets. J. Corporate 
Finance 31, 246–270. 
Jagannathan, R., Matsa, D., Meier, I., Tarhan, V., 2016. Why do firms use high discount rates. J. Financial Econ. 120, 
445–463. 
Jain, B., Kini, O., Shenoy, J., 2011. Vertical divestitures through equity carve-outs and spin-offs: a product markets 
perspective. J. Financial Econ. 100, 594–615. 
Jandik, T., Lallemand, J., 2015. Value impact of debt issuances by targets of withdrawn takeovers. J. Corporate 
Finance 29, 475–494. 

708	
REFERENCES
Jankowitsch, R., Nagler, F., Subrahmanyam, M., 2014. Determinants of recovery rates in the U.S. corporate bond 
market. J. Financial Econ. 114, 155–177. 
Jansen, I., Stuart, N., 2014. How to predict the market’s reaction when you announce an acquisition. J. Corporate 
Accounting Finance 25, 43–49. 
Jarrow, R., Turnbull, S., 1995. Pricing derivative on financial securities subject to credit risk. J. Finance 50, 1449–1470. 
Jarzemsky, M., 2016. How bad is retail? Look at the bonds. Wall Street Journal, January 25. <http://www.wsj.com/
articles/how-bad-is-retail-look-at-the-bonds-1453752646>.
Jenkinson, T., Souza, M., 2015. What determines the exit decision of leveraged buyouts. J. Banking Finance 59, 399–408. 
Jenkinson, T., Stucke, R., 2011. Who Benefits From the Leverage in LBOs? <http://ssrn.com/abstract=1777266>.
Jensen, M.C., 1986. Agency costs of free cash flow, corporate finance, and takeovers. Am. Econ. Rev. 76, 323–329. 
Jensen, M.C., 2005. Agency costs of overvalued equity. Financial Manage. 34, 5–19. 
Jenter, D., Lewellen, K., 2015. CEO preferences and acquisitions. J. Finance 70, 2815–2832. 
Jeon, J.Q., Ligonb, J.A., 2011. How much is reasonable? The size of termination fees in mergers and acquisitions. J. 
Corporate Finance 17, 959–981. 
Jiang, W., 2016. Reforming the Delaware Law to address appraisal arbitrage. Harvard Law School Forum on Corporate 
Governance and Regulation, May 12. <https://corpgov.law.harvard.edu/2016/05/12/reforming-the-delaware-
law-to-address-appraisal-arbitrage/>.
Jiang, W., Li, K., Wang, W., 2012. Hedge funds and Chapter 11. J. Finance 67, 513–560. 
Jindra, J., Walkling, R., 2004. Arbitrage spreads and the market pricing of proposed acquisitions. J. Corporate Finance 
10, 495–526. 
John, K., Ofek, E., 1995. Asset sales and increase in focus. J. Financial Econ. 37, 105–126. 
John, K., Knyazeva, A., Knyazeva, D., 2015. Employee rights and acquisitions. J. Financial Econ. 118, 49–69. 
Johnson, S.A., Houston, M.B., 2000. A re-examination of the motives and gains in joint ventures. J. Financial Quant. 
Anal. 35, 67–85. 
Johnson, W., Karpoff, J., Yi, S., 2015. The bonding hypothesis of takeover defenses: evidence from IPO firms. 
J. Financial Econ. 117, 307–332. 
Jones, S., Hensher, D., 2008. Advances in Credit Risk Modeling and Corporate Bankruptcy Prediction. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, England. 
Jordan, B., Kim, S., Liu, M., 2016. Growth opportunities, short-term market pressure, and dual class shares. 
J. Corporate Finance 41, 304–328. 
Jory, S., Ngo, T., 2015. The wealth effects of acquiring foreign divested assets. Int. Business Rev. 24, 235–245. 
Jory, S., Ngo, T., Wang, D., 2016. Credit ratings and the premiums paid in mergers and acquisitions. J. Empirical 
Finance 39, 93–104. 
Kahle, K., Walkling, R., 1996. The impact of industry classification on financial research. J. Financial Quant. Anal. 31, 
309–335. 
Kahya, E., Theodosiou, P., 1999. Predicting corporate financial distress: a time-series CUSUM methodology. Rev. 
Quant. Finance Accounting 13, 323–345. 
Kaiser, K.M.J., Stouraitis, A., 2001. Revering corporate diversification and the use of the proceeds from asset sales: the 
case of Thorn EMI. Financial Manage. 30, 63–101. 
Kale, P., Dyer, J.H., Singh, H., 2002. Alliance capability, stock market response, and long-term alliance success: the 
role of the alliance function. Strategic Manage. J. 23, 747–767. 
Kalodimos, J., Lundberg, C., 2017. Shareholder rights in mergers and acquisitions: are appraisal rights being abused? 
Finance Res. Lett., in press.
Kamar, E., Karaca-Mandic, P., Talley, E., 2009. Going-private decisions and the Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002: a cross-
country analysis. J. Law Econ. Organ. 25, 107–133. 
Kamoto, S., 2016. Managerial innovation incentives, management buyouts, and shareholders’ intolerance of failure. 
J. Corporate Finance 42, 55–74. 
Kang, J.K., Kim, J.M., 2008. The geography of block acquisitions. J. Finance 63, 2817–2858. 
Kang, J.K., Shivdasani, A., 1997. Corporate restructuring during performance declines in Japan. J. Financial Econ. 
46, 29–65. 
Kansal, S., Chandani, A., 2014. Effective management of change during merger and acquisition. Procedia Econ. 
Finance 11, 208–217. 
Kantor, R.M., 2002. Collaborative Advantage: The Art of Alliances. Harvard Business Review on Strategic Alliances. 
Harvard Business School Press, Cambridge, MA. 

	
REFERENCES	
709
Kaplan, S.N., 1989. The effects of management buyouts on operating performance and value. J. Financial Econ. 24, 
217–254. 
Kaplan, S.N., 1991. The staying power of leveraged buyouts. J. Financial Econ. 29, 287–313. 
Kaplan, S.N., 1997. The evolution of U.S. corporate governance: we are all Henry Kravis now. J. Private Equity 1, 
7–14. 
Kaplan, S.N., 2012. How to Think About Private Equity. J. Am. Enterprise Inst. 
Kaplan, S.N., Schoar, A., 2005. Returns, persistence and capital flows. J. Finance 60, 1791–1823. 
Kaplan, S.N., Stromberg, P., 2009. Leveraged buyouts and private equity. J. Econ. Perspect. 23, 121–146. 
Kaplan, S.N., Weisbach, M.S., 1992. The success of acquisitions: evidence from divestitures. J. Finance 47, 107–138. 
Kaprielyan, M., 2016. Valuation consequences of the decision to divest in the globalized world. J. Multinational 
Financial Manage. 36, 16–29. 
Karampatsas, N., Petmezas, D., Travlos, N., 2014. Credit ratings and the choice of payment method in mergers and 
acquisitions. J. Corporate Finance 25, 474–493. 
Karolyi, G., Taboada, A., 2015. Regulatory arbitrage and cross border acquisitions. J. Finance 70, 2395–2450. 
Karpoff, J., 2001. The impact of shareholder activism on target companies: a survey of empirical findings. Working 
Paper. University of Washington.
Karpoff, J., Malatesta, P.H., 1989. The wealth effects of second-generation state takeover legislation. J. Financial Econ. 
25, 291–322. 
Katz, S., 2008. Earnings quality and ownership structure: the role of private equity sponsors. NBER Working Paper 
No. W14085.
Kedia, B., Reddy, R., 2017. Language and cross-border acquisitions: an exploratory study. Int. Business Rev. 25, 1321–1332. 
Kedia, S., Zhou, X., 2011. Local market makers, liquidity and market quality. J. Financial Markets 14, 540–567. 
Kedia, S., Zhou, X., 2014. Informed trading around acquisitions: evidence from corporate bonds. J. Financial Markets 
16 (1), 61–103. 
Kedia, S., Ravid, S., Pons, V., 2011. When do vertical mergers create value? Financial Manage. 40, 845–877. 
Kengelbach, J., Roos, A., Keienburg, G., 2014. Maximizing Value: Choose the Exit Strategy. BCG Perspectives. The 
Boston Consulting Group, Boston, <https://www.bcgperspectives.com/content/articles/mergers_acquisitions_
divestitures_maximizing_value_choose_right_exit_route/Right Exit Route>. 
Kennedy, K., Moore, M., 2003. Going the Distance: Why Some Companies Dominate and Others Fail. Prentice-Hall, 
Upper Saddle River, NJ. 
Khanna, T., Palepu, K., Sinha, J., 2005. Strategies that fit emerging markets. Harv. Business Rev. 83, 63–74. 
Khorana, A., Shivdasani, A., Stendevad, C., Sanzhar, S., 2011. Spin-offs: tackling the conglomerate discount. J. Appl. 
Corporate Finance 23, 90–102. 
Kim, E., Lu, Y., 2013. Corporate governance reforms around the world and cross-border acquisitions. J. Corporate 
Finance 22, 236–253. 
Kim, W., Mauborgne, R., 2015. Blue Ocean Strategy, Expanded Edition: How to Create Uncontested Market Space 
and Make the Competition Irrelevant. Harvard Business Review Press, Boston, MA. 
Kim, K., Mauldin, E., Patro, S., 2014. Outside directors and board advising and monitoring performance. J. Accounting 
Econ. 57, 110–131. 
Kim, H., Liao, R., Wang, Y., 2015. Active block investors and corporate governance around the world. J. Int. Markets 
Inst. Money 39, 181–194. 
King, T.D., Wen, M., 2011. Shareholder governance, bondholder governance, and managerial risk-taking. J. Banking 
Finance 35, 512–531. 
Kini, I., Kracaw, W., Mian, S., 2004. The nature of discipline by corporate takeovers. J. Finance 59, 1511–1552. 
Kisgen, D., Qian, J., Wiehong, S., 2009. Are fairness opinions fair? The case of mergers and acquisitions. J. Financial 
Econ. 91, 178–207. 
Klein, K.E., 2004. Urge to merge? Take care to beware. Business Week, July 1, p. 68.
Klein, A., Zur, E., 2009. Entrepreneurial shareholder activism: hedge funds and other private investors. J. Finance 
64, 187–229. 
Koedijk, K., Kool, C., Schotman, P., Van Kijk, M., 2002. The cost of capital in international markets: local or global. 
Working Paper. Centre for Economic Policy Research.
Koeplin, J., Sarin, A., Shapiro, A.C., 2000. The private equity discount. J. Appl. Corporate Finance 12, 94–101. 
Koerniadi, H., Krishnamurti, C., Tourani-Rad, A., 2015. Cross border mergers and acquisitions and default risk. Int. 
Rev. Financial Anal. 42, 336–348. 

710	
REFERENCES
Kohers, N., Ang, J., 2000. Earnouts in mergers: agreeing to disagree and agreeing to stay. J. Finance 73, 445–476. 
Kolb, J., Tykvova, T., 2016. Going public via special purpose acquisition companies: frogs do not turn into princes. J. 
Corporate Finance 40, 80–96. 
Koller, T., Goedart, M., Wessels, D., 2010. Valuation: Measuring and Managing the Value of Companies. John Wiley 
& Sons, New York. 
KPMG, 2006a. When hedge funds start to look like private equity firms. Global M&A Spotlight.
KPMG, 2006b. Mergers and acquisitions. 2006 M&A Outlook Survey.
Kranhold, K., 2006. GE’s water unit remains stagnant as it struggles to integrate acquisitions. Wall Street Journal, 
August 23, p. C2.
Krapl, A., 2015. Corporate international diversification and risk. Int. Rev. Financial Anal. 37, 1–13. 
Krishnan, C.N.V., Masulis, R.W., Thomas, R.S., Thompson, R.B., 2012. Stakeholder litigation in mergers and 
acquisitions. J. Corporate Finance 18, 1248–1268. 
Krishnan, C.N.V., Partnoy, F., Thomas, R., 2016. The second wave of hedge fund activism: the importance of 
reputation, clout, and expertise. J. Corporate Finance 40, 296–314. 
Krolikowski, W., 2016. Incentive pay and acquirer returns—the impact of Sarbanes–Oxley. Q. Rev. Econ. Finance 59, 
99–111. 
Kruger, P., Landier, A., Thesmar, D., 2015. The WACC fallacy: the real effects of using a unique discount rate. J. Finance 
70, 1253–1285. 
Kuipers, D., Miller, D., Patel, A., 2009. The legal environment and corporate valuation: evidence from cross-border 
mergers. Int. Rev. Econ. Finance 18, 552–567. 
La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Sklanes, F., Schleifer, A., Vishny, R., 2002. Investor protection and corporate valuation. J. Finance 
57, 1147–1170. 
Laitinen, K., Suvas, A., 2016. Financial distress prediction in an international context: moderating effects of Hofstede’s 
original cultural dimensions. J. Behav. Exp. Finance 9, 98–118. 
Lajoux, A.R., 1998. The Art of M&A Integration. McGraw-Hill, New York. 
Lang, L., Stulz, R.M., 1992. Contagion and competitive intra-industry effects of bankruptcy announcements. J. Financial 
Econ. 81, 45–60. 
Lang, L., Poulsen, A., Stulz, R., 1995. Asset sales, firm performance, and the agency costs of managerial discretion. 
J. Financial Econ. 37, 3–37. 
Lattman, P., de la Merced, M.J., 2010. Old GM being sold in parts. New York Times, September 1, p. 23.
Lauterbach, B., Pajuste, A., 2015. The long-term valuation effects of voluntary dual class share unifications. J. Corporate 
Finance 31, 171–185. 
Le Nadant, A.L., Perdreau, F., 2012. Do private equity firms foster innovation? Evidence from French LBOs. Working 
Paper. University de Caen.
Lee, I., Lemmon, M., Li, Y., Sequeira, J., 2015. Do voluntary restrictions on insider trading eliminate informed insider 
trading? J. Corporate Finance 29, 158–178. 
Leeth, J.D., Rody Borg, J., 2000. The impact of takeovers on shareholders’ wealth during the 1920s merger wave. J. 
Financial Quant. Anal. 35, 29–38. 
Lehn, K.M., Zhao, M., 2006. CEO turnover after acquisitions: are bad bidders fired? J. Finance 61, 1383–1412. 
Lerner, J., Shane, H., Tsai, A., 2003. Do equity financing cycles matter? J. Financial Econ. 67, 411–446. 
Lerner, J., Sorensen, M., Stromberg, P., 2011. Private equity and long-run investment: the case of innovation. J. Finance 
66, 445–477. 
Leuz, C., Triantis, A., Wang, T.Y., 2008. Why do firms go dark? Causes and economic consequences of voluntary SEC 
deregistrations. J. Accounting Econ. 45, 181–208. 
Levi, M., Li, K., Zhang, F., 2014. Director gender in mergers and acquisitions. J. Corporate Finance 28, 185–200. 
Levine, D.M., Berenson, M.L., Stephan, D., 1999. Statistics for Managers, second ed. Prentice-Hall, New York. 
Levit, D., Malenko, N., 2012. Non-binding voting for shareholder proposals. J. Finance 66, 1579–1614. 
Li, J., 2012. Prediction of corporate bankruptcy from June 2008 through 2011. J. Accounting Finance 12, 31–42. 
Li, X., 2013. Productivity, restructuring, and the gains from takeovers. J. Financial Econ. 109, 250–271. 
Li, K., Wang, W., 2016. Debtor-in-possession financing: loan-to-loan and loan-to-own. J. Corporate Finance 39, 121–138. 
Liang, D., Lu, C., Tsai, C., Shih, G., 2016. Financial ratios and corporate governance indicators in bankruptcy predic­
tion: a comprehensive study. Eur. J. Operational Res. 252, 561–572. 
Liao, R., 2014. What drives corporate minority acquisitions around the world? The case for financial constraints. 
J. Corporate Finance 26, 78–95. 

	
REFERENCES	
711
Lim, J., 2015. The role of activist hedge funds in financially distressed firms. J. Financial Quant. Anal. 50, 1321–1351. 
Lim, M., Lee, J., 2016a. The effects of industry relatedness and takeover motives in cross-border acquisition comple­
tion. J. Business Res. 69, 4787–4792. 
Lim, M., Lee, J., 2016b. National economic disparity and cross border acquisition resolution. Int. Business Rev., in 
press.
Lim, S.C., Mann, S.C., Mihov, V.T., 2004. Market evaluation of off-balance sheet financing: you can run but you can’t 
hide. EFMA Basel Meetings Paper, December 1.
Lim, J., Minton, B., Weisbach, M., 2014. Syndicated loan spreads and the composition of the syndicate. J. Financial 
Econ. 111, 45–69. 
Lim, J., Makhija, A., Shenkar, O., 2016. The asymmetric relationship between national cultural distance and target 
premiums in cross-border M&As. J. Corporate Finance 41, 542–571. 
Lin, J., Stephens, C., Wu, Y., 2014. Limited attention, share repurchases, and takeover risk. J. Banking Finance 42, 
283–301. 
Linck, J., Netter, J., Yang, T., 2009. The effects and unintended consequences of the Sarbanes–Oxley Act on the supply 
and demand for directors. Rev. Financial Stud. 22, 3287–3328. 
Listokin, Y., 2009. Corporate voting versus market price setting. Am. Law Econ. Rev. 11, 608–637. 
Liu, T., Wu, J., 2014. Merger arbitrage short selling and price pressure. J. Corporate Finance 27, 36–54. 
Logue, D.E., Seward, J.K., Walsh, J.W., 1996. Rearranging residual claims: a case for targeted stock. Financial Manage. 
25, 43–61. 
Loh, C., Bezjak, J.R., Toms, H., 1995. Voluntary corporate divestitures as an anti-takeover mechanism. Financial Rev. 
30, 21–24. 
Longstaff, F.A., 1995. How can marketability affect security values? J. Finance 50, 1767–1774. 
Loughran, T., Ritter, J., 2002. Why don’t issuers get upset about leaving money on the table in IPOs? Rev. Financial 
Stud. 15, 413–443. 
Loughran, T., Ritter, J., Rydqvist, K., 1994. Initial public offerings: international insights. Pac. Basin Finance J. 2, 
165–199. 
Loughran, T., Anand, M., Vijh, A., 1997. Do long-term shareholders benefit from corporate acquisitions? J. Finance 
22, 321–340. 
Lynch, R.P., 1993. Business Alliance Guide: The Hidden Competitive Weapon. Wiley, New York. 
Macias, A., Moeller, T., 2016. Target signaling with material adverse change clauses in merger agreements. J. Empirical 
Finance 39, 69–92. 
Macias, A., Pirinsky, C., 2015. Employees and the market for corporate control. J. Corporate Finance 31, 33–53. 
Madura, J., Ngo, T., 2012. Determinants of the medium of payment used to acquire privately held targets. J. Econ. 
Finance 36, 424–442. 
Madura, J., Ngo, T., Viale, A., 2012. Why do merger premiums vary across industries and over time? Q. Rev. Econ. 
Finance 52, 49–62. 
Maksimovic, V., Phillips, G.M., 2001. The market for corporate assets: who engages in mergers and asset sales and are 
there efficiency gains? J. Finance 56, 332–355. 
Maksimovic, V., Phillips, G., Prabhala, N.R., 2011. Post-merger restructuring and the boundaries of the firm. J. Financial 
Econ. 102, 317–343. 
Maksimovic, V., Phillips, G., Yang, L., 2013. Private and public merger waves. J. Finance 68, 2177–2217. 
Malatesta, P.H., Walkling, R.A., 1988. Poison pills securities: stockholder wealth, profitability and ownership 
structure. J. Financial Econ. 20, 347–376. 
Malekzadeh, A.R., McWilliams, V.B., Sen, N., 1998. Implications of CEO structural and ownership power, ownership, 
and board composition on the market’s reaction to antitakeover charter amendments. J. Appl. Business Res. 14, 53–62. 
Malenko, A., Malenko, N., 2015. A theory of LBO activity based on repeated debt–equity conflicts. J. Financial Econ. 
117, 607–627. 
Mallea, J., 2008. A Review of Mergers of Equals. <http://FactSetmergermetrics.com>.
Malmendier, U., Tate, G., 2008. Who makes acquisitions? CEO overconfidence and the market’s reaction. J. Financial 
Econ. 89, 20–43. 
Malmendier, U., Tate, G., Yan, J., 2011. Overconfidence and early-life experiences: the impact of managerial traits on 
corporate financial policies. J. Finance 66, 1687–1733. 
Mao, Y., Renneboog, L., 2015. Do managers manipulate earnings prior to management buyouts? J. Corporate Finance 
35, 43–61. 

712	
REFERENCES
Markides, C., Oyon, D., 1998. International acquisitions: do they create value for shareholders? Eur. Manage. J. 16, 
125–135. 
Marks, M.L., 1996. From Turmoil to Triumph: New Life After Mergers, Acquisitions, and Downsizing. Lexington 
Books, Lanham, MD. 
Marquez, R., Singh, R., 2013. The economics of club bidding and value creation. J. Financial Econ. 108, 275–294. 
Martynova, M., Renneboog, L., 2008a. A century of corporate takeovers: what have we learned and where do we 
stand? J. Banking Finance 32, 2148–2177. 
Martynova, M., Renneboog, L., 2008b. Spillover of corporate governance standards in cross-border mergers and 
acquisitions. J. Corporate Finance 14, 200–223. 
Massari, M., Monge, V., Zanetti, L., 2006. Control premium in the presence of rules imposing mandatory tender of­
fers: can it be measured? J. Manage. Governance 22, 101–110. 
Masulis, R.W., Mobbs, S., 2014. Independent director incentives: where do talented directors spend their limited time 
and energy? J. Financial Econ. 111, 408–429. 
Masulis, R.W., Nahata, R., 2011. Venture capital conflicts of interest: evidence from acquisitions of venture-backed 
firms. J. Financial Quant. Anal. 46, 395–420. 
Masulis, R.W., Wang, C., Xie, F., 2007. Corporate governance and acquirer returns. J. Finance 62, 1851–1890. 
Masulis, R.W., Wang, C., Xie, F., 2009. Agency problems in dual-class companies. J. Finance 64, 1697–1727. 
Mateev, M., Andonov, K., 2016. Do cross-border and domestic bidding firms perform differently? New evidence from 
Continental Europe and the UK. Res. Int. Business Finance 37, 327–349. 
Maxwell, W.F., Rao, R.P., 2003. Do spin-offs expropriate wealth from bondholders? J. Finance 58, 2087–2108. 
McConnell, J.J., Nantell, T.J., 1985. Corporate combinations and common stock returns: the case of joint ventures. 
J. Finance 40, 519–536. 
McConnell, J.J., Ozbilgin, M., Wahal, S., 2001. Spin-offs: ex ante. J. Business 74, 245–280. 
McCoy, K., Chu, K., 2011. Merger of U.S. and Chinese firms is a cautionary tale. USA Today, December 26, p. 6.
McNamara, G., Dykes, B.J., Haleblian, J., 2008. The performance implications of participating in an acquisition wave. 
Acad. Manage. J. 51, 744–767. 
McNeil, C.R., Moore, W.T., 2005. Dismantling internal capital markets via spin-off: effects on capital allocation ef­
ficiency and firm valuation. J. Corporate Finance 11, 253–275. 
Megginson, W.L., Morgan, A., Nail, L., 2003. The determinants of positive long-term performance in strategic mergers: 
corporate focus and cash. J. Banking Finance 28, 523–552. 
Meier, O., Schier, G., 2014. Family firm succession: lessons from failures in external party takeovers. J. Fam. Business 
Strategy 5, 372–383. 
Mercer, C., 1997. The Management Panning Study: Quantifying Marketability Discounts. Peabody, New York. 
Metrick, A., Yasuda, A., 2010. The economics of private equity funds. Rev. Financial Stud. 23, 2303–2341. 
Meuleman, M., Wright, M., 2007. Industry concentration, syndication networks and competition in the UK private 
equity market. CMBOR Working Paper.
Meuleman, M., Amess, K., Wright, M., Scholes, L., 2009. Agency, strategic entrepreneurship, and the performance of 
private equity-backed buyouts. Entrepreneurship Theory Pract. 33, 213–239. 
Milano, M., Campa, D., 2014. Integrity of financial information as a determinant of the outcome of a bankruptcy 
procedure. Int. Rev. Law Econ. 37, 70–85. 
Miletkov, M., Poulsen, A., Wintoki, M., 2014. The role of corporate bard structure in attracting foreign investors. 
J. Corporate Finance 29, 143–157. 
Miller, W., 2010. Value Maps: Valuation Tools That Unlock Business Wealth. Wiley, New York. 
Miller, M., 2012. The rich get richer. The Deal, May 12, p. 38.
Mitchell, D., 1998. Survey conducted by Economist Intelligence Unit. In: Lajoux, A.R. (Ed.), The Art of M&A Integration. 
McGraw-Hill, New York, pp. 226–228. 
Mitchell, M.L., Pulvino, T.C., 2001. Characteristics of risk and return in arbitrage. J. Finance 56, 2135–2175. 
Mitchell, M., Pulvino, T., Stafford, E., 2004. Price pressure around mergers. J. Finance 59, 31–63. 
Moeller, T., 2005. Let’s make a deal! How shareholder control impacts merger payoffs. J. Financial Econ. 76, 
167–190. 
Moeller, S.B., Schlingemann, P., 2005. Global diversification and bidder gains: a comparison between cross-border 
and domestic acquisitions. J. Banking Finance 29, 533–564. 
Moeller, S.B., Schlingemann, F.P., Stulz, R.M., 2004. Firm size and the gains from acquisitions. J. Financial Econ. 73, 
201–228. 

	
REFERENCES	
713
Moeller, S.B., Schlingemann, F.P., Stulz, R.M., 2005. Wealth destruction on a massive scale? A study of the acquiring 
firm returns in the recent merger wave. J. Finance 60, 757–782. 
Moeller, S.B., Schlingemann, F.P., Stulz, R.M., 2007. How do diversity of opinion and information asymmetry affect 
acquirer returns? Rev. Financial Stud. 20, 2047–2078. 
Molina, C.A., 2006. Are firms unleveraged? An examination of the effect of leverage on default probabilities. 
J. Finance 60, 1427–1459. 
Morgan, J.P., 1999. Monitoring Spin-Off Performances. Morgan Markets, New York. 
Moroney, R.E., 1973. Most courts overvalue closely held stocks. Taxes, March, pp. 144–154.
Moschieri, C., Campa, J., 2014. New trends in mergers and acquisitions: idiosyncrasies of the European market. J. 
Business Res. 67, 1478–1485. 
Mousavi, M., Oueniche, J., Xu, B., 2015. Evaluation of bankruptcy prediction models: an orientation-free super ef­
ficiency DEA based framework. Int. Rev. Financial Anal. 42, 64–75. 
Mukherji, A., Mukherji, J., Dibrell, C., Francis, J., 2015. Overbidding in cross-border acquisitions: misperceptions in 
assessing and valuing knowledge. J. World Business 48, 39–46. 
Mulherin, J.H., Boone, A.L. 2000. Comparing acquisitions and divestitures. Social Science Research Network 38. 
Working Paper Series.
Mulherin, J.H., Poulsen, A.B., 1998. Proxy contests and corporate change: implications for shareholder wealth. J. 
Financial Econ. 47, 279–313. 
Mun, J., 2006. Modeling Risk: Applying Monte Carlo Simulation, Real Option Analysis, Forecasting, and Optimization. 
Wiley, New York. 
Murray, M., 2001. GE’s Honeywell deal is more than the sum of airplane parts. Wall Street Journal, April 5, p. B6.
Navarro, E., 2005. Merger Control in the EU: Law, Economics, and Practice, second ed. Oxford University Press, 
Oxford, UK. 
Nenova, T., 2003. The value of corporate voting rights and control: a cross-country analysis. J. Financ. Econ. 68, 
325–351. 
Netter, J., Stegemoller, M., Wintoki, M., 2011. Implications of data screens on merger and acquisition analysis: a large 
sample study of mergers and acquisitions. Rev. Financial Stud. 24, 2316–2357. 
Newbould, G.D., Chatfield, R.E., Anderson, R.F., 1992. Leveraged buyouts and tax incentives. Financial Manage. 21, 
1621–1637. 
Nguyen, N., 2014. On the compensation and activity of corporate boards. J. Corporate Finance 29, 1–19. 
Nielsen, A.C., 2002. Retailer Support Is Essential for New Product Success. Available from: www.bases.com/news/
news112002.html
Nixon, T.D., Roenfeldt, R.L., Sicherman, N.W., 2000. The choice between spin-offs and sell-offs. Rev. Quant. Finance 
Accounting 14, 277–288. 
Norback, P., Persson, L., Tag, J., 2014. Acquisitions, entry, and innovation in oligopolistic network industries. Int. J. 
Ind. Organ. 37, 1–12. 
Oded, A., Michel, A., Weinstein, S., 2011. Distortion in corporate valuation: implications for capital structure changes. 
Managerial Finance 37, 681–696. 
Ofek, E., 1993. Capital structure and firm response to poor performance: an empirical analysis. J. Financial Econ. 34, 3–30. 
Ofek, E., 1994. Efficiency gains in unsuccessful management buyouts. J. Finance 49, 627–654. 
Offenberg, D., 2009. Firm size and the effectiveness of the market for corporate control. J. Corporate Finance 15, 66–79. 
Offenberg, D., Officer, M., 2014. The totality of change-in-control payments. J. Corporate Finance 29, 75–87. 
Offenberg, D., Pirinsky, C., 2015. How do acquirers choose between mergers and tender offers? J. Financial Econ. 
116, 331–348. 
Officer, M.S., 2003. Termination fees in mergers and acquisitions. J. Financial Econ. 69, 431–467. 
Officer, M.S., 2004. Collars and renegotiation in mergers and acquisitions. J. Finance 59, 2719–2743. 
Officer, M.S., 2007. The price of corporate liquidity: acquisition discounts for unlisted targets. J. Financial Econ. 83, 
571–593. 
Officer, M.S., Ozbas, O., Sensoy, B.A., 2008. Club deals in leveraged buyouts. J. Financial Econ. 98, 214–240. 
Officer, M.S., Poulsen, A.B., Stegemoller, M., 2009. Information asymmetry and acquirer returns. Rev. Finance 13, 
467–493. 
Oliver, R.P., Meyers, R.H., 2000. Discounts seen in private placements of restricted stock. In: Reilly, R.F., Schweihs, 
R.P. (Eds.), Handbook of Advanced Business Valuation. McGraw-Hill, New York, (Chapter 5). 
Oppenheimer & Company, 1981. The Sum of the Parts. Oppenheimer & Company, New York. 

714	
REFERENCES
Otsubo, M., 2009. Gains from equity carve-outs and subsequent events. J. Business 62, 1207–1213. 
Otsubo, M., 2013. Value creation from financing in equity carve-outs: evidence from Japan. J. Econ. Business 68, 52–69. 
Ouyang, W., Zhu, P., 2016. An international study of shareholder protection in freeze-out M&A transactions. Int. 
Rev. Financial Anal. 45, 157–171. 
Overesch, M., 2009. The effects of multinational profit-shifting activities on real investment. Natl. Tax J. 62, 5–23. 
Ovtchinnikov, A.V., 2013. Merger waves following industry deregulation. J. Corp. Financ. 31, 51–76. 
Ovthinnikov, A.V., 2013. Merger waves following industry deregulation. J. Corporate Finance 31, 51–76. 
Paglia, J., Harjoto, M., 2014. The effects of private equity and venture capital on sales and employment growth in 
small and medium-sized businesses. J. Banking Finance 47, 177–197. 
Palepu, K.G., Healy, P.M., Bernard, V.L., 2004. Business Analysis and Valuation, third ed. Thomson, Skokie, IL. 
Palter, R.N., Srinivasan, D., 2006. Habits of the busiest acquirers. McKinsey Quarterly. <https://www.mckinseyquarterly.
com/home.aspxy>.
Pan, Y., Li, S., Tse, D., 1999. The impact of order and mode of entry on profitability and market share. J. Int. Business 
Stud. 30, 81–104. 
Parfomak, P., 2011. Keeping American Pipelines Safe And Secure: Key Issues in Congress. Congressional Research 
Service, Washington, DC, pp. 7–5700. 
Park, W., Sonenshine, R., 2012. Impact of horizontal mergers on research & development and patenting: evidence 
from major challenges in the U.S. J. Ind. Competitive Trade 12, 143–167. 
Pasal, F., Instefjord, N., 2013. Corporate governance and the cost of borrowing. J. Business Finance Accounting 40, 918–948. 
Pehrsson, A., 2008. Strategy antecedents of mode of entry into foreign markets. J. Business Res. 61, 132–140. 
Pergola, T.M., 2005. Management entrenchment: can it negate the effectiveness of recently legislated governance 
reforms? J. Am. Acad. Business 6, 177–185. 
Petmezas, D., 2009. What drives acquisitions? Market valuations and bidder performance. J. Multinational Financial 
Manage. 19, 54–74. 
Petty, J.W., Keown, A.J., Scott, Jr., D.F., Martin, J.D., 1993. Basic Financial Management, sixth ed. Prentice-Hall, Engle­
wood Cliffs, NJ, p. 798. 
Pinkowitz, L., 2002. The market for corporate control and corporate cash holdings. Working Paper. Georgetown 
University.
Pinkowitz, L., Sturgess, J., Williamson, R., 2013. Do cash stockpiles fuel cash acquisitions? J. Corporate Finance 23, 
128–149. 
Platt, D., Platt, B., Yang, Z., 1999. Probabilistic neural networks in bankruptcy prediction. J. Business Res. 44, 67–74. 
Poldolski, J., Truong, C., Veeraraghavan, M., 2016. Cash holdings and bond returns around takeovers. Int. Rev. 
Financ. Anal. 46, 1–11. 
Pololsky, J., Truong, C., Veeraraghavan, M., 2016. Cash holdings and bond returns around takeovers. Int. Rev. Financial 
Anal. 46, 1–11. 
Porter, M.E., 1985. Competitive Advantage. Free Press, New York. 
Poulsen, A., Stegemoller, M., 2002. Transitions from private to public ownership. Working Paper. University of Georgia.
Povel, P., Sertsios, G., 2014. Getting to know each other: the role of toeholds in acquisitions. J. Corporate Finance 26, 
201–224. 
Powers, E.A., 2003. Deciphering the motives for equity carve-outs. J. Financial Res. 26 (1), 31–50. 
Pratt, S., Niculita, A., 2008. Valuing a Business: The Analysis and Appraisal of Closely Held Businesses. McGraw-Hill, 
New York. 
Prezas, A., Simmonyan, K., 2015. Corporate divestitures: spin-offs vs. sell-offs. J. Corporate Finance 34, 83–107. 
Prezas, A., Tarmicilar, M., Vasudevan, G., 2000. The pricing of equity carve-outs. Financial Rev. 35, 123–138. 
PriceWaterhouseCoopers, Mergers and Acquisitions, 2015. PriceWaterhouseCoopers, Mergers and Acquisitions 
2015: A Global Tax Guide. Wiley, New York. 
Rabbiosi, L., Elia, S., Bertoni, F., 2012. Acquisitions by EMNCs in developed markets: an organizational learning 
perspective. Manage. Int. Rev. 52, 192–212. 
Rahma, N., Korn, H., 2014. Alliance longevity: examining relational and operational antecedents. Long Range Plan. 
47, 245–261. 
Rahman, M., Lambkin, M., Hussain, D., 2016. Value creation and appropriation following M&A: a data envelopment 
analysis. J. Business Res. 69, 5628–5635. 
Rajan, U., Seru, A., Vig, V., 2014. The failure of models that predict failure: distance, incentives, and defaults. J. Finan­
cial Econ. 115, 237–260. 

	
REFERENCES	
715
Rao-Nicholson, R., Kahn, Z., Stokes, P., 2016. Making great minds think alike: emerging multinational firms’ leader­
ship affects target employee psychological safety after cross-border mergers and acquisitions. Int. Business Rev. 
25, 103–113. 
Rappaport, A., 1990. The staying power of the public corporation. Harv. Business Rev. 76, 1–4. 
Rau, P.R., Vermaelen, T., 1998. Glamour, value, and the post-acquisition performance of acquiring firms. J. Financial 
Econ. 49, 223–253. 
Rau, R., Xu, J., 2013. How do ex ante severance pay contracts fit into optimal executive incentive schemes. J. Accounting 
Res. 51, 631–671. 
Ravenscraft, D., Scherer, F., 1987. Life after takeovers. J. Ind. Econ. 36, 147–156. 
Ravenscraft, D., Scherer, F., 1988. Mergers and managerial performance. In: Coffee, J., Lowenstein, L., Ackerman, S.R. 
(Eds.), Knights and Targets. Oxford University Press, New York, pp. 194–210. 
Ravenscraft, D.J., Scherer, F.M., 1991. Divisional sell-off: a hazard function analysis. Managerial Decis. Econ. 12, 
429–438. 
Rehm, W., Uhlaner, R., West, A., 2012. Taking a longer-term look at M&A value creation. McKinsey Quarterly, January. 
<http://www.mckinseyquarterly.com/article_print.aspx?L2=5&L3=4&ar=2916>.
Reisel, N., 2014. On the value of restrictive covenants: empirical investigation of public bond issues. J. Corporate 
Finance 27, 251–268. 
Renneboog, L., Szilagyi, P., 2007. Corporate restructuring and bondholder wealth. Eur. Financial Manage. 14, 792–819. 
Renneboog, L., Zhao, Y., 2013. Director networks and takeovers. J. Corporate Finance 17, 1068–1077. 
Renneboog, L., Simons, T., Wright, M., 2007. Why do public firms go private in the U.K.? J. Corporate Finance 13, 
591–628. 
Rhahman, M., 2013. Do managerial behaviors trigger firm exit? The case of hyperactive bidders. Q. Rev. Econ. 
Finance 54 (1), 92–110. 
Rhodes-Kropf, M., Viswanathan, S., 2004. Market valuation and merger waves. J. Finance 59, 2685–2718. 
Ritter, J., 1991. The long-run performance of initial public offerings. J. Finance 46, 3–27. 
Robinson, A., 2002a. Is corporate governance the solution or the problem? Corporate Board 23, 12–16. 
Robinson, D.T., 2002b. Strategic alliances and the boundaries of the firm. Working Paper. Columbia University.
Robinson, D.T., Sensoy, B.A., 2011. Cyclicality, performance measurement, and cash flow liquidity in private equity. 
NBER Working Paper 17428. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Rodregues, U., Stegemoller, M., 2014. What all-cash companies tell us about IPOs and acquisitions. J. Corporate 
Finance 29, 111–121. 
Romano, R., 2001. Less is more: making institutional investor activism a valuable mechanism of corporate 
governance. Yale J. Regul. 18, 174–251. 
Rosenfeld, C., 2014. The effect of banking relationships on the future of financially distressed firms. J. Corporate 
Finance 25, 403–418. 
Ross, S., Westerfield, R., Jaffe, J., 2008. Corporate Finance, eighth ed. McGraw-Hill, New York. 
Rowoldt, M., Starke, D., 2016. The role of governments in hostile takeovers. Int. Rev. Law Econ. 47, 1–15. 
RSM McGladrey, Inc., 2011. Maximizing investments in an evolving market. Managing Portfolio Investments Survey, 
Los Angeles.
Ruback, R.S., 2002. Capital cash flows: a simple approach to valuing risky cash flows. Financial Manage. 31, 85–103. 
Rudolph, C., Schwetzler, B., 2014. Mountain or molehill? Downward biases in the conglomerate discount. J. Banking 
Finance 40, 420–431. 
Ryngaert, M., 1988. The effects of poison pill securities on stockholder wealth. J. Financial Econ. 20, 377–417. 
Salihu, I., Annuar, H., Obid, S., 2015. Foreign investors’ interests and corporate tax avoidance: evidence from an 
emerging economy. J. Contemp. Accounting Econ. 11, 138–147. 
Sandler, L., 2013. Lehman bankruptcy advisory fees top $2 billion. Bloomberg News, January 31. <http://www.
bloomberg.com/news/2013-01-31/lehman-bankruptcy-fees-expenses-top-2-billion.html>.
Sarin, N., Summers, L., 2016. Have big banks gotten safer? Brookings Papers Economic Activity, Fall Edition, 57–127. 
Scherreik, S., 2002. Gems among the trash. Business Week, vol. XX, pp. 112–113.
Schleifer, A., Vishny, R.W., 2003. Stock market–driven acquisitions. J. Financial Econ. 70, 295–311. 
Schlingemann, F., Wu, H., 2015. Determinants of shareholder wealth effects of the sales method in acquisition. J. 
Banking Finance 59, 469–485. 
Schmidt, B., 2015. Costs and benefits of friendly boards during mergers and acquisitions. J. Financial Econ. 117, 
424–447. 

716	
REFERENCES
Schultes, R., 2010. AB InBev shines in tough times. Wall Street Journal, November 12, p. C7.
Schweiger, D.M., 2002. M&A Integration: Framework for Executives and Managers. McGraw-Hill, New York. 
Schwert, G., 2000. Hostility in takeovers: in the eyes of the bidder? J. Finance 55, 2599–2640. 
Selim, G., 2003. Mergers, Acquisitions and Divestitures: Control and Audit Best Practices. Institute of Internal Audit­
ing Research Foundation, New York. 
Sender, H., 2006. High-risk debt still has allure for buyout deals. Wall Street Journal, p. C2.
Seoungpil, A., Denis, D.J., 2004. Internal capital market and investment policy: evidence of corporate spin-offs. 
J. Financial Econ. 71, 489–516. 
Seru, A., 2014. Firm boundaries matter: evidence from conglomerates and R&D. Activity J. Financial Econ. 111, 
381–405. 
Servaes, H., Zenner, M., 1994. Taxes and the returns to foreign acquisitions in the U.S. Financial Manage. 23, 42–56. 
Seth, A., Song, K.P., Petit, R., 2000. Synergy, managerialism or hubris: an empirical examination of motives for foreign 
acquisitions of U.S. firms. J. Int. Business Stud. 31, 387–405. 
Shahrur, H., 2005. Industry structure and horizontal takeovers: analysis of wealth effects on rivals, suppliers, and 
corporate customers. J. Financial Econ. 76, 61–98. 
Shams, S., Gunasekarage, A., 2016. Operating performance following corporate acquisitions: does the organizational 
form of the target matter? J. Contemp. Accounting Econ. 12, 1–14. 
Shapovalova, K., Subbotin, A., 2011. Value and Size Puzzles: A Survey. <http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.
cfm?abstract_id=1770626>.
Sherman, A., 2006. Mergers and Acquisitions From A to Z: Strategic and Practical Guidance for Small- and Middle-
Market Buyers and Sellers, second ed. AMACOM, New York. 
Sherman, D.H., Young, S.D., 2001. Tread lightly through these accounting minefields. Harv. Business Rev. 79, 129–137. 
Shin, H.H., Stulz, R., 1998. Are internal capital markets efficient? Q. J. Econ. 113, 531–552. 
Shumsky, T., Francis, T., 2016. Accounting choices blur accounting picture. Wall Street Journal, June 28.
Shuttleworth, R., 2004. Twelve Keys to Venture Capital Tech Coast Angels. <http://techcoastangels.com>.
Sikes, S., Tian, X., Wilson, R., 2014. Investors’ reaction to the use of poison pills as a tax loss preservation tool. J. 
Accounting Econ. 57, 132–148. 
Silber, W.L., 1991. Discounts on restricted stocks: the impact of illiquidity on stock prices. Financial Analysts J. 47, 
60–64. 
Simonyan, K., 2014. What determines takeover premia: an empirical analysis. J. Econ. Business 75, 93–125. 
Singh, H., Montgomery, C., 2008. Corporate acquisition strategies and economic performance. Strategic Manage. J. 
8, 377–386. 
Sirower, M., 1997. The Synergy Trap. Free Press, New York. 
Skantz, T., Marchesini, R., 1987. The effect of voluntary corporate liquidation on shareholder wealth. J. Financial Res. 
10, 65–75. 
Slovin, M.B., Sushka, M.E., Polonchek, J.A., 2005. Methods of payment in asset sales: contracting with equity versus 
cash. J. Finance 60, 2385–2407. 
Smith, A., 1990. Corporate ownership structure and performance: the case of management buy-outs. J. Financial 
Econ. 27, 143–164. 
Sojli, E., Tham, W., 2010. The impact of foreign government investments: sovereign wealth fund investments in the 
U.S. In: Cosset, J., Boubakri, N. (Eds.), Institutional Investors in Global Capital Markets (International Finance 
Review, 12). Emerald Group Publishing Limited, United Kingdom. 
Song, W., Wei, J., Zhou, L., 2013. The value of boutique financial advisors in mergers and acquisitions. J. Corporate 
Finance 20, 94–114. 
Sorensen, M., Wang, N., Yang, J., 2014. Valuing private equity. NBER Working Paper No. 19612. Available from: 
<http://ssrn.com/abstract=2352129>.
Souther, M., 2016. The effects of takeover defenses: evidence from closed end funds. J. Financial Econ. 119, 420–440. 
Srikant, D., Frankel, R., Wolfson, M., 2001. Earnouts: the effects of adverse selection and agency costs on acquisition 
techniques. J. Law Econ. Organ. 17, 201–238. 
Standard Research Consultants, 1983. Revenue ruling 77-287 revisited. SRC Quarterly Reports, pp. 1–3.
Stout, L.A., 2002. Do antitakeover defenses decrease shareholder wealth? The ex post/ex ante valuation problem. 
Stanford Law Rev. 55, 845–861. 
Stromberg, P., 2008. The new demography of private equity. Globalization of alternative investments. The Global 
Economic Impact of Private Equity Report. World Economic Forum, vol. 1, pp. 3–26. Working paper.

	
REFERENCES	
717
Stromberg, P., Hotchkiss, E., Smith, D., 2011. Private Equity and the Resolution of Financial Distress, April 7. <http://
ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_1787446>.
Stulz, R.M., 1995a. Globalization of the capital markets and the cost of capital: the case of Nestle. J. Appl. Corporate 
Finance 8, 30–38. 
Stulz, R.M., 1995b. The cost of capital in internationally integrated markets: the case of Nestle. Eur. Financial Manage. 
1, 11–22. 
Stulz, R.M., Wasserfallen, W., 1995. Foreign equity invest restrictions, capital flight, and shareholder wealth maximi­
zation: theory and evidence. Rev. Financial Stud. 8, 1019–1057. 
Subramanian, G., 2010. Negotiauctions: Deal-Making Strategies for a Competitive Market Place. W.W. Norton, New 
York. 
Sweeney, P., 2005. Gap. Financial Executives Magazine, pp. 33–40.
Tarsalewska, M., 2015. The timing of mergers along the production chain, capital structure, and risk dynamics. 
J. Banking Finance 57, 51–64. 
Tashjian, E., Lease, R., McConnell, J.J., 1996. Prepacks: an empirical analysis of prepackaged bankruptcies. J. Financial 
Econ. 40, 135–162. 
Thenmozhi, M., Narayanan, P., 2016. Rule of law or country level corporate governance: what matters more in 
emerging market acquisitions? Res. Int. Business Finance 37, 448–463. 
Thompson, T.H., Apilado, V., 2009. An examination of the impact of equity carve-outs on stockholder and bond­
holder wealth. J. Econ. Business 61, 376–391. 
Thompson Financial Securities Data Corporation, 2000. The World’s Urge to Merge. Press release, January 5.
Tinoco, M., Wilson, N., 2013. Financial distress and bankruptcy prediction among listed companies using accounting, 
market and macroeconomic variables. Int. Rev. Financial Anal. 27, 77–90. 
Titman, S., Martin, J., 2010. Valuation: The Art and Science of Corporate Investment Decisions, second ed. Prentice-
Hall, Boston, pp. 144–147. 
Travlos, N.G., Cornett, M.N., 1993. Going private buyouts and determinants of shareholders’ returns. J. Accounting 
Auditing Finance 8, 1–25. 
Truitt, W.B., 2006. The Corporation. Greenwood Press, Westport, CT. 
Tykova, T., Borell, M., 2011. Do Private Equity Owners Increase Risk of Financial Distress and Bankruptcy? November 2. 
<papers.ssrn.com/sol13/papers.cfm?abstract_1987639>.
U.S. Attorney General, 2000. Global antitrust regulation: issues and solutions. Final Report of the International Com­
petition Policy Advisory Committee.
U.S. Department of Justice, 1999. Antitrust Division. <www.usdoj.gov>.
U.S. General Accountability Office, 2008. Private Equity: Real Growth in Leveraged Buyouts Exposes Risk. GAO-08-885.
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, 2012. Work plan for the consideration of incorporating international fi­
nancial reporting standards in the financial reporting system for U.S. issuers. Final Staff Report, Office of the 
Chief Accountant, July 13.
U.S. Small Business Administration, 1999. Financial Difficulties of Small Businesses and Reasons for Their Failure 
Office of Advocacy, RS 188.
U.S. Small Business Administration, 2003. State Small Business Profile. Office of Advocacy: RS 203.
Uhlaner, R.T., West, A.S., 2008. Running a winning M&A shop. McKinsey Quarterly. <mckinseyquarterly.com>.
United States v. Primestar, L.P., 58 Fed Register, 33944, June 22, 1993 (Proposed Final Judgment and Competitive 
Impact Study).
Uysal, V., 2011. Deviation from the target capital structure and acquisition choices. J. Financial Econ. 102, 602–620. 
Vachon, M., 1993. Venture capital reborn. Venture Capital Journal, p. 32.
Vagenas-Nanos, E., 2016. Mergers and acquisitions in frontier markets: a comparative analysis. Andrikopoulos, P., 
Gregoriou, G., Kallinterakis, V. (Eds.), Handbook of Frontier Markets: Evidence From the Middle East, North 
Africa, and International Comparative Studies, vol. 2, Elsevier, Holland (Chapter 15). 
Valkama, P., Maula, M., Nikoskelainen, E., Wright, M., 2013. Driver of holding period firm-level returns in private 
equity-backed buyouts. J. Banking Finance 37, 2378–2391. 
Vasconcellos, G.M., Kish, R.J., 1998. Cross-border mergers and acquisitions: the European–U.S. experience. J. Multi­
national Financial Manage. 8, 173–189. 
Veld, C., Veld-Merkoulova, Y., 2004. Do spin-offs really create value? J. Banking Finance 28, 1111–1135. 
Velikonja, U., 2016. Reporting agency performance: behind the SEC’s enforcement statistics. Cornell Law Rev. 901, 
101. 

718	
REFERENCES
Vermaelen, T., Xu, M., 2014. Acquisition finance and market timing. J. Corporate Finance 25, 73–91. 
Vijh, A.M., 1999. Long-term returns from equity carve-outs. J. Financial Econ. 51, 273–308. 
Vijh, A.M., 2002. The positive announcement period returns of equity carve-outs: asymmetric information or 
divestiture gains. J. Business 75, 153–190. 
Vijh, A., Yang, K., 2013. Are small firms less vulnerable to overpriced stock offers? J. Financial Econ. 110, 61–86. 
Villalonga, B., 2004. Diversification discount or premium? New evidence from the business information tracking 
series. J. Finance 59, 479–506. 
Vladimirov, V., 2015. Financing bidders in takeover contests. J. Financial Econ. 117, 534–557. 
Volkov, I., 2016. The choice of sale method and its consequences in mergers and acquisitions. Q. Rev. Econ. Finance 
63, 170–184. 
Volkov, N., Smith, G., 2015. Corporate diversification and firm value during economic downturns. Q. Rev. Econ. 
Finance 55, 160–175. 
Wagner, H.F., 2004. The equity carve-out decision. Working Paper. University of Munich.
Weifeng, W., Zhaoguo, Z., Shasa, Z., 2008. Ownership structure and the private benefits of control: an analysis of 
Chinese firms. Corporate Governance 8, 286–298. 
Weir, C., Liang, D., Wright, M., 2005. Incentive effects, monitoring mechanisms and the threat from the market for 
corporate control: an analysis of the factors affecting public to private transactions in the U.K. J. Business Finance 
Accounting 32, 909–944. 
Weir, C., Jones, P., Wright, M., 2007. Public to private transactions, private equity and performance in the UK: an 
empirical analysis of the impact of going private. Working Paper. Nottingham University, UK.
White, M., 1989. The corporate bankruptcy decision. J. Econ. Perspect. 3, 129–152. 
White, E., Joann, S., 2007. Companies trim executive perks to avoid glare. Wall Street Journal, vol. 13, p. A1.
Wiltbank, R., Boeker, W., 2007. Returns to Angel Investors in Groups. Marian Ewing Foundation and Angel Capital 
Education Foundation, Kansas City, Missouri. 
Wright, M.N.W., Robbie, K., 1996. The longer-term effects of management-led buyouts. J. Entrepreneurial Small 
Business Finance 5, 213–234. 
Wright, M., Burros, A., Ball, R., Scholes, L., Meuleman, M., Amess, K., 2008. The Implications of Alternative Invest­
ment Vehicles for Corporate Governance: A Survey of Empirical Research. Organization for Economic Coopera­
tion and Development. Available from: www.oecd,org/daf/corporate-affairs
Wruck, K.H., 1989. Equity ownership concentration and firm value: evidence from private equity financing. J. Finan­
cial Econ. 23, 3–28. 
Wruck, K.H., Yilin, W., 2009. Relationships, corporate governance, and performance: evidence from private place­
ments of common stock. J. Corporate Finance 15, 30–47. 
Wu, Y.L., 2004. The choice of equity-selling mechanisms. J. Financial Econ. 74, 93–119. 
Wulf, J., 2004. Do CEOs in mergers trade power for premium? Evidence from mergers of equals. J. Law Organ. 20, 60. 
Wulf, J., Rajan, R., 2003. The flattening firm: evidence from panel data on the changing nature of corporate hierar­
chies. Working Paper. University of Chicago.
Yago, G., Bonds, J., 1991. How High-Yield Securities Restructured Corporate America. Oxford University Press, New York. 
Yen, T., Andre, P., 2010. Long-Term Operating Performance of Acquiring Firms in Emerging Markets: The Corporate 
Governance Issue, August 22. <http://ssrn.com/abstract=1663287>.
Yilmaz, I., Tanyeri, B., 2016. Global mergers and acquisition activity: 1992–2011. Finance Res. Lett. 17, 1–9. 
Yim, S., 2013. The acquisitiveness of youth: CEO age and acquisition behavior. J. Financial Econ. 108, 250–273. 
Zahra, S., Elhagrasey, G., 1994. Strategic management of international joint ventures. Eur. Manage. J. 12, 83–93. 
Zahra, S.A., Ireland, R.D., Hitt, M.A., 2000. International expansion by new venture firms: international, mode of 
market entry, technological learning and performance. Acad. Manage. J. 19, 244–257. 
Zhao, J., 2013. Entrenchment or incentive? CEO employment contracts and acquisition decisions. J. Corporate 
Finance 22, 124–152. 
Zhou, L., Lu, D., Fujita, H., 2015. The performance of corporate financial distress prediction models guided by 
domain knowledge and data mining approaches. Knowl. Based Syst. 85, 52–61. 
Zingales, L., 1995. What determines the value of corporate control? Q. J. Econ. 110, 1047–1073. 
Zodrow, G., 2010. Capital mobility and national tax competition. Natl. Tax J. 63, 865–902. 
Zola, M., Meier, D., 2008. What is M&A performance? Acad. Manage. Perspect. 22, 55–77. 
Zuckerman, G., Sender, H., Patterson, S., 2007. Hedge fund crowd sees more green as fortress hits jackpot with IPO. 
Wall Street Journal, p. A1.

719
﻿﻿
﻿
Abnormal return  The return to shareholders due to nonrecurring events that differs from what would have been 
predicted by the market. It is the return due to an event such as a merger or an acquisition.
Acquirer  A firm that attempts to acquire a controlling interest in another company.
Acquisition  The purchase by one company of a controlling ownership interest in another firm, a legal subsidiary of 
another firm, or selected assets of another firm.
Acquisition vehicle  The legal structure used to acquire another company.
Arbitrageurs (“arbs”)  In the context of M&As, arbs are speculators who attempt to profit from the difference 
between the bid price and the target firm’s current share price.
Asset impairment  An asset is said to be impaired according to FASB Statement 142 if its fair value falls below its 
book or carrying value.
Asset purchases  Transactions in which the acquirer buys all or a portion of the target company’s assets and assumes 
all, some, or none of the target’s liabilities.
Asymmetric information  Information about a firm that is not equally available to managers as well as shareholders.
Back-end merger  The merger following either a single- or two-tier tender offer consisting of either a long-form or 
short-form merger, with the latter not requiring a target firm shareholder vote.
Bankruptcy  A federal legal proceeding designed to protect the technically or legally insolvent firm from lawsuits by 
its creditors until a decision can be made either to shut down or to continue to operate the firm.
Bear hug  A takeover tactic involving the mailing of a letter containing an acquisition proposal to the board of 
directors of a target company without prior warning and demanding a rapid decision.
Beta  A measure of nondiversifiable risk or the extent to which a firm’s (or asset’s) return changes because of a 
change in the market’s return.
Boot  The nonequity portion of a purchase price.
Breakup fee  A fee that will be paid to a potential acquirer if a target firm decides to accept an alternative bid. Also 
called a termination fee.
Bridge financing  Temporary unsecured short-term loans provided by investment banks to pay all or a portion of 
the purchase price and meet immediate working capital requirements until permanent or long-term financing is 
found.
Business alliance  A generic term referring to all forms of business combinations other than mergers and acquisitions.
Business strategy or model  That portion of a business plan detailing the way the firm intends to achieve its vision.
Buyout  Change in controlling interest in a corporation.
Capital asset pricing model  A framework for measuring the relationship between expected risk and return.
Capitalization multiple  The multiple estimated by dividing 1 by the estimated discount or capitalization rate that 
can be used to estimate the value of a business by multiplying it by an indicator of value, such as free cash flow.
Capitalization rate  The discount rate used by practitioners if the cash flows of a firm are not expected to grow or are 
expected to grow at a constant rate indefinitely.
Cash-for-assets  An acquisition in which the acquirer pays cash for the seller’s assets and may choose to accept some 
or all of the seller’s liabilities.
Cash-out statutory merger  A merger in which the shareholders of the selling firm receive cash or some form of 
nonvoting investment (e.g., debt or nonvoting preferred or common stock) for their shares.
Certificate of incorporation  A document received from the state once the articles of incorporation have been 
approved.
Classified board election  An antitakeover defense involving the separation of a firm’s board into several classes, 
only one of which is up for election at any one point in time. Also called a staggered board.
Closing  The phase of the acquisition process in which ownership is transferred from the target to the acquiring firm 
in exchange for some agreed-on consideration following the receipt of all necessary shareholder, regulatory, and 
third-party approvals.
Closing conditions  Stipulations that must be satisfied before closing can take place.
Collar agreement  An arrangement providing for certain changes in the share exchange ratio contingent on the level 
of the acquirer’s share price around the effective date of the merger.
Glossary

720	
Glossary
Common-size financial statements  Financial statements calculated by taking each line item as a percentage of 
revenue.
Composition  An agreement in which creditors consent to settling for less than the full amount they are owed.
Confidentiality agreement  A mutually binding accord defining how information exchanged among the parties may 
be used and the circumstances under which the discussions may be made public. Also known as a nondisclosure 
agreement.
Conglomerate mergers  Transactions in which the acquiring company purchases firms in largely unrelated 
industries.
Consent decree  Requires the merging parties to divest overlapping businesses or restrict anticompetitive practices.
Consent solicitation  A process enabling dissident shareholders in certain states to obtain shareholder support for 
their proposals by simply obtaining their written consent.
Consolidation  A business combination involving two or more companies joining to form a new company, in which 
none of the combining firms survive.
Constant-growth model  A valuation method that assumes that cash flow will grow at a constant rate.
Contingent value rights (CVR)  Commitments by an issuing company to pay additional cash or securities to the 
holder of the CVR if the share price of the issuing company falls below a specified level at some future date.
Control premium  The excess over a target’s current share price the acquirer is willing to pay to gain a controlling 
interest. A pure control premium is one in which the anticipated synergies are small and the perceived value of 
the purchase is in gaining control to direct the activities of the target firm.
Corporate bylaws  Rules governing the internal management of a corporation that are determined by the 
corporation’s founders.
Corporate charters  A state license defining the powers of a firm and the rights and responsibilities of its shareholders, 
board of directors, and managers. The charter consists of articles of incorporation and a certificate of incorporation.
Corporate governance  The systems and controls in place to protect the rights of corporate stakeholders.
Corporate restructuring  Actions taken to expand or contract a firm’s basic operations or fundamentally change its 
asset or financial structure.
Cost leadership  A strategy designed to make a firm the cost leader in its market by constructing efficient production 
facilities, tightly controlling overhead expense, and eliminating marginally profitable customer accounts.
Cram down  A legal reorganization occurring whenever one or more classes of creditors or shareholders approve, 
even though others may not.
Cumulative voting rights  In an election for a board of directors, each shareholder is entitled to as many votes as equal 
the number of shares the shareholder owns multiplied by the number of directors to be elected. Furthermore, the 
shareholder may cast all of these votes for a single candidate or any two or more of them.
Debt-for-equity swap  Creditors surrender a portion of their claims on a firm in exchange for an ownership position 
in the firm.
Debtor-in-possession  On the filing of a reorganization petition, the firm’s current management remains in place to 
conduct the ongoing affairs of the firm.
Destroyers of value  Factors that can reduce the future cash flow of combined companies.
Discounted cash flow  The conversion of future to current cash flows by applying an appropriate discount rate.
Discount rate  The opportunity cost associated with investment in a firm used to convert the projected cash flows 
to present values.
Diversifiable risk  The risk specific to an individual firm, such as strikes and lawsuits.
Diversification  A strategy of buying firms outside of the company’s primary line of business.
Divestiture  The sale of all or substantially all of a company or product line to another party for cash or securities.
Dual class recapitalization  A takeover defense in which a firm issues multiple classes of stock in which one class has 
voting rights that are 10 to 100 times those of another class. Such stock is also called supervoting stock.
Due diligence  The process by which an acquirer seeks to determine the accuracy of a target’s financial statements, 
evaluate the firm’s operations, validate valuation assumptions, determine fatal flaws, and identify sources and 
destroyers of value.
Earnouts  Payments to a seller based on the acquired business’s achieving certain profit or revenue targets.
Economic value  The present value of a firm’s projected cash flows.
Economies of scale  The spreading of fixed costs over increasing production levels.
Economies of scope  The use of a specific set of skills or an asset currently used to produce a specific product to 
produce related products.

	
Glossary	
721
Effective control  Control achieved when one firm has purchased another firm’s voting stock, it is not likely to be 
temporary, there are no legal restrictions on control such as from a bankruptcy court, and there are no powerful 
minority shareholders.
Employee stock ownership plan (ESOP)  A trust fund or plan that invests in the securities of the firm sponsoring the 
plan on behalf of the firm’s employees. Such plans are generally defined contribution employee-retirement plans.
Enterprise cash flow  Cash available to shareholders and lenders after all operating obligations of a firm have been 
satisfied.
Enterprise value  Viewed from the liability side of the balance sheet, it is the sum of the market or present value of 
a firm’s common equity plus preferred stock and long-term debt. For simplicity, other long-term liabilities are 
often excluded from the calculation. From the perspective of the asset side of the balance sheet, it is equal to cash 
plus the market value of current operating and nonoperating assets less current liabilities plus long-term assets.
Equity carve-out  A transaction in which a parent firm issues a portion of its stock or that of a subsidiary to the 
public.
Equity cash flow  Cash available to common shareholders after all operating obligations of a firm have been satisfied.
Equity premium  The rate of return in excess of the risk-free rate investors require to invest in equities.
Excess returns  See abnormal returns.
Exchange offer  A tender offer involving a share-for-share exchange.
Extension  Creditor agreement to lengthen the period during which the debtor firm can repay its debt and, in some 
cases, to temporarily suspend both interest and principal repayments.
Fair market value  The cash or cash-equivalent price a willing buyer would propose and a willing seller would 
accept for a business if both parties have access to all relevant information.
Fairness opinion letter  A written and signed third-party assertion certifying the appropriateness of the price of a 
proposed deal involving a tender offer, merger, asset sale, or leveraged buyout.
Fair value  An estimate of the value of an asset when no strong market exists for a business or it is not possible to 
identify the value of substantially similar firms.
Financial buyer  Acquirers that focus on relatively short to intermediate financial returns and typically use large 
amounts of debt to finance their acquisitions.
Financial sponsor  An investor group providing equity financing in leveraged buyout transactions.
Financial synergy  The reduction in the cost of capital as a result of more stable cash flows, financial economies of 
scale, or a better matching of investment opportunities with available funds.
Fixed or constant share-exchange agreement  An exchange agreement in which the number of acquirer shares 
exchanged for each target share is unchanged between the signing of the agreement of purchase and the sale and 
closing.
Fixed-value agreement  The value of the price per share is fixed by allowing the number of acquirer shares issued to 
vary to offset fluctuations in the buyer’s share price.
Flip-in poison pill  Shareholders’ rights plan in which the shareholders of the target firm can acquire stock in the 
target firm at a substantial discount.
Flip-over poison pill  Shareholders’ rights plan in which the target firm’s shareholders may convert such rights to 
acquire stock of the surviving company at a substantial discount.
Form of acquisition  The determination of what is being acquired (i.e., stock or assets) and the way in which 
ownership is transferred.
Form of payment  A means of payment: cash, common stock, debt, or some combination. Some portion of the 
payment may be deferred or dependent on the future performance of the acquired entity.
Forward triangular merger  The acquisition subsidiary being merged with the target and the acquiring subsidiary 
surviving.
Free cash flow  The difference between cash inflows and cash outflows, which may be positive, negative, or zero.
Friendly takeover  Acquisition when the target’s board and management are receptive to the idea and recommend 
shareholder approval.
General partner  An individual responsible for the daily operations of a limited partnership.
Globally integrated capital markets  Capital markets providing foreigners with unfettered access to local capital 
markets and local residents to foreign capital markets.
Going concern value  The value of a company defined as the firm’s value in excess of the sum of the value of its 
parts.
Going private  The purchase of the publicly traded shares of a firm by a group of investors.

722	
Glossary
Golden parachutes  Employee severance arrangements that are triggered whenever a change in control takes place.
Goodwill  The excess of the purchase price over the fair value of the acquired net assets on the acquisition date.
Go-shop provision  A provision allowing a seller to continue to solicit other bidders for a specific time period after 
an agreement has been signed but before closing. However, the seller that accepts another bid must pay a breakup 
fee to the bidder with which it had a signed agreement.
Hedge fund  Private investment limited partnerships (for US investors) or offshore investment corporations (for 
non-US or tax-exempt investors) in which the general partner has made a substantial personal investment.
Highly leveraged transactions  Transactions involving a substantial amount of debt relative to the amount of equity 
invested.
Holding company  A legal entity often having a controlling interest in one or more companies.
Horizontal merger  A combination of two firms within the same industry.
Hostile takeover  Acquisition when the initial bid was unsolicited, the target was not seeking a merger at the time of 
the approach, the approach was contested by the target’s management, and control changed hands.
Hostile tender offer  A tender offer that is unwanted by the target’s board.
Hubris  An explanation for takeovers that attributes a tendency to overpay to excessive optimism about the value of 
a deal’s potential synergy or excessive confidence in management’s ability to manage the acquisition.
Impaired asset  As defined by FASB, a long-term asset whose fair value falls below its book or carrying value.
Implementation strategy  The way in which a firm chooses to execute a business strategy.
Indemnification  A common contractual clause requiring a seller to indemnify or absolve the buyer of liability in 
the event of misrepresentations or breaches of warranties or covenants. Similarly, the buyer usually agrees to 
indemnify the seller. In effect, it is the reimbursement to the other party for a loss for which it was not responsible.
Interest rate parity theory  A theory that relates forward or future spot exchange rates to differences in interest rates 
between two countries adjusted by the spot rate.
Investment bankers  Advisors who offer strategic and tactical advice and acquisition opportunities, screen potential 
buyers and sellers, make initial contact with a seller or buyer, and provide negotiation support, valuation, and 
deal-structuring advice.
Involuntary bankruptcy  A situation in which creditors force a debtor firm into bankruptcy.
Junk bonds  High-yield bonds either rated by the credit-rating agencies as below investment grade or not rated at 
all.
Legal form of the selling entity  Whether the seller is a C or Subchapter S corporation, a limited liability company, 
or a partnership.
Legal insolvency  When a firm’s liabilities exceed the fair market value of its assets.
Letter of intent  Preliminary agreement between two companies intending to merge that stipulates major areas of 
agreement between the parties.
Leveraged buyout  Purchase of a company financed primarily by debt.
Liquidation  The value of a firm’s assets sold separately less its liabilities and expenses incurred in breaking up the 
firm.
Liquidity discount  The discount or reduction in the offer price for the target firm made by discounting the value 
of the target firm estimated by examining the market values of comparable publicly traded firms to reflect the 
potential loss in value when sold due to the illiquidity of the market for similar types of investments. The liquidity 
discount also is referred to as a marketability discount.
Management buyout  A leveraged buyout in which managers of the firm to be taken private are also equity investors 
in the transaction.
Management entrenchment theory  A theory that managers use a variety of takeover defenses to ensure their 
longevity with the firm.
Management preferences  The boundaries or limits that senior managers of an acquiring firm place on the acquisition 
process.
Managerialism theory  A theory espousing that managers acquire companies to increase the acquirer’s size and 
their own remuneration.
Marketability risk  The risk associated with an illiquid market for a specific stock. Also called liquidity risk.
Maximum offer price  The sum of the minimum price plus the present value of net synergy.
Merger  A combination of two or more firms in which all but one legally cease to exist.
Merger-acquisition plan  A specific type of implementation strategy that describes in detail the motivation for the 
acquisition and how and when it will be achieved.

	
Glossary	
723
Merger arbitrage  An investment strategy that attempts to profit from the spread between a target firm’s current 
share price and a pending takeover bid.
Merger of equals  A merger framework usually applied whenever the merger participants are comparable in size, 
competitive position, profitability, and market capitalization.
Minimum offer price  The target’s stand-alone or present value or its current market value.
Minority discount  The reduction in the value of minority investors’ investment in a firm because they cannot direct 
the activities of the firm.
Minority investment  A less-than-controlling interest in another firm.
Net asset value  The difference between the fair market value of total identifiable acquired assets and the value of 
acquired liabilities.
Net debt  The market value of debt assumed by the acquirer less cash and marketable securities on the books of the 
target firm.
Net operating loss carryforward and carrybacks  Provisions in the tax laws allowing firms to use accumulated net 
tax losses to offset income earned over a specified number of future years or recover taxes paid during a limited 
number of prior years.
Net purchase price  Total purchase price plus other assumed liabilities less the proceeds from the sale of discretionary 
or redundant target assets.
Net synergy  The difference between estimated sources of value and destroyers of value.
Nondiversifiable risk  Risk generated by factors that affect all firms, such as inflation and war.
One-tiered offer  A bidder announces the same offer to all target shareholders.
Operating synergy  Increased value resulting from a combination of businesses due to such factors as economies of 
scale and scope.
Payment-in-kind (PIK) notes  Equity or debt that pays dividends or interest in the form of additional equity or 
debt.
Poison pills  A new class of securities issued as a dividend by a company to its shareholders, giving shareholders 
rights to acquire more shares at a discount.
Postclosing organization  The organizational and legal framework used to manage the combined businesses 
following the completion of the transaction.
Private corporation  A firm whose securities are not registered with state or federal authorities.
Private equity fund  Limited partnerships in which the general partner has made a substantial personal investment.
Pro forma financial statements  A form of accounting that presents financial statements in a way that purports to 
describe a firm’s current or projected performance more accurately.
Proxy contest  An attempt by dissident shareholders to obtain representation on the board of directors or to change 
a firm’s bylaws.
Purchase accounting  A form of accounting for financial reporting purposes in which the acquired assets and 
assumed liabilities are revalued to their fair market value on the date of acquisition and recorded on the books 
of the acquiring company.
Purchasing power parity theory  The theory stating that one currency will appreciate (depreciate) with respect to 
another currency according to the expected relative rates of inflation between the two countries.
Purchase premium  The excess of an offer price over the target’s current share price, which reflects both the value of 
expected synergies and the amount necessary to obtain control.
Pure control premium  The value an acquirer believes can be created by replacing incompetent management or 
changing the strategic direction of a firm,
Pure play  A firm whose products or services focus on a single industry or market.
Real options  Management’s ability to adopt and later revise corporate investment decisions.
Reverse breakup fee  Fee paid to a target firm in the event the bidder wants to withdraw from a signed contract.
Reverse merger  Process by which a private firm goes public by merging with a public firm, with the public firm 
surviving.
Reverse triangular merger  The merger of a target with a subsidiary of the acquiring firm, with the target surviving.
Risk-free rate of return  The return on a security with an exceedingly low probability of default, such as US Treasury 
securities, and minimal reinvestment risk.
Risk premium  The additional rate of return in excess of the risk-free rate that investors require to purchase a firm’s 
equity. Also called the equity premium.
Secured debt  Debt backed by the borrower’s assets.

724	
Glossary
Segmented capital markets  Capital markets exhibiting different bond and equity prices in different geographic 
areas for identical assets in terms of risk and maturity.
Share-exchange ratio  The number of shares of an acquirer’s stock to be exchanged for each share of the target’s 
stock.
Shareholders’ interest theory  The presumption that management resistance to proposed takeovers is a good 
bargaining strategy to increase the purchase price for the benefit of the target firm shareholders.
Shell corporation  A company that is incorporated but has no significant assets or operations.
Sources of value  Factors increasing the cash flow of combined companies.
Spin-off  A transaction in which a parent creates a new legal subsidiary and distributes shares it owns in the 
subsidiary to its current shareholders as a stock dividend.
Split-off  A variation of a spin-off in which some parent company shareholders receive shares in a subsidiary in 
return for relinquishing their parent company shares.
Split-up  A transaction in which a parent firm splits its assets between two or more subsidiaries and the stock of each 
subsidiary is offered to its shareholders in exchange for their parent firm shares.
Staggered board election  A takeover defense involving the division of a firm’s directors into a number of different 
classes, with no two classes up for reelection at the same time. Also called a classified board.
Stand-alone business  A business whose financial statements reflect all the costs of running the business and all the 
revenues generated by the business.
Standstill agreement  A contractual arrangement in which an acquirer agrees not to make any further investments 
in the target’s stock for a stipulated period.
Statutory merger  The combination of the acquiring and target firms, in which one firm ceases to exist, in accordance 
with the statutes of the state in which the combined businesses will be incorporated.
Stock-for-stock statutory merger  A merger in which the seller receives acquirer shares in exchange for its shares 
(with the seller shares subsequently cancelled); also called a stock swap merger.
Stock purchases  The exchange of a target’s stock for cash, debt, or the stock of the acquiring company.
Strategic buyer  An acquirer primarily interested in increasing shareholder value by realizing long-term synergies.
Subsidiary carve-out  A transaction in which the parent creates a wholly owned independent legal subsidiary, with 
stock and a management team different from the parent’s, and issues a portion of the subsidiary’s stock to the 
public.
Supermajority rules  A takeover defense requiring a higher level of approval for amending a charter or for certain 
types of transactions, such as a merger or an acquisition.
Super voting stock  A class of voting stock having voting rights many times those of other classes of stock.
Synergy  The notion that the value of combined enterprises will exceed the sum of their individual values.
Takeover Generic  term referring to a change in the controlling ownership interest of a corporation.
Takeover defenses  Protective devices put in place by a firm to frustrate, slow down, or raise the cost of a takeover.
Target company  The firm that is being solicited by an acquiring company.
Taxable transaction  Transaction in which the form of payment is primarily something other than the acquisition of 
company stock.
Tax considerations  Structures and strategies determining whether a transaction is taxable or nontaxable to the 
seller’s shareholders.
Tax-free reorganization  Nontaxable transactions usually involving mergers, with the form of payment primarily 
acquirer stock exchanged for the target’s stock or assets.
Tax shield  The reduction in a firm’s tax liability due to the tax deductibility of interest.
Tender offer  The offer to buy shares in another firm, usually for cash, securities, or both.
Term sheet  A document outlining the primary areas of agreement between a buyer and a seller, which is often used 
as the basis for a more detailed letter of intent.
Total capitalization  The sum of a firm’s debt and all forms of equity.
Total consideration  A term commonly used in legal documents to reflect the different types of remuneration 
received by target company shareholders.
Total purchase price  The total consideration plus the market value of a target firm’s debt assumed by the acquiring 
company. Also referred to as enterprise value.
Tracking stocks  Separate classes of common stock of a parent corporation whose dividend payouts depend on the 
financial performance of a specific subsidiary. Also called target or letter stocks.

	
Glossary	
725
Two-tiered offer  A tender offer in which target shareholders receive an offer for a specific number of shares. 
Immediately following this offer, the bidder announces its intentions to purchase the remaining shares at a lower 
price or using something other than cash.
Type A reorganization  A tax-free merger or consolidation in which target shareholders receive cash, voting or 
nonvoting common or preferred stock, or debt for their shares. At least 50 percent of the purchase price must be 
in acquirer stock.
Type B stock-for-stock reorganization  A tax-free transaction in which the acquirer uses its voting common stock to 
purchase at least 80% of the voting power of the target’s outstanding voting stock and at least 80% of each class 
of nonvoting shares. Used as an alternative to a merger.
Type C stock-for-assets reorganization  A tax-free transaction in which acquirer voting stock is used to purchase at 
least 80% of the fair market value of the target’s net assets.
Valuation cash flows  Restated GAAP cash flows used for valuing a firm or a firm’s assets.
Variable growth valuation model  A valuation method that assumes that a firm’s cash flows will experience periods 
of high growth followed by a period of slower, more sustainable growth.
Weighted-average cost of capital  A broader measure than the cost of equity that represents the return that a firm 
must earn to induce investors to buy its stock and bonds.
White knight  A potential acquirer that is viewed more favorably by a target firm’s management and board than the 
initial bidder.
Zero-growth valuation model  A valuation model that assumes that free cash flow is constant in perpetuity.


727
Index
A
Aabaco Holdings, 598
Absolute priority rule, 635
Accelerating growth, 658
Acceleration clause, 467
Acquired assets, and liabilities 
guidelines for valuing, 454
Acquirers, 66, 404
domestic cash flows, 667
share price (ASP), 408
type of, 205
financial buyers, 205
strategic buyers, 206
Acquisition, 314
acquiring firm, plan for, 157
alternative forms of 
advantages and disadvantages, 415
currency, 599
form, 664
plan objectives 
business plan objectives, linkage between, 154
process. See Acquisition process 
strategy, 654
team management guidance, examples of, 156
vehicles, 179, 662–663
form of, 400–401
appropriate acquisition vehicle, selection of, 400
Acquisition process, 167
phase 1, business plan, 167
phase 8, closing, 187–191
assigning customer and vendor contracts, 187
completing acquisition/merger agreement, 
188–191
allocation of price, 188
assumption of liabilities, 188
closing conditions, 189–190
covenants, 189
deal provisions, 188
financing contingencies, 191
indemnification, 190
other closing documents, 190
payment mechanism, 188
price, 188
representations and warranties, 188–189
gaining approvals, 187
phase 10, conducting postclosing evaluation, 192–193
asking questions, 193
learning from mistakes, 193
not changing performance benchmarks, 192
phase 7, developing integration plan, 185–187
choosing integration manager and other 
decisions, 187
contract-related issues, 186
earning trust, 186
phase 5, first contact, 173–177
discussing value, 175
preliminary legal transaction documents, 175
confidentiality agreement, 175
letter of intent, 176–177
term sheet, 176
phase 2, implementation strategy, 167
phase 9, implementing postclosing integration, 
191–192
communication plans, 191
cultural issues, 192
employee retention, 191
employing best practices, 192
satisfying cash flow requirements, 192
phase 6, negotiation, 177–185
conducting due diligence, 179–182
buyer, seller and lender due diligence, 181–182
components of due diligence, 181
information sources for, 180
deal structuring, 178–179
defining purchase price, 184–185
net purchase price, 185
total consideration, 184
total purchase price/enterprise value, 184
developing financing plan, 182
refining valuation, 177–178
virtual data room, 182
phase 4, screening process, 172–173
age of CEO or controlling shareholder, 173
cultural compatibility, 173
degree of leverage, 172
market segment, 172
market share, 173
product line, 172
profitability, 172
phase 3, search process, 169–172

728	
Index
Actavis, 432
Activist investors, 104
gaining influence without control, 103–104
Adient, spin-off of, 166
Adjusted EPS, 529
Affirmative covenant, 467
Aggressive investment program, 464
Alibaba, 598
Altera, 395, 396
Alternative exit, and restructuring strategies, 609
characteristics of, 610
Alternative financing 
by type of security and lending source, 472
Alternative takeover defenses, 105–116
board’s defenses strengthening, 109–110
limiting shareholder actions, 110
other shark repellents, 111–113
antigreenmail provisions, 111
dual class recapitalization, 111–113
fair-price provisions, 111
golden parachutes (change-of-control payouts), 113
reincorporation, 113
postoffer defenses, 114–116
corporate restructuring, 116
employee stock ownership plans (ESOPs), 115
greenmail, 115
leveraged recapitalization, 115
litigation, 117
share repurchase/buyback plans, 116
white knights and white squires, 115
preoffer defenses, 105–109
poison pills, 106
shark repellents, 109
preoffer vs. postoffer, 105
Alternative takeover tactics 
advantages and disadvantages, 103
hostile tender offer pretender offer tactics toehold 
bidding strategies, 97–98
understanding of, 94–99
bear hug, 95
friendly takeovers, 94
hostile takeovers, 95
hostile tender offer, 97–99
implementing tender offer, 98
multitiered offers, 99
proxy contests, 95
implementing, 96
shareholder value, impact on, 96
Alternative taxable and nontaxable structures, 433
Alternative tax-free deal structures 
characteristics of, 442
Alternative tax-free reorganizations 
type A 
forward triangular stock merger, 438
reverse triangular stock merger, 439
statutory merger consolidation, 437
statutory stock consolidation, 437, 438
type B stock-for-stock reorganization, 440
type C stock-for-assets reorganization, 440, 441
Alternative tax structures, 433
Amazon.com, 136
American Depository Receipt (ADR), 665
American International Group (AIG), 642
Amortization, 8
1997 Anti-Bribery Convention of the Organization for 
Economic Cooperation and Development, 72
Antitrust actions impact on firm value, 67
Antitrust legislation, 59
Antitrust merger guidelines, for horizontal 
mergers, 63–64
Appraisal rights, 236
ASP. See Acquirer, share price (ASP) 
Asset, 365
composition, 644
purchase, 513
Asset-oriented methods, 288
breakup value, 289
liquidation value, 290–292
replacement cost method, 292
tangible book value methods, 289, 290
Assignee, 629
Assignment, 629
Attractive returns to firms, 645
Auction, 591
Automatic stay, 629
Autonomy Corporation, 318
Avago’s share price, 654
Avago Technologies (Avago), 654
acquisition by, 655
Avago’s share price, 654
handset business, 655
B
Back-end merger, 99, 420
Balance sheet, 182, 336
adjustments, 405, 406
historical, 338
β and credit ratios, risk measures, 339
Bankruptcy, 354, 625. See also Cross-border 
bankruptcy
court, 627
cross-border, 636
high cost of, 637
liquidation in, 629
motivations for filing, 636
predicting corporate default and, 642–644
prepackaged, 637
proceedings of automakers General Motors (GM) 
and Chrysler, 635
reorganization in, 629

	
Index	
729
resolution of the GM 363, 635
Section 363, 633
Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer 
Protection Act (BAPCPA), 631
Bankruptcy Reform Act of 1978, 631
Behavioral remedies, 63
Bidders, 24, 96
Bidding strategies, 101–102, 662
Big data, 465
Black-Scholes model, valuing real options, 295, 297, 
300, 301
abandon, 299, 302
delay, 299
formula for valuing call option, 299
NPV, 298
option to expand, 298
Blockholders, 91
Board of directors/management 
incentive payments, 90
member removing, for cause provisions, 110
two-tier board, 87
unitary board, 87
Bond holder, 92
Bond issuer, 92
Bortz Health Care, 354
Bottoms-up approach, 247, 327
Breakup fees, 191
Breakup or termination fees, 100
Breakup value, 290, 291
Bridge bank, 626
Bridge financing, 468
Bring-down provision, 189
Broadcom Technologies (Broadcom), 655
Brocade Communications Systems (Brocade) β, 
estimation, 248
Buildup method, 367
Bullet loans, 494
Business alliance, 224–225, 553
access, to new markets, 557
alternative legal forms of, 560, 561
corporate structures, 562
C-type, 562–563
subchapter S corporations, 563–564
differences among, 554
equity partnership, 566
favorable regulatory treatment, 558
franchise alliance, 566
globalization, 557
integrating mechanisms, 225
consensus decision making, 225
coordination, 225
leadership, 225
policies and values, 225
teamwork and role clarification, 225
limited liability company (LLC), 564
motivations for, 555
partnership structures, 565
general partnerships, 565
limited liability partnerships, 565
master limited partnerships (MLPs), 566
prelude to acquisition/exit, 558
risk sharing, 555
cost reduction, 556
management skills/information/resources, 555
proprietary knowledge, 555
substantial capital outlays, 556
supply sources, 556
strategic and operational plans, 567
for success, 559
accountability, 559
clarity, of purpose/roles/responsibilities, 559
compatible time frames, 560
cooperation, 560
financial expectations, 560
support, 560
synergy, 559
win-win situation, 560
written contract, 567
Business alliance deal-structuring issues, 567, 568
control, 573
dispute resolution, 574
distribution issues, 573
duration, 569
equity and debt financing, 572
financing ongoing capital requirements, 571
governance, 569
interests, transfer, 574
legal form, 569
factors affecting choice of legal entity, 570
management and organizational issues, 575–576
owner/partner financing, 571
ownership determination, 569, 572
performance criteria, 573
regulatory restrictions and notifications, 576
resource contributions, 569
revision, 574
scope, 568
taxes, 575
termination, 574
Business combinations, 19
financial reporting of, 447–449
acquired net assets recognition, 448
acquirer, role of, 448
contingent considerations recognition, 449
expensing deal costs, 449
fair value, 448
in-process research and development assets, 449
step (or stage) transactions 
net acquired assets, recognition and 
measurement, 449

730	
Index
provisions, 71
purchase accounting impact of, 450–456
balance sheet 
considerations, 451–453
pending rule changes affecting, 455–456
income statement and cash flow 
considerations, 453
International Accounting Standards, 456
revenue recognition, pending rule changes 
affecting, 453–454
purchase method of accounting, 452
Business failure, 626
Business judgment rule, 68
Business plan, building of, 135–150
actual profits and cash flow, determinants of, 141
appropriate corporate, business, and implementation 
strategies, selection of, 145–147
blue ocean strategy, 147
business-level strategies, 146
corporate-level strategies, 145
focus or niche strategies, 147
price or cost leadership, 146
product differentiation, 146
as communication document, 151
contingency plans, 133
external analysis, 136–137
determining how to compete, 137
determining where to compete, 136–137
functional strategies, 149–150
implementation strategies, 148–149
advantages and disadvantages, 148
analyzing assumptions, 149
intangible factors, role of, 149
industry competition intensity, determinants of, 
139–141
internal analysis, 142–143
mission or vision statement, 135
mission/vision statement definition, 143–144
real options, 133
select a business strategy, 135
strategic controls, 136, 150
strategic or long-term business objectives, setting of, 
144–145
common business objectives, 144–145
trigger points, 133
Business strategy, 133
business-level strategies, 133
corporate-level strategies, 133
functional strategies, 133
implementation strategy, 133
Business valuation, 316
Buyout funds, 484
BuzzFeed, 552
C
Calculating enterprise, and equity values, 328–333
Canada Pension Plan Investment Board (CPPIB), 584
Capital asset pricing model (CAPM), 238, 303, 366
in near-zero/negative interest rate environment, 
240–241
Capital budgeting, 303, 316
Capitalization rate, 364
Capital markets, 85
CAPM. See Capital asset pricing model (CAPM) 
Carried interest, 475
Carve-out, restructuring strategies, 610
Case studies, 122–126, 159–164, 413, 424, 427, 459, 462
Arch Coal files, for bankruptcy protection, 648–651
cancer drug maker pharmcyclics, 459–461
Dow chemical and DuPont merger, 424–427
International DisplayWorks (IDW), 
acquisition of, 413
Perrigo's hostile takeover, 122–125
Yahoo’s fall from grace, 159–163
Cash flow, 169, 171, 176, 515, 527, 667
statement, 319
historical, 339
Cash-for-assets acquisition, 414
Cash outflows, 319
Cash-out provisions, 71
Cash payments, 633
Cash-rich split-offs, 602–603
Casual pass, 101
Celler-Kefauver Act of 1950, 60
CEO. See Chief executive officer (CEO) 
CFIUS. See Committee on Foreign Investment in the 
United States (CFIUS) 
Chief executive officer (CEO), 87
China National Offshore Oil Corporation (CNOOC) 
acquisition of Nexen Inc., 204–205
Circular references, 320
Cisco Systems Inc., 136
Civil law, 663
Civil wars, 2
Clayton Act, 59
CLO. See Collateralized loan obligation (CLO) 
Cloud computing, 14, 394
Cloud services, 465
Club deals, 483
Codified law, 663
Collar arrangements construction, 411–412
Collateralized loan obligation (CLO), 494
Comcast, 48
Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States 
(CFIUS), 72
Common bidding-strategy, 101
Common international market entry strategies, 660–661
Company management, 104
Business combinations (cont.)

	
Index	
731
Comparable integrated oil companies, valuing 
total SA, 281
Comparative salary data, 360
Compensation, 90
Competitive product, 661
ConAgra Food (ConAgra), 84
Conglomerate discount, 12
Consent decree, 63
Consent solicitation, 110
Conservatorship, 626
Constant-growth valuation model, 254, 255
Consultative selling approach, 219
Continental law, 663
Contingent liabilities, cash impact, 262
Contingent value rights (CVR), 408, 409
Continuing-growth value, 255
Continuity of ownership, 563
Controlled sale, 591
Control premium (CP), 373, 374
liquidity, and minority discounts application 
liquidity discounts, 372
and control premiums, relationship, 373–374
purchase price premiums and minority discounts, 
372–373
liquidity, and minority discounts estimation, 374
factors affecting 
control premium, 375–376
liquidity discount, 374
minority discount, 376–378
Control share provisions, 71
Convertible bonds, 469
market value determination, 261
Convertible debt, 532
Convertible preferred 
shares, 494
stock, 532
Convertible securities, 494, 531
Corporate bylaws, 110
advance notice provisions, 110
supermajority rules, 110
Corporate charters, 71, 109
Corporate chief financial officers (CFOs), 294
Corporate culture, 209, 221
Corporate directors election, 109
cumulative voting, 109
straight voting, 109
Corporate governance, 29, 85–94
alternative models, 86
factors affecting, 86
factors external to firm, 92–94
corporate takeover market, 93–94
institutional activists, 93
legislation and the legal system, 92
regulators, 92
factors internal to firm, 87–92
antitakeover defenses, 91
board of directors/management, 87–90
bond covenants, 92
corporate culture and values, 91
internal controls, incentive systems 
and management contracts, 90–91
Corporate inversions, 15
Corporate-level strategies 
diversification strategy, 145
financial restructuring, 145
growth strategy, 145
operational restructuring strategy, 145
turnaround or defensive strategy, 145
Corporate management, 29
Corporate restructuring, 19–21
acquisitions, divestitures, spin-offs, split-offs, 
carve-outs, and buyouts, 21
mergers and consolidations, 20
economic perspective, 20
legal perspective, 20
other tax considerations, effect of, 443–447
alternative corporate minimum tax, 444
corporate capital gains taxes, 444
master limited partnerships (MLPs), 444–445
net operating losses (NOLs), 443
tax inversions, 445–447
Corporate takeover market, 85
other tactical considerations, 99–101
contract considerations, 100–101
premium, board composition, and investor 
sentiment, importance of, 100
Corporate tax inversions, 659
Corporate value chain, 20
Corporation bylaws, 109
Cost-of-capital method, 369
Cost of equity, 238, 366
impact, of changing debt levels on, 249
risk-free rate of return, and market risk premium, 238
size premium estimates, 239
Cost of preferred stock, 243
Country risk premium (CRP), 676
CP. See Control premium (CP) 
Cram down, 637
Credit bids, 635
Credit default swap (CDS) rate, 672
Credit limits, 671
Creditors, 630, 632
Credit rating, 505, 508
agencies, 171, 469
Creeping merger, 440
Cross-border bankruptcy, 636
foreign main proceeding, 636
foreign nonmain proceeding, 636

732	
Index
Crossborder M&A’s, 655
factors contributing, 658
Crossborder transactions, 77, 666, 667
adjusting CAPM for risk 
for country or political risk (emerging 
countries), 676
developed countries, 672
emerging countries, 675–676
empirical studies of, 680–681
corporate governance, and significant shareholder 
value, 683
foreign institutional ownership, promote 
crossborder M&A activity, 684
international diversification, contribute to higher 
financial returns, 681
M&As in frontier economies, 684
returns for crossborder deals consistent with, 682
estimating cost of equity, 671–672
in developed (globally integrated) countries, 672
in emerging (segmented) capital market 
countries, 674
estimating local firm’s cost of debt 
in emerging markets, 677–678
estimating risk-free rate of return 
developed countries, 672
emerging countries, 674
evaluating risk using scenario planning, 678–680
global CAPM formulation 
developed countries, 673
emerging countries, 677
methodologies for valuing, 680
Cross-default provisions, 467
Crown jewel lockup, 101
Cultural exchange, 657
Cumulative sums (CUSUM) method, 644
Currency values, changes in, 660
Customer buying patterns, 139
Customer service drivers, 288
Customers satisfaction, 660
D
Data 
analytics application in mergers, and acquisitions, 
193–194
integration, 465
mining software, 642
security, 465
sources, 335
DCF. See Discounted cash flow (DCF) 
Deal financing 
hedge funds, role in, 473–478
financial engineering and operational expertise 
providers, for target firms, 476–478
LBO shareholders, postbuyout returns to, 477–478
LBO target firm (prebuyout) shareholders, 
prebuyout returns to, 476
private equity-owned firms and financial 
distress, 478
financial intermediaries, 474–475
lenders and investors of last resort, 475
private equity, role in, 473–478
financial engineering and operational expertise 
providers, for target firms, 476–478
LBO shareholders, postbuyout returns to, 
477–478
LBO target firm (prebuyout) shareholders, 
prebuyout returns to, 476
private equity-owned firms and financial 
distress, 478
financial intermediaries, 474–475
lenders and investors of last resort, 475
venture capital funds, role in, 473–478
financial engineering and operational expertise 
providers, for target firms, 476–478
LBO shareholders, postbuyout returns to, 
477–478
LBO target firm (prebuyout) shareholders, 
prebuyout returns to, 476
private equity-owned firms and financial 
distress, 478
financial intermediaries, 474–475
lenders and investors of last resort, 475
Deal negotiation, 168
Deal-structuring, 397–399, 492
common linkages, 398–399
acquisition vehicle choice 
form of payment, effect of, 398
form, amount, and timing of payment 
accounting considerations, effect of, 399
form of acquisition, effect of, 398
form of payment 
legal form of selling entity, effect of, 399
postclosing organization 
form of payment, effect of, 398
tax considerations, effect of, 399
key components, 397–398
Deal terms, 518, 519
Debt, 320
based defenses, 109
estimation, of common equity value, 263
markets, 665
pretax cost of, 241–242
restructuring, 627
Debt-for-equity swap, 627
Debtor-in-possession (DIP), 631, 632
financing, 640
Debt-to-equity ratio, 246
Debt-to-total capital ratio, 528

	
Index	
733
Default premium, 242
Default risk, 238, 241
Defensive acquisition, 116
Deferred revenue, 318
Deferred taxes 
determination, of cash impact of, 261
estimation, of common equity value, 263
Degree of synergy, 610
Delaware Chancery Court’s opinion, 237
Delaware corporate law, 115
Delaware General Corporation Law, 420
Delaware Supreme Court decision 
Moran v. Household, 118
Department of Defense (DoD), 75
Department of Justice (DoJ), 48
Developed countries, 655
Differential voting rights (DVR) shares, 109
Direct cash mergers, 433
Direct investment restrictions in United States, 72
Disappearing corporation, 414
Discounted cash flow (DCF), 236, 251, 364
appropriate discount rate, determination, 258
constant-growth valuation model, 254, 255
enterprise discounted cash flow model, 252
equity discounted cash flow model, 253
estimation, of economic value of company, 251
high-growth period, determination, 258
impact, of changes in assumptions, on terminal 
value, 256
stable/sustainable growth rate, determination, 258
variable-growth valuation model, 255–257
zero-growth valuation model, 253, 254
Discount factor, calculation, using Midyear 
Convention, 334
Discount rates, 364, 366
appropriate tax rate, determination, 369
cost of capital, estimation, 369
cost of private-firm debt, estimation, 368
private firm’s β and cost of equity, estimation, 
366–368
Discriminant analysis, 643
Dish Network, 48
Dispute resolution, 574
arbitration clause, 574
choice of law provision, 574
deadlock/impasse clause, 574
Distress, 644
Diversification 
discount, 12
geographic and industrial, 658
Divestiture, 589
corporate portfolio reviews, 589
factors affecting purchase price premiums, 595
motives for, 589
multistep process, to sell, 589
after-tax equity value (EV), 590
after-tax market value of business, estimation, 590
calculation, after-tax cash flows, 589
decision to sell, 590
discount rate, estimation, 590
restructuring strategies, 610
right selling process, 592, 593
auction, 594
one-on-one negotiations, 594
purchase premium, 594
selling process, 591
tax and accounting considerations for, 596
timing of sale, 591
Divestitures, 21
Dividends, 471
payments, 92
DOA balance sheet, 634
DOA Inc 
liquidation of, 633, 634
reorganization plan for, 633
Doctrine of corporate personhood, 562
Documenting potential problems, 643
Dodd-Frank Act, 68, 90
provisions, 69
Dodd-Frank legislation, 642
Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer 
Protections Act of 2010, 641
Dollar/euro exchange rate, 668
Dollar/Mexican peso exchange rate, 669
Dollar/Peso exchange rate, 669
Double taxation, 444
Dual holders, 39
Due diligence, 168, 177, 217
Dyax Corporation, 409
E
Earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT), 246, 322, 358
Earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and 
amortization (EBITDA), 166, 279, 329, 358, 528
Earnings per share (EPS), 18, 145, 318, 431
Earnouts, 472
agreement, 406
parts, 407
Ease of transferring ownership, 563
EBIT. See Earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT) 
EBITDA. See Earnings before interest, taxes, 
depreciation and amortization (EBITDA) 
Economic growth, 19, 657
Economic risks, 666
Economies of scale, 10
Emergency Planning and Community Right to Know 
Act (EPCRA), 76
Emerging countries, 655

734	
Index
Employee layoffs, 515
Employee options, cash impact, 262
Employee stock ownership plans (ESOPs), 23, 114, 
355, 398
Employee turnover, 208
Enforcement efforts, trends, 67
Enron-type scandals, 94
Enterprise 
cash flow, 252
discounted cash flow model, 252
Entire fairness standard, 422
Environmental laws, 76
EPCRA. See Emergency Planning and Community 
Right to Know Act (EPCRA) 
EPS. See Earnings per share (EPS) 
EQC. See Equity consideration (EQC) 
Equity-based employee compensation, 112
Equity-based incentive systems, 90
Equity carve-outs, 599
initial public offerings (IPO), 599, 600
motives for, 599
subsidiary carve-out, 599
tax and accounting considerations, 600
Equity cash flow, 251
Equity consideration (EQC), 532
Equity discounted cash flow model, 253
Equity partnership, 566
Equity premium, 238
Equity value, estimation, 259
Escrow accounts, 405
ESOPs. See Employee stock ownership plans (ESOPs) 
Eurobonds, 665
Euro-denominated FCFF cash flows, 669
Euromoney, 667
European options, 295
Euro-to-Dollar exchange rate, 668
EV-to-EBITDA multiple, 283, 285
Exchange Act Rule, 96
Exchange offer, 98
Experience curve, 146
Export Import Bank (United States), 667
Extraordinary achievement, 633
F
Facebook, 314
Face-to-face meeting, 174
Failing firm’s strategic options, 638
merging with another firm, 638–639
Fair disclosure (regulation FD), 73
Fair market value, 364
Fairness opinions, 236
Fair-price provisions, 71, 99
Family-owned firms, 226
Fast-food industry, 147
FCFF. See Free cash flow to firm (FCFF) 
Federal Communications Commission (FCC), 48
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), 68, 626
Federal securities laws, 49–59, 98
Federal Trade Commission (FTC), 57, 60, 92
actions at market share concentration levels, 65
alternative to imminent failure, 66
antitrust guidelines 
for collaborative efforts, 67
for vertical mergers, 66
coordinated effects, 66
ease of entry, 66
efficiencies, 66
partial acquisitions, 66
unilateral effects, 60
Finance crossborder transactions, 665
Financial Accounting Standards Board, 453
Financial advisors, 26
Financial credibility, 175
Financial data, 629
Financial distress, 645
attractive returns to firms, 645
financially ailing firms, contagious, 646
IPOs to experience bankruptcy, 646
returns to financially distressed stocks, 645–646
Financial due diligence, 27
Financial engineering, 476
Financial incentive systems, 90
Financial Industry Regulatory Authority’s (FINRA), 241
Financial leverage, 245
effects, on financial returns, 246
Financial models, 314, 504
circularity, 320
data requirements, 316–318
linkages, 319–320
Financial options, 294
Financial ratio analysis, 322
Financial restructuring, 19
Financial returns, 40, 238
capital asset pricing model, 238
cost of capital, 243–244
cost of equity, 238
market risk premiums, 238–240
preferred stock, cost, 243
pretax cost of debt, 241–242
size premium estimates, 239
Financial Sponsor Group (FSG), 584
Financial statements, 319
analysis, 316
common-size, 322
firm's interrelationships between, 319
Financial transparency, 683
Firms emerging from bankruptcy, attractive 
returns to, 645

	
Index	
735
Firms, existing businesses, 586
conflicts with customers, 588
corporate focus, 586
discarding unwanted businesses, 588
funds, 587
increasing transparency, 588
lack of fit, 587
operating assets, 588
regulatory concerns, 587
risk reduction, 588
tax considerations, 587
underperforming businesses, 587
Firm’s interest payments, 247
Firm size, 644
First-in, first-out (FIFO) method, 361
Fisher effect, 673–674
Fitch IBCA, 676
Five Forces framework, 137
Fixed share-exchange agreements, 411
Fixed-value agreement fixes, 411
Flextronics-International DisplayWorks (IDW) 
acquisition 
fixed-share-exchange agreements, 412
fixed-value agreement, 412
Foreign currencies, appreciation of, 660
Foreign direct investment, 660
Foreign-earned income, 670
Foreign investor, 571
Foreign target cash flow, 667
Foreign tax credit, 671
Forest Laboratories Inc., 432
Form of acquisition, 413–422
asset purchase, 414–417
buyer’s perspective, 416–417
seller’s perspective, 417
mergers, 418–421
dual track deal structures, 421
merger of equals, 419
shareholder approvals, 421
statutory 
consolidation, 419
merger, 418
subsidiary merger, 418
tender offers, 420
top-up options, 421
special applications of basic structures, 422
statutory or direct merger, 414
stock purchase, 417–418
buyer’s perspective, 418
seller’s perspective, 418
Form of payment, 401–405
alternative forms, evaluation of, 410
cash, 402–403
and stock combination, 404
convertible securities, 405
noncash, 403
seller’s legal form, effect of, 402
Forward 
currency exchange rates, 668
triangular cash merger, 433
Franchise alliance, 566
Free cash flows, 249
equity investors, 251
firm (enterprise cash flow), 249
operating leases, dealing with, 250–251
right tax rate, selection, 250
Free cash flow to equity (FCFE), 249
Free cash flow to firm (FCFF), 249, 333, 668
net working capital, 249
tax rate, 249
Friendly vs. hostile deals, 662
G
GAAP. See Generally Accepted Accounting 
Principles (GAAP) 
GDP, 644
deflator, 667
General Electric (GE), 400
Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP), 27, 
316–317, 447, 464
financial statements, 317
global, 456
General partners, 565
Genetically modified organisms (GMOs), 278
German commercial bank, 665
Global economic downturn, 18
Globalization, 557, 656
Globally integrated capital markets, 656
Golden parachutes, firm value reduction, role in, 113
Goldman Sachs, 395
Government intervention, in hostile deals, 662
Growth rate, 644
H
Hart-Scott-Rodino (HSR) Antitrust Improvements Act 
of 1976, 60
Hedge fund, 28, 31, 93, 640, 641
Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI), 64
Hermes (Germany), 667
Hewlett-Packard, 318, 604
High-performing acquirers (HPA), 167
characteristics of, 168
High-performing manager, 153
High-profit vs. low-profit industries, 
characteristics, 325
Holdout problem, 639
Home country, 655
Home Depot’s Equity Value determination, 267

736	
Index
Horizon growth value, 255
Hostile tender offer 
one-tier offer, 99
two-tiered offer, 99
HPA. See High-performing acquirers (HPA) 
Hybrid transactions, 664
Hypothetical Facebook 2014 SWOT matrix, 143
I
IAS. See International Accounting Standards (IAS) 
IFRS. See International Financial Reporting 
Standards (IFRS) 
IHS Global Energy, 630
InBev takeover of Anheuser-Busch, 221
Incentive systems, 150
Income redistribution, 657
Income statement, 335
historical, 337
Indemnification, 416
rights, 188
Indenture, 469
Indications of interest, 592
Industry competition intensity, determinants of 
competitors, 139
legal constraints, 139
limited pricing power, 139
relative price, 140
switching costs, 139
Industry consolidation, 658
Industry regulation, 74
banking, 74
communications, 74
defense, 75
other regulated industries, 75
railroads, 75
IndyMac Federal Bank, 626
Inflation risk, 238
Informatica, spending program of, 464–465
Informed adjustments, 359
accounting for inventory, 361
adjustments to financial statements, 362
auto expenses and personal life insurance, 360
commonly 
overlooked areas, 362
understated areas, 362
depreciation expense, 361
family members, 360
professional services fees, 361
rent or lease payments, in excess of fair market 
value, 361
reserves, 361
salaries and benefits, 360
travel, meals, and entertainment, 360
Initial public offering (IPO), 287, 359, 599
Input cells, 327
Inside mergers and acquisitions 
takeover battles strategy, 84–85
Institutional Investor, 667
Insurance, 667
Integration, 209–224
acquisition, role in, 206–209
acquisition-related customer attrition, 208
employee turnover, impact of, 207–208
rapid integration, 209
realizing projected financial returns, 207
building new corporate culture, 221–223
identifying cultural issues through cultural 
profiling, 222
overcoming cultural differences, 222–223
creating new organization, 214–217
compensation plans, 216
developing staffing plans, 215
employee availability, 216
establishing structure, 214–215
personnel 
information systems, 217
requirements, 215
staffing plans and timetable, 216
developing communication plans for stakeholders, 
212–214
communities, 214
customers, 213
employees, 212–213
investors, 213
lenders, 214
suppliers, 213
digital tools and change management, 223–224
functional integration, 217–220
benchmarking performance, 217
finance, integrating, 219
human resources, integrating, 220
information technology, integrating, 218–219
manufacturing operations, integrating, 218
marketing, integrating, 219
purchasing, integrating, 220
research and development, integrating, 220
reset synergy expectations, 217
revalidating due diligence data, 217
sales, integrating, 219
postmerger integration organization, 210–211
composition and responsibilities, 211–212
premerger integration planning, 209–210
Intellectual property, 661
Intercompany sales, 589
Interest, 241
rate parity theory, 668
transfer, 574
drag-along provision, 574

	
Index	
737
right of first refusal, 574
tag-along provision, 574
Internal rate of return (IRR), 303
Internal Revenue Code, 434
Internal Revenue Service (IRS), 355
Code, 440
Internal Revenue Tax Code, 598
International Accounting Standards (IAS), 316–317
International Accounting Standards Board (IASB), 453
International Country Risk Guide, 667
International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS), 447
International partnerships, 571
Internet Service Providers (ISPs), 49
Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC), 75
Investment clubs, 29
Involuntary, 629
liquidations, 640
IRS. See Internal Revenue Service (IRS) 
ISPs. See Internet Service Providers (ISPs) 
J
Johnson Controls Inc., 166
merger with Tyco, 166–167
Joint venture (JV), 24, 398, 553, 661
as corporation, 572
favorable regulatory treatment, 558
globalization, of companies, 557
project-based, 571
regulatory restrictions and notifications, 576
securing sources of supply, 556
taxes, 575
Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act (JOBS Act), 54–55
JV. See Joint venture (JV) 
K
Key customer relationships, 357
L
Labor and benefit laws, 76
Labor cost, 658
Last-in, first-out (LIFO) method, 361
Layoffs, 168
LBOs. See Leveraged buyouts (LBOs) 
LD. See Liquidity discount (LD) 
Legal insolvency, 626
Legal institutions, 684
Legal protection, 662
Letter of intent (LOI), 100, 175
Letter stocks, 604
Leverage, 644
Leveraged buyouts (LBOs), 18, 422, 444, 464
creating value with, 487–491
alleviating public firm agency problems, 488–489
creating tax shield, 490
debt reduction, 490
operating margin, improvement in, 490
providing access to capital for private firms, 489
by reducing debt, improving margins and 
increasing exit multiples, 491
sale of firm, timing of, 490–491
deal and capital structures, 492–494
common capital structures, 493–494
common deal structures, 492
factors contribute to success of, 485–487
improving operating performance, 487
not overpaying, 486
target selection, 485–486
attractive industries, firms in, 486
change-of-control covenants, firms without, 486
competent and motivated management, firms 
having, 486
generate cash flow, firms performing with 
potential to, 485
large-company operating divisions, firms 
having, 486
significant agency problems, firms with, 485
unused borrowing capacity and redundant 
assets, firms with, 485
as financing strategies, 479–484
acquisitions of private firms, 482
employment growth, effects of LBOs on, 483
innovation, effects of LBOs on, 482
LBO transactions, 481
private equity firm collaboration, changing nature 
of, 483–484
private equity market, 480
pure management buyouts, 480
sales to strategic buyers, 481–482
structure, 392
Leveraged employee stock ownership 
use to buy private companies, 381
Leveraged/levered β, 245
Leveraged loans, 470, 494
Leveraged recapitalization, 481
Leveraging intangible assets, 659
Liabilities, 533
Licenses, 24, 661
Life Technologies, undertaking strategic review 
case study, 343–351
Lighting Group Incorporated (LGI), 377
Limited liability company (LLC), 398, 564
Limited partners, 565
LinkedIn, 314
Liquidating dividend, 116
Liquidation, 290, 469, 494, 626
value, 366
Liquidity, 18, 372

738	
Index
Liquidity discount (LD), 374
size estimation, 375
Loan agreement, 214, 467
Loan repayment, 511
“Loan-to-own” strategies, 640
Local country, 655
LOI. See Letter of intent (LOI) 
Long-term asset, 336
Long-term debt, determination of market value, 259
financially 
distressed firms, 260
stable firms, 259, 260
hybrid securities, 261
M
MAC. See Material adverse change clauses (MAC) 
Machine learning efforts, 133
Macrovalue drivers, 288
M&A financial model. See also Merger and acquisitions 
(M&As)
applications, 504–506
asset purchases, 533–536
balancing mechanism, 510, 511
building process steps, 508
instruction worksheet, 514
stock purchases, 509, 513–533
constructing historical financials, and determining 
value drivers, 513–515
building historical financial statements, 515
collecting and analyzing historical data, 514
normalizing historical data for forecasting 
purposes, 515
estimating value of Newco, 516–524
estimating synergy and investment required to, 
518–519
projecting Newco financials, 519–522
selecting discount rate and terminal period 
assumptions to value Newco, 522–524
offer price and posttransaction capital structure, 
determining appropriateness of, 524–533
comparing offer price with estimated maximum 
offer price and comparable deals, 525–527
comparing projected credit ratios with industry 
average ratios, 527–528
Newco’s EPS, determining impact of deal on, 
528–532
Newco to meet or exceed required returns, 
532–533
projecting acquirer and targeting financials and 
estimating stand-alone values, 515–516
determining assumptions for input variable, 516
input assumptions into model and project 
financials, 516
understanding and applying, 507–512
common elements of models, 507–508
data linkages and model balancing mechanism, 
510–512
worksheet flow diagram, 510
Management 
abuses, 90
buyouts (MBO), 480
contracts, 91
decision making, 316
entrenchment index, 118
entrenchment theory, 94
friendly environment, 660
integration team (MIT), 211
Managerial autonomy, 562
Marginal tax rate, 369, 671
Market 
definition, 64
entry 
barriers, 660
method of, 660
power, 63
price-to-value indicator ratio, 284
risk, 238
premium, 238
segmentation, 136
share, 139
and concentration, 64–65
value per share for target firm, 284
Marketability discount, 372
Market/industry competitive dynamics, 137, 138
M&As. See Merger and acquisitions (M&As) 
Master limited partnerships (MLPs), 400, 443, 566
Material adverse change clauses (MAC), 189
M&A transactions, financing of, 466–473. See also 
Merger and acquisitions (M&As)
borrowing, 467–468
asset-based (secured) lending, 467–468
cash flow (unsecured) lenders, 468
common and preferred equity, 470–471
long-term financing, types of, 469–470
junk bonds, 469
leveraged bank loans, 470
near-zero/negative interest rates, impact on, 473
seller financing, 471–472
MBO. See Management, buyouts (MBO) 
Measure of nondiversifiable risk (β), risk 
assessment, 244
effects of financial and operating leverage, 245, 246
bottoms-up approach, 247
Brocade Communications Systems’ (Brocade) β, 
estimation, 248
cost of equity, estimation, 248
Media companies, 130
Merger.. See also spcific entries of Merger

	
Index	
739
direct, 492
subsidiary, 492
Merger and acquisitions (M&As), 2, 49, 553
agreements, 394
business alliances as alternatives, 24–25
deal-structuring process, 397
discount retailers battle, 6–7
Dodd-Frank Act and Consumer Protection Act, 68
employee stock ownership plans, role in, 23–24
historical developments, 16–19
merger waves 
anticipation, 19
similarities and differences, 19
waves occurence, 16–18
fifth wave (1992-99), age of strategic 
megamerger, 18
first wave (1897-1904), horizontal 
consolidation, 17
fourth wave (1981-89), retrenchment era, 18
second wave (1916-29), increasing 
concentration, 17
sixth wave (2003-08), rebirth of leverage, 18
third wave (1965-69), conglomerate era, 18
holding companies, role in, 23
implementation plan building, 152–156
management guidance, 155
objectives, 153
resource/capability evaluation, 154–155
timetable, 156
implications for shareholders, bondholders, and 
society, 31
acquirer returns, by characteristics of acquirer, 
target, and deal, 35–39
firm-specific characteristics, 38
investor sentiment, 39
payment impacts acquirer returns, 37–38
returns positive for privately owned or 
subsidiary targets, 36
small deals generating higher returns, 36
smaller acquirers realizing higher returns, 36
payoffs for 
bondholders, 39–40
society, 40
postmerger returns to shareholders, 34
premerger returns to shareholders, 32–34
returns high for target shareholders, 33
returns to acquirer shareholders, 33–34
laws affecting, 50
overview, 8
participants, 25–31
activist investors, 29–30
hedge funds and private equity firms, 30
mutual funds and pension funds, 29–30
institutional investors and lenders, 28–29
angel investors, 29
commercial banks, 28
hedge, private equity, and venture 
capital funds, 28
insurance, pension, and mutual funds, 28
sovereign wealth funds, 29
M&A arbitrageurs, 30–31
providers of specialized services, 25–27
accountants, 27
investment banks, 25–27
lawyers, 27
proxy solicitors, 27
public relations firms, 27
regulators, 27
planning, role of, 132–133
key business planning concepts, 133
process, 134–135
flow diagram, 134
phases, 135
state regulations affecting, 68–72
theories, 8–16
buying undervalued assets, Q-ratio, 14
causing, 9
hubris and “winner’s curse”, 14
managerialism (agency problems), 15
market power, 15
misvaluation, 16
strategic realignment, 14
synergy, 8–11
financial synergy, 11
operating synergy, 8–11
tax considerations, 15
transactions, 237
in the United States, 2
Merger arbitrage, 31
Merger integration, 210
Merger of equals, 419
Mexican Peso/Dollar exchange rate, 669
Mezzanine debt, 494
Mezzanine financing, 468
Microsoft, 314
long-term debt, weighted average yield to maturity 
of, 242
Minority 
discount, 373
investments, 24
MIT. See Management, integration team (MIT) 
Model balancing mechanism, 334–335
Monte Carlo simulation, 341
Moody’s Investors Service, 676
Morgan Stanley Capital International World Index 
(MSCI), 672
Morris Trust and Reverse Morris Trusts, 604
Multifactor models, 239

740	
Index
Multinational corporations, 661
Multinational firms, using territorial tax system, 670
Multiperiod comparison, 322
Multiple-option bidding strategy, 404
Mutual funds, 28, 93
N
Napoleonic Code, 663
Negative covenant, 467
Net neutrality, 63
Net operating losses (NOLs), 434
Net present value (NPV), 295, 375, 678
Net working capital, 249
Neural networks, 644
New Baker Hughes, 558
Newco, 507
balance sheet worksheet adjustments, stock 
purchase, 523
ending cash balances, 512
New York Stock Exchange (NYSE), 58, 380
Nodes, 295
Noncash payment, other forms, 403
Noncontrolling interests 
determination, of market value, 264
Nondisclosure agreement, 175
Nonoperating assets, valuation, 264
cash and marketable securities, 265
estimation, minimum and excess cash balances, 265
investments in firms, 266
overfunded pension plans, 266
patents/service marks/trademarks, 266
unutilized and undervalued assets, 266
Normal profits, 323
No-shop agreement, 100
Note on Debt and Long-term Obligations, 336
NPV. See Net present value (NPV) 
Nursing facilities, 354
O
Operating expenses, 357
Operating lease 
expense, 250
market value determination, 261
Operating leverage, 245
effects, on financial returns, 246
firm’s degree of, 247
Operating margin, 521
Option strike prices, 90
Order for relief, 631
Orderly Liquidation Authority (OLA), 641
Organization 
divisional, 214
functional, 214
product or service, 214
Over-the-counter (OTC) market, 52
P
Paid-in-kind (PIK) preferred stock, 471
Paid prioritization, 74
Parent company operating units, characteristics, 611
Parent-submerger exception, 421
Partnership, 631
Pay-for-performance incentive plans, 91
Payment, form of, 663
Payment-in-kind notes, 470
PEG ratio, 284, 287
Pension funds, 93
Personal assets, 631
Peso-denominated FCFF cash flows, 670
Pfizer, 431
and Allergan, planned merger 
changing tax regulations, effect of, 430–432
Pill defenses, 108
PIPE. See Private investment in public equity (PIPE) 
Planning, 666
based acquisition process, 133
period, 321
Poison pills 
flip-in pill, 106
flip-over pill, 106
Political risks, 666
Porter five forces model summary, 324
Postbuyout shareholders, 476
Post-carve-out returns, 617
Postclosing organization, 400–401
appropriate postclosing organization, selection of, 
400–401
Postmerger integration strategy, 206
Postoffer takeover defenses 
advantages and disadvantages, 114
Post-spin-off returns, 617
Preannouncement abnormal returns, 612
agency issues, 616
difference, management and shareholders, 614
divestitures, 612
equity carve-outs, 615
focus of divesting firm, 613
increasing focus, 615, 616
mitigating financial distress, 614
source of financing, 616
spin-offs, 614
tracking stocks, 617
transferring assets, 614
transparency, 615
wealth transfers, 615
Precedent transactions method, 282
Predictive accuracy, 643
Predictors, of incidence of default, 644
Preferred stock, 471, 494
market value determination, 261
estimation, of common equity value, 263

	
Index	
741
Premerger balance sheets, 459
Preoffer takeover defenses 
advantages and disadvantages, 107
Prepackaged bankruptcy, 637
Present value (PV), 321
Price-to-earnings ratio, 169
Pricing power continuum, 325
Private companies, going public, 378–383
financing reverse mergers, 380
reverse mergers, 379
special-purpose acquisition corporations, 380
wealth effects, 379
Private equity investors, 93, 464
Private firms, 681. See also Privately owned businesses
sources of information on, 359
Private investment in public equity (PIPE), 356, 475
Privately held companies valuing, challenges, 357–358
externally generated information, lack of, 357
firm-specific problems, 357
internal controls and reporting systems, lack of, 357
reported income manipulation, forms, 357–358
misstating revenue, 357
operating expenses manipulation, 358
Privately owned businesses, 355
applying valuation methodologies 
appropriate valuation methodology selection, 364
asset-oriented approach, 366
defining value, 364
income, or discounted cash flow, approach, 364
relative value (or market-based) approach, 365
replacement cost approach, 365
value definition, 364
valuing process, 358–378
applying valuation methodologies, 364–366
control premiums, liquidity, and minority discounts 
application, 371–378
estimation, 374
discount rates development, 366–371
financial statements adjustment, 358–362
Private sale, 591
Proactive sales, 591
Procedural rules, 62
Product differentiation 
hybrid stratgies, 147
Product life cycle, 146
Product-market matrix, 12
Profitability, 323, 644
Pro forma 
accounting, 317
cash flows, 327
financial statements, 317, 513
project financial statements, 326
Protectionism, 2
Provisions liabilities, cash impact determination, 262
Proxy contests, 94
Proxy statement, 96
Public Company Accounting Oversight Board 
(PCAOB), 59
Public/free float, 600
Public sale, 591
Public stock exchange, 22
Public-to-private LBO, 476
Purchase accounting 
balance-sheet impacts, 455
Purchase price 
hypothetical earnout, role of, 408
premiums 
adjusting valuation estimates for, 293
effecting factors, 595
risk management, and reaching consensus, 405–409
contingent value rights (CVR), 408–409
earnouts and other contingent payments, 406–408
postclosing balance-sheet price adjustments and 
escrow accounts, 405–406
rights, royalties, and fees, 409
Purchasing power parity theory, 669
states, 669
PV. See Present value (PV) 
Q
Quantifying synergy, 536–538
cost savings-related synergies, 537
revenue-related synergy, 537
R
Racketeering, 27
Ralcorp Holdings (Ralcorp), 84
Raw material cost, 658
Reactive sales, 591
Real cash flow, 667
Real discount rates, 667
Real Estate Investment Trust (REIT), 587
Real options, 294
decision tree framework, 295, 297
embedded/implied in M&A decisions, 295
mergers and acquisitions, 295, 296
Recapitalization (Recap) accounting, 456–457
Receivership, 626
Recommendation statement, 57
Reduced form models, 644
Regulatory arbitrage, 77
Regulatory prenotification filing requirements 
for 2016, 61
Relative valuation, 279
adjusting relative valuation methods, for firm growth 
rates, 284–286
comparable companies method, 280–282
enterprise-value-to-EBITDA method, 282–284
market value of target firm, 279
price-to-earnings (P/E) ratio, 279

742	
Index
recent comparable transactions method, 282
same/comparable industries method, 282, 283
value-driver-based valuation, 287
Reorganization period, 631
Reorganization plan, 631
Restructuing implementation issues, 606
allocation of nonlong-term debt liabilities, 607
assets and liabilities associated with business, 606
board governance, 608
human resource management, 608
solvency, 607
target capital structure, 607
Restructure legal documents, 608
separation and distribution agreement, 609
tax matters agreement, 609
transition agreement, 609
Restructuring strategies 
choosing among divestiture/carve-out/spin-off, 610
determinants of returns to shareholders, 611, 612
Retention bonuses, 57, 150
Revenue growth, 323
rate rise impact on selected financial variables, 343
Revenue ratio, 169
Revenue ruling, 365
Reverse breakup fees, 101
Reverse stock split, 492
Reverse triangular cash merger, 433
Risk assessment, 244
correlation, 245
measure of nondiversifiable risk (β), 244
volatility, 245
Risk-averse managers, 154
Risk-free rate of return, 238
Risk premium report, 368
Risk sharing, 397
Risky firms, 91
S
SACE(Italy), 667
Same-store sales, 288
Sanofi, 409
Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOA), 53
of 2002, 58–59
SBO. See Secondary buyouts (SBO) 
SBU. See Strategic business units (SBU) 
SEC. See Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) 
SEC filings, 170
Secondary buyouts (SBO), 481
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), 55, 92, 317
enforcement effectiveness, 55
Securities Exchange Act of 1934, 51, 52, 55
insider trading regulations, 53–54
reporting requirements, 52
section 13, periodic reports, 52
section 14, proxy solicitations, 52
Securities Investor Protection Corporation (SIPC), 641
Securities transactions, 98
Securitization, 643
Security agreement, 467
Security provisions, 467
Segmented capital markets, 656
Selling entity, legal form of, 401
Senior management. See also Management
risk confronting, basic types of, 155
financial risk, 155
operating risk, 155
overpayment risk, 155
SER. See Share-exchange ratio (SER) 
Settlement tender offer 
alternative takeover tactics, role of, 102
Share-exchange ratio (SER), 411, 513
Shareholders, 20, 37, 204, 247, 318, 336, 356
impact of leverage on return to, 479
interests hypothesis, 94, 117
returns, empirical studies, 382–383
value 
takeover defenses, impact of, 117–120
public offerings, 120
target firm shareholder financial returns, 117–120
Sherman Act, 59
Shire PLC, Baxalta Inc, acquisition of, 504
Shocks, 644
Short-form merger, 421
Short-term financing, 465
Short-term investors, 100
Single-firm recapitalizations, 422
Small-scale merger exception, 421
Social networking company, 130
Social Security and Medicare taxes, 360
Sole proprietorships, 631
Solvency, 644
Sovereign wealth funds, 28
Sovereign wealth funds (SWFs), 665
Special-purpose acquisition corporations (SPACs), 380
Spin-offs, 21, 596
restructuring strategies, 610
tax and accounting considerations, 597–598
Split-offs, 21, 601
cash-rich split-offs, 602–603
with M&A transactions, 604
motives for, 602
Split-up, 601
Spot exchange rate, 668
Squeeze-out/freeze-out merger, 420
Staffing strategy sequencing, 216
Staged transactions, 422
Staggered/classified board election, 110
Relative valuation (cont.)

	
Index	
743
Stakeholders, 133
Stalking horse, 635
Standstill agreement, 94, 115
Start-up companies, 222
State antitrust, and securities laws, 72
Statutory consolidation, 419
Step-transaction doctrine, 435
Stock-based pay plans, 92
Stock-for-assets deals, 414
Stock-for-stock deals, 414
Stock lockup, 101
Stock purchase, 513
Stocks, Bonds, Bills & Inflation, 368
Strategic alliance, 24, 577
Strategic business units (SBU), 214
Strategic industries, 665
Structural models, of credit risk, 644
Structural remedy, 63
Structured data, 194
Subordinated debentures, 469
Subsidiary carve-out, 599
Successor liability, 414
Sun Healthcare Systems (Sun), 587
Supervoting shares, 111
Surface-conduction electron-emitter displays (SEDs), 556
Surface Transportation Board (STB), 75
Surviving corporation, 414
Survivor Inc., 628
Sustainable growth value, 255
SWOT analysis, 135
Synergy, 516, 655
T
TA. See Target assets (TA) 
Takeover, 48
strategies, alternative, 22
Tangible book value methods, 289
Target assets (TA), 533
Target assumptions, 517
Targeted customers, and potential for price 
discrimination, 64
Targeted stocks, 604
Target firm planning 
period assumptions, 328
period balance sheet, 330
period cash flow statement, 331
Target firm’s financial statements, adjustment, 363
Target firm valuation, 332
Target’s float, 100
Target shareholders, 96. See also Shareholders
appraisal rights, 99
Target valuation model, 327
Taxable deals, key characteristics, 436
Taxable transactions, 433–435
section 338 elections, 435
target assets, cash purchase of, 434
target stock, cash purchase of, 434
taxable mergers, 433
Taxes, 575. See also specific entries Tax
burden, 670
liabilities, minimizing, 659
minimization, 357
strategies, 664
Tax-free reorganizations, 664
Tax-free transactions, 435–441
alternative tax-free reorganizations, 437–440
1031 like-kind exchanges, arising from, 441
qualification, 435
target tax attributes treatment, 441
Technical insolvency, 626
Technological innovation, 14
Telecommunications, 67
Tender offer, 22
proration clause, 404
solicitation, 57
statement, 56
Terminal growth value, 255
Terminal value, 333
Termination rights, 188
Territorial tax system, 670, 671
TFEU. See Treaty on the Functioning of the European 
Union (TFEU) 
Time Warner Cable (TWC), 48
Toehold position, 97
Toehold strategies, 98
Toggle buttons, 320
Top-down approach, 327
Topping fee, 635
Tracking stocks, 604
motives for, 605
problems with, 606
tax and accounting considerations for, 605
Trade magazines, 667
Transaction, goodwill calculation, 452
Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership 
(TTIP), 657
Transfer taxes, 417
Transformational deal, 314
Treasury method, 531
Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union 
(TFEU), 77
Triangular merger, 421
Trustee, 629, 632
TWC. See Time Warner Cable (TWC) 
Two-factor models, 643
Two-step merger, 420
Tyco International Plc, 166
Typical business unit, 151–152

744	
Index
U
Unfunded pension liabilities, 139
cash impact, 262
United Nations Commission on International Trade 
Law (UNCITRAL), 631
Unlevered β, 245
US bankruptcy laws, 629–631
US Central Intelligence Agency, 139
US Constitution authorizes Congress, 630
US corporate tax rates, 447
US Court of Appeals, 54
US Federal Drug Administration, 409
US Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, 72
US Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), 456
US tax liabilities, 655
US tax rate, 671
US tax system, 430
US Treasury, 665
bond rate, 676
regulations, 431
V
Valuable corporate asset, 91
Valuation cash flows, 249
Valuation methodologies, 304
Valuation process, key steps, 321
determinants of revenue growth and profit 
margins, 323–326
financial statements analyzation, 321
historical data normalization, 322–323
Value drivers, 321, 508
Value-enhancing investments, 91
VDRs. See Virtual data rooms (VDRs) 
Vertical mergers, 64
Virtual data rooms (VDRs), 182, 592
Voluntary, 629
liquidations, 640
settlement, 627
resulting in liquidation, 629
Vornado Realty Trust, 56
Vox Media, 553
W
WACC. See Weighted average cost of capital 
(WACC) 
Warrant, 406, 472, 531
Weighted average cost of capital (WACC), 243, 
321, 333, 508
Weighted average valuation method, 293, 294
WhatsApp, 314
acquisition of, 142
Whetlab, 133
White knight, 115
White squires, 115
Williams Act 
sections 13(D) and 13(G), ownership disclosure 
requirements, 56
sections 14(D), rules governing tender offer process, 
56–57
obligations of acquirer, 56
obligations of target firm, 57
shareholder rights, 14(D)-4 to 14(D)-7, 57
tender offers, regulation, 55
Williams Act of 1968, 98
Worker Adjustment and Retraining Notification Act 
(WARN), 76
Working capital guarantee balance-sheet 
adjustments, 406
Workouts, 627
World Bank’s Multilateral Investment Guarantee 
Agency, 667
Worldwide/global tax system, 670
Written contract, 567
Y
Yield to maturity (YTM), 241
Microsoft’s long-term debt, 242
Z
Zero-growth valuation model, 253, 254
Zombie companies, 473
Z scores, 643

