DESCENT THEORY AND APPLICATIONS TO RING SPECTRA
AKHIL MATHEW
The theory of structured ring spectra plays an important role in modern algebraic topology. For
instance, many fundamental objects in stable homotopy theory, such as real and complex K-theory
and the numerous variants of topological modular forms, are E∞-ring spectra and are most naturally
studied as such.
Principle. To study a discrete commutative ring, we should study the objects that it acts on: that
is, modules. Similarly, we should study ring spectra by understanding properties or features of their
modules.
In particular, one of our goals will be to study invariants of modules or module categories of ring
spectra.
Let R be an E∞-ring spectrum. Then one has a symmetric monoidal ∞-category of R-modules.
The spectrum R has homotopy groups π∗(R) which form a graded commutative ring. Given an
R-module M, the homotopy groups π∗(M) form a graded module over π∗(R). This is the ﬁrst and
most basic structure one obtains from an R-module. The theory of R-modules contains a number of
homotopy coherences that one cannot detect only from as coarse an invariant as π∗(M). Ultimately,
to work with R-modules, one can use the spectral sequence
(1)
Exts,t
π∗(R)(π∗(M), π∗(N)) =⇒πt−sHomR(M, N).
Roughly, (1) implies that the simpler π∗(R) is homologically, the simpler the theory of R-modules
will be. For example, if π∗(R) is of ﬁnite homological dimension, then the spectral sequence (1) has
only ﬁnitely many rows at the E2-page. As a result, one should expect the theory of R-modules to
be relatively algebraic.
Example 1. Suppose R is an even periodic E∞-ring with π∗(R) regular noetherian. Then by [1]
the Picard group of R arises entirely from algebra. If π0R has no nontrivial idempotents, then it is
Z/2 × Pic(π0R), the former factor coming from suspensions.
Example 2. Suppose R is an even periodic E∞-ring with π∗(R) regular noetherian. Then the thick
subcategories of the category of perfect R-modules are in bijection with the specialization-closed
subsets of Specπ0R.
However, without these hypotheses other things can happen:
Example 3 ([9, Prop. 2.4.9]). There exists an E∞-ring R with πi(R) = 0 for i ̸= 0, −1, π0(R) ≃
Q[ϵ]/ϵ2, and π−1(R) a free π0(R)-module of rank one, such that the Picard group of R is given by
Z × Q.
A number of important E∞-ring spectra in modern algebraic topology have the property that,
while the homotopy groups are quite complicated, they are related to E∞-ring spectra with much
simpler homotopy groups. When combined with descent theory, this yields techniques for under-
standing invariants of them.
1. Descent via thick subcategories
The following is our key deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 1. Let R →R′ be a morphism of E∞-ring spectra.
Then R′ is descendable as an
R-module if the thick tensor ideal1 that R′ generates in Mod(R) is all of Mod(R).
Date: March 5, 2015.
1Recall that a stable subcategory of Mod(R) is called thick if it is additionally closed under retracts, and a tensor
ideal if it is closed under tensor products with objects of Mod(R).
1

2
AKHIL MATHEW
Closely related ideas have been discussed by Balmer in [2].
Theorem 1 (M. [5]). Suppose R →R′ is descendable. Then one has a canonical equivalence of
symmetric monoidal ∞-categories
Mod(R) ≃Tot

Mod(R′) ⇒Mod(R′ ⊗R R′)
→
→
→. . .

.
Theorem 1 holds for a faithfully ﬂat morphism R →R′ of E∞-rings by the derived version of
faithfully ﬂat descent, due to Lurie.2 However, the main interest of Theorem 1 is that it applies in
cases where π∗(R′) is much simpler than π∗(R). For example, it applies to the complexiﬁcation map
KO →KU (this was previously known to Gepner-Lawson and Meier). For TMF, one obtains the
following result.
Theorem 2 (M.-Meier [7]). There is an equivalence of symmetric monoidal ∞-categories between
modules over TMF (resp. Tmf) and quasi-coherent sheaves on the derived moduli stack of elliptic
curves (resp. its compactiﬁcation).
Using Theorem 2, we were able to stratify thick subcategories of the category of perfect TMF-
modules in [6].
Theorem 3 (M. [6]). The thick subcategories of the category of perfect TMF-modules are in natural
bijection with the specialization-closed subsets of the underlying space of the moduli stack of elliptic
curves.
2. Galois theory
An application of this approach to descent theory is a reformulation of the Galois theory of Rognes
[11].
Deﬁnition 2. Let φ : R →R′ be a morphism of E∞-rings. φ is said to be a ﬁnite cover 3 if there
exists a descendable morphism R →eR such that eR →R′ ⊗R eR exhibits R′ ⊗R eR as a ﬁnite product
of copies of eR localized at an idempotent.
Theorem 4 (M. [5]). Suppose π0R has no nontrivial idempotents. Then the ∞-category of ﬁnite
covers of R is a Galois category in the sense of Grothendieck, and therefore has associated to it a
Galois group.
Let π1(Mod(R)) be the Galois group of the E∞-ring R.
Then a continuous homomorphism
π1(Mod(R)) →G, for G a ﬁnite group, corresponds to giving a faithful G-Galois extension of R in
the sense of Rognes.
Using descent, one can compute Galois groups in several examples.
For instance, the Galois
group of integral TMF is trivial; this is equivalent to the folklore algebraic theorem that the ´etale
fundamental group of the moduli stack of elliptic curves over Z is trivial. If G is a ﬁnite p-group
and k a separably closed ﬁeld of characteristic p, the Galois group of the Tate construction ktG is
the quotient of G by the normal subgroup generated by the order p elements.
3. Applications to Picard groups
Let R be an E∞-ring. Another basic invariant of R is the Picard group of invertible R-modules.
The Picard group is essentially an algebraic invariant of R if R is connective, or if π∗(R) is periodic
but suﬃciently nice (e.g., even periodic with π0(R) regular noetherian). However, the Picard group
can be somewhat mysterious in general for general non-connective E∞-rings.
Theorem 5 (M.-Stojanoska [9]; Hopkins (unpublished, for TMF)). The Picard group of the periodic
integral TMF is cyclic, Z/576 generated by ΣTMF. The Picard group of the non-connective, non-
periodic Tmf is isomorphic to Z ⊕Z/24.
2In general, we do not know if a faithfully ﬂat morphism R →R′ satisﬁes descendability (even in the case of a
morphism of discrete commutative rings) without, e.g., countable presentation hypotheses.
3The analog of a ﬁnite ´etale morphism.

DESCENT THEORY AND APPLICATIONS TO RING SPECTRA
3
This is proved by using the equivalence of Theorem 2. In particular, one may compute the Picard
group of the derived moduli stack itself. Over an aﬃne scheme ´etale over the moduli stack, the
Picard group is algebraic. To globalize, one obtains a descent spectral sequence; the bulk of [9]
consists of analyzing this descent spectral sequence in the cases of TMF and Tmf.
4. Vista: Descent in equivariant stable homotopy theory
A current project related to this circle of ideas focuses on applications of descent and thick
subcategory ideas in equivariant stable homotopy theory. This project is joint with Niko Naumann
and Justin Noel, and was inspired by the work of Carlson [3] and the recent preprint of Balmer [2]
interpreting Quillen’s classical work on the spectrum of an equivariant cohomology ring [10].
Fix a ﬁnite group G and let SpG denote the ∞-category of G-spectra.
Deﬁnition 3. Let M be a G-spectrum and let F be a family of subgroups of G. We say that M is
F-nilpotent if it belongs to the thick tensor ideal generated by AF
def
= Q
H∈F(G/H)+.
Theorem 6 (M.-Naumann-Noel [8]). Let R be a ring G-spectrum and let X be any G-space. Suppose
R is F-nilpotent for a family F of subgroups. Consider the Green functor {R∗
H(X)}H⊂G. Then we
have:
(1) The Green functor {R∗
H(X)}H⊂G satisﬁes a form of Artin induction, i.e.
R∗
G(X)[1/|G|] ≃
lim
←−
OF(G)op
R∗
H(X)[1/|G|],
where OF(G) is the subcategory of the orbit category of G spanned by the G-sets {G/H}H∈F.
(2) The Green functor {R∗
H(X)}H⊂G satisﬁes a version of Quillen’s F-isomorphism theorem.
That is, the map R∗
G(X) →lim
←−OF(G)op R∗
H(X) has nilpotent kernel, and anything in the
codomain raised to a suﬃciently divisible power is in the image.
The Borel equivariant mod p cohomology spectrum is F-nilpotent for F the family of abelian
subgroups. This is (essentially) Carlson’s and Balmer’s intepretation of Quillen’s theorem. One of our
main results in [8] is that the equivariant spectrum representing a Borel-equivariant complex-oriented
cohomology theory is always nilpotent for the family of abelian subgroups. Other important examples
include equivariant real and complex K-theory (for the family of cyclic subgroups) and equivariant
elliptic cohomology in the sense of Lurie [4] (for the family of rank ≤2 abelian subgroups). Finally,
we are studying these nilpotence questions for equivariant algebraic K-theory, which we believe will
have applications to the descent problem; this is closely related to forthcoming work of Clausen.
References
[1] A. Baker and B. Richter. Invertible modules for commutative S-algebras with residue ﬁelds. Manuscripta Math.,
118(1):99–119, 2005.
[2] P. Balmer. Separable extensions in tt-geometry and generalized Quillen stratiﬁcation. 2013. Available at http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1309.1808.
[3] J. F. Carlson. Cohomology and induction from elementary abelian subgroups. Q. J. Math., 51(2):169–181, 2000.
[4] J. Lurie. A survey of elliptic cohomology. In Algebraic topology, volume 4 of Abel Symp., pages 219–277. Springer,
Berlin, 2009.
[5] A. Mathew. The Galois group of a stable homotopy theory. 2014. Available at http://arxiv.org/abs/1404.2156.
[6] A. Mathew. A thick subcategory theorem for modules over certain ring spectra. 2015. To appear in Geom. Topol.
Preprint available at 1311.3940.
[7] A. Mathew and L. Meier. Aﬃneness and chromatic homotopy theory. 2015. To appear in J. Topol. Preprint
available at http://arxiv.org/pdf/1311.0514v3.
[8] A. Mathew, N. Naumann, and J. Noel. Derived induction and restriction theory I-II. In preparation.
[9] A. Mathew and V. Stojanoska. The Picard group of topological modular forms via descent theory. 2014. Preprint
available at http://arxiv.org/abs/1409.7702.
[10] D. Quillen. The spectrum of an equivariant cohomology ring. I, II. Ann. of Math. (2), 94:549–572; ibid. (2) 94
(1971), 573–602, 1971.
[11] J. Rognes. Galois extensions of structured ring spectra. Stably dualizable groups. Mem. Amer. Math. Soc.,
192(898):viii+137, 2008.

