Simulation Theory
versus
Theory Theory
Theories concerning the Ability to Read Minds
Diplomarbeit
zur Erlangung des akademischen Grades eines Magisters
an der Geisteswissenschaftlichen Fakult¨at der
Leopold-Franzens-Universit¨at Innsbruck
eingereicht bei Herrn Univ.-Doz. Dr. Hans Kraml
von Martin Michlmayr <tbm@cyrius.com>
Innsbruck, M¨arz 2002

Contents
1
Introduction
4
1.1
Functions of Theory of Mind . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2
Living without Mindreading . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3
Theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Theory Theory
12
2.1
Is TT a Theory?
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2
TT and ‘Reality’
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3
Acquiring Folk Psychology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.4
Testing for Theory of Mind
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3
Simulation Theory
23
3.1
ST as a ‘Hot Theory’ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2
Simulation in More Detail . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2.1
From First to Third Person Statements . . . . . .
27
3.2.2
Some Examples of Simulation . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2.3
Simulation Without the Concept of Belief
. . . .
30
3.2.4
ST and the False Belief Task . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.2.5
ST and Theoretical Knowledge
. . . . . . . . . .
33
3.3
Support for ST from Contemporary Research
. . . . . .
34
3.3.1
Autism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.3.2
Mirror Neurons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
2

Contents
3.3.3
Combining Autism and Mirror Neurons . . . . . .
39
3.4
Diﬀerent ST Positions in More Detail . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.4.1
Harris . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.4.2
Goldman . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.4.3
Gordon
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
3.5
Problems of ST . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
3.5.1
Simulation Needs a Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
3.5.2
Developmental Evidence Against ST
. . . . . . .
61
3.5.3
Gordon’s ST and Circularity . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
3.5.4
ST Relies on Introspection . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
4
Conclusions
66
3

1 Introduction
The philosophy of mind debate is one of the most important topics in
contemporary philosophy. The problems are so extensive and complex
that the debate has been going on for a very long time and yet there is
no end in sight. Many problems have been solved over the years but at
the same time new questions have been posed. Furthermore, the focus
of the debate itself has shifted in the last few decades.
Greenwood (1991) claims that in the past “most philosophers were
almost exclusively concerned with the question of whether the qualitative
aspects of sensations such as pain or sense impressions could be reduced
to brain states” (p. 1).
In recent years, many philosophers have lost
interest in the problem of qualia because neuroscience has made such
tremendous progress in this area (Churchland, 1990). Philosophers are
increasingly involved in a debate about social interaction and intentional
psychological states such as beliefs, desires, emotions, and motives.
The importance of social interaction has been recognized in vari-
ous disciplines in recent years. In fact, it has even been suggested that
“the evolution of intelligence in primates that ultimately led to human
beings was driven in part by the demands of social information process-
ing” (Barresi & Moore, 1996, p. 107). Humphrey (1984), who proposed
that intelligence evolved in order to support organisms living in complex
groups, coined the metaphor of social chess to illustrate his ideas. He
claims that:
4

1 Introduction
Like chess, social interaction is typically a transaction be-
tween social partners. One animal may, for instance, wish by
his own behavior to change the behavior of another; but since
the social animal is himself reactive and intelligent the inter-
action soon becomes a two-way argument where each “player”
must be ready to change his tactics – and maybe his goals –
as the game proceeds. Thus, over and above the cognitive
skills which are required merely to perceive the current state
of play (and they may be considerable), the social gamesman,
like the chess-player, must be capable of a special sort of for-
ward planning. Given that each move in the game may call
forth several alternative responses from the other player this
forward planning will take the form of a decision tree, having
its root in the current situation and branches corresponding
to the moves considered in looking ahead at diﬀerent possi-
bilities. It asks for a level of intelligence which is, I submit,
unparalleled in any other sphere of living. (p. 20–21)
Humphrey’s metaphor of social chess is indeed a good illustration of
the theory that in order to deal with increasing social demands, primates,
especially humans, have evolved a system that is used for understanding,
predicting and manipulating the behavior of others. Using a phrase from
Premack & Woodruﬀ(1978), who worked with chimpanzees, this system
is usually called a theory of mind. Simon Baron-Cohen, who is famous
for his work on autism, calls the ability mindreading.
1.1 Functions of Theory of Mind
We take our theory of mind (ToM) for granted and usually do not think
about the inﬂuence it has on our lives. Just like breathing, the functions
of ToM happen automatically without requiring volitional actions. When
we see someone walking to his car and then rummaging in his pockets, we
5

1 Introduction
assume that he is searching for his keys. This interpretation would not
be possible without intentional understanding which is made possible by
our theory of mind. Baron-Cohen (1995) underlines the importance of a
fast and eﬀective mindreading system from an evolutionary perspective:
[I]magine that you are an early hominid, and that another
early hominid oﬀers to groom you and your mate. You need
to reason quickly about whether you should let him approach.
[ . . . ] Making inferences about whether his motives are purely
altruistic or whether he might be deceitful is a reasoning strat-
egy that you can apply in time to react to a social threat. (p.
25)
This example shows that from an evolutionary point of view theory
of mind can be seen as a successful surviving strategy. The fast-acting
mindreading system gives you immediate information about the inten-
tions of the people around you, which in turn allows you to act quickly
and safely.
Furthermore, as observed previously in the description of
the chess metaphor, theory of mind is a crucial prerequisite for the evo-
lution and development of complex social systems and interactions. In
particular, the mindreading system has these functions:
• Comprehend and explain: theory of mind allows us to see a mean-
ing in the behavior and actions of other people. Without it, we
would be confused by other people’s actions and overwhelmed by
the complexity of daily life. Theory of mind creates an order in life
by giving everything a purpose and meaning.
• Predict: theory of mind also gives us the ability to predict other
people’s behavior.
This is a requirement for dealing with other
people, or, as Churchland (1991) puts it, “if one cannot predict or
anticipate the behavior of one’s fellows at all, then one can engage
6

1 Introduction
in no useful commerce with them whatever” (p. 57). Furthermore,
by making the world predictable, much complexity is taken. When
one knows that something is going to happen as well as the reason
why it will happen one can adjust to the situation in advance.
• Manipulate: one can use theory of mind to inﬂuence and manipu-
late the behavior of others by controlling the information available
to them. However, this can only be done when one perceives the
other’s goals, desires and beliefs through one’s mindreading ability.
We have now learned what role theory of mind plays.
However,
since we all posses theory of mind and take it for granted, it is diﬃcult
for us to see when we actually use this facility.
Fortunately, we can
increase our understanding using a method common in cognitive science
and neuroscience – we can move out of our usual perspective and take
a look at the situation when theory of mind is not functioning properly.
Autism will act as an example for this case.
1.2 Living without Mindreading
Autism is a developmental disorder of the brain which exists from birth
and lasts the whole life. Although most research on autism has only been
conducted during the last few decades, Uta Frith (1989) speculates that
the disorder is not new. Frith has found evidence for autism throughout
history and cites the “Blessed Fools” of Old Russia as an example. They
were described as showing “bizarre behaviour, innocence, and lack of
social awareness” (Happ´e, 1994, p. 7).
Autism has ﬁrst been described independently by Kanner (1943) and
Asperger (1944). They highlighted features such as strange social inter-
action, desire for the preservation of sameness, excellent rote memory,
7

1 Introduction
delayed echolalia and oversensitivity to stimuli. Although autism is a
biologically based disorder with a strong genetic component, the diagno-
sis is still based on behavioral criteria (Happ´e, 1999). The criteria are
usually based on Wing’s triad, which consists of (Happ´e, 1994, p. 20):
• qualitative impairment in reciprocal social interaction
• qualitative impairment in verbal and nonverbal communication and
in imaginative activity
• markedly restricted repertoire of activities and interests
In his book, Baron-Cohen (1995) suggests that “children and adults
with the biological condition of autism suﬀer, to varying degrees, from
mindblindness” (p. 5). In other words, their mindreading ability is im-
paired. He starts his book by asking his readers to “imagine what your
world would be like if you were aware of physical things but blind to
the existence of mental things” (p. 1). This is a very diﬃcult task since
we attribute beliefs and desires to each other unselfconsciously all the
time. Baron-Cohen continues by giving an example of a simple human
act, namely:
John walked into the bedroom, walked around, and walked
out.
Baron-Cohen then asks how we would make sense of this sentence.
He oﬀers some typical explanations (p. 1) from humans with the min-
dreading ability, the so called “mindreaders”:
• Maybe John was looking for something he wanted to ﬁnd, and
he thought it was in the bedroom.
• Maybe John heard something in the bedroom, and wanted to
know what had made the noise.
8

1 Introduction
• Maybe John forgot where he was going: maybe he really intended
to go downstairs.
We as mindreaders typically use mental-state words (printed above
in boldface) to make sense of John’s act. However, people with mind-
blindness appear to have only limited access to such explanations. They
can merely give simple statements about temporal regularities (“he does
it everyday”). If this explanation fails – which it most likely will – not
many simple, readily available, plausible, non-mentalistic explanations
are left.
It is therefore not suprising that Frith (1996), who describes the in-
ability to attribute mental states as “tantamount to not diﬀerentiating
between the world of objects (with physical states) and the world of per-
sons (with mental states)” (p. 65), claims that the social world must be
very alienating for people with limited mindreading ability. Mindreaders
are sometimes lost when they enter cultures in which acts and gestures
have diﬀerent meanings. People with mindblindness always live in a so-
cial world without meaning.
1.3 Theories
The cases of people with some form of mindblindness, and theoretical and
empirical studies about the evolution of primates underline the impor-
tance of the mindreading device. There is no dispute that our complex
social system and interaction would not be possible without an eﬀective
theory of mind. However, there are various theories oﬀering diﬀerent
explanations how exactly the mindreading mechanisms work. These the-
ories are usually grouped into two categories, theory theory (TT) and
simulation theory (ST).
9

1 Introduction
Theory theory is the theory which has been predominant in the last
few decades. It states that our understanding of the mind is based on
a folk psychological theory which consists of a framework of concepts
which is “roughly adequate to the demands of everyday life” (Churchland,
1991, p. 51).
Explanations are derived from a set of laws and rules
that “connect the explanatory conditions with the behavior explained”
(Churchland, 1990, p. 207). There is no consensus among theory theorists
of which type theses laws and rules are. However, generally speaking,
early theories have proposed a set of explicit laws comparable to those
of a full-ﬂedged science. Probably due to the inﬂuence of Thomas Kuhn,
who pointed out that implicit assumptions are part of science, it has
recently become more common to propose implicit or tacit laws.
Some philosophers and scientists believe that this folk psychological
theory is learned as the child grows up (e.g. Churchland, 1991), while
others hold a nativistic attitude. Carruthers (1996), for example, sup-
ports the nativistic theory because he ﬁnds it “puzzling how [learning
the theory] can take place without any explicit teaching or training” (p.
22).
In recent years, increasing attention has been given to the alterna-
tive account of mindreading known as simulation theory (ST). ST denies
that we come to an understanding of others through the deployment of
a theory. Instead, it suggests that we use “the resources of [our] own
minds to simulate [ . . . ] others.” (Davies & Stone, 1995a, p. 3). ST has
roots in the Verstehen methodology of Dilthey (Heal, 1995, p. 39) and in
empathizing. By putting yourself in the shoes of someone else, you can
simulate them and come to predictions and explanations.
It is important to note that in the debate of theory theory and simu-
lation theory terms often have diﬀerent meanings depending on who uses
them. Sometimes, the term “folk psychology” (FP) is used to refer to the
10

1 Introduction
mindreading ability per se, regardless of whether the ability is accounted
for using theory theory or simulation theory. In other cases, the term
“folk psychology” is only used in the context of theory theory. It is not
used for simulation theory since the use of the word “psychology” sug-
gests that a theory lies behind the mindreading ability and this is exactly
what simulation theory denies. In this paper, I will adhere to the latter
usage and use “folk psychology” strictly for theory theory. When the
ability to understand and predict others is meant, I will use the terms
“mindreading” or “theory of mind”.
In the following, I am going to describe both of these theories in
more detail in order to investigate what each has to oﬀer in terms of
explanation of the mindreading ability. The predominant theory theory
will be evaluated ﬁrst to see which solutions and explanations have been
proposed in the last few decades.
Afterwards, I am going to discuss
simulation theory in more detail. Diﬀerent ST theories will be presented
and contrasted. Furthermore, some attention will be given to current
research in cognitive science and neuroscience which are connected to ST.
In the end, insights won by studying theory of mind will be summarized
and conclusions will be drawn.
11

2 Theory Theory
Theory theory claims that we posses a folk psychological ability which
rests upon knowledge of a theory. Just like other folk theories, such as folk
physics, it enables us to master our daily lives successfully. Although we
use this theory constantly throughout the whole day, we are not actually
aware of the laws of which the theory is composed. The theory therefore
is of implicit and tacit nature.1
Blackburn (1995) tries to give a description of the relation between
tacit knowledge and theories. He states:
If we are good at something [ . . . ] then we can be thought
of as making tacit (very tacit) use of some set of principles
that could, in principle, provide a description of a device, or
possibly a recipe for the construction of a device, that is also
good at it. (p. 275)
This account, which resembles the ideas of the mathematician and
computer pioneer Alan Turing, outlines a very weak conception of a
theory. If it was suﬃcient to ﬁnd a theoretical description, there would be
no dispute between TT and ST at all. After all, it is plausible to develop
a theoretical representation of simulation and empathizing. Although
Blackburn’s thoughts do not give an adequate description of theories,
they raise the question what a theory really is.
1There are theories which propose an explicit folk psychological theory, too. How-
ever, implicit and tacit theories appear to be more common these days; therefore,
explicit theories are not covered here.
12

2 Theory Theory
2.1 Is TT a Theory?
The theoretical view of ToM holds the position that our common-sense
terms for mental states are part of a theoretical framework, namely folk
psychology (FP), which is embedded in our common-sense understanding
(Churchland, 1992). The theory can be seen as containing a “large num-
ber of universally quantiﬁed conditional statements, conditions with the
conjunction of the relevant explanatory factors as the antecedent and the
relevant explanandum as the consequent” (Churchland, 1991, p. 52–53).
These “laws” therefore express the relations between the various prop-
erties and entities postulated by the theory. Churchland (1990) states
that:
Each of us understands others, as well as we do, because we
share a tacit command of an integrated body of lore con-
cerning the lawlike relations holding among external circum-
stances, internal states, and overt behavior. Given its nature
and functions, this body of lore may quite aptly be called
“folk psychology.” (p. 207)
Churchland (1990, 1991) is one of the most forceful supporters of
the idea that folk psychology is an “empirical theory that is subject to
the same canons of empirical evaluation as any other” (Davies & Stone,
1995b, p. 7). According to Churchland (1991) the theory may be eval-
uated for its virtues and may be rejected fully if it fails the measure
of evaluation. Indeed, the evaluation is very simple. The framework of
folk psychology as an empirical theory is successful if it helps explaining
and predicting human behavior at large. Churchland (1991) criticizes
those who ask for a justiﬁcation of folk psychology and suggests that
“folk psychology is justiﬁed by what standardly justiﬁes any conceptual
framework: namely, its explanatory, predictive, and manipulative suc-
cess” (p. 61).
13

2 Theory Theory
One common objection to the framework of folk psychology is that it
does not have the character of genuine causal/explanatory laws. Rather,
the theory and its laws have some other, less empirical status, such as
that of normative principles. Churchland (1991) on the other hand de-
fends the empirical and theoretical nature of folk psychology. He groups
folk psychological concepts into two broad classes. First, there are fully
intentional concepts expressing various propositional attitudes, such as
beliefs and desires. Second, there are non-intentional or quasi-intentional
concepts expressing all other mental states, such as grief, fear, pain and
hunger. Churchland (1991, p. 53) lists some typical generalizations for
the latter type, including:
• A person who suﬀers severe bodily damage will feel pain.
• A person who suﬀers a sudden sharp pain will wince.
• A person denied food for any length will feel hunger.
He furthermore observes that these generalizations, “and thousands
more like them” (p. 53), are causal/explanatory in character. They are
used for simple explanations and have a great importance in folk psychol-
ogy. Churchland claims that “concepts of this simple sort carry perhaps
the major part of the folk psychological burden” (p. 53). Furthermore,
he suggests that concepts expressing propositional attitudes are empirical
since “on the basis of presumed information about the current cognitive
states of the relevant individuals, one can nonaccidentally predict at least
some of their future behavior some of the time. But any principle that
allows us to do this – that is, to predict one empirical state or event on
the basis of another, logically distinct, empirical state or event – has to
be empirical in character” (p. 54). These logical relations are akin to
those in high-grade theoretical frameworks in science. Summing up, the
14

2 Theory Theory
simpler parts of folk psychology are causal and the more complex parts
posses the same sophisticated logical structure as powerful theories in
science.
One implication of the theoretical nature of folk psychology is that
it is not dependent on knowledge of one’s own mind, and, more broadly,
that it is not dependent on human psychology. In other words, TT does
not require a speciﬁc psychology from the attributor. Anyone, includ-
ing Martians (Churchland, 1990), who knows the laws and propositions
which make up folk psychology can form predictions and explanations
through proper reasoning and use of the laws. Goldman (unpublished)
describes this feature of TT in more detail:
[T]he body of knowledge used to make attributions would be
just as eﬀective, or accurate, in the hands of an alien creature
as it [is] in the hands of a human attributor. If the alien is
just as competent at wielding this body of knowledge as a
human, the fact that the alien might have a radically diﬀerent
psychology from his human target would make no diﬀerence.
(p. 4)
This characteristic can be seen as a great advantage of TT. For one,
it would imply that artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) should be possible in prin-
ciple and that we can expect computers and robots which understand
folk psychology.2 Furthermore, a merely theoretical framework is often
much easier to study and investigate since it can largely be explored
without having to pay attention to the attributor’s speciﬁc features and
characteristics.
2In fact, there are projects, such as Cyc (http://www.cyc.com/), which try to teach
computers folk physics and folk psychology.
15

2 Theory Theory
2.2 TT and ‘Reality’
Folk psychology (FP) is supposed to be a very old theory and like other
folk theories it has changed little or not at all since ancient times (Car-
ruthers, 1996; Churchland, 1991).3 Since FP is an empirical theory, it is
possible in principle that it is false. This means that it could be that “its
principles are radically false and that its ontology is an illusion” (Church-
land, 1990, p. 210). Any part of FP might be “overthrown and replaced
by some other doctrine” (Dennett, 1991, p. 135). In fact, insights won
through the huge progress in recent times in neuroscience suggest that
FP most likely does not describe cognitive processes adequately.
However, it is important not to draw wrong conclusions from these
observations. It does not necessarily mean that FP will be given up for a
more correct, scientiﬁc theory. Dennett (1991), for example, underlines
that FP is here to stay:
What I want to stress is that for all its blemishes, warts, and
perplexities, folk psychology is an extraordinarily powerful
source of prediction. It is not just prodigiously powerful but
also remarkably easy for human beings to use. (p. 135)
What one has to keep in mind is that the debate whether theory
of mind is based on a theory or on simulation is the question of how
we perform mentalizing in our everyday life. The question whether this
layman understanding describes mental concepts properly in a scientiﬁc
sense is on a totally diﬀerent level. There is only one position which
suggests that folk psychological understanding and a scientiﬁc theory
cannot exist at the same time, namely eliminativism.
There are various theories about the relation between people’s un-
derstanding of qualitative states and their mentalizing ability, and the
3Our scientiﬁc and philosophical understanding of folk psychology, however, has
changed dramatically and is still adapting to new insights.
16

2 Theory Theory
mental states in the brain as discovered and described by neuroscience on
the other side. The identity-theorist thinks that it will be possible to re-
duce FP to neuroscience smoothly. The ontology of FP will be preserved
and relations to scientiﬁc entities be shown. The dualist on the other
hand thinks that such a reduction will not be possible since non-physical
entities are involved. The eliminative materialists think that FP will be
replaced by a better theory because they see FP as a “radically inade-
quate account of our internal activities, too confused and too defective
to win survival through intertheoretic reduction” (Churchland, 1990, p.
209–210).
Initially I have claimed that theory theory was an empirical theory
which is not immune to revision. However, revision does not necessarily
mean that the whole theory will be replaced by a better one, as it is
the goal of the eliminative materialist. FP could be improved within its
framework. Although FP might not be accurate on the level of brain
states, it does describe the empirical circumstances in the user’s envi-
ronment properly and therefore allows adequate explanations and pre-
dictions. After all, it is not the goal of FP to give a proper account of
neuroscience, but to allow mindreading.
2.3 Acquiring Folk Psychology
The question how this mindreading facility is actually acquired remains,
however. As seen previously, folk psychology has much in common with
professional science. There are diﬀerences as well, though. Folk psychol-
ogy is “not learned by way of explicit formal teaching; nor is it written
up in text book form” (Davies & Stone, 1995b, p. 12). Churchland sug-
gests that the principles making up the theoretical framework of FP are
17

2 Theory Theory
learned “at mother’s knee, as we learn our language” (cited in Davies &
Stone, 1995b, p. 10). In other words, the laws are acquired as we grow
up by implicit “teaching” through others (especially our mothers) and
by learning step by step by living together with other people and having
social interactions all the time.
Carruthers (1996) opposes this idea and suggests instead that the
folk psychological theory is given innately, rather than acquired through
learning of any sort. He has two main arguments to support his nativistic
thesis. First, if one pictures young children as little scientists constructing
a theory, it is strange that they all come to the same theory at the
same time (which they in fact do at about the age of four). Second,
if FP on the other hand is learned from adults, how should that take
place without explicit teaching? Furthermore, Carruthers observes that
the folk psychological theory has remained invariant across cultures and
historical eras, which he ﬁnds strange if the theory is a cultural construct.
Although Carruthers does not mention it, one might also view autism as
supporting the nativistic theory. However, this disorder can just as well
be accounted for with a non-nativistic explanation. It could be that the
facility which normally allows children to learn the theory is impaired.
The question whether FP is learned or given at birth can certainly
not be answered satisfactorily at this point. However, in my opinion,
there are some arguments against Carruthers’ thesis. He himself claims
that the suggestion that FP might be innate “is not at all implausible,
given the crucial role that it plays in facilitating communication and
social co-operation in highly social creatures such as ourselves” (Car-
ruthers, 1996, p. 23). This argument can, however, be directed against
Carruthers as well since – with the same plausibility as giving FP innately
– nature could have created a very eﬀective device to allow the learning
of such a theory. This in turn could explain why children come to the
18

2 Theory Theory
same theory at about the same time. The advantage of this approach
over hardcoding a theory is that it is more ﬂexible and allows the theory
to be adapted more easily. The question how FP can be learned from
adults without formal teaching is similar to the one asked in linguistics.
The fact that people of diﬀerent nationalities speak diﬀerent languages
obviously suggests that language itself is not innate. Why then should a
folk psychological framework be given innately?
Interestingly, the study of FP shows further parallels to problems in
linguistics. Although we are ﬂuent in our mother tongue and can solve
many linguistic problems without thinking, we fail completely when we
try to describe the laws which determine our language. The same goes
for FP, which Churchland (1991) describes very eloquently:
If one’s capacity for understanding and predicting the be-
havior of others derives from one’s internal storage of thou-
sands of laws or nomic generalizations, how is it that one is
so poor at enunciating the laws on which one’s explanatory
and predictive prowess depends? It seems to take a trained
philosopher to reconstruct them! (p. 61–62)
This is not necessarily an argument for us not really using laws and
sentences at all (and that therefore simulation theory should be used to
explain ToM). It merely shows the tacit nature of the folk psychological
framework which I discussed at the beginning of this chapter.
2.4 Testing for Theory of Mind
While the question how exactly theory of mind is acquired remains open,
it appears that children at about the age of four show a folk psychological
understanding which is, at least in the main areas, comparable to that
19

2 Theory Theory
of adults. One could ask for a test which shows how far theory of mind
is developed. In fact, since the work with chimpanzees by Premack &
Woodruﬀ(1978) “false belief has been considered a kind of litmus test
for the presence of a theory of mind” (Barresi & Moore, 1996, p. 118).
Wimmer & Perner (1983) developed the ﬁrst false belief task for chil-
dren, and carried out a widely acclaimed experiment. In the task children
are presented with the following story: Maxi places some chocolate in a
cupboard in the kitchen and leaves the room. While Maxi is away, an-
other character takes the chocolate from the ﬁrst cupboard and puts it
in the second cupboard, and then leaves. When Maxi returns, the child
is asked to predict where Maxi will look for the chocolate.4 The correct
answer of course is that Maxi will look for the chocolate were he left it
(i.e. in the ﬁrst cupboard).
In the experiment, two groups of children have been studied. The
children in the ﬁrst group had an average age of about three, the second
group of roughly ﬁve. For the experiment to work properly, the experi-
mentator of course has to ensure that the child understands the story and
remembers where the chocolate has been placed. After the experiment
had been performed, it has been shown that the younger group failed to
answer the question correctly while children in the older group had little
diﬃculty giving the correct answer. The older children understand that
Maxi does not know that the chocolate has been moved while he was out
of the room and that he will therefore act upon a false belief.
The assumption why older children get it right while younger ones
do not is that
the older children have an understanding of folk psychology
that is in key respects identical to the understanding that the
4A similar version is that Sally puts a marble in a basket. While she is away, Anne
moves the marble to a box. Again, the child has to guess where Sally will expect
to ﬁnd the marble.
20

2 Theory Theory
mature adult has, whereas the younger children lack some
aspects of adult understanding. Given this assumption, the
experiment becomes a diagnostic of whether a child has at-
tained the mature state with respect to key components of
the conceptual repertoire that comprises our folk psychology.
(Davies & Stone, 1995b, p. 3)
Barresi & Moore (1996) try to give an account of why the task is so
hard to accomplish for children under the age of four. They argue that
the younger children typically fail because they answer “on the basis of
the real location of the hidden object” (p. 119). Clearly, there is no “real
location” independent of any agent or observer. What Barresi & Moore
mean by “real location” is the content of the child’s own current belief.
However, it does not necessarily correspond to the real location. After
all, it is imaginable that the object in the false belief task is moved again
without the knowledge of the child participating in the experiment.
Barresi & Moore identify two critical aspects about the task. First,
the child has to “generate a representation of the agent’s epistemic rela-
tion to the situation, for which that agent’s third person information is
not perceptually given” (p. 119). Second, it has to image the ﬁrst person
information of the agent, while at the same time having a diﬀerent ﬁrst
person intentional relation. This is critical because it implies that “nei-
ther current third person information nor current ﬁrst person information
are available to generate the requisite representation of the intentional
relation” (p. 119).
However, according to their theory, younger chil-
dren can only imagine one component of an intentional relation. When
younger children are presented with third person information, they are
able to imagine the ﬁrst person information. However, when third person
information lacks as well, they can only generate a presentation of the
other’s intentional relation by using the current ﬁrst person information
21

2 Theory Theory
of themselves. Unfortunately, this leads to a wrong prediction. Only at
about the age of four children get the “capacity to perform what amounts
to a double imaginative act, whereby the child can generate, through the
use of the intentional schema, a representation of an intentional relation
for which both ﬁrst and third person information are imagined” (p. 119).
A diﬀerent account of the failure in the false belief task is Josef
Perner’s theory (1991) about meta-representation. He argues that one
has to be capable of meta-representational thought in order to solve the
false belief task. In other words, one needs to have the ability to repre-
sent someone else’s act of representing the world. Perner suggests that
children at the age of two are situation theorists. At about four a shift
happens and children become representation theorists. This leads to the
understanding that beliefs are attitudes towards representations of reality
rather than towards reality itself.
The simulation theorists have a radical diﬀerent explanation for the
failure of children younger than four in the false belief task, as we will
shortly see.
22

3 Simulation Theory
The history of simulation theory reaches back quite far. Simulation (or
empathy) has roots in Dilthey’s Verstehen methodology and Goldman
(unpublished) argues that the great philosophers Hume and especially
Kant had strong simulationist learnings.
Similarly, Perner & Howes
(1992) describe that simulation is an old idea in developmental psychol-
ogy circles which has great importance in Piaget’s psychology. In partic-
ular, simulation – known as role-taking or perspective-taking in Piaget’s
theory – helps young children overcome their egocentric views.
According to Fuller (1995), simulation and empathy was “killed and
buried” by the positivists (p. 19). They distinguished between the con-
text of discovery and the context of justiﬁcation and claimed that em-
pathy only belonged to the former context.
While simulation can be
used as a great heuristic device to suggest predictive and explanatory
hypotheses, it cannot be used to justify these hypotheses – formulation
and testing of generalizations have to be done for a proper justiﬁcation.
However, empathy and simulation have been resurrected in the last
few decades. Putnam (cited in Fuller, 1995, p. 19), for example, argues
that empathy plays a role in justiﬁcation of hypotheses because it “gives
plausibility”.
Simulation theory (ST) today has a strong inﬂuence on the philos-
ophy of mind debate. ST suggests that we do not understand others
through the use of a folk psychological theory. Rather, we use our own
23

3 Simulation Theory
mental apparatus to form predictions and explanations of someone by
putting ourselves in the shoes of another person and simulating them. ST
is often described as oﬀ-line simulation, although there are philosophers
who maintain that oﬀ-line simulation is only an ancillary hypothesis of
ST (see Davies & Stone, 1995a, p. 4). In oﬀ-line simulation, one takes
one’s own decision-making system oﬀ-line and supplies it with pretend
inputs of beliefs and desires of the person one wishes to simulate in order
to predict their behavior. One then lets one’s decision-making system do
the work and come to a prediction.
There are many variants of ST, some diﬀering more than others.
While some philosophers suggest a hybrid theory of TT and ST, others
argue that ST should replace the predominant TT. Gordon, for example,
who holds some of the strongest claims, suggests that simulation is fun-
damental to the mastery of psychological concepts and that it has ram-
iﬁcations for the ontology of psychological states (Fuller, 1995). While
there are many varieties and diﬀerent views of ST, all have in common
that simulation acts as a very eﬀective device for forming predictions
and explanations. This leads to an important implication of ST. Since
simulation depends on one’s own mental apparatus, it is clear that ST
(in contrast to TT) is attributor dependent.
3.1 ST as a ‘Hot Theory’
Gordon (1996) describes theory theory as a cold theory. A cold method-
ology mainly uses intellectual processes, makes inferences from one set
of beliefs to another and “makes no essential use of our own capacities
for emotion, motivation, and practical reasoning” (p. 11). On the other
hand, there is the hot methodology. It makes use of one’s own moti-
24

3 Simulation Theory
vational and emotional resources and one’s own capacity for practical
reasoning. Simulation theory is a typical hot methodology.
In a similar way as Gordon, Goldman (unpublished) distinguishes
between attributor neutral (AN) and attributor dependent (AD) heuris-
tics. In the discussion about the characteristics of TT and the possibility
of AI (see page 15), it has clearly been shown that TT is an AN heuristic.
Goldman argues for AD heuristics from an evolutionary perspective. He
ﬁrst cites David Marr saying that “an algorithm is likely to be under-
stood more readily by understanding the nature of the problem being
solved”. Then, he suggests that AD heuristics are ecologically rational
because other human beings have “major psychological similarities to any
prospective attributor” (p. 3). It is therefore very eﬀective to use one’s
own mind since one can achieve accurate predictions and explanations
with few cognitive resources.
Since AD heuristics are so eﬀective, Goldman suspects that “evo-
lution might have hit upon this kind of heuristic” (p. 3). At the same
time he suggests that evolution gave us more than only one mentalizing
strategy. In neuroscience it is common knowledge that one can often
learn a task again after an impairment occurred using non-standard re-
sources. Goldman names autism as a case of this for the mindreading
ability. While autistic children are impaired in the mentalizing domain,1
they can learn to use theorizing resources to perform mindreading.
While Goldman is a proponent of the AD model, he points out an
important problem this approach has to face. When we put ourselves
in the shoes of someone else, this simulation “does not involve the very
same states in the attributor as those undergone by the target” (p. 11).
Rather than having beliefs and desires, the simulator has pretend beliefs
and pretend desires. The important question therefore is whether these
1This means, according to Goldman, that their simulation capability is impaired.
25

3 Simulation Theory
pretend states are “suﬃciently similar – in psychological and perhaps
neurological terms – to their genuine counterparts” (p. 11).
Goldman clearly thinks that they are suﬃciently similar and presents
evidence from various domains. Speciﬁcally, he names visual imagery
(pretense-generated vision) and motor imagery (pretense-generated mo-
tor instructions) as supporting the similarity of real and pretense states.
The experiment of Shepard & Metzler (1971) about visual imagery is
famous in psychology. Their experiment about mental rotation showed
that rotating an object mentally takes roughly the same time as it would
take to rotate it in reality. Similarly, sport psychologists have known for a
long time that “athletes can enhance their performance by merely mental
rehearsal” (Goldman, unpublished, p. 12). Yue & Cole (1992) published
a study in which they compared subjects who actually trained with sub-
jects who generated appropriate motor imagery. The study shows that
training leads to an increase of 30% in maximal force while motor im-
agery leads to an increase of 22%. This clearly shows that motor imagery
has a great impact on strength, even if not as much as real training.
Goldman concludes that “all this indicates that pretense can often
produce close facsimiles of naturally-generated states, which bodes well
for the accuracy potential of pretense-based attributions of many types
of states, including the attitudes” (p. 12). This suggests that pretend
states won through simulation can in fact be used to make predictions
and explanations of real states.
26

3 Simulation Theory
3.2 Simulation in More Detail
3.2.1 From First to Third Person Statements
The basic idea of simulation theory is that one uses one’s own mental
apparatus to simulate others and thereby comes to predictions and ex-
planations. One motivation for simulation is that while the prediction
of other people’s behavior can be diﬃcult, the prediction of “our own
immediate and near immediate actions is usually a simple and accurate
matter” (Davies & Stone, 1995b, p. 15). Gordon (1995a, p. 60) gives
some samples of his own accurate self-predictions:
• I shall now pour some coﬀee.
• I shall now pick up the cup.
• I shall now drink the coﬀee.
• I shall now switch on the word processor.
• I shall now draft the opening paragraphs of a paper on folk psy-
chology.
These statements on the whole are liable to be correct. Gordon notes
that these self-predictions have “a success rate that would be the envy
of any behavioral or neurobehavioral science” (p. 61). He then observes
that these ﬁrst-person statements are not very diﬀerent to those of the
third-person case. According to Gordon, the diﬀerence is only a matter of
degree. Given that the ﬁrst-person predictive statements are so accurate,
one might wonder whether “the psychological mechanisms that are used
in making them might be put at the service of more diﬃcult predictive
tasks” (Davies & Stone, 1995b, p. 16).
27

3 Simulation Theory
If one wonders how one would act if one were alone in the house
and heard a sound in the basement, then one can use the same decision-
making processes that one would use if one actually were in this situation
in order to get an answer. The big question is whether it is possible to
extend the ﬁrst-person based methodology to third-person cases. Gordon
(1995a) thinks that this is indeed possible:
As in the case of hypothetical self-prediction, the methodol-
ogy essentially involves deciding what to do; but, extended
to people of ‘minds’ diﬀerent from one’s own, this is not the
same as deciding what I myself would do. One tries to make
adjustments for relevant diﬀerences. (p. 63)
In other words, you do not merely simulate that you are in the
other’s situation but the simulation is carried out having the other per-
son’s psychological traits. You therefore simulate being the other. When
Robert M. Gordon (RMG) simulates someone, the referent “I” ceases to
be RMG and becomes the person he is simulating. Gordon underlines
this by saying that simulation requires not a transfer but a transforma-
tion (Davies & Stone, 1995a).
3.2.2 Some Examples of Simulation
Simulation theorists often use the example of the understanding of the
eﬀects of a new drug on the human body when talking about the advan-
tages of simulation over a theoretical framework. When a new drug is
developed and one wants to know which reactions it will have on the hu-
man body, the scientiﬁc knowledge of pharmacology and physiology could
be used. This theoretical framework would allow us to generate hypothe-
ses about the drug’s eﬀects. However, there is another method available
to the researcher which is in fact commonly used in practice. One could
28

3 Simulation Theory
administer the drug to non-human animals which are similar to humans.
In this case, one would, however, need a theoretical understanding in or-
der to map the insights won in the experiments with non-human animals
onto humans. However, when human guinea pigs are used, simulation
theorists argue that this theoretical understanding is not necessary since
“the bodily organs of human beings are being used in order to discover
the eﬀects of the drug” (Davies & Stone, 1995b, p. 17). It is important to
note that in this example simulation is presented as an eﬀective device;
in this view, ST is not necessarily incompatible with TT. More radical
simulation theorists would disagree with this point of view.
Another common example used to illustrate ST is the Tees/Crane
experiment (Kahneman & Tversky, 1982). In the experiment, subjects
are ﬁrst read a story and then asked a question. The story is about Mr
Crane and Mr Tees who are scheduled to leave the airport on diﬀerent
ﬂights, at the same time. They go to the airport in the same car and
get caught in a traﬃc jam, thus arriving at the airport 30 minutes after
the scheduled departure time of their ﬂights. Mr Crane is told that his
ﬂight left on time. Mr Tees on the other hand is told that his ﬂight was
delayed and left just ﬁve minutes ago. The question for the subjects then
is: who is more upset?
The experiment showed that 96% subjects thought that Mr Tees
would be more upset. Simulation theories usually claim that the subjects
in the experiment come to an answer by simulating. They use their own
mental apparatus to predict how the two characters in the story would
feel. Of course they do not themselves become angry or resigned since
their mental organs are operating oﬀ-line.
Finally, Fuller (1995) describes a story from his life to illustrate ST.
He usually gets his sister a book for Christmas or her birthday and uses
empathy and simulation to ﬁnd the right book. Since he and his sister
29

3 Simulation Theory
have the same taste in literature, he simply reads the book himself and
if he likes it he assumes that she will do so a well. According to Fuller,
she has “rarely been disappointed” (p. 21).
3.2.3 Simulation Without the Concept of Belief
Gordon, who is one of the most radical simulation theorists, claims that
simulation is suﬃcient for providing children with intentional concepts
like belief, knowledge and desire. He says:
1. Let’s do a Smith simulation. Ready? Dewey won the
election.. .
2. Smith believes that Dewey won the election.
My suggestion is that (2) be read as saying the same thing
as (1), although less explicitly.
(Gordon, 1995a, p. 68)
I will use the false belief task to illustrate this claim. In order to
solve the problem of the false belief task, one has to – according to the
simulation theorists – identify oneself with the person in the story (Sally
or Maxi). Gordon says that one has to imaginatively identify with Sally
and imagine the world from Sally’s point of view. Even though the child
knows that the marble is not in the basket, she (from Sally’s point of
view) has to hold the following thought:
I [Sally] believe that the marble is in the basket.
Gordon then argues that one does not need to have a concept of
belief at all in order to hold this belief. The “I believe that” could just
as well be deleted. The child, who identiﬁes with Sally, thus simply has
to hold the thought
The marble is in the basket.
30

3 Simulation Theory
The child does not need the full concept of belief – it merely needs
to be able to have beliefs!
In order words, according to Gordon
I believe that p
can always be reduced simply to
p
as seen in his example with Smith and Dewey given at the beginning
of this section.
This claim of Gordon is quite controversial among theory theorists as
well as simulation theorists. Perner & Howes (1992), who evaluate diﬀer-
ent ST positions, describe a more cautious claim of simulation theorists
which suggests that simulation is “at best necessary (but not suﬃcient)
for the acquisition of intentional concepts” (p. 75). In this view, simu-
lation provides a useful, and perhaps necessary, source of data for the
acquisition of concepts but “does not in itself constitute understanding
of these concepts” (p. 75).
The question of the relation between simulation and the concept
of intentional states and the understanding of psychology is answered
diﬀerently by many simulation theorists. Gordon’s claim is certainly the
most interesting one but at the same time the most controversial and
criticized one. I will discuss the various positions in more detail later.
3.2.4 ST and the False Belief Task
As seen in chapter 2.4, the false belief task is commonly used to test for
the presence of a theory of mind which is comparable to that of adults
in the main respects.
While it has been shown how theory theorists
31

3 Simulation Theory
explain the failure of children younger than four in the false belief task,
the explanation of the simulation theorists has not been given yet.
Simulation theorists obviously think that ﬁve year old children solve
the problem through simulation. Therefore, the simulation has to fail for
younger people. The question is “why”. Harris suggests that younger
children fail because the complexity of the imaginative task that they
face is beyond them. The simulation would require “overwriting current
reality (in which the marble is in the box), and adopting the divergent
stance towards the world that imaginatively taking on that belief in-
volves” (Davies & Stone, 1995b, p. 31). Davies & Stone conclude that:
The child of ﬁve succeeds where the child of three fails because
the older child has an ability to simulate another whose view
upon the world is diﬀerent from his own. (The child subject
saw the marble moved from the basket to the box; Sally in
contrast was out of the room, and so quite literally had a
diﬀerent view.) (p. 6)
This view contains an important implication. While the implication
is not surprising, it has not yet been expressed explicitly in the discus-
sion of simulation. The explanation of the false belief test suggests that
simulation is an ability rather than knowledge. While development has
been explained as theory reductions and changes in knowledge by the
theory theorists, simulation theorists view development as the reﬁne-
ment of a skill. Children gradually become “more adept at imaginatively
identifying with other people and at imaging counterfactual situations”
(Davies & Stone, 1995b, p. 6).
32

3 Simulation Theory
3.2.5 ST and Theoretical Knowledge
Although the view that simulation heavily depends on the reﬁnement of a
skill does not seem surprising, the question whether simulation is merely
a skill or whether it requires skill and knowledge is not uncontroversial,
as seen before in the discussion of the relation between simulation and
the concept of intentional states. It is clear that any simulation requires
information. When I want to simulate someone else being alone at home,
it helps to know whether the person is of a frightened and scared nature.
However, while this knowledge is important for a particular simulation, it
is not substantial for simulation per se. The question is whether simula-
tion requires the knowledge of a theory in order to function at all. Perner
(1991) argues that no simulation can do without theoretical knowledge:
Assume you learn that your colleague’s mother-in-law has just
died. How does he feel? It ill not do to imagine that your
mother-in-law has just died [ . . . ] because your relationship
[ . . . ] may be quite diﬀerent from your colleague’s. [ . . . ] Your
simulation must be informed by some “theory” about which
personal relationships are emotionally relevant. If you love
your mother-in-law but your colleague hates his, then your
simulation will be more accurate if you imagine the death of
one of your foes. (p. 268)
Gordon (1995b) accepts that simulation needs evidence but ques-
tions if it has to be in the form of a theory. He wonders how one uses
evidence in order to come to a prediction and suggests that it happens
“not by plugging the evidence into a general theory of the organization
of the human behavior control system, but by trying to motivate similar
behavior within the context of simulation” (Gordon, 1995b, p. 110).
33

3 Simulation Theory
3.3 Support for ST from Contemporary
Research
Simulation theory has gained a considerable momentum during the last
few years. This is in part due to new insights won in elaborate research
carried out in areas which were not connected to theory of mind in the
past – the new insights, however, showed that there are more connections
than previously thought. I am going to describe research results from two
ﬁelds which seem to support the simulation view of theory of mind.
3.3.1 Autism
The biologically based disorder of autism is often described by simulation
theorists as supporting ST. However, this claim is quite controversial.
Although an impairment of theory of mind is increasingly used by autism
researchers to explain the disorder, some prominent researchers (such as
Alan M. Leslie) use TT approaches instead of the simulation view.
Currie (1996), who examines ST, TT and the evidence from autism,
describes the two theories as the ability of knowing that (TT) and know-
ing how (ST). Instead of saying what TT and ST are he lists what people
with autism lack according to the theory. Theory theory suggests that
autism is a deﬁciency of knowledge. According to this theory, autistic
people do not know a signiﬁcant number of propositions and perhaps
cannot even formulate them. ST says that “autism is a deﬁciency of
imaginative capacity – the capacity to project the self imaginatively into
a situation other than its own current, actual position” (Currie, 1996, p.
243).
The reason why many simulation theorists use autism as a case sup-
porting ST is because of two notable aspects of autism: deﬁcits in pre-
tense (and imaginative activity in general) and mentalistic understand-
34

3 Simulation Theory
ing. The latter is clearly due to an impairment of theory of mind and
the former shows many connections to simulation, especially to the oﬀ-
line variant. In simulation, you have to pretend being the other person.
However, imagination and pretend play is obviously not possible without
being able to “separate real states of aﬀairs from states of aﬀairs that are
being pretended about” (Frith, 1996, p. 65). Without this, simulation
cannot work since you can hardly feed your own decision-making process
with pretend inputs such as pretend beliefs and pretend desires without
having the capability of pretense.
What is striking is that autistic people (even after the age of four)
have great diﬃculty with false belief tests. The Sally experiment has
been carried out with autistic patients and the results showed that most
subjects did not pass the test. ST explains the failure in terms of simu-
lative incompetence. The autistic person does not understand that the
puppet Sally “will look in the wrong place for her sweet because she has
an impaired capacity to simulate Sally, whose epistemic situation diﬀers
from the child’s own in so far as she lacks knowledge the child possesses”
(Currie, 1996, p. 248).
Similarly, autistic people fail in the Smarties false belief task. The
child is shown a closed Smarties tube and has to guess the contents.
Naturally, most children give “Smarties” or “sweets” as a reply. When
the tube is opened, a pencil comes out to the child’s suprise. The next
question is what Billy, who will arrive soon, will say when asked about
the contents of the tube. Most children say that he will give “pencil”
as an answer although they are aware what they ﬁrst thought to be the
contents before seeing the pencil (Baron-Cohen, 1995, p. 71).
However, it is to note that while most autistic people fail these tasks,
there are some who pass (about 20%). This variability of autistic per-
formance is quite hard to explain using TT since people using the same
35

3 Simulation Theory
theoretical framework would reach the same conclusions. However, ST,
which is seen as an ability, has two explanations to oﬀer. First, some peo-
ple with autism have learned to “hack out” a solution for these rather
simple and artiﬁcial tests but they do not really have the ability to men-
talize. This implies that success on false belief tasks is only to be found
in older autistic children “who have learned various rules of thumb, for
example that people who haven’t seen something don’t know about it”
(Currie, 1996, p. 247).
Second, diﬀerent autistic people have a vary-
ing degree of diﬃculty with simulation and those less aﬀected can make
simple perspective shifts required for the false belief tests.
Both explanations imply that autistic people will fail in more com-
plex false belief tasks, which – it has been shown – in fact they do.
The ﬁrst explanation ﬁts neatly with the suggestion of Goldman (un-
published) that evolution gave us more than only one mentalizing strat-
egy (see page 25). Since their simulation ability is impaired, people with
autism will try to acquire a theoretical framework in order to master their
basic life. This suggestion does indeed not seem unlikely since autistic
people have been shown to be very good with technical things and at
theorizing. This explanation, however, is not compatible with Gordon’s
point of view that simulation is necessary for the formation of mental
concepts.
It is not clear yet how much of autism can be explained by an im-
pairment of theory of mind. There are more aspects of autism than just
impairment in play, social interaction, and verbal and non–verbal com-
munication. Happ´e (1999) argues that all “deﬁcit accounts of autism
[ . . . ] fail to explain why people with autism show not only preserved
but also superior skills in certain areas” (p. 217). This should not con-
cern us, however, since it is plausible that the impairment of theory of
mind due to a simulative incompetence is still true – it just has to be
36

3 Simulation Theory
supplemented by another explanation. The case of autism is thus a good
example supporting ST.
3.3.2 Mirror Neurons
A new type of visuomotor neuron which has recently been discovered in
the monkey’s premotor cortex has gained signiﬁcant popularity within
cognitive science. It has been suggested that these neurons are used for
imitation, allow the acquisition of language (Rizzolatti & Arbib, 1998)
and enable theory of mind (Gallese & Goldman, 1998).
Neurons which discharge when the monkey grasps or manipulates
objects have been known for a long time. Recently, a new type has been
found which also discharges when the monkey observes the experimenter
making a similar gesture. Rizzolatti & Arbib (1998) describe these neu-
rons, dubbed “mirror neurons” (MN), in more detail:
The response properties of mirror neurons to visual stimuli
can be summarized as follows: mirror neurons do not dis-
charge in response to object presentation; in order to be trig-
gered they require a speciﬁc observed action. The majority of
them respond selectively when the monkey observes one type
of action (such as grasping). Some are highly speciﬁc, coding
not only the action aim, but also how that action is executed.
They ﬁre, for example, during observation of grasping move-
ments, but only when the object is grasped with the index
ﬁnger and the thumb. (p. 188)
Gallese & Goldman (1998) suggest that one function of these neu-
rons is to “enable an organism to detect certain mental states of observed
conspeciﬁcs. This function might be part of, or a precursor to, a more
general mind-reading ability” (p. 493). They argue that mind-reading
could make a contribution to inclusive ﬁtness since “detecting another
37

3 Simulation Theory
agent’s goals and/or inner states can be useful to an observer because it
helps him anticipate the agent’s future actions, which might be cooper-
ative, non-cooperative, or even threatening” (p. 495–496).
They also claim that simulation can be used to retrodict as well as
predict mental states. In other words, it is possible to determine which
mental states of a target have already occurred.
The attributor can
wonder what goals the target had that led him to perform an action.
He can then go backwards and draw an inference from the observed
action to a hypothesized goal state.
This mechanism can be used to
generate explanations of the target’s behavior. Furthermore, the mirror
neuron system can be used to produce the target’s mental states in the
attributor since the mirror neurons are active when observing another
monkey making an action. This implies that there is one system with
two distinct (but closely related) functions:
MNs respond both when a particular action is performed by
the recorded monkey and when the same action performed
by another individual is observed. All MNs [ . . . ] discharge
during speciﬁc goal-related motor acts. Grasping, manipulat-
ing and holding objects are by far the most eﬀective actions
triggering their response. (Gallese & Goldman, 1998, p. 495)
In summary, NM activity “seems to be nature’s way of getting the
observer into the same ‘mental shoes’ as the target – exactly what the
conjectured simulation heuristic aims to do” (Gallese & Goldman, 1998,
p. 497–498).
38

3 Simulation Theory
3.3.3 Combining Autism and Mirror Neurons
One might wonder if there are any connections between autism and mir-
ror neurons. After all, the ability to detect and represent mental states
of others seems to be impaired in autistic people and this is – so it has
been suggested – one function of mirror neurons.
Castelli et al. (2000) have conducted a study in order to ﬁnd out
which brain areas are involved in theory of mind. They used the PET
(positron emission tomography) technique to get images of the brain
activity of six healthy adult volunteers. The volunteers were watching
computer-presented animations which generally lead to the attribution
of mental states. The study clearly showed that some speciﬁc areas were
more active during the mentalizing tasks than during the control period.
Abell et al. (200) went one step further and showed that these brain areas
are less active in autistic children.
It has been suggested that the brain areas which have been found in
these studies correspond to the areas where mirror neurons are generally
found. It is not clear yet whether mirror neurons speciﬁcally or any type
of neurons found in these particular areas are involved. It would not
be surprising, however, if evidence was found which showed that mirror
neurons played a central role. More research has to be carried out in order
to shed more light on these issues, but it certainly is intriguing that there
might be connections between two areas which seem to support ST. It
would strengthen the hypothesis of ST enormously if the case of autism,
mirror neurons and ST could be combined to form better explanations
of all issues involved.
39

3 Simulation Theory
3.4 Diﬀerent ST Positions in More Detail
Similar to theory theory, of which many diﬀerent versions have been pro-
posed, simulation theory is not one coherent theory. Instead, the term
“simulation theory” is used as an umbrella term to refer to diﬀerent the-
ories which have in common that they view mindreading as an ability
rather than the use of a theoretical framework. In the following, I am
going to give an overview of three of the most popular versions of simula-
tion theory. I will discuss the views of Paul L. Harris, Alvin I. Goldman
and Robert M. Gordon.
3.4.1 Harris
Harris’ approach to understanding theory of mind is one of developmental
psychology. He sets out the “psychological case, and more speciﬁcally the
developmental case, for the proposal that children improve their grasp
of folk psychology2 by means of a simulation process” (Harris, 1995, p.
207). He maintains that improvement in the mindreading ability stems
“from changes in the child’s imaginative ﬂexibility, rather than from a
transformation in the child’s so called theory of mind” (p. 216). In or-
der to execute appropriate simulation thoughts, those acts must usually
override a “background of default settings” (Harris, cited in Davies &
Stone, 1995b, p. 30). Children are increasingly able to deal with the high
number of adjustments needed in order to perform accurate simulations.
Harris’ approach to simulation does not claim that simulation is al-
ways accurate – not even in adults. The accuracy depends, according to
Harris (1995, p. 226):
2Harris uses the term “folk psychology” in a diﬀerent way than I do. He uses it to
refer to the general mindreading ability or understanding of theory of mind, not
to the theoretical framework postulated by theory theory.
40

3 Simulation Theory
1. on feeding in the relevant pretend inputs, and
2. on the target behavior being guided by the decision-making system.
If these two assumptions are not met, inaccurate predictions are
more than likely. Harris, who is mostly concerned with the problem how
children acquire and improve their mindreading ability, summarizes that:
In the course of development, children become increasingly
proﬁcient at feeding in the appropriate pretend inputs. Much
of that advance is constrained by increments in imaginative
power. (p. 226)
In his discussion about theory theory and simulation theory, Harris
gives the following thought experiment: English speakers are presented
with grammatical and ungrammatical sentences and they have to make
judgments about which is which. Another person is then asked to predict
what decision most people came to about each sentence. It turns out that
the person’s hit rate is very high.
In almost every case you can tell me whether the majority
judged the sentence to be grammatical or ungrammatical.
Moreover, when I ask you to explain your predictions you
do so by indicating deviant constructions or morphemes in
the ungrammatical sentences, something that speakers in the
ﬁrst part of the study also did. How are your predictions so
accurate? (Harris, 1995, p. 210)
Harris replies that the most plausible answer is that one simply read
each sentence and asked oneself whether it sounded grammatical or not.
Furthermore, one assumed that other English speakers would come to
the same conclusions for the same reason.
Stich & Nichols (1995) agree that the sort of predictive strategy
Harris sketches generalizes to many other cases. They wonder what their
41

3 Simulation Theory
Rutgers colleagues would say when asked: “Who is the President of Rut-
gers University?” and conclude that “we would proceed by ﬁrst answer-
ing the question ourselves [ . . . ] and since we assume that our colleagues
[ . . . ] believe the same things we do on questions like this, we would
predict that they would say the same thing we would” (p. 93).
While Stich & Nichols agree that this strategy can be seen as a sort
of simulation, it is radically diﬀerent to oﬀ-line simulation, which is so
typical for ST. They then try to explain the diﬀerence:
On the oﬀ-line simulation account, the information about the
target’s belief (along, perhaps, with some other information
about the target’s desires and further beliefs) is fed into our
own decision-making system. That makes a decision which,
rather than being acted on, is transformed into a prediction
and reported to the “belief box”. (p. 94)
In the thought experiment about grammatical and ungrammatical
sentences, however, simulation does not take the states of the target into
account. One’s decision-making system is not fed with such states either.
Instead, we ﬁrst determine what we believe ourselves and then attribute
the same belief to someone else. While Stich & Nichols agree that this
is a very plausible account of the way in which we sometimes ﬁgure out
what other people believe, they are quite sceptic to what amount this
type of simulation contributes to ST. They observe that:
It is not a process which results in predictions of behavior, and
it is compatible with both the theory-theory and the oﬀ-line
simulation theory, each of which provides an account of how
we use information about a person’s beliefs, desires, and other
mental states in producing predictions about that person’s
behavior. (p. 94)
Stich & Nichols dub this type of simulation “type-1 Harris simula-
tion” and go on to sketch another, more controversial sort of simulation,
42

3 Simulation Theory
which they believe Harris has also in mind. They begin with a “Harris-
style thought experiment” (p. 94):
Sven believes that all Italians like pasta. Sven is introduced
to Maria, and he is told that she is Italian. (p. 95)
Now someone is asked what Sven would say if he was asked: “Does
Maria like pasta?” One way to answer this question is to make use of a
theoretical framework about how people form beliefs from other beliefs.
Using theory theory, one could infer that Sven will come to believe that
Maria likes pasta. Another way to solve the problem would be to use
a simulation process and “feed pretend or hypothetical inputs into your
own inference mechanism, and then allow it to churn away as it normally
does and draw appropriate conclusions” (Stich & Nichols, 1995, p. 95).
The pretend inputs would be:
All Italians like pasta.
and
Maria is an Italian.
Quite obviously, the conclusion would be:
Maria likes pasta.
According to Stich & Nichols, the conclusion that Maria likes pasta is
not directly given to your belief box. If it were, you would end up believ-
ing that Maria likes pasta, rather than you believing that Sven holds this
belief. Therefore, the conclusion “churned out by your inference mecha-
nism is attributed to Sven” (p. 95). This implies that there must be a
mechanism which takes “the output of your inference box and embeds it
in a belief-sentence before it is fed into your belief box” (p. 95). Stich &
Nichols call this inference simulation process “type-2 Harris simulation”.
43

3 Simulation Theory
The most interesting insight won through the discussions of Stich &
Nichols besides the detailed distinction between type-1 and type-2 Harris
simulation is that both forms seem to be compatible with theory theory.
While Harris (1995) maintains that children learn to grasp mindreading
through simulation, he agrees that “there is no reason to doubt that
adults resort to theories, be they tacit or explicit, in explaining and
predicting behaviour” (p. 226). Therefore, it would not be surprising
if he largely agreed with the observations made by Stich & Nichols. In
an “one-eyed overview of a debate”, Leslie & German (1995) give their
summary of Harris’ version of simulation theory:
Harris has in mind a notion of simulation that is very broad
indeed, encompassing almost any use of one’s own knowledge
in the interpretation of another person’s behavior, including,
for example, using one’s knowledge of English to understand
what someone says to you. This will almost guarantee that
most theory of mind abilities involve “simulation”, but such
an outcome is largely a terminological victory. (p. 127)
This problem becomes very obvious in the example of Sven and
Maria. The pretend inputs of the simulation are typical premises used
in logical deductions. If it is held that a simulation is used instead of
a deduction, then the boundaries between simulation and TT begin to
blur.
44

3 Simulation Theory
3.4.2 Goldman
In his important 1989 paper “Interpretation Psychologized” in Mind and
Language,3 Alvin I. Goldman asks how people arrive at attributions of
propositional attitudes (and other mental states). In his investigation, he
assumes that the interpreters themselves have beliefs and ﬁnds it hard to
imagine the problem without this assumption. He points out that there
are three types of interpretation theories:
1. Rationality theories which rely on the basic presumption that an
“attributor A operates on the assumption that the agent in ques-
tion, S, is rational” (Goldman, 1995a, p. 75). In other words, the
agent acts according to an ideal or normative model of proper infer-
ence and choice. Goldman names Daniel C. Dennett’s intentional
stance as an example for a rationality theory. Intentional states
are attributed using the intentional stance by “ﬁrst postulating
ideal rationality on the part of the target system, and then trying
to predict and/or explain the system’s behavior in terms of such
rationality” (p. 76).
2. Folk theory theories which postulate that attributors somehow ac-
quire a common-sense or folk psychological theory. Goldman claims
that such theories face three problems: vagueness, inaccuracy, and
non-universality. First, the laws constituting the folk psychological
theory are so vague that no reliable interpretive conclusion can be
drawn. Second, the theory is only useful if the laws are actually
more or less true. However, Goldman doubts that “ordinary inter-
preters [ . . . ] posses laws that are true” (p. 79). Third, a common
assumption of theory theories is that most competent users of the
3Reprinted as Goldman (1995a).
45

3 Simulation Theory
folk psychological theory share a common set of laws and plati-
tudes. Goldman thinks that “this universality assumption is very
dubious” (p. 79).
3. Simulation theory, which Goldman describes and defends in his
1989 and other papers, such as Goldman (1995b).
Goldman’s view of simulation theory is a very interesting account of
simulation. Goldman (1995a) suggests that we do not use a mathematical
decision theory to make predictions but rather “consider what we should
do if we had the relevant beliefs and desires” (p. 81). One ascribes mental
states to others by pretending and imagining oneself being in the other’s
shoes. One ﬁrst generates the states in which the person is in oneself and
then acts thereupon. Goldman summarizes this process by saying that
“we simulate the situation of others, and interpret them accordingly”
(p. 81). While simulation is often described as an eﬀective heuristic to
predict beliefs, desires and other states, it is “also relevant in inferring
actions from mental states, not just mental states from other mental
states” (p. 82).
It is important to note an important diﬀerence to Gordon’s view of
simulation (which will be covered right after Goldman). While Goldman
claims that we put ourselves in the shoes of someone else and simulate
the other person, Gordon sees simulation as a transformation rather than
a transfer. In other words, during simulation Robert M. Gordon (RMG)
ceases to be RMG and instead becomes the person he simulates. Such a
transformation is not postulated by Goldman’s theory, however.
In his introduction to simulation, Goldman suggests that it seems –
introspectively – as if we were using simulation quite regularly in order
to try to predict the behavior of the people around us. We often imagine
ourselves in their situation and determine what they might think. For ex-
46

3 Simulation Theory
ample, when we are playing chess, I may try to predict the other player’s
next move by imaging myself being in their position and deciding what
I would choose to do. Goldman (1995a) summarizes this method and its
assumptions:
From your perceptual situation, I infer that you have certain
perceptual experiences or beliefs, the same ones I would have
in your situation. I may also assume (pending information
to the contrary) that you have the same basic likings that I
have: for food, love, warmth, and so on. (p. 82)
Goldman underlines that the simulation procedure cannot be used
too simplistically. In order to come to adequate predictions using sim-
ulation, one has to pay attention to individual diﬀerences.
Goldman
suggests that if “I am a chess novice and you are a master, or vice versa,
it would be foolish to assume that your analysis would match mine” (p.
82). In order to optimize the use of simulation, one must not only imag-
ine oneself being in possession of the other’s goals and beliefs but also in
possession of the other’s level of chess sophistication. Goldman notes that
people may not always take such factors into account, or frequently lack
the information needed to make an adequate and accurate adjustment.
He does therefore not assume that people are always successful or opti-
mal simulators. As such, he does not propose that simulation is a perfect
method or the only method used for interpersonal mental ascriptions or
for prediction of behavior. He proposes, however, that simulation is “the
fundamental method used for arriving at mental ascriptions of others”
(p. 83).
While Goldman views simulation as the primary method of forming
mental ascriptions and predicting other people, he suggests that it is
very plausible that evolution gave us more than only one mentalizing
strategy (Goldman (unpublished); also see page 25 where I have discussed
47

3 Simulation Theory
this before).
In particular, he names theory theory as an alternative
to simulation. However, he also mentions that the use of a theoretical
framework alone is not as eﬀective as simulation, as seen in the cases of
autistic people who are able to complete easy false belief tasks, but who
largely fail on harder tasks and in real world situations.
In fact, Goldman (1995a) claims that we often develop “general-
izations and other inductively formed representations (schemas, scripts,
and so forth) that can trigger analogous interpretations by application
of [ . . . ] ‘knowledge structures’ alone, sans simulation” (p. 88). As an
illustration, Goldman gives the example of Jones and Brown. Jones al-
ways greets people with a smile whereas Brown greets them with a grunt.
People can then form expectations without the use of simulation since
there is a regularity in the behavior of Jones and Brown. As a second ex-
ample, Goldman says that we do not need simulation in order to predict
that people who enter a car in the driver’s seat will typically proceed to
start it. Goldman views simulation as an intensively used heuristic on
which interpretation fundamentally rests, but accepts that inductive or
nomological information is not wholly absent. However, it plays a less
important role than in theory theory. Goldman (1995a) summarizes that
“simulation remains the fundamental source of interpretation, though
not the essence of every act (or even most acts) of interpretation” (p.
88).
Additionally, Goldman suggests that we use simulation to a larger
extend that we think. While we know that we sometimes use simulation
to predict other people’s behavior, we are typically not aware of sim-
ulation processes going on in us. Goldman (1995a) suggests that this
is because simulation need not be an introspectively vivid aﬀair and be-
cause it is likely that the process is “semi-automatic, with relatively little
salient phenomenology” (p. 88). He explains that
48

3 Simulation Theory
[i]t is a psychological commonplace that highly developed
skills become automatized, and there is no reason why in-
terpersonal simulation should not share this characteristic.
(On the issue of conscious awareness, the simulation theory
is no worse oﬀthan its competitors. Neither the rational-
ity approach nor the folk-theory theory is at all credible if it
claims that appeals to its putative principles are introspec-
tively prominent aspects of interpretation.) (p. 88)
Furthermore, as mentioned above, simulation is an eﬀective heuristic
which can be used to develop generalizations. Therefore, simulation has
to be used in an decreasing amount since more and more generalizations
are available (and which are – once developed – typically easier and faster
to use than carrying out a simulation process).
One notable aspect of Goldman’s view of ST is that he distinguishes
between two types of simulation. In response to Dennett’s question how
simulation can work without being a kind of theorizing, Goldman (1995a)
claims that there are two diﬀerent variations of simulation. If a person
wants to simulate the weather or the economy successfully and accu-
rately, they will fail unless they have a good theory of the system. This
is, according to Goldman, a theory-driven simulation. The question re-
mains whether all simulations are theory-driven. Goldman negates this
question and proposes process-driven simulations as an alternative. This
alternative is only possible if two conditions are met:
1. the process that drives the simulation is the same as (or relevantly
similar to) the process that drives the system, and
2. the initial states of the simulating agent are the same as, or rele-
vantly similar to, those of the target system.
(Goldman, 1995a, p. 85)
49

3 Simulation Theory
A person who tries to simulate a sequence of mental states of another
person will wind up in the same ﬁnal states if they begin in the same
initial states and if both sequences are driven by the same cognitive
process or routine. While these two requirements have to be met, it is of
no importance at all for the simulating agent to have “a theory of what
the routine is, or how it works” (p. 85). Process-driven simulation is
therefore an eﬀective means to predict and explain other people’s beliefs,
desires and states if the two conditions are met.
In fact, there is another assumption which underlies process-driven
simulation. I have already discussed this precondition brieﬂy in chap-
ter 3.1 when I covered AD (attributor dependent) heuristics, for which
simulation is the prime example. The ﬁrst condition of process-driven
simulation listed above is that the interpreter needs to be in the very
same initial states as the interpretee. However, it is not possible to be in
exactly the same states. While they might share some desires and goals,
there will always be relevant diﬀerences, too. One possible way to get
around this problem is to imagine or feign the same initial states as the
interpretee has. However, this raises the question whether these pretend
states are “relevantly similar to the genuine beliefs and desires that they
model” (Goldman, 1995a, p. 85). Goldman (unpublished) argues quite
successfully that they are in fact suﬃciently similar, as seen in evidence
from various domains. For an overview, refer to chapter 3.1, especially
the discussion on page 25.
An interesting implication of Goldman’s distinction between real and
pretend beliefs and states is that it seems as if he had the assumption of
two diﬀerent systems. This is in stark contrast to Gordon, who clearly
postulates one system. It is not clear how this distinction ﬁts in with
the evidence won in research about mirror neurons (in which Goldman
was involved). Mirror neurons respond both when a speciﬁc action is
50

3 Simulation Theory
performed by a recorded monkey and when the same action carried out
by another individual is observed (Gallese & Goldman, 1998). This im-
plies one system since the same mirror neurons are active in both cases.
Unfortunately, Goldman does not clearly state how the mirror neuron
system is related to his distinction between real and pretend states.
Summing up Goldman’s view of ST, it can be said that his account
of simulation is a very interesting and promising approach. He sees sim-
ulation as a very eﬀective heuristic, but also accepts that inductive or
nomological information is not wholly absent. This makes Goldman’s
account a “less-than-radical, knowledge-and-ability account, where one
of the abilities happens to be simulation” (Leslie & German, 1995, p.
132). However, simulation remains the fundamental source of interpreta-
tion and it is where “the action is” (Goldman, cited in Leslie & German,
1995). Also, while his view of simulation converges somewhat toward
theory theory, ST clearly remains distinct:
It still remains distinct, however, (A) because the folk-theory
theory makes no allowance for simulation, and (B) because
the complex variant postulates simulation as the originating
source of (most) interpretation. (Goldman, 1995a, p. 88)
Another feature of Goldman’s “less-than-radical” account is that he
is not very optimistic that simulation will yield a “constitutive account
either of mental states or of the possession of conditions for mental con-
cepts” (Davies & Stone, 1995a, p. 5). While simulation can be used in
order to form generalizations, it cannot be necessary for the formation
of mental concepts since Goldman suggests that autistic people use the-
ories as an alternative strategy. This view represents a huge diﬀerence
to Gordon’s position which claims that simulation will indeed yield an
alternative to the theory theorist’s understanding of mental states.
51

3 Simulation Theory
3.4.3 Gordon
Gordon’s version of simulation theory is the most controversial view of
simulation which has been proposed to this date. It is so diﬀerent to
other theories because simulation plays a radical diﬀerent epistemological
signiﬁcance for Gordon than suggested in other theories:
That people do sometimes resort to [ . . . ] simulation is not in
serious dispute. What is in dispute is the claim that simula-
tion is fundamental to [theory of mind] or at least is of deep
psychological and philosophical signiﬁcance. (Gordon, 1995c,
p. 53)
Most simulation theorists view simulation as an eﬀective heuristic for
predicting the behavior of others. Gordon, however, goes one step further
and holds that, beyond this, “even our ability to grasp the concepts of
mind and the various mental states depends on our having the capacity
to simulate others” (Gordon, 1996, p. 11). This claim is the reason why
Gordon’s version of ST is often called the “radical” position.
Gordon (1995c) describes “traditional” simulation theories and ar-
gues that they depend on an implicit inference from oneself to others,
not unlike the use of an analogy.
This is usually connected to intro-
spection and the question of “how one recognizes and ascribes one’s own
mental states” (p. 53). He summarizes that, according to this account,
simulation is:
1. an analogical inference from oneself to others
2. premised on introspectively based ascriptions of mental states to
oneself,
3. requiring prior possession of the concepts of the mental states as-
cribed.
Gordon (1995c, p. 53)
52

3 Simulation Theory
Gordon continues by stating that he rejects all of these three as-
sumptions.
Additionally, he claims that most arguments against the
simulation theory “crucially depend on the assumption that in simulat-
ing another one recognizes one’s own mental states by introspection and
then infers that the other is in similar states” (p. 54). Since Gordon’s
theory does not depend on introspection and inference, he maintains that
the arguments are mute when applied to his theory.
Gordon (1995c) uses the Tees/Crane example to illustrate his version
of simulation. In order to ﬁnd out what Mr Tees would think, Gordon
does not imagine what he would do in Tees’ situation. Instead, uses an
alternative way to solve the problem: “I have the option of imaging in
the ﬁrst person Mr Tees barely missing his ﬂight, rather than imaging
myself, a particular individual distinct from Mr Tees, in such a situation
and then extrapolating to Mr Tees” (p. 55). RMG then ceases to be
the referent of “I” and “I” refers to Mr Tees instead. This is due to the
egocentric shift which is required by Gordon’s simulation. This leads to
Gordon’s slogan that simulation is “not a transfer but a transformation”
(Gordon, 1995c, p. 54). This view leads to the implication that neither
introspection nor an inference are required:
The point I am making is that once a personal transformation
has been accomplished, there is no remaining task of mentally
transferring a state from one person to another, no question
of comparing Mr Tees to myself. For insofar as I have recen-
tered my egocentric map on Mr Tees, I am not considering
what RMG would do, think, want, and feel in the situation.
Within the context of the simulation, RMG is out of the pic-
ture altogether. In short, when I simulate Mr Tees missing
his ﬂight, I am already representing him as having been in a
certain state of mind.
53

3 Simulation Theory
In order for the transformation to work properly, one has to decide
what mental states Mr Tees is in. For example, we have to determine
“whether he was extremely upset, whether he thought it was the driver’s
fault, and so forth” (Gordon, 1995c, p. 57).
Critics could claim that
the capacity for introspection is needed to solve this problem. Gordon,
however, has a diﬀerent alternative to oﬀer:
My own view [ . . . ] is that the method we ordinarily use is lim-
ited to identifying states in the ﬁrst person, but, thanks to our
capacity for imaginatively transforming ourselves into other
“ﬁrst persons”, it is not exclusively a one-person method. It
is just as well suited for labeling another’s states as it is to
labeling our own, provided we represent these states in the
ﬁrst person, that is, by an egocentric shift. (p. 58)
This egocentric shift is possible due to a technique which Gordon
(1996) calls “ascent routines”. These routines have two purposes: they
are used for self-ascriptions as well as for egocentric shifts.
Gordon thinks that adults often answer questions about their belief p
by asking themselves the question whether or not p is true. For example,
if someone asked Gordon “Do you believe Mickey Mouse has a tail?”
(Q1) he would ask himself “Does Mickey Mouse have a tail?” (Q2). If
the answer for Q2 was “yes”, he would give the same answer to Q1. If
he would negate Q2, he would do the same with Q1.
I call this procedure an ascent routine because it answers a
question by answering another question pitched at a lower
semantic level – the former being a question about a mental
state that is about x, the latter a question directly about x.
(Gordon, 1996, p. 15)
54

3 Simulation Theory
This procedure has an interesting implication:
What is of particular interest is that it allows one to get the
answer to a question about oneself, and speciﬁcally about
one’s mental states, by answering a question that is not about
oneself, nor about mental states at all. (Gordon, 1996, p. 15)
One implication from this feature of ascent routines is that they are
equally well suited to identifying another’s beliefs as it is to identifying
one’s own, as has been mentioned brieﬂy before. If you want to answer
“Do I believe that p?” during the simulation of a person O, you can
simply look at the situation and determine whether it is the case that p.
In Gordon’s words:
So I settle the question of whether O beliefs that p simply
by asking, within the context of a simulation of O, whether
it is the case that p. That is, I simply concern myself with
the world – O’s world, the world from O’s perspective [ . . . ]
– and, reporting what is there, I am reporting O’s beliefs.
That is, reporting O’s beliefs is just reporting what is there.
(Gordon, 1995c, p. 60)
Another feature of ascent routines is that they give children the ca-
pability to answer questions they would normally not be able to answer
since they transfer a diﬃcult question (about your mental states) in an
easy question (about the world). However, this does not actually equip
them with genuine, comprehending ascriptions of belief.
They would
not understand that the question “Do you believe that p?” is a “ques-
tion about themselves rather than simply a question about (for example)
Mickey Mouse” (Gordon, 1996, p. 16). Gordon summarizes this as fol-
lows:
The point is [ . . . ] that they would have no means of under-
standing how, ‘I believe Mickey Mouse has a tail’, could be
55

3 Simulation Theory
about an individual (other than Mickey Mouse) at all. They
fail to grasp several components of the concept of belief, but
the one that is paramount, because it is presupposed by all the
others, is the general idea that a fact (about Mickey Mouse,
for example) can have a mental location: can be, in other
words, a fact to some individual. (p. 16)
While ascent routines do not equip children with a genuine under-
standing of mental concepts, Gordon maintains that simulation is used
to bootstrap such an understanding. This obviously implies that sim-
ulation has to work without understanding mental concepts.
Gordon
(1995b) gives an example to illustrate that this is possible: “Long before
the child is able to attribute to herself or another an interest in some-
thing, she will turn her eyes to what the other is gazing at; and at a
later stage, pull up alongside another child who is studying an object on
the ﬂoor” (p. 114). The question how children actually develop a true
understanding of mental concepts remains, however.
According to Gordon, children may realize by using their ability to
simulate that “assertions within the context of a simulation can contra-
dict [their] own (unpretended) beliefs” (Davies & Stone, 1995a, p. 13).
A child will not learn to understand that its beliefs may deviate from the
facts by simply asking what the facts are.
To see her own present beliefs as distinguishable from the
facts she will have to simulate another for whom the facts are
diﬀerent – or, more broadly, adopt a perspective from which
the facts are diﬀerent, whether this perspective is occupied
by a real person or not – and then from the alien perspective,
simulate herself. (Gordon, 1995c, p. 62)
This is the ﬁrst step in the direction of genuine understanding of
the notion of belief. The child will realize abstractly that her present
56

3 Simulation Theory
perspective which she views as fact may indeed not be fact at all but
“nothing more than fact-from-her-particular-perspective” (p. 62).
Based on these observations, Gordon (1995c) distinguishes between
two types of ascriptions and draws his conclusions about their develop-
ment:
[If] we ordinarily identify our own present beliefs by using an
ascent routine, then there is an important distinction to be
made between comprehending and uncomprehending ascrip-
tions: that is, ascriptions made with and ascriptions without
the understanding that the beliefs ascribed may be false. On
the one hand, a capacity for reliable uncomprehending iden-
tiﬁcation of one’s own present beliefs should emerge before
one can ascribe beliefs to others or to oneself in the past.
It emerges extremely quickly, if my view is right, and does
not even await development of a capacity to introspect, much
less a capacity to recognize a belief by its introspected phe-
nomenological marks. (Gordon, 1995c, p. 62)
Gordon’s “radical” version of simulation theory is quite diﬀerent to
Harris’ or Goldman’s versions described before.
Gordon argues that
Harris’ and Goldman’s theories depend on introspection and inference
while his own theory suggests a transformation. Gordon’s ascent rou-
tines should do away with the need of the problematic introspective ac-
cess. Furthermore, they oﬀer interesting perspectives of how children
and adults use and learn beliefs. Only by simulating, children can rec-
ognize that what they hold as “facts” are only beliefs. Through the use
of simulation, they eventually acquire a genuine understanding of mental
concepts. This is in stark contrast to Harris and Goldman who do not
believe that simulation can lead to the formation of mental concepts.
57

3 Simulation Theory
3.5 Problems of ST
In recent years, simulation theory has brought new momentum to the
philosophy of mind debate. The new position is certainly an interesting
view and should be considered and evaluated thoroughly. Since ST has
gained importance in the philosophy of mind debate, many objections
have been found and described. I will present some of the most important
arguments against ST in the following.
3.5.1 Simulation Needs a Theory
Several arguments have been put forward which claim that simulation
requires a theory so that it can be used successfully. The arguments vary
in the degree in which they allow simulation to work without the use of a
theory. While some critics have argued that simulation can indeed work
without a theory, but that you need one in order to form explanations,
others believe that a theory is already required to carry out a simple
simulation.
In the following, I will discuss three diﬀerent arguments
which suggest that simulation has to be combined with a theory.
Dennett (1987) wondered how simulation can work without being a
kind of theorizing. He suggested that he was a suspension bridge and
observed how a simulation could be carried out:
If I make believe I am a suspension bridge and wonder what I
will do when the wind blows, what ‘comes to me’ in my make
believe state depends on how sophisticated my knowledge is
of the physics and engineering of suspension bridges. (p. 100)
These observations made Goldman (1995a) propose a distinction be-
tween theory-driven and process-driven simulation. While Goldman ad-
mits that theory-driven simulation is in need for a theory, this is not the
case for process-driven simulations. Process-driven simulation makes use
58

3 Simulation Theory
of the fact that your decision-making apparatus is very similar to the
person you are simulating. You therefore do not need a theory how the
mechanism works. You simply feed your apparatus with input data and
let it do the work.
Another argument put forward is that you need a theory in order to
get started with simulation. This view has been summarized by Davies &
Stone (1995b) who write that “even if mental simulation does not need
to be driven by a psychological theory, still theory comes in when we try
to set the simulation up in the ﬁrst place” (p. 19). When you perform a
simulation, you have to feed your decision-making apparatus with appro-
priate pretend inputs. However, the argument goes, you need a theory
in order to determine which facts are really relevant to the simulation:
[T]aking those variables into account is a matter of reﬂecting
upon a number of theoretical considerations. [ . . . ]
[W]hen we simulate another person, we need to make al-
lowances for relevant diﬀerences. But which diﬀerences are
relevant? (Davies & Stone, 1995b, p. 19)
The simulation theorists have a good defense for this argument, how-
ever. They can claim that you do not need a theory at all. You simply
put yourself in the shoes of the person you wish to simulate and let your
decision-making apparatus do the rest. It will select the information it
requires for its decision and will discard the rest. If not enough infor-
mation have been supplied, the outcome of the simulation will not be
reliable. However, simulation theorists openly admit that simulations
are not always perfect and heavily depend on having enough information
supplied.
The ﬁnal argument is that while simulation can be used to predict
other people’s behavior, a theory is needed to form explanations. Church-
land (1991) argues:
59

3 Simulation Theory
A simulation itself, even a successful one, provides no ex-
planation. What explanatory understanding requires is an
appreciation of the general patterns that comprehend the in-
dividual events in both cases. And that brings us back to the
idea of a moderately general theory. (p. 60)
Simulation theorists usually reply that simulations can be used to
test the behavior under diﬀerent circumstances and thereby ﬁnd the
causal factors. For example, Gordon (1995b) writes that:
[W]ind tunnel models can be used to explain as well as to pre-
dict the behavior of airplanes. To predict what the plane will
do under certain conditions one observes what the model does
under similar conditions. And to test competing explanations
why the actual plane behaved as it did on some occasion, one
tries to simulate the conditions and then vary them [ . . . ] (p.
115)
He then concludes:
Thus a manipulable model, because it can be used to model
counterfactual conditions, permits us to say what causes or
causal factors account for the behavior of the model and thus,
if we can extrapolate, permits us to say what causes or causal
factors account for the behavior of whatever it is a model of.
(p. 115)
One could object that merely picking out causes and causal factors
is diﬀerent to actually seeing the connection between those factors and
“understanding why the cause has the eﬀect it does” (Gordon, 1995b, p.
116). Gordon agrees that this might be a point in the example of the
airplane, but wonders “just what sort of ‘connection’ between explanans
and explanandum are we looking for when we want to understand why
a person acted as she did?” (p. 116).
60

3 Simulation Theory
3.5.2 Developmental Evidence Against ST
Some criticism of simulation theory is based on developmental evidence.
One of the most important study has been conducted by Perner & Howes
(1992). They told children the following story: John and Mary unpack
theirs bags. Since Mary has to leave, it is up to John to put the chocolate
in a drawer. He has two drawers to choose from and tells Mary that he
will decide later (when she is gone). After he puts the chocolate in a
drawer, he goes out to play. During this time, their mother unexpectedly
transfers the chocolate to the other drawer. John therefore mistakenly
thinks that the chocolate is in the drawer he put it in originally.
Children’s understanding is then tested with three questions. The
ﬁrst assesses their understanding of John’s belief by asking “Where does
John think the chocolate is?” The second question tests their under-
standing of John’s self-reﬂection: “If we ask John: ‘Do you know where
the chocolate is?’, what will John say?” The ﬁnal question investigates
Mary’s reﬂection on John’s knowledge: “If we ask Mary: ‘Does John
know where the chocolate is?’, what will Mary say?”
The main idea behind this study is that TT and ST have diﬀerent
predictions about how diﬃcult children will ﬁnd it to answer these ques-
tions correctly. If children work by simulation, they would answer the
questions about John like this:
To answer the questions about John, the child has to imagine
herself in John’s situation, in particular, imagine herself not
having seen mother transfer the chocolate to the new location.
Once this hypothetical position has been taken the simulating
child will ﬁnd herself in a simulated false belief about where
the chocolate is and in position to answer both our questions
about John by assuming they were asked about herself in her
simulated mental state. (Perner & Howes, 1992, p. 75–76)
61

3 Simulation Theory
Since the child is already in John’s situation, both questions should
be equally easy to answer. On the other hand, the question about Mary’s
belief will be more diﬃcult since it requires “two levels of changes in
default setting, whereas the simulation of John’s mind requires but one
such level of changes” (p. 76).
However, if theory theory is used instead of simulation, the second
question (about John’s self-reﬂection) will be very diﬃcult to answer, at
least according to Perner’s version of TT:
[If] children have to mentally represent John’s mental state
a quite diﬀerent prediction follows, because explicit represen-
tation of John’s subjective conviction requires formulation
of a second-order state: ‘John thinks he knows where the
chocolate is’. This should be of comparable diﬃculty to rep-
resenting Mary’s second-order belief about John’s knowledge,
which we know to be substantially more diﬃcult than repre-
sentation of John’s belief about the chocolate’s location. (p.
76–77)
The critical question which diﬀerentiates the two theories is there-
fore that about how John would respond to the question about his own
knowledge.
Questions
Simulation
Representing
(Role-Taking)
mental states
John think?
easy
easy
John say John knows?
easy
diﬃcult
Mary say John knows?
diﬃcult
diﬃcult
Table taken from Perner & Howes (1992, p. 77)
The most important result of the experiment was that “there is a
substantial gap between children’s ability to answer the question about
what John thinks and their ability to answer the self-reﬂection question
62

3 Simulation Theory
about what he thinks about his knowledge” (Perner & Howes, 1992, p.
79–80). The conclusion drawn from this evidence is that simulation is
not used to solve the problem.
So, the clear developmental gap between children understand-
ing where John thinks something is and their understanding
of John’s insight in his belief is diﬃcult to square with the
simulation theory. (p. 82)
3.5.3 Gordon’s ST and Circularity
Fuller (1995) argues that Gordon’s version of simulation theory faces
many circularity problems. He describes some possible circularities and
oﬀers possible responses by Gordon. The most important circularity he
wants to stress “involves the last stage of simulation” (p. 25). Fuller
(1995) argues that:
It is not enough that I correctly simulate Mr Tees and go into
the ﬁnal stage of imaging, or pretending, that I am upset. I
must also ascribe that state to Mr Tees. And this seems to
require that I already have the, or at least a, concept of the
mental state of being upset. (p. 24)
What Fuller seems to miss here is that according to Gordon’s version
of ST simulation does not require a transfer. Since you transform into the
person you want to simulate, a transfer of mental states is not necessary.
As the discussion develops, Fuller accepts this defense but still holds that
“the problem with Gordon’s account is that we are left hanging” (p. 26).
Although there is no explicit reference to beliefs in Gordon’s theory, Fuller
objects that “there is, however, reference to appropriate simulation, and
this surely requires of the ascriber that he have the concept of appropriate
simulation and not simply the ability to simulate” (p. 27).
63

3 Simulation Theory
Fuller’s paper lists many circularity problems which turn out not to
be a problem at all. He often mentions a possible response of Gordon
and the general impression is that Gordon’s defense is quite well founded.
However, Fuller indeed has a point to discuss possible circularity prob-
lems in Gordon’s version of ST. Unfortunately, he is not very clear and
does not seem to convey his points properly.
3.5.4 ST Relies on Introspection
One of the most important arguments against Harris’ and Goldman’s ver-
sion of ST is that they depend on introspection. Gordon, for example,
argues that Harris’ and Goldman’s theories require introspection because
their simulation uses a transfer. You put yourself in the shoes of some-
one else and therefore have to perform a comparison between the other
person and yourself. This, according to Gordon, needs introspective ac-
cess. Gordon’s theory, on the other hand, tries to solve this problem by
postulating a transformation rather than a transfer.
Similarly, Carruthers (1996) claims that “they take self-knowledge of
mental states for granted” (p. 28). One has to be able to recognize the
beliefs, desires and intentions which are relevant for the simulation. By
having access to my own mental states, I use simulation to ascribe mental
states to others. According to Carruthers, this access does not happen
using a theoretical description in ST. Instead, as Carruthers (1996) de-
scribes ST, ‘I begin by distinguishing between one type of mental state
and another purely on the basis of their intrinsic, subjectively accessi-
ble, qualities” (p. 29). This view makes ST vulnerable to “the standard
objections to Cartesianism” (p. 31).
Carruthers (1996) therefore argues that Goldman and Harris “must
face several diﬃculties” (p. 32). He gives several examples, of which I
64

3 Simulation Theory
will present one. Carruthers maintains that there are cases where we can
have (and know that we have) distinct propositional episodes, and yet
it is implausible that there would not be any diﬀerence in introspectible
feel.
For example, consider the diﬀerence between intending and
predicting that if the party should turn out a bore then I shall
fall asleep. Each state will consist, on the above account, in
an image of the very same sentence – the sentence, namely,
‘If the party is a bore I shall go to sleep’. So the claim be that
imaging this sentence in the mode of intention is subjectively,
introspectively, diﬀerent from imaging it in the mode of pre-
diction. This certainly does not ﬁt with my phenomenology.
Granted, I will immediately know that I have formed an in-
tention, if I have; but not on the basis of the distinctive way
that event felt. (Carruthers, 1996, p. 32)
This objection against ST has been sketched here very brieﬂy since
the arguments against introspection are generally known. It is important
to note, however, that this criticism does not apply to Gordon’s version
of ST since he does not rely on introspection.
65

4 Conclusions
The philosophy of mind debate has gained considerable momentum dur-
ing the past few years. One of the reasons for this is that the use of
simulation has been proposed as an alternative to the predominant view
that theory of mind is based on knowledge of a theoretical framework.
Simulation theory, on the other hand, suggests that simulation – an abil-
ity – is central to mindreading and theory of mind.
Simulation theory maintains that you predict other people’s behavior
by putting yourself in the other person’s shoes. According to Goldman,
you engage in a kind of pretend play in which you feed your decision-
making system with pretend inputs of beliefs and desires of the person
you wish to simulate in order to predict their behavior. Then, you let
your decision-making system do the rest and come to a prediction.
The signiﬁcance of simulation varies between diﬀerent ST theories.
Gordon argues that simulation is fundamental to the mastery of psycho-
logical concepts, while other proponents of ST, such as Goldman, hold
a less radical position. Goldman maintains that simulation remains the
fundamental source of interpretation but acknowledges that knowledge
and generalizations play an important role too.
Goldman suggests that it is plausible that evolution allowed for more
than merely one strategy to develop. For him, simulation is the prime
method, but the use of a theoretical framework is a possible strategy if
simulation fails. This view ﬁts in well with the evidence gained through
66

4 Conclusions
research about autism. Autistic people, who are generally quite bad with
imagination and especially with pretend play, show an impairment of the
mindreading ability. Simulation theorists, who see a connection between
the reduced ability of pretend play and mindreading, suggest that autism
is good evidence that we normally use simulation.
While the ability of mindreading is reduced in autistic people, there
are some who can learn to master theory of mind. Following Goldman’s
argumentation, it has been claimed that they learn to use a theoretical
framework to master easy false belief tasks. Since they still fail in harder
false belief tasks and often in real world it has been suggested that this
alternative strategy is not as capable as simulation.
This evidence from autism can hardly be uniﬁed with Gordon’s ver-
sion of ST. Since he thinks that simulation is fundamental to the master
of mental concepts, there is no way that a theoretical framework can
be used as an alternative to simulation. Gordon’s radical view of ST,
which wants to be viable without the use of any form of knowledge or
theory at all, is problematic in many areas, especially when it comes to
the question of how the egocentric shift is performed.
In my opinion, Goldman is on the right track striking a good balance
between the ability of simulation and the use of theoretical knowledge
and generalizations. We have to move into the direction of an integrated
theory – a hybrid theory – which takes many diﬀerent aspects into ac-
count. For example, Barresi & Moore have shown conclusively that the
false belief task cannot be solved without the availability of ﬁrst per-
son information. This observation has a major impact on pure theory
theories.
What we need is a theory which integrates ﬁrst and third person
information, and simulation and knowledge of a theory. The schema pro-
posed by Barresi & Moore (1996) is a ﬁrst step in this direction. Their
67

4 Conclusions
intentional schema is an intermodal perceptual and conceptual structure
with the “capacity to coordinate and integrate ﬁrst and third person
sources of information about object-directed activities into representa-
tions that link agents to objects through intentional relations” (p. 109).
Informational inputs both from oneself and other people can be inte-
grated with the schema and the resultant representation can be applied
to either yourself or another person.
Summing up, it can be said that simulation had a major impact
on the philosophy of mind debate. Although simulation theories have
to face severe problems and are not the panacea of philosophy of mind,
their introduction has opened up new views and has shown that theory
of mind is more than just the rigid use of a theoretical framework.
68

Bibliography
Abell, F., Happ´e, F., Frith, U. (2000). Do triangles play tricks? Attri-
bution of mental states to animated shapes in normal and abnormal
development. Journal of Cognitive Development, 15, 1–20.
Asperger, H. (1944). Die “autistischen Psychopathen” im Kindesalter.
Archiv f¨ur Psychiatrie und Nervenkrankheiten, 117, 76–136.
Baron-Cohen, S. (1995). Mindblindness. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Barresi, J., Moore, C. (1995). Intentional relations and social understand-
ing. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 19, 107–154.
Blackburn, S. (1995). Theory, observation, and drama. In: M. Davis &
T. Stone (Eds.). Folk Psychology. Oxford: Blackwell. 274–290.
Carruthers, P. (1996). Simulation and self-knowledge:
a defence of
theory-theory. In: P. Carruthers & P. R. Smith (Eds.). Theories of
theories of mind. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 22–38.
Castelli, F., Happ´e, F., Frith, U., Frith, C. (2000). Movement and Mind:
A Functional Imaging Study of Perception and Interpretation of Com-
plex Intentional Movement Patterns. NeuroImage, 12, 314–325.
Churchland, P. M. (1990). Eliminative Materialism and the Propositional
Attitudes. In: W. G. Lycan (Ed.). Mind and Cognition. Oxford: Black-
well. 206–223.
69

Bibliography
Churchland, P. M. (1991). Folk psychology and the explanation of human
behavior. In: J. D. Greenwood (Ed.). The future of folk psychology.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 51–69.
Churchland, P. M. (1992). Matter and Consciousness. Cambridge, AM:
MIT Press.
Currie, G. (1996). Simulation-theory, theory-theory and the evidence from
autism. In: Carruthers, P. & Smith, P. K. (Eds.). Theories of theories
of mind. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 242–256.
Davies, M., Stone, T. (1995). Introduction. In: M. Davies & T. Stone
(Eds.). Mental Simulation. Oxford: Blackwell. 1–18.
Davies, M., Stone, T. (1995). Introduction. In: M. Davies & T. Stone
(Eds.). Folk Psychology Oxford: Blackwell. 1–43.
Dennett, D. C. (1987). Making sense of ourselves. In: D. C. Dennett.
The Intentional Stance. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 83–101.
Dennett, D. C. (1991). Two contrasts: folk craft versus folk science, and
belief versus opinion. In: J. D. Greenwood (Ed.). The future of folk
psychology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 135–148.
Frith, U. (1989). Autism: explaining the enigma. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Frith, U. (1996). Cognitive explanations of autism. Acta Pædiatr Suppl,
416, 63–68.
Fuller, G. (1995). Simulation and Psychological Concepts. In:
M.
Davies & T. Stone (Eds.). Mental Simulation. Oxford: Blackwell. 19–
32.
Gallese, V., Goldman, A. (1998). Mirror neurons and the simulation
theory of mind-reading. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 2, 493–501.
70

Bibliography
Goldman, A. I. (unpublished). Using Your Own Mind to Read Others.
Unpublished manuscript.
Goldman, A. I. (1995a). Interpretation Psychologized. In: M. Davis & T.
Stone (Eds.). Folk Psychology. Oxford: Blackwell. 74–99.
Goldman, A. I. (1995b). In Defense of the Simulation Theory. In: M.
Davis & T. Stone (Eds.). Folk Psychology. Oxford: Blackwell. 191–
206.
Gordon, R. M. (1995). Folk Psychology as Simulation. In: M. Davis &
T. Stone (Eds.). Folk Psychology. Oxford: Blackwell. 60–73.
Gordon, R. M. (1995). The Simulation Theory: Objections and Miscon-
ceptions. In: M. Davis & T. Stone (Eds.). Folk Psychology. Oxford:
Blackwell. 100–122.
Gordon, R. M. (1995). Simulation Without Introspection or Inference
From Me to You. In: M. Davies & T. Stone (Eds.). Mental Simulation.
Oxford: Blackwell. 53–67.
Gordon, R. M. (1996). ‘Radical’ simulationism. In: Carruthers, P. &
Smith, P. K. (Eds.). Theories of theories of mind. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press. 11–21.
Greenwood, J. D. (1991). Introduction: Folk psychology and scientiﬁc
psychology. In: J. D. Greenwood (Ed.). The future of folk psychology.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 1–21.
Happ´e, F. (1994). Autism: an introduction to psychological theory. Lon-
don: UCL Press.
Happ´e, F. (1999). Autism: cognitive deﬁcit or cognitive style? Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 3 (6), 216–222.
71

Bibliography
Harris, P. L. (1995). From Simulation to Folk Psychology: The Case
for Development. In: M. Davis & T. Stone (Eds.). Folk Psychology.
Oxford: Blackwell. 207–231.
Heal, J. (1995). How to Think About Thinking. In: M. Davies & T. Stone
(Eds.). Mental Simulation. Oxford: Blackwell. 33–52.
Humphrey, N. (1984). Consciousness regained. Oxford: Oxford Univer-
sity Press.
Kahneman, D., Tversky, A. (1982). The simulation heuristic. In: D. Kah-
neman, P. Slovic & A. Tversky (Eds.). Judgment Under Uncertainty.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 201–208.
Kanner, L. (1943). Autistic disturbances of aﬀective contact. Nervous
Child, 2, 217–250.
Leslie, A. M., German, T. P. (1995). Knowledge and Ability in “Theory
of Mind”: One-eyed Overview of a Debate. In: M. Davies & T. Stone
(Eds.). Mental Simulation. Oxford: Blackwell. 123–150.
Perner, J. (1991). Understanding the Representational Mind. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Perner, J., Howes, D. (1992). ‘He Thinks He Knows’: And More De-
velopmental Evidence Against the Simulation (Role Taking) Theory.
Mind & Language, 7, 72–86.
Premack, D., Woodruﬀ, G. (1978). Does the chimpanzee have a theory
of mind? Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 4, 515–526.
Rizzolatti, G., Arbib, M. A. (1998). Language within our grasp. Trends
in Neuroscience, 21, 188–194.
72

Bibliography
Shepard, R. N., Metzler, J. (1971). Mental Rotation of Three-Di-
mensional Objects. Science, 171. 701–703.
Stich, S., Nichols, S. (1995). Second Thoughts on Simulation. In: M.
Davies & T. Stone (Eds.). Mental Simulation. Oxford: Blackwell. 87–
108.
Wimmer, H., Perner, J. (1983). Beliefs about beliefs: Representation and
constraining function of wrong beliefs in young children’s understand-
ing of deception. Cognition, 13, 103–128.
Yue, G., Cole, K. (1992). Strength increases from the motor program:
Comparison of training with maximal voluntary and imagined muscle
contractions. Journal of Neurophysiology, 67. 1114–1123.
$Id: text.tex,v 1.113.2.5 2002/03/03 22:09:08 tbm Exp $
73

