
MICROBIOLOGY DEMYSTIFIED

Demystified Series
Advanced Statistics Demystified
Algebra Demystified
Anatomy Demystified
Astronomy Demystified
Biology Demystified
Biotechnology Demystified
Business Statistics Demystified
Calculus Demystified
Chemistry Demystified
College Algebra Demystified
Differential Equations Demystified
Digital Electronics Demystified
Earth Science Demystified
Electricity Demystified
Electronics Demystified
Environmental Science Demystified
Everyday Math Demystified
Geometry Demystified
Math Proofs Demystified
Math Word Problems Demystified
Microbiology Demystified
Physics Demystified
Physiology Demystified
Pre-Algebra Demystified
Precalculus Demystified
Probability Demystified
Project Management Demystified
Quantum Mechanics Demystified
Relativity Demystified
Robotics Demystified
Statistics Demystified
Trigonometry Demystified

MICROBIOLOGY DEMYSTIFIED
TOM BETSY, D.C.
JIM KEOGH
McGRAW-HILL
New York
Chicago
San Francisco
Lisbon
London
Madrid
Mexico City
Milan
New Delhi
San Juan
Seoul
Singapore
Sydney
Toronto

Copyright © 2005 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. All rights reserved. Manufactured in the United States of 
America. Except as permitted under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication may be 
reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the 
prior written permission of the publisher. 
 
0-07-147134-0 
 
The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title: 0-07-144650-8. 
 
All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a trademark symbol after every 
occurrence of a trademarked name, we use names in an editorial fashion only, and to the benefit of the trademark 
owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark. Where such designations appear in this book, they have 
been printed with initial caps. McGraw-Hill eBooks are available at special quantity discounts to use as premiums 
and sales promotions, or for use in corporate training programs. For more information, please contact George 
Hoare, Special Sales, at george_hoare@mcgraw-hill.com or (212) 904-4069. 
 
TERMS OF USE 
 
This is a copyrighted work and The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. (“McGraw-Hill”) and its licensors reserve all 
rights in and to the work. Use of this work is subject to these terms. Except as permitted under the Copyright Act 
of 1976 and the right to store and retrieve one copy of the work, you may not decompile, disassemble, reverse 
engineer, reproduce, modify, create derivative works based upon, transmit, distribute, disseminate, sell, publish or 
sublicense the work or any part of it without McGraw-Hill’s prior consent. You may use the work for your own 
noncommercial and personal use; any other use of the work is strictly prohibited. Your right to use the work may 
be terminated if you fail to comply with these terms. 
 
THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS.” McGRAW-HILL AND ITS LICENSORS MAKE NO GUARANTEES 
OR WARRANTIES AS TO THE ACCURACY, ADEQUACY OR COMPLETENESS OF OR RESULTS TO BE 
OBTAINED FROM USING THE WORK, INCLUDING ANY INFORMATION THAT CAN BE ACCESSED 
THROUGH THE WORK VIA HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE, AND EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY 
WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. McGraw-Hill and its licensors do not 
warrant or guarantee that the functions contained in the work will meet your requirements or that its operation will 
be uninterrupted or error free. Neither McGraw-Hill nor its licensors shall be liable to you or anyone else for any 
inaccuracy, error or omission, regardless of cause, in the work or for any damages resulting there from. McGraw-
Hill has no responsibility for the content of any information accessed through the work. Under no circumstances 
shall McGraw-Hill and/or its licensors be liable for any indirect, incidental, special, punitive, consequential or 
similar damages that result from the use of or inability to use the work, even if any of them has been advised of the 
possibility of such damages. This limitation of liability shall apply to any claim or cause whatsoever whether such 
claim or cause arises in contract, tort or otherwise. 
 
DOI: 10.1036/0071446508

	


Want to learn more?
We hope you enjoy this 
McGraw-Hill eBook! If 
you’d like more information about this book, 
its author, or related books and websites, 
please click here.

I would like to dedicate this book to my wife, Shelley,
and my two babies, Juliana and Thomas, 
for their encouragment during the writing of this book 
and the continued joy they bring to my life.
Dr. Tom Betsy
This book is dedicated to Anne, Sandy, Joanne, 
Amber-Leigh Christine, and Graaf, 
without whose help and support 
this book could not have been written.
Jim Keogh

This page intentionally left blank.

Introduction
xiii
Acknowledgments
xix
CHAPTER 1
The World of the Microorganism
1
Types of Microorganisms
2
What Is a Microorganism?
4
What’s in a Name: Naming and Classifying
5
How Small Is a Microorganism?
7
Your Body Fights Back
7
History of the Microscope
9
How Do Organisms Appear?
10
Germ Theory
12
Vaccination
15 
Killing the Microorganism
16
Quiz
19
CHAPTER 2
The Chemical Elements of Microorganisms
23
Everything Matters
24
Chemical Elements and the Atom
24
A Dinner Table of Elements: 
The Periodic Table
27
The Glowing Tale of Isotopes
27
Around They Go: Electronic Configuration
29
Before James There Was Bond...
Chemical Bond
29
Decoding Chemical Shorthand
31
vii
CONTENTS
For more information about this title, click here

I Just Want to See Your Reaction
31
Molarity: Hey, There’s a Mole Amongst Us
36
An Unlikely Pair: Inorganic and Organic
37
The Blueprint of Protein Synthesis
42
The Power House: ATP
44
Quiz
44
CHAPTER 3
Observing Microorganisms
47
Size Is a Matter of Metrics
47
Here’s Looking at You
51
What Big Eyes You Have: Magnification
52
The Microscope
54
Preparing Specimens
60
Quiz
64
CHAPTER 4
Prokaryotic Cells and Eukaryotic Cells
67
Prokaryotic Cells
68
Eukaryotic Cells
78
Quiz
83
CHAPTER 5
The Chemical Metabolism
87
Riding the Metabolism Cycle
87
Catabolic and Anabolic: The Only Reactions 
You Need
88
A Little Give and Take: Oxidation-Reduction
88
Making Power: ATP Production
89
What’s Your Name: Naming and 
Classifying Enzymes
89
Brewing Up Protein
90
The Magic of Enzymes: Enzyme Activities
90
The Krebs Cycle
94
Fermentation
97
Other Catabolic Pathways
97
Photosynthesis
98
Quiz
100
CONTENTS
viii

CHAPTER 6
Microbial Growth and Controlling 
Microbial Growth
103
Chemical Requirements for Microbial 
Growth
104
Culture Media
105
Phases of Growth
109
Measurements of Microbial Growth
110
Establishing Bacterial Numbers 
by Indirect Methods
111
Controlling Microbial Growth
112
Microbial Death Rates
113
Action of Antimicrobial Agents
113
Chemical Agents That Control Microbial 
Growth
114
Quiz
116
CHAPTER 7
Microbial Genetics
119
Genetics
120
DNA Replication: Take My Genes, Please!
120
Protein Synthesis
123
Controlling Genes: You’re Under My Spell
124
Mutations: Not a Pretty Copy
125
Quiz
127
CHAPTER 8
Recombinant DNA Technology
131
Genetic Engineering: Designer Genes
132
Gene Therapy: Makes You Feel Better
134
DNA Fingerprinting: Gotcha
134
Recombinant DNA Technology and Society: 
Too Much of a Good Thing
136
Quiz
137
CHAPTER 9
Classification of Microorganisms
139
Taxonomy: Nothing to Do with the IRS
139
Nomenclature of Taxonomy: Name Calling
140
CONTENTS
ix

Classification: All Natural
146
Quiz
148
CHAPTER 10
The Prokaryotes: Domains Archaea and
Bacteria
151
Archaea
152
Aerobic/Microaerophilic, Motile, 
Helical/Vibroid, Gram-Negative Bacteria
154
Gram-Negative Aerobic Rods and Cocci
155
Facultatively Anaerobic Gram-Negative Rods 156
Anaerobic Gram-Negative Cocci and Rods
158
Rickettsias and Chlamydias
158
Mycoplamas
159
Gram-Positive Cocci
160
Endospore-Forming Gram-Positive Rods 
and Cocci
162
Regular Nonsporing Gram-Positive Rods
163
Irregular Nonsporing Gram-Positive Rods
164
Mycobacteria
164
Nocardia Forms
165
Quiz
165
CHAPTER 11
The Eukaryotes: Fungi, Algae, Protozoa, 
and Helminths
167
Fungi
168
Algae
171
Protozoa
174
Helminths
178
Quiz
182
CHAPTER 12
Viruses, Viroids, and Prions
185
Viruses
185
Viroids
192
Prions
193
Quiz
193
CONTENTS
x

CHAPTER 13
Epidemiology and Disease
197
What Is Epidemiology?
197
Classification of Disease
198
Infection Sites
199
Disease Transmission
201
The Development of Disease
203
Epidemiological Studies
204
Control of Communicable Diseases
205
Nosocomial Infections
206
Who Is Susceptible?
206
Prevention and Control of Nosocomial 
Infections
207
Quiz
207
CHAPTER 14
Immunity
211
What Is Immunity?
211
Types of Immunity
213
A Closer Look at Antigens
214
A Closer Look at Binding
214
B Cells
216
Lasting Immunity
218
Antibodies Used for Diagnosing Diseases
218
Chemical Messengers
218
T Cells
219
Macrophages and Natural Killer Cells
220
Quiz
221
CHAPTER 15
Vaccines and Diagnosing Diseases
223
What Is a Vaccine?
223
Types of Vaccines
224
Developing a Vaccine
225
Diagnosing Diseases
226
Quiz
228
CONTENTS
xi

CHAPTER 16
Antimicrobial Drugs
231
Chemotherapeutic Agents: The Silver Bullet
231
Antimicrobial Activity: Who to Attack?
233
The Attack Plan
235
Exploring Antimicrobial Drugs
237
Chemotherapy Tests
246
Quiz
247
Final Exam
249
Answers to Quiz and Exam Questions
265
Index
269
CONTENTS
xii

xiii
When you hear the words “germ,” “bacteria,” and “virus” you might cringe, run-
ning for the nearest sink to wash your hands. These words may bring back mem-
ories of when you caught a cold or the flu—never a pleasant experience. Germs,
bacteria, viruses and other microscopic organisms are called microorganisms, or
microbes for short. And as you’ll learn throughout this book, some microbes
cause disease while others help fight it.
Think for a moment. Right now there are thousands of tiny microbes living
on the tip of your finger in a world that is so small that it can only be visited by
using a microscope. In this book we’ll show you how to visit this world and how
to interact with these tiny creatures that call the tip of your finger home.
The microscopic world was first visited in the late 1600s by the Dutch mer-
chant and amateur scientist Antoni van Leeuwenhoek. He was able to see living
microorganisms by using a single-lens microscope. We’ve come a long way
since Van Leeuwenhoek’s first visit. Today scientists are able to see through
some microbes and study the organelles that bring them to life. 
It wasn’t until the Golden Age of Microbiology between 1857 and 1914 when
scientists such as Louis Pasteur and Robert Koch made a series of discoveries
that rocked the scientific community. During this period scientists identified
microbes that caused diseases, learned how to cure those diseases, and then pre-
vented them from occurring through the use of immunization. 
Scientists were able to achieve these remarkable discoveries by using cultur-
ing techniques to grow colonies of microbes in the laboratory. Once microbes
could be grown at will, scientists focused their experiments on ways to slow that
growth and stop microbes in their tracks—killing the microbe and curing the dis-
ease caused by the microbe.
Culturing microbes is central to the study of microbiology. You’ll be using
many of the same culturing techniques described in this book to colonize
microbes in your college laboratory. We provide step-by-step instructions on
how to do this.
xiii
INTRODUCTION

You would find it difficult to live without the aid of microbes. For example,
living inside your intestines are colonies of microorganisms. Just this thought is
enough to make your skin crawl. As frightful as this thought might be, however,
these microbes actually assist your body in digesting food. That is, you might
have difficulty digesting some foods if these microbes did not exist.
Microbes in your intestines are beneficial to you as long as they remain 
in your intestines. However, you’ll become very ill should they decide to 
wander into other parts of your body. Don’t become too concerned—these
microbes tend to stay at home unless your intestines are ruptured as a result 
of trauma.
By the end of this book you’ll learn about the different types of microbes,
how to identify them by using a microscope, and how to cultivate colonies 
of microbes.
A Look Inside
Microbiology can be challenging to learn unless you follow the step-by-step
approach that is used in Microbiology Demystified. Topics are presented in an
order in which many students like to learn them—starting with basic compo-
nents and then gradually moving on to those that are more complex. 
Each chapter follows a time-tested formula that explains topics in an easy-
to-read style. You can then compare your knowledge with what you’re ex-
pected to know by taking chapter tests and the final exam. There is little room
for you to go adrift. 
CHAPTER 1: THE WORLD OF THE MICROORGANISM
You’ll begin your venture into the microscopic world of microbes by learning
the fundamentals. These are the terms and concepts that all students need to
understand before they can embark on more advanced topics, such as cultivat-
ing their own microbes. 
In this chapter, you will be introduced to the science of microbiology with a
look back in time to a period when little was known about microbes except that
some of them could kill people. You’ll also learn about the critical accomplish-
ments made in microbiology that enable scientists to understand and develop
cures for disease.
xiv
INTRODUCTION

CHAPTER 2: THE CHEMICAL ELEMENTS 
OF MICROORGANISMS
Chemistry is a major factor in microbiology because microbes are made up of
chemical elements. Scientists are able to destroy microbes by breaking them
down into their chemical elements and then disposing of those elements.
Before you can understand how this process works, you must be familiar with
the chemical principles related to microbiology. You’ll learn about these chemi-
cal principles in this chapter. 
CHAPTER 3: OBSERVING MICROORGANISMS
“Wash the germs from your hands!” That was the cry of every mom who knew
that hand washing is the best way to prevent sickness. Most kids balked at hand
washing simply because they couldn’t see the germs on their hands. 
We’ll show you how to see germs and other microbes in this chapter by using a
microscope. You’ll learn everything you need to know to bring microbes into clear
focus so you can see with a microscope what you can’t see with the naked eye.
CHAPTER 4: PROKARYOTIC CELLS AND EUKARYOTIC
CELLS
It is time to get down and personal with two common microbe cells. These are
prokaryotic cells and eukaryotic cells. These names are probably unfamiliar to
you, but they won’t be by the time you’re finished reading this chapter. 
Prokaryotic cells are bacteria cells and eukaryotic cells are cells of animals,
plants, algae, fungi, and protozoa. Each carries out the six life processes that all
living things have in common. In this chapter you’ll learn about how prokary-
otes and eukaryotes carry out these life processes. 
CHAPTER 5: THE CHEMICAL METABOLISM
“It’s my slow metabolism! That’s why I can’t shed a few pounds.” This is a great
excuse for being unable to lose weight, but the reason our metabolisms are slow
is because we tend not to exercise enough. 
In this chapter, you’ll learn about the biochemical reactions that change food
into energy—collectively called metabolism—and how the cell is able to con-
vert nutrients into energy.
INTRODUCTION
xv

CHAPTER 6: MICROBIAL GROWTH 
AND CONTROLLING MICROBIAL GROWTH
You and microbes need nutrients to grow—chemical nutrients such as carbon,
hydrogen, nitrogen, and oxygen. However, not all microbes need the same
chemical nutrients. For example, some require oxygen while others can thrive in
an oxygen-free environment.
You’ll learn in this chapter how to classify microbes by the chemical nutri-
ents they need to survive. You’ll also learn how to use this knowledge to grow
microbes and control their growth in the laboratory. 
CHAPTER 7: MICROBIAL GENETICS
Just like us, microbes inherit genetic traits from their species’ previous genera-
tions. Genetic traits are instructions on how to everything to stay alive. Some in-
structions are passed along to the next generation while other instructions are not.
In this chapter you’ll learn how microorganisms inherit genetic traits from
previous generations of microorganisms. Some of these traits show them how to
identify and process food, how to excrete waste products, and how to reproduce. 
CHAPTER 8: RECOMBINANT DNA TECHNOLOGY
Who we are and what we are going to be is programmed into our genes. The
same is true for microbes. This genetic information is encoded into DNA by the
linking of nucleic acids in a specific sequence. 
Genetic information can be reordered in a process called genetic engineering.
You’ll learn about genetic engineering and how to recombinant DNA using
DNA technology in this chapter. 
CHAPTER 9: CLASSIFICATION OF MICROORGANISMS
There are thousands of microbes and no two are identical, but many have simi-
lar characteristics. Microbiologists have spent years carefully observing
microbes and organizing them into groups by their similarities.
You’ll learn how microbes are classified in this chapter, which enables you to
efficiently identify microbes that you see under a microscope. 
INTRODUCTION
xvi

CHAPTER 10: THE PROKARYOTES: 
DOMAINS ARCHAEA AND BACTERIA
Bacteria are one of the most common microbes that you encounter. Some bacte-
ria cause disease and other bacteria help you live by aiding in digestion. There
are many different kinds of bacteria; however, all bacteria can be grouped into
four divisions based on the characteristics of their cell walls. 
Each division is further divided into sections based on other characteristics,
such as oxygen requirements, motility, shape, and Gram-stain reaction. In this
chapter, you’ll learn how to use these divisions and sections to identify bacteria. 
CHAPTER 11: THE EUKARYOTES: 
FUNGI, ALGAE, PROTOZOA, AND HELMINTHS
In this chapter you’ll take a close look at the kingdoms of fungi, protista, and
animalia. These are microbes that are commonly known as fungi, algae, proto-
zoa, and helminths.
Eukaryotes are a type of microbe and are different from bacteria and viruses.
However, they, too, are beneficial to us. They supply food, remove waste, and
cure disease (in the form of antibiotics). And as bacteria, some eukaryotes also
cause disease. 
CHAPTER 12: VIRUSES, VIROIDS, AND PRIONS
Probably one of the most feared microbes is a virus because often there is little
or nothing that can be done to kill it. Once you’re infected, you can treat the
symptoms, such as a runny nose and watery eyes, but otherwise you must let the
virus run its course.
Did you ever wonder why this is case? If so, then read this chapter for the
answer and learn what a virus is, how viruses live, and which diseases they cause. 
CHAPTER 13: EPIDEMIOLOGY AND DISEASE
It’s flu season and you can only hope that you don’t become infected—otherwise
you’ll have ten days of chills, sneezing, and isolation. No one will want to come
close to you for fear of catching the flu.
INTRODUCTION
xvii

In this chapter, you’ll learn about diseases like the flu and how diseases are
spread. You’ll also learn how to take simple precautions to control and prevent
the spread of diseases.
CHAPTER 14: IMMUNITY
Inside your body there is a war going on. An army of B cells, T cells, natural
killer cells, and other parts of your immune system are on the defense. These
cells seek microbes to rip apart before any of them can give you a runny nose,
cough, or that dreaded feverish feeling.
The immune system is your body’s defense mechanism: Its “soldiers” sur-
round, neutralize, and destroy foreign invaders before they can do harm. In this
chapter you’ll learn about your immune system and how it gives you daily pro-
tection against invading microbes.
CHAPTER 15: VACCINES AND DIAGNOSING DISEASES
Think about this: Each year millions of people pay their doctor to inject them
with the flu virus. On the surface that may not make sense, but after reading this
chapter you’ll find that it makes perfect sense because this injection is actually
a vaccination against the flu. 
A vaccine prevents you from catching a certain disease because it has ele-
ments of that disease, triggering your body to create antibodies to the disease.
You’ll learn about vaccines and antibodies in this chapter. 
CHAPTER 16: ANTIMICROBIAL DRUGS
“Doc, give me a pill to knock out whatever is causing me to be sick!” All of us
say this whenever we come down with an illness. All we want is a magic pill that
makes us feel better. Sometimes that magic pill—or injection—contains a
microbe that seeks out and destroys pathogenic microbes, which are disease-
causing microbes.
In this chapter you’ll learn about antimicrobial drugs that are given as
chemotherapy to cure disease. These antimicrobial drugs contain microbes that
kill other microbes.
INTRODUCTION
xviii

I would like to acknowledge my mentor, colleague, and friend Professor Robert
Highley for all his encouragement and technical support in the production of
this book; my friend Ms. Joan Sisto for all her hours of computer work; and my
friend and coauthor Professor Jim Keogh for asking me to help write this book.
Thank you.
DR. TOM BETSY
Professor Robert Highley has done a magnificent job as technical editor on this
project. His diligence and attention to detail has made Microbiology Demystified
a rewarding addition to every microbiology student’s library.
JIM KEOGH
xix
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Copyright © 2005 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

This page intentionally left blank.

MICROBIOLOGY DEMYSTIFIED

This page intentionally left blank.

1
CHAPTER
1
The World of the 
Microorganism
Microbiology is the study of microorganisms, which are tiny organisms that
live around us and inside our body. An organism is a living thing that ingests and
breaks down food for energy and nutrients, excretes undigested food as waste,
and is capable of reproduction. You are an organism and so are dogs, cats,
insects, and other creatures that you see daily. 
A microorganism is simply a very, very small organism that you cannot see
with your naked eye, but you sure feel its effect whenever your eyes fill with
water and mucus flows like an open faucet from your nose. You call it a head
cold. Actually, you are under siege by an army of microorganisms attacking
membranes inside your body. Watery eyes and a runny nose are ways that you
fight microorganisms by flushing them out of your body. 
Microorganisms are a key component of biological warfare along with chem-
icals that disrupt homeostasis. The anthrax attack that followed the 9/11 terror-
ist attacks clearly illustrated how a dusting of anthrax in an envelope can be
lethal to people in an office building. Anthrax is a disease caused by the micro-
organism Bacillus anthracis, a bacterium that forms endospores and infiltrates
Copyright © 2005 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

the body by ingestion, skin contact, and inhalation. An endospore is a bacterium
in a dormant state that forms within a cell.
Fortunately, incidents of biological attacks using microorganisms have been
infrequent. However, there are thousands of microorganisms all around us that
can be just as deadly and debilitating as the microorganisms used in warfare
throughout history.
Types of Microorganisms
UNFRIENDLY MICROORGANISMS
An infection is caused by the infiltration of a disease-causing microorganism
known as a pathogenic microorganism. Some pathogenic microorganisms infect
humans, but not other animals and plants. Some pathogenic microorganisms that
infect animals or plants also infect humans. 
Pathogenic microorganisms make headlines and play an important role in his-
tory. Legendary gunfighter John “Doc” Holliday is famous for his escapades in
the Wild West. He dodged countless bullets, showing that he was the best of the
best when it came to gun fighting. Yet Mycobacterium tuberculosis took down
Doc Holliday quietly, without firing a shot. Mycobacterium tuberculosis is the
bacterium that causes tuberculosis (Fig. 1-1). This bacterium affects the lung tis-
sue when droplets of respiratory secretions or particles of dry sputum from a per-
son who is infected with the disease are inhaled by an uninfected person.
CHAPTER 1
The World of the Microorganism
2
Fig. 1-1.
Mycobacterium tuberculosis is the bac-
terium that causes tuberculosis.

Yersinia pestis nearly conquered Europe in the fourteenth century with the
help of the flea. Yersinia pestis is the microorganism that caused the Black
Plague (Fig. 1-2) and killed more than 25 million Europeans. You might say that
Yersinia pestis launched a sneak attack. First, it infected fleas that were carried
into populated areas on the backs of rats. Rodents traveled on ships and then
over land in search of food. Fleas jumped from rodents and bit people, trans-
mitting the Yersinia pestis microorganism into the person’s blood stream. 
In an effort to prevent the spread of Yersinia pestis, sailors entering Sicily’s
seaports had to wait 40 days before leaving the ship. This gave time for sailors
to exhibit the symptoms of the Black Plague if the Yersinia pestis microorgan-
ism had infected them. Sicilians called this quarantenaria. Today we know it as
quarantine. Sailors who did not exhibit these symptoms were not infected and
free to disembark. 
Campers and travelers sometimes become acquainted with Giardia lamblia,
Escherichia coli, or Entameba histolytica whenever they visit tropical countries.
Travelers who become infected typically do not die but come down with a bad
case of diarrhea.
FRIENDLY MICROORGANISMS
Not all microorganisms are pathogens. In fact many microorganisms help to
maintain homeostasis in our bodies and are used in the production of food and
other commercial products. For example, flora are microorganisms found in
our intestines that assist in the digestion of food and play a critical role in the
formation of vitamins such as vitamin B and vitamin K. They help by breaking
down large molecules into smaller ones. 
CHAPTER 1
The World of the Microorganism
3
Fig. 1-2.
Yersinia pestis is the microorganism 
that caused the Black Plague.

What Is a Microorganism?
Microorganisms are the subject of microbiology, which is the branch of science
that studies microorganisms. A microorganism can be one cell or a cluster of
cells that can be seen only by using a microscope.
Microorganisms are organized into six fields of study: bacteriology, virology,
mycology, phycology, protozoology, and parasitology. 
BACTERIOLOGY
Bacteriology is the study of bacteria. Bacteria are prokaryotic organisms. A
prokaryotic organism is a one-celled organism that does not have a true nucleus.
Many bacteria absorb nutrients from their environment and some make their own
nutrients by photosynthesis or other synthetic processes. Some bacteria can
move freely in their environment while others are stationary. Bacteria occupy
space on land and can live in an aquatic environment and in decaying matter.
They can even cause disease. Bacillus anthracis is a good example. It is the bac-
terium that causes anthrax. 
VIROLOGY
Virology is the study of viruses. A virus is a submicroscopic, parasitic, acellular
entity composed of a nucleic acid core surrounded by a protein coat. Parasitic
acellular means that a virus receives food and shelter from another organism and
is not divided into cells. An example of a virus is the varicella-zoster virus (Fig.
1-3), which is the virus that causes chickenpox in humans.
CHAPTER 1
The World of the Microorganism
4
Fig. 1-3.
The varicella-zoster virus causes chickenpox.

MYCOLOGY
Mycology is the study of fungi. A fungus is a eukaryotic organism, often micro-
scopic, that absorbs nutrients from its external environment. Fungi are not pho-
tosynthetic. A eukaryotic microorganism is a microorganism whose cells have
a nucleus, cytoplasm and organelles. These include yeasts and some molds.
Tinea pedis, better known as athlete’s foot, is caused by a fungus.
PHYCOLOGY
Phycology is the study of algae. Algae are eukaryotic photosynthetic organisms
that transform sunlight into nutrients using photosynthesis. A eukaryotic photo-
synthetic microorganism is a microorganism whose cells have a nucleus, nuclear
envelope, cytoplasm, and organelles and that is able to carry out photosynthesis. 
PROTOZOOLOGY 
Protozoology is the study of protozoa, animal-like single-cell microorganisms
that can be found in aquatic environments. Many obtain their food by engulfing
or ingesting smaller organisms. Protozoa are found in aquatic and terrestrial
environments. An example is Amoeba proteus. 
PARASITOLOGY
Parasitology is the study of parasites. A parasite is an organism that lives at the
expense of another organism or host. Parasites that cause disease are called
pathogens. Examples of parasites are bacteria, viruses, protozoa, and many ani-
mals such as worms, flatworms, and arthropods (insects). 
What’s in a Name: Naming and Classifying
Carl Linnaeus developed the system for naming organisms in 1735. This system
is referred to as binominal nomenclature. Each organism is assigned two latin-
ized names because Latin or Greek was the traditional language used by schol-
ars. The first name is called the genus. The second name is called the specific
CHAPTER 1
The World of the Microorganism
5

epithet, which is the name of the species, and is not capitalized. The genus and
the epithet appear underlined or italicized. 
The name itself describes the organism. For example, Staphylococcus aureus
is a very common bacterium. Staphylococcus is the genus and aureus is the epi-
thet. In this case, the genus describes the appearance of the cells. Staphylo means
a clustered arrangement of the cells and coccus signifies that the cells are spheres.
In other words, this means a cluster of sphere-like cells. Aureus is the Latin word
for golden, which means that the cluster of sphere-like cells has a golden hue.
Sometimes an organism is named for a researcher, as is the case with
Escherichia coli (Fig. 1-4), better known as E. coli. The genus is Escherichia,
which is named for Theodor Escherich, a leading microbiologist. The epithet is
coli, which implies that the bacterium lives in the colon (large intestine).
Organisms were classified into either the animal kingdom or the plant king-
dom before the scientific community discovered microorganisms in the seven-
teenth century. It was at that time when scientists realized that this classification
system was no longer valid. 
Carl Woese developed a new classification system that arranged organisms
according to their molecular characteristics and then cellular characteristics.
However, it wasn’t until 1978 when scientists could agree on the new system for
classifying organisms, and it took 12 years after this agreement before the new
system was published. 
Woese devised three classification groups called domains. A domain is larger
than a kingdom. These are:
Domains
• Eubacteria: Bacteria that have peptidoglycan cell walls. (Peptidoglycan
is the molecular structure of the cell walls of eubacteria which consists of
N-acetylglucosamine, N-acetylmuramic acid, tetrapeptide, side chain and
murein.)
CHAPTER 1
The World of the Microorganism
6
Fig. 1-4.
E. coli is a bacterium that lives in the colon.

• Archaea: Prokaryotes that do not have peptidoglycan cell walls. 
• Eucarya: Organisms from the following kingdoms:
Kingdoms
• Protista (Note: This is in the process of changing.)—algae, protozoa, slime
molds.
• Fungi—one-celled yeasts, multicellular molds, and mushrooms.
• Plantae—moss, conifers, ferns, flowering plants, algae.
• Animalia—insects, worms, sponges, and vertebrates.
How Small Is a Microorganism?
Microorganisms are measured using the metric system, which is shown in Table
1.1 In order to give you some idea of the size of a microorganism, let’s compare
a microorganism to things that are familiar to you. 
German shepherd 
1 meter 
Human gamete (egg) from a female ovary 
1 millimeter
A human red blood cell 
100 micrometers
A typical bacterium cell 
10 micrometers
A virus 
10 nanometers 
An atom 
0.1 nanometer
Your Body Fights Back 
Immunology is the study of how an organism specifically defends itself against
infection by microorganisms. When a microorganism such as the bacterium
Streptococcus pyogenes, which can cause strep throat, invades your body, white
blood cells engulf the bacterial cells and digest it in an immune response called
phagocytosis. Phagocytosis is the ability of a cell to engulf and digest solid mate-
rials by the use of pseudopods or “false feet.” 
Phagocytosis was discovered in 1880 by Russian zoologist Elie Metchnikoff,
who was one of the first scientists to study immunology. Metchnikoff studied the
body’s defense against disease-causing agents and invading microorganisms. He
CHAPTER 1
The World of the Microorganism
7

discovered that leukocytes (white blood cells) defended the body by engulfing
and eating the invading microorganism.
DRUGS: SEND IN THE CAVALRY 
Invading microorganisms activate your body’s immune system. It is at this point
when you experience a fever and feel sick. In an effort to help your immune sys-
tem, physicians prescribe drugs called antibiotics that contain one or more
antimicrobial agents that combat bacteria. An antimicrobial agent is a substance
that specifically inhibits and destroys the attacking microorganism. 
One of the most commonly used antimicrobial agent is penicillin. Penicillin
is made from Penicillium, which is a mold that secretes materials that interfere
with the synthesis of the cell walls of bacteria causing “lysis,” or destruction of
the cell wall, and kills the invading microorganism. 
IMMUNITY: PREVENTING A MICROORGANISM ATTACK
Our bodies have a wide range of body responses in the fight against pathogens.
These responses are referred to as nonspecific resistance. Resistance is the abil-
ity of the body to ward off disease. The lack of resistance is called susceptibil-
ity. When your immune system is compromised you become susceptible to
pathogens invading your body where they divide into colonies causing disease,
making you sick. 
Generally, your first line of defense is to use mechanical and chemical means
to prevent a pathogen from entering your body. Skin is the primary mechanical
means to fight pathogens; it acts as a barrier between the pathogen and the inter-
nal structures of your body. Mucous membranes are another mechanical barrier;
CHAPTER 1
The World of the Microorganism
8
Unit
Fraction of Standard
English Equivalent
meter (m)
3.28 feet
centimeter (cm)
0.01 m = 10
−2
0.39 inch
millimeter (mm)
0.001 m = 10
−3
0.039 inch
micrometer (µm)
0.000001 m = 10
−6
0.000039 inch
nanometer (nm)
0.000000001 m = 10
−9
0.000000039 inch
Table 1-1.
Quantity and Length: Metric and English Equivalents

they move the pathogen using tears and saliva (to flush it) and mucus cilia in the
respiratory track to physically move it. Urination, defecation, and vomiting are
other mechanical means to combat a pathogen by forcefully removing the
pathogen from your body.
Chemical means attack a pathogen by changing its pH properties. Skin sebum
is an important defense. Sebum is a thick substance secreted by the sebaceous
glands; it consists of lipids and cellular debris that have a low pH, enabling it to
chemically destroy a pathogen. 
Sweat contains the enzyme lysozyme, which attacks the cell walls of bacte-
ria. Hyaluronic acid found in areolar connective tissue sets up a chemical barrier
that restricts a pathogen to a localized area of the body. Likewise, gastric juice
and vaginal secretions have a low pH that is a natural barrier to many kinds of
pathogens.
History of the Microscope
Diseases are less baffling today than they were centuries ago, when scientists
and physicians were clueless as to what causes disease. Imagine for a moment
that a close relative had taken ill. One day she was well and the next day she was
sick for no apparent reason. Soon she was dead if her body couldn’t fight the ill-
ness. You couldn’t see whatever attacked her—and neither could the doctor.
ZACHARIAS JANSSEN
In 1590, Zacharias Janssen developed the first compound microscope in
Middleburg, Holland. Janssen’s microscope consisted of three tubes. One tube
served as the outer casing and contained the other two tubes. At either ends of the
inner tubes were lenses used for magnification. Janssen’s design enabled scientists
to adjust the magnification by sliding the inner tubes. This enabled scientists to
enlarge the image of a specimen three and nine times the specimen’s actual size. 
ROBERT HOOKE
In 1665, Robert Hooke, an English scientist, popularized the use of the compound
microscope when he placed the lenses over slices of cork and viewed little boxes
that he called cells. It was his discovery that led to the development of cell the-
ory in the nineteenth century by Mathias Schleiden, Theodor Schwann, and
Rudolf Virchow. Cell theory states that all living things are composed of cells. 
CHAPTER 1
The World of the Microorganism
9

ANTONI VAN LEEUWENHOEK
Hooke’s experiments with a crude microscope inspired Antoni van Leeuwenhoek
to further explore the micro world. Van Leeuwenhoek, an amateur lens grinder,
improved Hooke’s microscope by grinding lenses to achieve magnification. His
microscope required one lens. With his improvement, van Leeuwenhoek became
the first person to view a living microorganism, which he called Animalcules. 
This discovery took place during the 1600s, when scientists believed that
organisms generated spontaneously and did not come from another organism.
This sounds preposterous today; however, back then scientists were just learning
that a cell was the basic component of an organism. 
How Do Organisms Appear?
FRANCESCO REDI
Italian physician Francesco Redi developed an experiment that demonstrated that
an organism did not spontaneously appear. He filled jars with rotting meat.
Some jars he sealed and others he left opened. Those that were open eventually
contained maggots, which is the larval stage of the fly. The other jars did not con-
tain maggots because flies could not enter the jar to lay eggs on the rotting meat. 
His critics stated that air was the ingredient required for spontaneous gen-
eration of an organism. Air was absent from the sealed jar and therefore no sponta-
neous generation could occur, they said (Fig. 1-5). Redi repeated the experiment
except this time he placed a screen over the opened jars. This prevented flies from
entering the jar. There weren’t any maggots on the rotting meat.
Until that time scientists did not have a clue about how to fight disease.
However, Redi’s discovery gave scientists an idea. They used Redi’s findings to
conclude that killing the microorganism that caused a disease could prevent
the disease from occurring. A new microorganism could only be generated by
CHAPTER 1
The World of the Microorganism
10
Fig. 1-5.
No spontaneous generation occurred in the sealed jar.
Open
Sealed

the reproduction of another microorganism. Kill the microorganism and you
won’t have new microorganisms, the theory went—you could stop the spread
of the disease. Scientists called this the Theory of Biogenesis. The Theory of Bio-
genesis states that a living cell is generated from another living cell. 
LOUIS PASTEUR
Although the Theory of Biogenesis disproved spontaneous generation, sponta-
neous generation was hotly debated among the scientific community until 1861
when Louis Pasteur, a French scientist, resolved the issue once and for all.
Pasteur showed that microorganisms were in the air. He proved that sterilized
medical instruments became contaminated once they were exposed to the air. 
Pasteur came to this conclusion by boiling beef broth in several short-necked
flasks. Some flasks were left open to cool. Other flasks were sealed after boil-
ing. The opened flasks became contaminated with microorganisms while no
microorganisms appeared in the closed flasks. Pasteur concluded that airborne
microorganisms had contaminated the opened flasks.
In a follow-up experiment, Pasteur placed beef broth in an open long-necked
flask. The neck was bent into an S-shape. Again he boiled the beef broth and let
it cool. The S-shaped neck trapped the airborne microorganisms (see Fig. 1-6).
CHAPTER 1
The World of the Microorganism
11
Fig. 1-6.
Pasteur placed beef broth into a long-necked flask,
then bent the neck into an S-shape.

The beef broth remained uncontaminated even after months of being exposed
to the air. The very same flask containing the original beef broth exists today in
Pasteur Institute in Paris and still shows no sign of contamination. Pasteur’s
experiments validated that microorganisms are not spontaneously generated.
Based on Pasteur’s findings, a concerted effort was launched to improve
sterilization techniques to prevent microorganisms from reproducing. Pasteur-
ization, one of the best-known sterilization techniques, was developed and
named for Pasteur. Pasteurization kills harmful microorganisms in milk, alco-
holic beverages, and other foods and drinks by heating it enough to kill most
bacteria that cause spoilage.
JOHN TYNDALL AND FERDINAND COHN
The work of John Tyndall and Ferdinand Cohn in the late 1800s led to one of the
most important discoveries in sterilization. They learned that some microorgan-
isms are resistant to certain sterilization techniques. Until their discovery, scien-
tists had assumed that no microorganism could survive boiling water, which
became a widely accepted method of sterilization. This was wrong. Some ther-
mophiles resisted heat and could survive a bath in boiling water. This meant that
there was not one magic bullet that killed all harmful microorganisms.
Germ Theory
Until the late 1700s, not much was really known about diseases except their
impact. It seemed that anyone who came in contact with an infected person
contracted the disease. A disease that is spread by being exposed to infection is
called a contagious disease. The unknown agent that causes the disease is called
a contagion. Today we know that a contagion is a microorganism, but in the 1700s
many found it hard to believe something so small could cause such devastation. 
ROBERT KOCH
Opinions changed dramatically following Robert Koch’s study of anthrax in
the late 1800s. Koch noticed a pattern developing: Anyone who worked with or
ingested animals that were infected with anthrax contracted the disease. In fact,
CHAPTER 1
The World of the Microorganism
12

people who simply inhaled the air around an infected animal were likely to
inhale the anthrax bacterium spores and come down with the disease. Koch’s
investigations into anthrax led him to discover how microorganisms work.
Anthrax is caused by Bacillus anthracis (Fig. 1-7), which is a bacterial type
of microorganism consisting of one cell. Bacillus anthracis, whether in a dor-
mant or an active state, is called a spore. A spore is not infectious. However,
under the right conditions, the Bacillus anthracis spores germinate and enter the
active state and rapidly multiply and become infectious. 
The question that Koch raised is: Would taking active Bacillus anthracis from
one animal and injecting it into a healthy animal cause the healthy animal to
come down with anthrax? If so, then he could prove that a microorganism was
actually the cause of disease. 
Bacillus anthracis was present in the blood of infected animals, so Koch
removed a small amount of blood and injected it into a healthy animal. The ani-
mal came down with anthrax. He repeated the experiment by removing a small
amount of blood from the newly infected animal and gave it to another healthy
animal. It, too, came down with anthrax.
Koch expanded his experiment by cultivating Bacillus anthracis on a slice of
potato. He then exposed the potato to the right blend of air, nutrients, and tem-
perature. Koch took a small sample of his homegrown Bacillus anthracis and
injected it into a healthy animal. The animal came down with anthrax. 
Based on his findings, Koch developed the Germ Theory. The Germ Theory
states that a disease-causing microorganism should be present in animals
infected by the disease and not in healthy animals. The microorganism can be
cultivated away from the animal and used to inoculate a healthy animal. The
CHAPTER 1
The World of the Microorganism
13
Fig. 1-7. Bacillus anthracis rapidly multiplies in
the active state and becomes infectious.

healthy animal should then come down with the disease. Samples of a micro-
organism taken from several infected animals are the same as the original
microorganism from the first infected animal. 
Four steps used by Koch to study microorganisms are referred to as Koch’s
Postulates. Koch’s Postulates state:
1. The microorganism must be present in the diseased animal and not present
in the healthy animal.
2. Cultivate the microorganism away from the animal in a pure culture.
3. Symptoms of the disease should appear in the healthy animal after the
healthy animal is inoculated with the culture of the microorganism.
4. Isolate the microorganism from the newly infected animal and culture it in
the laboratory. The new culture should be the same as the microorganism
that was cultivated from the original diseased animal.
Koch’s work with anthrax also developed techniques for growing a culture of
microorganisms. He eventually used a gelatin surface to cultivate microorgan-
isms. Gelatin inhibited the movement of microorganisms. As microorganisms
reproduced, they remained together, forming a colony that made them visible
without a microscope. The reproduction of microorganisms is called colonizing.
The gelatin was replaced with agar that is derived from seaweed and still used
today. Richard Petri improved on Koch’s cultivating technique by placing the
agar in a specially designed disk that was to later be called the Petri dish (Fig.
1-8). It, too, is still used today.
CHAPTER 1
The World of the Microorganism
14
Fig. 1-8. A Petri dish is used to grow a culture of microorganisms.

Vaccination 
The variola microorganism was one of the most feared villains in the late 
1700s. The variola virus causes smallpox. If variola didn’t kill you, it caused
pus-filled blisters that left deep scars that pitted nearly every part of your body.
Cows were also susceptible to a variation of variola called cowpox. Milkmaids
who tended to infected cows contracted cowpox and exhibited immunity to the
smallpox virus.
EDWARD JENNER
Edward Jenner, an English physician, discovered something very interesting
about both smallpox and cowpox in 1796. Those who survived smallpox never
contracted smallpox again, even when they were later exposed to someone who
was infected with smallpox. Milkmaids who contracted cowpox never caught
smallpox even though they were exposed to smallpox.
Jenner had an idea. He took scrapings from a cowpox blister found on a milk-
maid and, using a needle scratched the scrapings into the arm of James Phipps,
an 8-year-old. Phipps became slightly ill when the scratch turned bumpy. Phipps
recovered and was then exposed to smallpox. He did not contract smallpox
because his immune system developed antibodies that could fight off variola
and vaccinia.
Jenner’s experiment discovered how to use our body’s own defense mecha-
nism to prevent disease by inoculating a healthy person with a tiny amount of
the disease-causing microorganism. Jenner called this a vaccination, which is an
extension of the Latin word vacca (cow). The person who received the vaccina-
tion became immune to the disease-causing microorganism. 
ELIE METCHNIKOFF
Elie Metchnikoff, a nineteenth-century Russian zoologist, was interested by
Jenner’s work with vaccinations. Metchnikoff wanted to learn how our bodies
react to vaccinations by exploring our body’s immune system. He discovered
that white blood cells (leukocytes) engulf and digest microorganisms that invade
the body. He called these cells phagocytes, which means “cell eating.” Metch-
nikoff was one of the first scientists to study the new area of biology called
immunology, the study of the immune system.
CHAPTER 1
The World of the Microorganism
15

Killing the Microorganism
Great strides were made during the late 1800s in the development of antiseptic
techniques. It began with a report by Hungarian physician Ignaz Semmelweis on
a dramatic decline in childbirth fever when physicians used antiseptic tech-
niques when delivering babies. Infections become preventable through the use
of antiseptic techniques.
JOSEPH LISTER
Joseph Lister, an English surgeon, developed one of the most notable antiseptic
techniques. During surgery he sprayed carbolic acid over the patient and then
bandaged the patient’s wound with carbolic acid–soaked bandages. Infection
following surgery dramatically dropped when compared with surgery performed
without spraying carbolic acid. Carbolic acid, also known as phenol was one of
the first surgical antiseptics. 
PAUL EHRLICH
Antiseptics prevented microorganisms from infecting a person, but scientists
still needed a way to kill microorganisms after they infected the body. Scientists
needed a magic bullet that cured diseases. At the turned of the nineteenth cen-
tury, Paul Ehrlich, a German chemist, discovered the magic bullet. Ehrlich
blended chemical elements into a concoction that, when inserted into an
infected area, killed microorganisms without affecting the patient. Today we call
Ehrlich’s concoction a drug. Ehrlich’s innovation has led to chemotherapy using
synthetic drugs that are produced by chemical synthesis. 
ALEXANDER FLEMING
Scientists from all over set out to use Ehrlich’s findings to find drugs that could
make infected patients well again. One of the most striking breakthroughs came
in 1929 when Alexander Fleming discovered Penicillin notatum, the organ-
ism that synthesizes penicillin. Penicillium notatum is a fungus that kills the
Staphylococcus aureus microorganism (Fig. 1-9), and similar microorganisms. 
CHAPTER 1
The World of the Microorganism
16

Fleming grew cultures of Staphylococcus aureus, a bacterium, in the laboratory.
He was also conducting experiments with Penicillium notatim, a mold. By acci-
dent the Staphylococcus aureus was contaminated with the Penicillium notatum,
causing the Staphylococcus to stop reproducing and die. Penicillium notatum be-
came one of the first antibiotics. An antibiotic is a substance that kills bacteria.
A summary of the scientists and their contributions can be found in Table 1-2.
CHAPTER 1
The World of the Microorganism
17
Fig. 1-9.
Penicillium notatum is a fungus 
that kills the staphylococcus aureus.
Table 1-2.
Scientists and Their Contributions
Year
Scientist
Contribution
1590
Zacharias Janssen
Developed the first compound microscope.
1590
Robert Hooke
Observed nonliving plant tissue of a thin slice of
cork.
1668
Francesco Redi
Discovered that microorganisms did not spontane-
ously appear. His contribution led to the finding that
killing the microorganism that caused the disease
could prevent the disease.
1673
Antoni van
Invented the single-lens microscope, grinding the
Leeuwenhoek
microscope lens to improve magnification. First
person to view a living organism.
1798
Edward Jenner
Developed vaccinations against disease-causing
microorganisms.

CHAPTER 1
The World of the Microorganism
18
Year
Scientist
Contribution
1850s
Mathias Schleiden,
Developed cell theory.
Theodore Schwann, 
Rudolf Virchow
1847
Ignaz Semmelweis
Reported a dramatic decline in childbirth fever after
physicians used antiseptic techniques when deliver-
ing babies.
1864
Louis Pasteur
Discovered that microorganisms were everywhere,
living on organisms and in nonliving things such as air.
His work led to improved sterilization techniques called
pasteurization. One of the founders of bacteriology.
1867
Joseph Lister
Reduced infections after surgery by spraying car-
bolic acid over the patient before bandaging the
wound. This was the first surgical antiseptic.
1876
Robert Koch
Discovered how microorganisms spread contagious
diseases by studying anthrax. Developed the 
Germ Theory. Developed techniques for cultivating
microorganisms.
1870s
John Tyndall, 
Discovered that some microorganisms are resistant to 
Ferdinand Cohn
certain sterilization techniques. One of the founders
of bacteriology.
1884
Elie Metchnikoff
Discovered that white blood cells (leukocytes)
engulf and digest microorganisms that invade the
body. Coined the word phagocytes. Founded the
branch of science called immunology.
1887
Richard Petri
Developed the technique of placing agar into a spe-
cially designed dish to grow microorganisms, which
was later called the Petri dish.
1890
Paul Ehrlich
Developed the first drug to fight disease-causing
microorganisms that had already entered the body. 
1928
Alexander Fleming
Discovered Penicillium notatum, the fungus that
kills staphylococcus aureus, a microorganism that is
a leading cause of infection.
Table 1-2.
Scientists and Their Contributions (Continued)

Quiz
1. What is a microorganism?
(a) A microorganism is a small organism that takes in and breaks down
food for energy and nutrients, excretes unused food as waste, and is
capable of reproduction. 
(b) A microorganism is a small organism that causes diseases only in
plants.
(c) A microorganism is a small organism that causes diseases only in
animals.
(d) A microorganism is a term that refers to a cell.
2. What is a pathogenic microorganism?
(a) A microorganism that multiplies
(b) A microorganism that grows in a host
(c) A microorganism that is small
(d) A disease-causing microorganism
3. Name the parts of this microorganism using the nomenclature system:
Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
(a) A bacterium is a one-cell organism that does not have a distinct
nucleus.
(b) Mycobacterium is the presemous and tuberculosis is the specific
postsemous.
(c) Mycobacterium is the epithet and tuberculosis is the specific genus.
(d) Mycobacterium is the genus and tuberculosis is the specific epithet.
4. Why is a bacterium called a prokaryotic organism?
(a) A bacterium is a one-cell organism that does not have a distinct
nucleus. 
(b) A bacterium is a one-cell organism that has a distinct nucleus.
(c) A bacterium is a multicell organism that does not have a distinct
nucleus.
(d) A bacterium is a multicell organism that has a distinct nucleus.
5. Why is a fungus called a eukaryotic microorganism?
(a) Fungus has cells that have a nucleus, nuclear envelope, cytoplasm,
and organelles. 
CHAPTER 1
The World of the Microorganism
19

(b) Fungus has cells that have a nucleus and no nuclear envelope.
(c) Fungus has cells that have a nucleus, nuclear envelope, cytoplasm,
but no organelles.
(d) Fungus has cells that have no nucleus, no nuclear envelope, no cyto-
plasm, and no organelles.
6. What is Archaea?
(a) Archaea is a classification for organisms that have two nuclei. 
(b) Archaea is a classification for organisms that use phagocytosis.
(c) Archaea is a classification of an organism that identifies prokaryotes
that do not have peptidoglycan cell walls. 
(d) Archaea is a classification of an organism that identifies prokaryotes
that have peptidoglycan cell walls.
7. What is phagocytosis?
(a) The ability of a cell to reproduce.
(b) The ability of a cell to move throughout a microorganism. 
(c) The ability of a cell to engulf and digest solid materials by use of
pseudopods, or “false feet.”
(d) The ability of a cell to change shape.
8. What is a compound microscope?
(a) A microscope that has one lenses.
(b) A microscope that has two sets of lenses: an ocular lens and an eye-
piece. 
(c) A microscope whose lenses are concave.
(d) A microscope whose lenses are convex.
9. What is Germ Theory?
(a) Germ Theory states that a disease-causing microorganism should be
present in animals infected by the disease and not in healthy animals. 
(b) Germ Theory states that a disease-causing microorganism should be
present in healthy animals and not in infected animals.
(c) Germ Theory states that a disease-causing microorganism should be
destroyed.
(d) Germ Theory states that a disease-causing microorganism cannot be
destroyed.
10. What is Edward Jenner’s contribution to microbiology?
(a) Edward Jenner discovered the Germ Theory.
CHAPTER 1
The World of the Microorganism
20

(b) Edward Jenner discovered how to create vaccinations to trigger 
the body’s immune system to develop antibodies that fight micro-
organisms.
(c) Edward Jenner discovered the compound microscope.
(d) Edward Jenner discovered the compound nomenclature system.
CHAPTER 1
The World of the Microorganism
21

This page intentionally left blank.

2
CHAPTER
23
The Chemical 
Elements of
Microorganisms
No doubt you’re asking yourself what chemistry has to do with microbiology
since they seem to be two different branches of science. The simple answer is
that microorganisms are made up of chemicals, as is every organism—and all
matter. Remember that matter is anything that occupies space and has mass.
You might say that an organism is a chemical processing plant where things
are broken down into chemical elements; these chemical elements are then re-
arranged to form new things. You do this every time you ingest food. Food is a
group of chemical compounds. The digestive process rearranges these digested
chemical compounds into new substances that provide you with energy and
nutrients that are necessary for you to live. Some microorganisms called auto-
trophic organisms manufacture their own food. Microorganisms that derive energy
from other microorganisms (food) are called heterotopic organisms.
Copyright © 2005 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

When you catch a cold or become infected by pathogenic microorganisms,
your body is no longer in homeostasis. You feel rotten, but what’s really hap-
pening is that the microorganism is disrupting your chemical processing plant’s
normal operation. Some microorganisms prevent necessary chemical processing
from occurring. Other microorganisms cause your chemical processing plant to
execute different processes designed to fight the microorganism attack and
return your body to homeostasis—then your body is back to normal.
As you can see, chemistry is a crucial component of microbiology. It is for this
reason that we begin the study of microorganisms with a close look at chemistry.
Everything Matters
Anything that takes up space and has mass is matter. The chair you’re sitting on
is matter. You are matter. And so are the microorganisms crawling over you and
the chair. All nonliving and living things are matter because they take up space
and have mass. 
Matter is anything that takes up space and has mass. It is easy to envision
something taking up space, but what is mass?
Mass is the amount of matter a substance or an object contains. A common mis-
conception is that mass is the weight of a substance. It is true that the more there
is of a substance, the more it weighs. However, weight is the force of gravity act-
ing on mass and is calculated as weight = mass × gravity. A trip to the moon will
clarify the difference between mass and weight: You have the same mass on earth
as you do on the moon, but you weigh more on the earth than you do on the moon
because the earth has six times the gravitational force of the moon. 
Chemical Elements and the Atom
Everything including you is composed of chemical elements. A chemical ele-
ment, sometimes simply referred to as an element, is a substance that cannot be
broken down into simpler substances by a chemical process. All matter is a com-
bination of chemical elements.
A chemical element is made up of atoms. An atom is the smallest particle of
an element; it cannot be further decomposed into smaller chemical substance
(Fig. 2-1). In the early 1800s, John Dalton developed the Atomic Theory, which
explains the relationship between an element and an atom. The Atomic Theory
CHAPTER 2
Chemical Elements of Microorganisms
24

states that an element cannot be decomposed into two or more chemical sub-
stances because the element consists of one kind of atom. The atom is also the
smallest amount of matter that can enter into a chemical reaction. You’ll learn
about chemical reactions later in this chapter.
At the center of every atom is a nucleus. The nucleus does not change spon-
taneously unless it is unstable—making it radioactive—and does not participate
in a chemical reaction. It is for this reason that the nucleus for most atoms is con-
sidered stable. 
Moving around the nucleus are electrons. An electron is a negatively charged
particle that follows a path called an orbital. Electrons are the parts of an atom
that enter into a chemical reaction. 
The nucleus is made up of protons and neutrons. A proton is a positively
charged particle. A neutron is a particle that does not have a charge; it is called
neutral or uncharged. The number of protons in the nucleus equals the number
of electrons in an electrically stable atom. This makes the atom neutral because
the number of positively charged particles (protons) offsets the number of neg-
atively charged particles (electrons).
An element is identified by its atomic number. The atomic number is the num-
ber of protons in the nucleus of the atom. The atomic mass (also called the atomic
weight) is slightly less than the sum of the masses of an atom’s neutrons and pro-
tons. The standard for measuring atomic mass is called a dalton, named for John
Dalton. A dalton is also known as an atomic mass unit (amu). For example, a neu-
tron has an atomic mass of 1.088 daltons. A proton has an atomic mass of 1.077
daltons. An electron has an atomic mass of 0.0005 dalton.
Atoms that have the same atomic number are classified as the same chemical
element because these atoms behave the same way. Therefore, a chemical ele-
ment consists of one or more atoms that have the same atomic number.
CHAPTER 2
Chemical Elements of Microorganisms
25
Electron
Electron shells
Proton
Neutron
Orbital
Nucleus
Fig. 2-1.
An atom is the smallest particle of an element.

Atoms of elements that have the same atomic number, but different mass
numbers are called isotopes. This difference is do to a difference in number of
neutrons.
Each chemical element is identified by a one or two-letter symbol that corre-
sponds to the first letter or the first two letters in its name. For example, the sym-
bol C is used for carbon. Some chemical elements have English names while
others have Latin names. It is for this reason that symbols for some chemical
elements seem strange at first glance. Take sodium, for example. You would
think its symbol should be S, but that’s the symbol for sulfur. The symbol for
sodium is Na—the first two letters of its Latin name, natrium. 
There are 92 natural chemical elements and others that scientists synthesized
(created). All of these are organized into a table called the Periodic Table (see
“A Dinner Table of Elements: The Periodic Table”).  The six most abundant
chemical elements in living things are carbon, oxygen, hydrogen, nitrogen,
phosphorus and calcium. The rest are also important (see Table 2-1) and are
found in trace amounts.
CHAPTER 2
Chemical Elements of Microorganisms
26
Atomic
Approximate
Element
Symbol
Number
Atomic Weight
Calcium
Ca
20
40
Carbon
C
6
12
Chlorine
Cl
17
35
Hydrogen
H
1
1
Iodine
I
53
127
Iron
Fe
26
56
Magnesium
Mg
12
24
Nitrogen
N
7
14
Oxygen
O
8
16
Phosphorus
P
15
31
Potassium
K
19
39
Sodium
Na
11
23
Sulfur
S
16
32
Table 2-1. Chemical Elements Commonly Found in All Living Things

A Dinner Table of Elements: The Periodic Table
As scientists continued to discover new chemical elements, it became appar-
ent that there needed to be a way to place chemical elements in some kind of
order. In this way, scientists can easily reference information about each chem-
ical element. 
In the 1800s Russian chemist Dimitri Mendeleev organized chemical ele-
ments into a table by their atomic weight. Chemist H. G. J. Moseley reorganized
chemical elements using their atomic number rather than atomic weight.
Chemical elements were placed on the table in increasing atomic number. This
is referred to as the Law of Chemical Periodicity, and the table became known
as the Periodic Table (Fig. 2-2). 
The Periodic Table consists of seven rows, each called a period. Chemical
elements that have the same number of electron shells are placed in the same
period. Rows are divided into columns, which are identified with the Roman
numerals IA through VIIIA or 1 through 18, depending on the author of the
Periodic Table. Chemical elements within the same column have the same chem-
ical properties. For example, chemical elements in column IA can easily be
joined with other chemical elements. In contrast, chemical elements in column
VIIIA will not join with other chemical elements.
Each chemical element is identified by its symbol on the Periodic Table and is
associated with two numbers. The number on top of the chemical symbol is the
atomic number. The number beneath the chemical symbol is the atomic weight.
The Glowing Tale of Isotopes
Scientists describe the decay of an isotope using half-life. The half-life of an iso-
tope is the time required for half the isotope’s radioactive atoms in a sample of the
isotope to decay into a more stable form. The rate at which the number of atoms
of an isotope disintegrates is called the isotope’s rate of decay, which can be a mat-
ter of seconds, minutes, hours, days, or years. Ernest Rutherford coined the term
half-life at the turn of the twentieth century. Rutherford discovered two kinds of
radiation that he called alpha and beta. Scientists acknowledged Rutherford’s
important contribution by naming an element for him: rutherfordium (Rf). 
Around the same time, Marie Curie along with her husband Pierre Curie dis-
covered that atoms of the chemical element polonium (Po) and of the chemical
element radium (Ra) spontaneously decayed and gave off particles. She called
this process radioactivity.
CHAPTER 2
Chemical Elements of Microorganisms
27

I A
VIII B
1
1
H
1.0079
II A
III B
IV B
V B
VI B
VII B
2
He
4.003
2
3
Li
6.94
4
Be
9.0121
5
B
10.81
6
C
12.011
7
N
14.006
8
O
15.999
9
F
18.998
10
Ne
20.17
3
11
Na
22.989
12
Mg
24.035
III A
IV A
V A
VI A
VII A
VIII A VIII A VIII A
I B
II B
13
Al
26.981
14
Si
28.085
15
P
30.973
16
S
32.06
17
Cl
35.453
18
Ar
39.948
4
19
K
39.098
20
Ca
40.08
21
Sc
44.955
22
Ti
47.90
23
V
50.941
24
Cr
51.996
25
Mn
54.938
26
Fe
55.847
27
Co
58.933
28
Ni
58.71
29
Cu
63.546
30
Zn
65.38
31
Ga
69.735
32
Ge
72.59
33
As
74.921
34
Se
78.96
35
Br
79.904
36
Kr
83.80
5
37
Rb
85.467
38
Sr
87.62
39
Y
88.905
40
Zr
91.22
41
Nb
92.906
42
Mo
95.94
43
Tc
98.906
44
Ru
101.07
45
Rh
102.90
46
Pd
106.4
47
Ag
107.86
48
Cd
112.41
49
In
114.82
50
Sn
118.69
51
Sb
121.75
52
Te
127.60
53
I
126.90
54
Xe
131.30
6
55
Cs
132.90
56
Ba
137.33
57
La
138.90
72
Hf
178.49
73
Ta
180.94
74
W
183.85
75
Re
186.20
76
Os
190.2
77
Ir
192.22
78
Pt
195.09
79
Au
196.96
80
Hg
200.59
81
Tl
204.37
82
Pb
207.2
83
Bi
208.98
84
Po
(209)
85
At
(210)
86
Rn
(222)
7
87
Fr
(223)
88
Ra
226.02
89
Ac
(227)
104
Unq
(261)
105
Unp
(262)
106
Unh
(263)
107
Uns
(262)
108
Uno
(265)
109
Une
(266)
110
Unn
(272)
 
Lanthanide
Series
58
Ce
140.12
59
Pr
140.90
60
Nd
144.24
61
Pm
(145)
62
Sm
150.4
63
Eu
151.96
64
Gd
157.25
65
Tb
158.92
66
Dy
162.5
67
Ho
164.93
68
Er
167.26
69
Tm
168.93
70
Yb
173.04
71
Lu
174.96
Actinide Series
90
Th
232.03
91
Pa
231.03
92
U
238.02
93
Np
237.04
94
Pu
(244)
95
Am
(243)
96
Cm
(247)
97
Bk
(247)
98
Cf
(251)
99
Es
(254)
100
Fm
(257)
101
Md
(258)
102
No
(259)
103
Lr
(260)
Fig. 2-2.
The Periodic Table organizes chemical elements into periods and groups.
28

A chemical element can have multiple isotopes. Each of those isotopes has
the same atomic number but different mass number. As you’ll recall from earlier
in this chapter, the mass number is the sum of protons and neutrons in the
nucleus. Each isotope of the same chemical element has a different number of
neutrons but the same number of protons. 
Around They Go: Electronic Configuration
Previously in this chapter you learned that electrons of an atom move around the
atom’s nucleus in a pattern called an orbital. An orbital of an atom is organized
into one or more energy levels around the nucleus. The lowest energy level
orbital is closest to the nucleus. The highest energy level is in the outermost
orbital. The outermost orbital is called the valence shell. Each orbital holds a
maximum number of electrons. 
An atom with completely filled shells is called an inert atom and is chemi-
cally stable. An inert atom tends not to react with other atoms. However, an atom
that has an incomplete set of electrons in its valence shell is chemically unstable
and tends to react with other atoms in an effort to become stable. Atoms want to
be stable, so they either empty or fill their valence shell. 
If an atom’s valance shell is not filled, it is considered unstable. In order to
become stable the atom must undergo a chemical reaction to acquire one or more
electrons from another atom, give up one or more electrons to another atom, or
share one or more electrons with another atom. 
A chemical reaction is a chemical change in which substances called reactants
change into substances called products by rearrangement, combination, or separa-
tion of elements. Chemical reactions occur naturally, sometimes taking a relatively
long time to complete. A catalyst can be used to speed up a chemical reaction.
Enzymes are chemical substances that act like catalysts to increase the rate of reac-
tion, without changing the products of the reaction or by being consumed in the
reaction. A catalyst remains unaffected by the chemical reaction and does not
affect the result of the reaction. It simply speeds up the reaction.
Before James There Was Bond...Chemical Bond
An atom stabilizes by bonding with another atom in order to fill out its outer set
of electrons in its valence shell. When two atoms of the same chemical element
CHAPTER 2
Chemical Elements of Microorganisms
29

bond together they form a diatonic molecule. When two atoms of different chemi-
cal elements bond, they form a chemical compound.
Atoms are held together because there is an electrostatic attractive force
between the two atoms. Energy is required for the chemical reaction to bond
atoms. This energy becomes potential chemical energy that is stored in a mole-
cule or chemical compound. 
For example, combining two atoms of hydrogen forms a hydrogen molecule,
H2 (Fig. 2-3). Combing a hydrogen molecule consisting of two atoms with one
oxygen atom forms the compound we know as water, H2O (Fig. 2-4). 
Bonds are formed in two ways:
• Gain or lose an electron from the valence shell; called an ionic attraction.
• Share one or more electrons in the valence shell; called a covalent bond.
In reality, atoms bond together using a range of ionic and covalence bonds.
There are four kinds of chemical bonds:
• Ionic bond. Transfer electrons from one atom to another atom. An atom
becomes unbalanced when it gains or loses an electron. An atom that gains
an electron becomes negatively charged. An atom that loses an electron
CHAPTER 2
Chemical Elements of Microorganisms
30
Fig. 2-4.
Water is a compound consisting of two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom.
H
H
O
O
H
H
+
H
H
Fig. 2-3. Hydrogen becomes chemically stable by sharing a valence
electron with another hydrogen atom.

CHAPTER 2
Chemical Elements of Microorganisms
31
becomes positively charged. The atom is oxidized. An atom that is in-
volved in this exchange is called an ion. The atom that gives up an electron
is called a cation. A cation is positively charged. The atom that receives an
electron is called an anion, which is negatively charged. The reaction that
creates table salt from sodium and chlorine causes an ionic bond between
these atoms (Fig. 2-5). 
• Covalent bond. Atoms share electrons in their valence shell (Fig. 2-5). 
The shared electron orbits the nucleus of both atoms. A covalent bond is the
strongest bond and the most commonly found in organisms. There are three
kinds of covalent bonds: single, double, and triple. These names reflect 
the number of electrons that are shared between the two atoms that form
the bond. Atoms that share electrons equally form nonpolar covalent
bond. Atoms that share electrons unequally form polar covalent bond.
• Coordinate covalent bond. A bond is formed when electrons of the shared
pair come from the same atom. 
• Hydrogen bond. A hydrogen bond forms a weak (5% the strength of a
covalent bond), temporary bond that serves as a bridge between either dif-
ferent molecules or portions of the same molecule. For example, two water
molecules are physically combined using a hydrogen bond.
Decoding Chemical Shorthand
Over the years chemists have developed a way of describing atoms, chemical
elements, and reactions so they can convey ideas to each other. Table 2-2 shows
commonly used chemical notations that you’ll need to know when learning
about microbiology.
I Just Want to See Your Reaction
The process of bonding together atoms and separating atoms that are already
bonded together is called a chemical reaction. A chemical reaction causes a
change in the properties of atoms or to a collection of atoms, but the atoms
remain unchanged because of a change in the electron configuration. For example,

Na
Cl
+
Sodium is chemically unstable
because sodium has one
valence electron and needs
eight valence electrons to be
chemically stable.
Chlorine is chemically unstable
because Chlorine has seven
valence electrons and needs
eight valence electrons to be
chemically stable.
Chemical
reaction
causing an
iconic bond
Na
Sodium donates one valence
electron to chlorine. Sodium’s
valence shell has eight
electrons, making sodium
chemically stable.
Cl
Chlorine receives the electron
from sodium. Chlorine’s
valence shell has eight
electrons, making chlorine
chemically stable.
Donates
Fig. 2-5.
Sodium donates one valence electron to chlorine in a chemical reaction that forms the compound known as salt.
32

a chemical reaction occurs when a sodium atom is combined with a chlorine
atom; the property of the resulting chemical compound is table salt. If the
sodium chloride (table salt) compound were broken down into its chemical ele-
ments, you would see that the atoms of sodium and chlorine remain unchanged.
Theoretically a chemical reaction can be reversed if the conditions are opti-
mal. A chemical reaction that is reversible is called a reversible reaction. (see
Fig. 2-6)
In practical use, same reactions can do this much easier than others. Some of
these reversible reactions occur due to the instability of the reactants and prod-
ucts, while others will only reverse under special conditions. Examples of spe-
cial conditions could be the presence of water or the application of heat.
CHAPTER 2
Chemical Elements of Microorganisms
33
Notation
Description
Na
+
The plus superscript indicates a positive ion.
Cl
−
The negative superscript indicates a negative ion.
Na
+ + Cl
−→NaCl
The plus sign indicates synthesizing (combining) two
particles. The right arrow indicates that a chemical
reaction occurs towards the product.
NaCl →Na
+ + Cl
−
Decomposing (breaking up) a molecule or chemical
compound.
NaOH + HCl →NaCl + H2O
Exchange reaction where a chemical compound is de-
composed into its chemical elements and those chemi-
cal elements are synthesized into a new compound.
Here, sodium hydroxide (NaOH) and hydrochloric acid
(HCl) form salt (NaCL) and water (H2O).
Na
+ + Cl
−→
←NaCl
Reversible reaction is noted with a right arrow over a
left arrow. 
C – C
Single covalent bond.
C = C
Double covalent bond.
C ≡ C
Triple covalent bond.
H2O
A subscript following a chemical symbol indicates the
number of atoms (two hydrogen atoms). If no subscript
is used, then it is implied there is one atom (here, one
oxygen atom).
Table 2-2.
Commonly Used Chemical Notations

The type of reaction that occurs can further describe a chemical reaction.
There are three types of chemical reactions:
• Synthesis reaction: Two or more atoms, ions, or molecules are bound to form
a larger molecule. A synthesis reaction combines substances called reactants
to form a new molecule, which is called a product. A reactant is a substance
that reacts in a reaction and the product is the result of a reaction. In Na
+ +
Cl
−→NaCl, sodium and chlorine are reactants and sodium chloride is the
product of this reaction. A synthesis reaction in a living organism is referred
to as an anabolic reaction or anabolism. These are metabolic pathways.
• Decomposition reaction: A reaction that breaks the bond between atoms in a
molecule or chemical compound. In NaCl →Na
+ + Cl
−, sodium chloride is
broken up into its chemical elements sodium and chlorine. A decomposition
reaction in a living organism is called a catabolic reaction or catabolism. 
• Exchange reaction: A reaction that is both a synthesis reaction and a
decomposition reaction, where a chemical compound is decomposed into
its chemical elements and those chemical elements are synthesized into a
new chemical compound. In NaOH + HCl →NaCl + H2O, sodium hydrox-
ide (NaOH) and hydrochloric acid (HCl) enter into an exchange reaction
to form salt (NaCL) and water (H2O). 
A chemical reaction theoretically can be reversed, but in practice some reac-
tions create an unstable chemical compound that might require special con-
ditions to exist for the reverse reaction to happen. Those special conditions
required to reverse a reaction appear below the arrow in the reaction notation.
Above the arrow appears any special condition that must exist for the synthe-
sized reaction to occur. In Fig. 2-6, a temperature of 250° C is the special con-
dition for the synthesized reaction to occur and absolute zero is necessary for the
decomposition reaction to occur.
A catalyst is a substance that speeds up the rate of a chemical reaction by
decreasing the energy needed to run the reaction without changing the reactants
or products. Enzymes are an example of a biological substance that acts as cat-
alysts to speed up a reactor rate.
CHAPTER 2
Chemical Elements of Microorganisms
34
Fig. 2-6.
In theory all chemical reactions are reversible. In
practice these are called reversible reactions.
X
Y
XY
+
heat
water

• Velocity. Aspecific level of energy is required for a bond to occur. This energy
level is called activation energy and is different for each chemical reaction. 
• Orientation. Two atoms, ions, or molecules must strike each other at a
position where bonding can occur. 
• Reaction rate. Collisions must occur frequently at the proper orientation
and at the activation rate in order for bonding to happen. There are two
ways to increase the reaction rate. These are an increase in temperature and
an increase in pressure. Both cause atoms, ions, and molecules to move
faster and increase the probability of a collision. 
• Size. The atomic weight of an element influences the speed of a chemical
reaction. An atom with a larger atomic weight than another atom requires
more energy to be expended to increase the speed of the chemical reaction
that binds the atom to another atom. 
CATALYST: MAKING THINGS HAPPEN
Living organisms possess large molecules of proteins that are called enzymes.
These enzymes act as catalysts. A catalysts is a chemical substance that speeds-
up the rate of a chemical reaction. These catalysts do this without affecting the
end products of the reaction, nor permanently altering themselves.
In order for an enzyme to be effective it must interact with a chemical called
a substrate. The enzyme attaches itself to the substrate in an area that will most
likely increase its ability to react. This enzyme-substrate complex lowers the
activation energy of the reaction and enables the collision of chemicals involved
in the reaction to be more effective.
An important factor of enzymes is that they can reduce the reaction time with-
out the need to increase temperature. This is very important in living organisms
because high temperatures can break apart the proteins that make up the cell.
CHEMICAL COMPOUND: 
MAKING SOMETHING USEFUL
As you learned previously in this chapter, a chemical element is a substance that
cannot be divided into other chemical substances. For example, you cannot fur-
ther divide hydrogen into anything because hydrogen is an element. 
CHAPTER 2
Chemical Elements of Microorganisms
35

In its simplest form, a chemical element is made up of one atom. In its more
complex form, a chemical element is made up of two or more atoms, which is
called a molecule of the chemical element. For example, binding together two
hydrogen atoms forms a hydrogen molecule.
H + H →H2
In order to make different things you need to combine different atoms and
molecules of different chemical elements. This combination is called a com-
pound. For example, combining two hydrogen molecules to an oxygen atom
results in the compound we know as water.
H2 + O →H2O
Molarity: Hey, There’s a Mole Amongst Us
It seems nearly impossible to measure a molecule’s mass or size. Fortunately,
there is Avagadro’s number, which is the number of particles in a mole of a sub-
stance. The number is 6.022 × 10
23. Amadeo Avagadro was an Italian physicist
for whom the value was named. 
Scientists can measure molecules using units called a mole. Abbreviated as
mol. One mole is equal to the atomic weight of an element expressed in grams.
A mole is the weight in grams of a substance that is equal to the sum of the
atomic weights of the atoms in a molecule of the substance. This is referred to
as a gram molecular weight. 
Let’s look at a water molecule to determine how many moles there are in a
liter of water. 
• Find the atomic mass for each chemical element that makes up water.
Water has two chemical elements. These are hydrogen and oxygen. 
• Look up the symbol for each element on the Periodic Table. These are H
and O for hydrogen and oxygen. 
• Note the bottom number alongside the symbol. This is the atomic mass for
the chemical element. These are 1 for hydrogen and 16 for oxygen. 
• Multiply the number of atoms of each chemical element in the molecule by
its atomic mass to determine the value for one mole for the chemical ele-
ment. For water, there are two hydrogen atoms so this will be 2 × 1g. One
CHAPTER 2
Chemical Elements of Microorganisms
36

mole of a hydrogen molecule H2 equals 2 g. Water has one oxygen atom.
Therefore, multiply 1 × 16 g. One mole of oxygen is 16 g. 
• Sum the atomic mass of atoms that make up the molecule to determine one
mole of the molecule. For water this is 2 g ++ 16 g = 18 g. One mole of
water equals the atomic mass of 18 g.
• The weight of one mole is the atomic mass of a molecule expressed in
grams. Therefore, one mole of water weighs 18 grams. 
• A liter of water has a mass of 1,000 grams. Calculate the number of moles
per liter by dividing the number of grams (1,000) by one mole of water (18
grams). The result is 55 moles/liter.
An Unlikely Pair: Inorganic and Organic
Chemical compounds are divided into two general categories of substances.
These are:
• Inorganic compound. A compound that does not contain the chemical ele-
ment carbon (C). 
• Organic compound. A compound containing carbon atoms, the exception
is carbon dioxide (CO2). Carbon dioxide is inorganic. 
• Inorganic compounds are further divided into three categories. These are:
• Acids. An acid is any compound that dissociates into one or more hydro-
gen ions (H
+) and one or more negative ions (called anions) and is a pro-
ton donor.
• Bases. A base is any compound that dissociates into one or more positive
ions (called cations) and one or more negative hydroxide ions. The nega-
tive hydroxide ions (OH
−) can either accept or share protons.
• Salts. A salt is an ionic compound that dissociates into one or more positive
or negative ions in water, although some salts are not soluble in water. The
positive and negative ions are neither hydrogen ions nor hydroxide ions.
Sodium and chlorine atoms break away from the salt lattice when water
molecules surround them. Water molecules become oriented so that the pos-
itive poles face the negatively charged chlorine ions and the negative poles
face the positively charged sodium ions. The water’s hydrogen shells react
with the sodium and chlorine ions, drawing the ions from the salt lattice. 
CHAPTER 2
Chemical Elements of Microorganisms
37

THE pH SCALE
There must be a balance between acids and bases in order to maintain life. An
imbalance disrupts homeostasis. The acid-base balance is measured using the
pH scale. The pH scale (Fig. 2-7) measures the acidity or alkalinity (base) of a
substance using a pH value from 0 to 14. Values on the pH scale are logarithmic
values. A pH value of 7 is neutral, which is the pH of pure water. A pH value
greater than 7 is a base or alkaline. A pH value less than 7 is an acid. A change
in one pH value is a large change because it is a logarithmic scale. For example
a pH of 1 has 10 times more hydrogen ions than a pH of 2 and 100 times more
hydrogen ions than a pH of 3 (pH = −log10[H+]).
Adding a substance that will increase or decrease the concentration of hydro-
gen ions can change the pH value of a substance. Increasing the concentration
of hydrogen ions makes the substance more acidic and decreasing the concen-
tration makes the substance more alkaline. 
CHAPTER 2
Chemical Elements of Microorganisms
38
Fig. 2-7.
The pH scale is a logarithmic scale that measures
the acidity or alkalinity of a substance.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Distilled water
Oven cleaner
Stomach acid
Acidity
Alkalinity 
(Base)
Lemon juice
Vinegar
Tomatoes
Black coffee
Urine 
Bile
Baking soda
Milk of Magnesia 
Household Bleach
Ammonia 
Lime water

The pH value of chemical compounds in living things naturally fluctuates
during metabolism. Metabolism is a collection of chemical reactions occurring
in a living organism. Sometimes the chemical compound is more acidic than
alkaline and vice versa. Any drastic sway in the acid-base balance could have a
devastating effect. A chemical compound called a buffer is used to prevent harm-
ful swings in the acid-base balance. A buffer releases hydrogen ions or binds
hydrogen ions to stabilize the pH. A weak acid or base does not easily separate
(ionization).
ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
An organic compound is a compound whose chemical elements include carbon.
Carbon plays an import role in living things because compounds that contain it
build many different organic compounds, each having different structures and
functions. The large size of most carbon-containing molecules and the fact that
they don’t dissolve easily in water makes them useful in building body structures.
Organic compounds also store energy required by an organism for metabolism. 
Carbon can combine with other atoms because carbon has four electrons in
its outer shell. This leaves room for four additional electrons from other atoms
to bond to the carbon atom in a biological reaction (Fig. 2-8). Carbon also has
low electronegativity and lacks polarity when a bond is formed. 
A carbon atom commonly combines with other carbon atoms to form a car-
bon chain. There are two forms of carbon chains. These are straight carbon
chains and ring carbon chains. Fig. 2-9 shows how this is used to illustrate fruc-
tose. Carbon chains are the basic form for many organic compounds. 
Organic compounds come in many sizes—small to large. Many, but not all,
large organic compounds are called polymers. A polymer is made up of small
molecules called monomers. A monomer is another name for subunit. Monomers
are bonded together to form a polymer in a process called dehydration synthe-
sis, which removes water molecules from the compound. 
CHAPTER 2
Chemical Elements of Microorganisms
39
C
Fig. 2-8.
The lines indicate a single bond with other atoms.

A large organic compound is called a macromolecule which in many cases is
a polymer. A macromolecule can be reduced to its monomer in a process called
hydrolysis, which adds water molecules to the polymer. 
There are four types of organic compounds that are macromolecules. These are:
• Carbohydrates
• Lipids
• Proteins
• Nucleic acids
Carbohydrates
Carbohydrates store energy from an organism in the form of sugar, starches and
in the human body, glucogen. Cellulose is also a carbohydrate used as bulk to
move food and waste through the gastrointestinal tract. Carbohydrates are also
used as material in the cell wall. Carbohydrates are organized into three major
Carbohydrate groups. These are:
• Monosaccharides. Some of the important monosaccharides are: glucose, the
main energy source for an organism; fructose, acquired by eating fruit; galac-
tose, which is in milk; deoxyribose, DNA; and ribose, RNA. A monomer is
also a monosaccharide.
• Disaccharides. This is a combination of two monosaccharides bonded dur-
ing dehydration synthesis. Sucrose (table sugar) and lactose (milk sugar)
CHAPTER 2
Chemical Elements of Microorganisms
40
O
H
H
H
H
H
H
O
OH
OH
OH
H
HO
HO
H
HO
OH
CH2OH
CH2OH
HOCH2
Glucose
C6H12O6
Fructose
C6H12O6
Fig. 2-9. A carbon cain is used to show the compound fructose.

are disaccharides. Sucrose contains glucose and fructose. Lactose contains
glucose and galactose.
• Polysaccharides. A polysaccharide is comprised of many monosaccharides
and includes glycogen, starch, cellulose, and chitin, which is an amino sugar.
Lipids
Lipids are our fats and provide protection, insulation and can be used as an
energy reserve. They are important components to the cell membrane and store
pigments. 
There are four kinds of lipids. These are:
• Triglycerides. Triglycerides protect and insulate the body from most lipids
and are a source of energy. Because lipids have few polar covalent bonds,
they are mostly insoluble (do not mix well) with polar solvents, like water.
• Phospholipids. Phospholipids are a major component in cell membranes. 
• Steroids. Steroids are cholesterol and some hormones.
• Eicosanoids. Eicosanoids are divided into two kinds. These are prostaglan-
dins and leukotrienes. Prostaglandins are involved in various behaviors
such as dilating airways, regulating body temperature, and aiding in the
formation of blood clots. Leukotrienes are involved in inflammatory and
allergic responses.
Other kinds of lipids include fatty acids, lipoproteins and many plant pig-
ments including chlorophyll and beta-carotene and the fat soluble vitamins such
as A, D, E and K.
Proteins
Proteins comprise about 50% of a cell’s dry weight and make up material in the
cell wall. Proteins are peptidoglycans and help to transport chemicals into and
out of a cell. In addition, proteins are part of cell structures and cytoplasmic
components. Some proteins are antibodies that kill bacteria and play a role in
muscle contractions and provide movement of microorganisms. Proteins are
made up of polypeptides that bond together using peptide bonds. There are four
structural levels of proteins. These are:
• Primary. The primary structure is the sequence in which amino acids are
linked to form the polypeptide. Sequences are genetically determined and
even the slightest alteration within the sequence may have a dramatic effect
on the way the protein functions. 
CHAPTER 2
Chemical Elements of Microorganisms
41

• Secondary. The secondary structure is locally folded and is the repeated
twisting of the polypeptide chain that links together the amino acids. There
are two types of secondary structures. These are a helix and a pleated sheet.
The alpha-helix is a clockwise spiral structure. The pleated sheet forms the
parallel portion of the polypeptide chain.
• Tertiary. The tertiary structure is the three-dimensional active structure of
the polypeptide chain. Tertiary structure is the minimal level of structure
for biological activity.
• Quarternary. Is where the proteins, in order to be functional, contain sub-
units of polypeptide chains. An example would be DNA polymerase.
Proteins have many roles in a living organism. They are found in bone colla-
gen and connective tissue and provide protection in the form of immunoglobins,
which are antibodies. Some of the other important proteins are:
• Myosin. Muscle contraction.
• Actin. Muscle contraction.
• Hemoglobin transports oxygen (O2) and carbon dioxide (CO2) in blood.
• Enzymes. An enzyme that is a biological catalyst that increases the rate of
chemical reactions in cells by reducing the energy required to begin the
reaction. The reaction does not change the enzyme. The name of an
enzyme typically ends with “-ase.”
• Flagellin. Protein in flagella. 
The Blueprint of Protein Synthesis
Proteins play a critical role in chemical reactions of microorganisms and other
kinds of organisms. Information needed to direct the synthesis of a protein is
contained in DNA (Deoxyribonucleic Acid). This information is transferred
through generations from parent to child microorganisms. Nucleotides also store
energy in high-energy bonds and form together to make nucleic acids. 
There are three parts to a nucleotide:
• A nitrogen base, such as adenine.
• A five-carbon sugar, such as ribose.
• One or more phosphate groups.
CHAPTER 2
Chemical Elements of Microorganisms
42

Nucleic acids form by the joining of nucleotides that have stored energy that
the microorganism needs for metabolism. Enzymes form to speed the rate of the
chemical reaction that breaks these high-energy bonds to release the energy
needed for cell metabolism. 
Nucleic acids are long polymer chains that are found in the nucleus of cells
and contain all the genetic material of the cell. Genetic material determines the
activities of the cell and is passed on from generation to generation.
TYPES OF NUCLEIC ACIDS
There are two types of nucleic acids found in the cell:
• Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). DNA is a double strand of nucleotides that
is organized into segments. Each segment is called a gene. Genes deter-
mine the genetic markers that are inherited from previous generations of
the organism. A genetic marker is a specific genetic characteristic such as
CHAPTER 2
Chemical Elements of Microorganisms
43
Table 2-3.
Scientists and Their Contributions
Year
Scientist
Contribution
1803
John Dalton
Developed the Atomic Theory that explains the rela-
tionship between an element and an atom.
1860
Dimitri Mendeleev
Organized chemical elements into a table according
to its atomic weight.
1800
H. G. J. Moseley
Organized chemical elements into a table according
to their atomic numbers.The table was originally 
know as the Law of Chemical Periodicity and has
since been called the Periodic Table.
1911
Ernest Rutherford 
Developed the Rutherford model of an atom and
developed the concept of half-life.
1903
Marie and Pierre Curie
Discovered radioactivity.
1811
Amadeo Avagadro
An Italian physicist after whom the value of the
number of molecules in a mole of a substance 
was named.
1913
Niels Bohr
Proposed that electrons occupy a cloud surrounding
the nucleus of an atom. This is called an orbital.

the ability to synthesize proteins. Protein controls activities of the cell.
Some microorganisms, such as viruses contain either DNA or RNA but not
both. Think of DNA as a set of instructions. 
• Ribonucleic acid (RNA). RNA is a single strand of nucleotides that relays
instructions from genes to ribosomes, guiding the chemical reactions in the
synthesis of amino acids into protein. Think of RNA as the person who car-
ries out the instructions of DNA.
The Power House: ATP
Energy is stored in adenosine triphosphate (ATP) molecules. ATP supplies power
necessary to:
• Move flagella in microorganisms.
• Move chromosomes in the cytoplasm. 
• Transport substances in and out of the plasma membrane.
• Synthesis reactions.
ATP is synthesized from adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and a phosphate
group (P), the latter of which gets its energy from the decomposition reaction of
glucose and other substances. ATP releases energy in the form of ADP and P
when ATP is decomposed. 
Quiz
1. What is a dalton?
(a) The equivalent of a nanometer
(b) The unit of measurement used to measure the structure of an atom
(c) The unit of measurement used to measure atomic number
(d) The unit of measurement used to measure atomic weight 
2. What is the name given to a chemical element whose atoms have a
different number of neutrons?
(a) Complex element
(b) Differential element
CHAPTER 2
Chemical Elements of Microorganisms
44

(c) Isotope
(d) Stable element
3. How is the valence shell used?
(a) The valence shell is used in bonding together two stable atoms.
(b) The valence shell is used in bonding together two inorganic, stable atoms.
(c) The valence shell is used in bonding together two organic, stable atoms.
(d) The valence shell is used in bonding together two unstable atoms.
4. What process is used for two atoms to bond together?
(a) Hydrogen synthesis
(b) Ionic synthesis
(c) A chemical reaction
(d) Covalent synthesis
5. What is the difference between a molecule and a chemical compound?
(a) A molecule consists of two or more atoms of different chemical
elements. A chemical compound consists of two or more atoms of
the same chemical element.
(b) A molecule consists of only two atoms of the same chemical ele-
ments. A chemical compound consists of more than two atoms of
different chemical elements.
(c) A molecule consists of two or more atoms of the same chemical
element. A chemical compound consists of two or more atoms of
different chemical elements.
(d) A molecule consists of two or more atoms of organic chemical ele-
ment. A chemical compound consists of two or more atoms of inor-
ganic chemical elements.
6. What kind of bond shares electrons in the valence shell?
(a) Endergonic bond
(b) Covalent bond
(c) Hydrogen bond
(d) Ionic bond
7. What kind of reaction uses chemical energy to bond atoms together?
(a) Endergonic reaction
(b) Fusion reaction
(c) Fission reaction
(d) Exchange reaction
CHAPTER 2
Chemical Elements of Microorganisms
45

8. What kind of reaction performs synthesis and decomposition?
(a) Endergonic reaction
(b) Fusion reaction
(c) Fission reaction
(d) Exchange reaction
9. What is the importance of orientation in a chemical reaction?
(a) Atoms must be in the ideal position when they collide in order to
have a high probability of bonding.
(b) All atoms must be in a polar orientation in order for a chemical reac-
tion to occur.
(c) All atoms must be in a nonpolar orientation in order for a chemical
reaction to occur.
(d) Orientation is of no importance for a chemical reaction to occur.
10. How does an enzyme increase the likelihood that two atoms will bond?
(a) An enzyme temporarily moves other atoms away, so it is highly likely
that collision will occur. 
(b) An enzyme temporarily changes the chemical environment, so it is
highly likely that collision will occur.
(c) An enzyme temporarily bonds with an atom to help it move into a
position where it is highly likely that it will collide and bond with
another atom.
(d) An enzyme temporarily changes the pH level, so it is highly likely
that collision will occur.
CHAPTER 2
Chemical Elements of Microorganisms
46

3
CHAPTER
47
Observing 
Microorganisms
Growing up you were probably forever being told to wash your hands so you
would not become infected by germs. You probably complied only to stay out
of trouble because no matter how well you focused on your hands, you never
saw a germ on them. Today you realize that a germ is a microorganism, one of
the many microorganisms that surround us. Microorganisms cannot be seen with 
the naked eye, but you can see them with the aide of a microscope. In this chap-
ter, you’ll learn how to view microorganisms under a microscope. 
Size Is a Matter of Metrics
We could describe the size of a microorganism in a variety of ways. A micro-
organism is small, tiny, and miniscule. It is smaller than a human hair. Millions
of them can fit on the head of a pin. All of these words give you an idea of how
Copyright © 2005 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

small a microorganism really is, but there’s a problem using them to describe
size. What is tiny? Are we talking about the diameter of a human hair or its
length? As for the head of a pin, how big is the pin? 
Words that are normally used to describe size do so in relative terms rather
than provide a precise measurement. Relative terms compare one thing to
another thing without scientific precision. For example the statement, “millions
of them can fit on the head of a pin” isn’t precise and raises a lot of questions.
How many millions? What size is the head of the pin?
Speaking in relative terms is fine if you want to convey a general sense of
size. Saying that millions of microorganisms can fit on the head of a pin gives
someone a sense that a microorganism isn’t the size of a dog or cat, but is some-
thing much smaller. However, scientists need to precisely measure the size of a
microorganism in order to prevent diseases. 
Let’s see how this works by examining a surgical mask commonly used by
medical professionals to control the flow of microorganisms. If you could zoom
in on a surgical mask you would see that the surgical mask is a weave of threads
that form a tiny web consisting of squareish holes. The size of each hole is deter-
mined by how close each strain of thread is to each other. Size is critical to
reduce the spread of disease carrying microorganisms. If the hole is smaller than
the microorganism, then the microorganism is unable to pass through the surgi-
cal mask. It becomes trapped or simply moves in a direction of less resistance.
However a microorganism can easily pass through a hole that is larger than the
microorganism.
Among other reasons, medical professionals choose surgical masks based on
the size of microorganisms that they want to control. In order to make this selec-
tion, they need to precisely measure the size of a microorganism and the size of
the holes created by the web of threads in the surgical mask. 
NO FEET, PLEASE
Scientists measure the size of microorganisms—and practically everything
else—by using metric measurements, commonly called the metric system. A
system is a way of doing something, such as having a system to beat the odds in
Las Vegas. The metric system is a way of measuring things by using multiples
or fractions of ten, called factors of ten or the power of ten. 
The metric system is the standard way of measuring things throughout the
world except in the United States where we use the U.S. customary system of
measurement, which includes inches, feet, and yards. The metric system is part
of the the Système International d’Unités (SI system).
CHAPTER 3
Observing Microorganisms
48

It is usually at this point in the study of microbiology when some students
begin a slow panic because they must learn a new measurement system. Don’t
panic! The metric system is very easy to learn—much easier to learn than the
U.S. measurement system.
THE PREFIX FIXES ALL YOUR PROBLEMS
The first trick to learning the metric system is to memorize the meaning of six
prefixes. In the metric system, each prefix means that a meter is either multiplied
or divided by a multiple of 10. 
The second trick to learning the metric system is to learn how to multiply and
divide by 10. This is easy because all you need to do is move the decimal point.
The decimal point is moved to the right one place when multiplying by 10. The
decimal point is moved to the left one place when dividing by 10. 
Let’s see how this works. First, multiply 1 meter by 10. 
1 × 10 = 10
Now convert a meter to a decimeter. From the previous section, you know
that a decimeter is one-tenth of a meter, which means that you must divide 
by 10. 
1 ÷ 10 = 0.10
Table 3-1 shows the prefixes for the metric system and their equivalent in
meters. 
CHAPTER 3
Observing Microorganisms
49
Prefix
Value in Meters
Kilo (km) (kilo = 1,000)
1,000 m
Deci (dm) (deci = 1/10)
0.10 m 
Centi (cm) (centi = 1/100)
0.01 m 
Milli (mm) (milli = 1/1000)
0.001 m 
Nano (nm) (nano = 1/1,000,000,000)
0.000000001 m 
Pico (pm) (pico = 1/1,000,000,000,000)
0.000000000001 m
Table 3-1.
Prefixes

A meter is the standard for length in the metric system. A kilogram is the stan-
dard for mass in the metric system. A gram uses the same prefixes as a meter to
specify the number of grams that are represented by a value. For example, a kilo-
meter is 1,000 meters and a kilogram is 1,000 grams. This makes it a lot easier
to learn the metric system since the number of grams and meters are indicated
by the same set of prefixes.
Table 3-2 contains a list of various ways to express a gram. You’ll notice that
this table contains two prefixes that were not used in Table 3-1. These are deka-
and hecto-. The prefix deka- means 10 and the prefix hecto- means 100. That’s
10 grams and 100 grams. 
SIZING UP MICROORGANISMS
How small is a microorganism? You are probably asking yourself this question
after learning the metric system of measurement. The answer depends on the
kind of microorganism that you are measuring. As you’ll remember from
Chapter 1, there are two general categories of microorganisms. These are pro-
karyotes and eukaryotes. Fig. 3-1 illustrates the relative size of a microorganism
when compared to other things.
CHAPTER 3
Observing Microorganisms
50
Prefix
Value in Grams
Kilo (kg)
1,000 g
Hecto (hg)
100 g
Deka (dag)
10 g
Gram (g)
1 g
Deci (dg)
0.1 g
Centi (cg)
0.01 g
Milli (mg)
0.001 g
Micro (µg)
0.000001 g
Nano (ng)
0.000000001 g
Pico (pg)
0.000000000001 g
Table 3-2.
Units of Mass in the Metric System

Here’s Looking at You
The principal way a microbiologist studies microorganisms is by observing them
through a microscope. A microscope is a device that enlarges objects using a
process called magnification. The simplest form of a microscope is a magnify-
ing glass consisting of a single lens that is shaped in such a way as to make
things appear larger than they are to the naked eye. And the simplest magnify-
ing glass is the bottom of an empty glass. Some glasses are slightly bent at the
bottom, causing a magnifying effect if held at a certain height over an object.
This causes a change in the ray’s path.
The most complex microscope is an electron microscope, which uses elec-
trons to increase the apparent size of an object. Electron microscopes are capa-
ble of magnifying the organs of a microorganism called organelles, which you’ll
learn about later in this book. That is, an electron microscope is capable of show-
ing what is inside a bacterium and virus. 
WAVELENGTH
You don’t really “see” anything. It sounds strange, but it is true. You see only the
reflection of light waves—or, in the case of an electron microscope, the reflec-
tion or absence of electrons. Electromagnetic radiation is generated by a variety
CHAPTER 3
Observing Microorganisms
51
10m
1m
0.1m
1cm
1mm 100 µm
10 µm 1µm
100nm
10nm
1nm
0.1nm
Electron Microscope
Light Microscope
Unaided Human Eye
Human
Frog
Egg
Bacteria
Viruses
Atom
Proteins
Lipids
Chicken
Egg
Fig. 3-1.
Comparative sizes of humans and microorganisms.

of sources, such as the sun, a light bulb, or a radio transmitter. It takes the form
of a wave similar in shape to an ocean wave. 
A wave has two characteristics. These are the wave height and the wave-
length. The wave height is the highest level above the surface traveled by 
the wave. Let’s say that you’re traveling across a calm stretch of ocean. This
is the surface. Your boat is then pushed high above the surface by a swell—the
wave height—before returning to the surface. The wavelength is the distance
between the highest point of two waves. That is, the distance the boat trav-
els between the highest point of the first wave and the highest point of the
second wave.
Waves of electromagnetic radiation are in a continuous scale and are 
clustered into groups called bands. They are given names based on their
wavelengths. Some are probably familiar to you, such as x-rays, visible light
waves, and radio waves. These groups are assembled into the electromagnetic
spectrum. 
Waves such as light waves are generated from a source such as the sun and
strike an object such as your friend. Your friend absorbs some light waves and re-
flect other light waves. Your eyes detect only the reflected light waves. 
It is this principle that enables you to observe a microorganism using a micro-
scope. Light waves from either a light bulb or room light are reflected on to the
microorganism. Reflected light waves are observed using the microscope. As
you’ll learn in Chapter 4, sometimes a microorganism reflects few light waves,
making it difficult to see under a microscope. A stain is used to cause the micro-
organism to reflect different light waves. Microorganisms are visible under an
electron microscope by directing waves of electrons onto the microorganism.
Some electron waves are absorbed and others are reflected. The reflected waves
are detected by an electronic circuit that displays an image of the microorganism
on a video screen. 
What Big Eyes You Have: Magnification
Light reflected from a specimen travels in a straight line to your eyes, which
lets you see the specimen at its natural size. You can magnify the size of the
specimen by looking at the specimen through a concave lens. A convex lens (Fig.
3-2) is usually made out of glass or plastic; the back of the lens is bent inward
and the front is bent outward. It is like looking into a bubble. A magnifying
glass is a convex lens.
CHAPTER 3
Observing Microorganisms
52

The specimen is the focal point, which is the place where all the reflected
light originates. Light travels in a straight line from the focal point to the lens
where the light is bent in a process called refraction. The angle at which light
is bent is called the angle of refraction, which is measured in degrees from the
natural path of the light. The degree of angle of refraction is determined by
the curvature in the lens. The more the lens curves, the greater the angle of
refraction. 
The image appears larger as the light reflected from the image is refracted.
Although the image appears magnified, curvature does distort the image. The
amount of distortion depends on the angle of refraction and the distance between
the lens and the specimen, which is called the focal length. The point at which
light rays meet is called the focal point (Fig. 3-3). 
CHAPTER 3
Observing Microorganisms
53
Fig. 3-2.
Convex lens.
Focal Point
Focal Length
Fig. 3-3. The focal point is where light rays meet.

You probably saw a distorted image when using a magnifying glass and were
able to minimize the distorted effect by changing the distance between the mag-
nifying glass and the specimen. 
The Microscope
A microscope is a complex magnifying glass. In the 1600s, during the time of
Antoni van Leeuwenhoek (see Chapter 1), microscopes consisted of one lens
that was shaped so that the refracted light magnified a specimen 100 times its
natural size. Other lenses were shaped to increase the magnification to 300 times. 
However, van Leeuwenhoek realized that a single-lens microscope is difficult
to focus. Once Van Leeuwenhoek brought the specimen into focus, he kept his
hands behind his back to avoid touching the microscope for fear they would
bring the microscope out of focus. It was common in the 1600s for scientists to
make a new microscope for each specimen that wanted to study rather than try
to focus the microscope.
The single-lens magnifying lens or glass is a thing of the past. Scientists today
use a microscope that has two sets of lenses (objective and ocular), which is
called a compound light microscope. Fig. 3-4 shows parts of a compound light
microscope. A compound light microscope consists of:
CHAPTER 3
Observing Microorganisms
54
Ocular
(eyepiece)
Body
Arm
Coarse focus
adjustment knob
Fine focus
adjustment knob
Stage adjustment knobs
Interpupillary adjustment
Nosepiece
Objective lens (4)
Mechanical stage
Substage condenser
Aperture diaphragm control
Base with light source
Field diaphragm lever
Light intensity control
Fig. 3-4.
Parts of a compound light microscope. 

• Illuminator. This is the light source located below the specimen.
• Condenser. Focuses the light through the specimen.
• Stage. The platform that holds the specimen.
• Objective. The lens that is directly above the stage.
• Nosepiece. The portion of the body that holds the objectives over the stage.
• Field diaphragm. Controls the amount of light into the condenser.
• Base. Bottom of the microscope.
• Coarse focusing knob. Used to make relatively wide focusing adjustments
to the microscope.
• Fine focusing knob. Used to make relatively small adjustments to the
microscope.
• Body. The microscope body.
• Ocular eyepiece. Lens on the top of the body tube. It has a magnification
of 10× normal vision.
MEASURING MAGNIFICATION
A compound microscope has two sets of lenses and uses light as the source of
illumination. The light source is called an illuminator and passes light through
a condenser and through the specimen. Reflected light from the specimen is
detected by the objective. The objective is designed to redirect the light waves,
resulting in the magnification of the specimen.
There are typically four objectives, each having a different magnification.
These are 4×, 10×, 40×, and 100×. The number indicates by how many times the
original size of a specimen is magnified, so the 4× objective magnifies the spec-
imen four times the specimen size. The eyepiece of the microscope is called the
ocular eyepiece and it, too, has a lens—called an ocular lens—that has a magni-
fication of 10×. 
You determine the magnification used to observe a specimen under a micro-
scope by multiplying the magnification of the objective by the magnification of
the ocular lens. Suppose you use the 4× objective to view a specimen. The image
you see through the ocular is 40× because the magnification of the object is mul-
tiplied by the magnification of the ocular lens, which is 10×.
Many microscopes have several objectives connected to a revolving nose-
piece above the stage. You can change the objective by rotating the nosepiece
until the objective that you want to use is in line with the body of the micro-
scope. You’ll find the magnification marked on the objective. Sometimes the
CHAPTER 3
Observing Microorganisms
55

mark is color-coded and other times the magnification is etched into the side
of the objective. 
RESOLUTION
The area that you see through the ocular eyepiece is called the field of view.
Depending on the total magnification and the size of the specimen, sometimes
the entire field of view is filled with the image of the specimen. Other times,
only a portion of the field of view contains the image of the specimen. 
You probably noticed that the specimen becomes blurry as you increase mag-
nification. Here’s what happens. The size of the field of view decreases as mag-
nification increases, resulting in your seeing a smaller area of the specimen.
However, the resolution of the image remains unchanged, therefore you must
adjust the fine focus knob to bring the image into focus again. 
Resolution is the ability of the lens to distinguish fine detail of the specimen
and is determined by the wavelength of light from the illuminator. At the begin-
ning of this chapter you learned about the wave cycle, which is the process of
the wave going up and then falling down time and again. A wavelength is the
distance between the peaks of two waves. As a general rule, shorter wavelengths
produce higher resolutions of the image seen through the microscope. 
CONTRAST
The image of a specimen must contrast with other objects in the field of view or
with parts of the specimen itself to be visible in different degrees of brightness.
Suppose the specimen was a thin tissue layer of epidermis. The tissue must be a
different color than the field of view, otherwise the tissue and field of view
blend, making it impossible to differentiate between the two. That is, the tissue
and the field of view must contrast.
Previously in this chapter you learned that what you see is light reflected by
the specimen (or the transmitted light if the specimen doesn’t absorb light).
The illuminator shines white light onto the specimen. White light contains all
the light waves in the visible spectrum. The specimen absorbs some of the
light waves and reflects other light waves, giving the appearance of some color
other than white.
Light waves that are reflected by the specimen are measured by the refractive
index. The refractive index specifies the amount of light waves that is reflected
by an object. There is a low contrast between a specimen and the field of view if
CHAPTER 3
Observing Microorganisms
56

they have nearly the same refractive index. The further these refractive indexes
are from each other, the greater the contrast between the specimen and the field
of view. 
Unfortunately, refractive indexes of the specimen and the field of view are
fixed. However, you can tweak the refractive index of the specimen by using a
stain. The stain adheres to all or part of the specimen, absorbing additional light
waves and increasing the difference between the refractive indexes of the speci-
men and the field of view. This results in an increase in the contrast between the
specimen and the field of view.
Oil Immersion 
A challenge facing microbiologists is how to maintain good resolution at mag-
nifications of 100× and greater. In order to maintain good resolution, the lens
must be small and sufficient light must be reflected from both the specimen
and the stain used on the specimen. The problem is that too much light is lost;
air between the slide and the objective prevents some light waves from pass-
ing to the objective, causing the fuzzy appearance of the specimen in the ocu-
lar eyepiece.
The solution is to immerse the specimen in oil. The oil takes the place of air
and, since oil has the same refractive index as glass, the oil becomes part of the
optics of the microscope. Light that is usually lost because of the air is no longer
lost. The result is good resolution under high magnification.
TYPES OF LIGHT COMPOUND MICROSCOPES
There are five popular light compound microscopes used today (see Table 3-3).
Bright-Field Microscope
The bright-field microscope is the most commonly used microscope and consists
of two lenses. These are the ocular eyepiece and the objective. Light coming from
the illuminator passes through the specimen. The specimen absorbs some light
waves and passes along other light waves into the lens of the microscope, causing
a contrast between the specimen and other objects in the field of view. Specimens
that have pigments contrast with objects in the field of view and can be seen by
using the bright-field microscope. Specimens with few or no pigments have a low
contrast and cannot be seen with the bright-field microscope. Some bacteria have
low contrast.
CHAPTER 3
Observing Microorganisms
57

Dark Field Microscope
The dark-field microscope focuses the light from the illuminator onto the top of
the specimen rather than from behind the specimen. The specimen absorbs some
light waves and reflects other light waves into the lens of the microscope. The
field of view remains dark while the specimen is illuminated, providing a stark
contrast between the field of view and the specimen.
Phase-Contrast Microscope
The phase-contrast microscope bends light that passes through the specimen so
that it contrasts with the surrounding medium. Bending the light is called mov-
ing the light out of phase. Since the phase-contrast microscope compensates for
the refractive properties of the specimen, you don’t need to stain the specimen
to enhance the contrast of the specimen with the field of view. This microscope
is ideal for observing living microorganisms that are prepared in wet mounted
slides so you can study a living microorganism.
CHAPTER 3
Observing Microorganisms
58
Type of 
Microscope
Features
Best Used for
Bright-field
Dark-field
Phase-
contrast
Fluorescent
Transmission
electron
microscope
Scanning 
electron 
microscope
Uses visible light
Uses visible light with a that causes the
rays of light to reflect off the specimen
Uses a condenser that increases 
differences in the refractive index of
structures within the specimen
Uses ultraviolet light to stimulate mole-
cules of the specimen to make it stand
out from its background
Uses electron beams and electro-
magnetic lenses to view thin slices 
of cells
Uses electron beams and electro-
magnetic lenses
Observing dead stained spe-
cimens and living organ-
isms with natural color
Observing living 
organisms
Observing internal 
structures of specimens
Observing specimens or anti-
bodies in clinical studies
Observing exterior surfaces
and internal structures
Giving a three-dimensional
view of exterior surfaces 
of cells
Table 3-3.
Quick Guide to Microscopy

Fluorescent Microscope
Fluorescent microscopy uses ultraviolet light to illuminate specimens. Some
organism fluoresce naturally, that is, give off light of a certain color when
exposed to the light of different color. Organisms that don’t fluoresce naturally
can be stained with fluorochrome dyes. When these organisms are placed under
a fluorescent microscope with an ultraviolet light, they appear very bright in
front of a dark background.
Differential Interface Contrast Microscope (Nomanski)
The differential interface contrast microscope, commonly known as Nomanski,
works in a similar way to the phase-contrast microscope. However, unlike the
phase-contrast microscope (which produces a two-dimensional image of the
specimen), the differential interface contrast microscope shows the specimen in
three dimensions.
THE ELECTRON MICROSCOPE
A light compound microscope is a good tool for observing many kinds of 
microorganisms. However, it isn’t capable of seeing the internal structure of a
microorganism nor can it be used to observe a virus. These are too small to effec-
tively reflect visible light sufficient to be seen under a light compound micro-
scope. In order to view internal structures of viruses and internal structures of
microorganisms, microbiologists use an electron microscope where specimens
are viewed in a vacuum. 
Developed in the 1930s, the electron microscope uses beams of electrons and
magnetic lenses rather than light waves and optical lenses to view a specimen.
Very thin slices of the specimen are cut so that the internal structures can be
viewed. Microscopic photographs called micrographs are taken of the specimen
and viewed on a video screen. Specimens can be viewed up to 200,000 times
normal vision. However, living specimens cannot be viewed because the speci-
men must be sliced. 
Transmission Electron Microscope
The transmission electron microscope (TEM) has a total magnification of up to
200,000× and a resolution as fine as seven nanometers. A nanometer is
1/1,000,000,000 of a meter. The transmission electron microscope generates an
image of the specimen two ways. First, the image is displayed on a screen sim-
ilar to that of a computer monitor. The image can also be displayed in the form
CHAPTER 3
Observing Microorganisms
59

of an electron micrograph, which is similar to a photograph. Specimens viewed
by the transmission electron microscope must be cut into very thin slices, other-
wise the microscope does not adequately depict the image. 
Scanning Electron Microscope
The scanning electron microscope (SEM) is less refined than the transmission
electron microscope. It can provide total magnification up to 10,000× and a res-
olution as close as 20 nanometers. However, a scanning electron microscope
produces three-dimensional images of specimen. The specimen must be freeze-
dried and coated with a thin layer of gold, palladium, or other heavy metal. 
Preparing Specimens 
There are two ways to prepare a specimen to be observed under a light com-
pound microscope. These are a smear and a wet mount. 
Smear
A smear is a preparation process where a specimen that is spread on a slide. You
prepare a smear using the heat fixation process:
1. Use a clean glass slide.
2. Take a loop of the culture.
3. Place the live microorganism on the glass slide.
4. The slice is air dried then passed over a Bunsen burner about three times.
5. The heat causes the microorganism to adhere to the glass slide. This is
known as fixing the microorganism to the glass slide.
6. Stain the microorganism with an appropriate stain (see “Staining a Speci-
men” later in this chapter).
Wet Mount
A wet mount is a preparation process where a live specimen in culture fluid is
placed on a concave glass side or a plain glass slide. The concave portion of the
glass slide forms a cup-like shape that is filled with a thick, syrupy substance,
such as carboxymethyl cellulose. The microorganism is free to move about
within the fluid, although the viscosity of the substance slows its movement.
This makes it easier for you to observe the microorganism. The specimen and
CHAPTER 3
Observing Microorganisms
60

the substance are protected from spillage and outside contaminates by a glass
cover that is placed over the concave portion of the slide.
STAINING A SPECIMEN
Not all specimens can be clearly seen under a microscope. Sometimes the spe-
cimen blends with other objects in the background because they absorb and
reflect approximately the same light waves. You can enhance the appearance of
a specimen by using a stain. A stain is used to contrast the specimen from the
background. 
A stain is a chemical that adheres to structures of the microorganism and in
effect dyes the microorganism so the microorganism can be easily seen under a
microscope. Stains used in microbiology are either basic or acidic. 
Basic stains are cationic and have positive charge. Common basic stains are
methylene blue, crystal violet, safranin, and malachite green. These are ideal for
staining chromosomes and the cell membranes of many bacteria. 
Acid stains are anionic and have a negative charge. Common acidic stains are
eosin and picric acid. Acidic stains are used to stain cytoplasmic material and
organelles or inclusions.
Types of Stains
There are two types of Stains: simple and differential. See Table 3-4 for a sum-
mary of staining techniques.
Simple Stain
A simply stain has a single basic dye that is used to show shapes of cells and the
structures within a cell. Methylene blue, safranin, carbolfuchsin and crystal vio-
let are common simple stains that are found in most microbiology laboratories.
Differential Stain
A differential stain consists of two or more dyes and is used in the procedure to
identify bacteria. Two of the most commonly used differential stains are the
Gram stain and the Ziehl-Nielsen acid-fast stain. 
In 1884 Hans Christian Gram, a Danish physician, developed the Gram stain.
Gram-stain is a method for the differential staining of bacteria. Gram-positive
microorganisms stain purple. Gram-negative microorganisms stain pink. Staphy-
lococcus aureus, a common bacterium that causes food poisoning, is gram-
positive. Escherichia coli is gram-negative. 
CHAPTER 3
Observing Microorganisms
61

The Ziehl-Nielsen acid-fast stain, developed by Franz Ziehl and Friedrick
Nielsen, is a red dye that attaches to the waxy material in the cell walls of bac-
teria such as Mycobacterium tuberculosis, which is the bacterium that causes
tuberculosis, and Mycobacterium leprae, which is the bacterium that causes
leprosy. Microorganisms that retain the Ziehl-Nielsen acid-fast stain are called
acid-fast. Those that do not retain it turn blue because the microorganism
doesn’t absorb the Ziehl-Nielsen acid-fast stain.
Here’s how to Gram-stain a specimen (Fig. 3-5).
CHAPTER 3
Observing Microorganisms
62
Apply Crystal Violet Stain
Apply Iodine
Alcohol wash
Apply Safranin 
Orange
Fig. 3-5.
How to Gram-stain a specimen.
Type
Number of Dyes Used
Observations
Examples
Simple stains 
Uses a single dye
Size, shape, and 
Methylene blue
arrangement of cells
Safranin
Crystal violet
Differential stains
Uses two or more dyes 
Distinguish gram-positive 
Gram stain
to distinguish different 
or gram-negative
Ziehl-Nielsen
types or different 
Distinguishes the members
acid-fast stain
structures of bacteria
of mycobacteria and 
nocardia from other 
bacteria
Special stains
These stains identify 
Exhibit the presence 
specialized structures
of flagellae
Shaeffer-Fulton
Exhibits endospores
spore staining
Table 3-4.
Quick Guide for Staining Techniques

1. Prepare the specimen using the heat fixation process (see “Smear” earlier
in this chapter). 
2. Place a drop of crystal violet stain on the specimen.
3. Apply iodine on the specimen using an eyedropper. The iodine helps the
crystal violet stain adhere to the specimen. Iodine is a mordant, which is a
chemical that fixes the stain to the specimen.
4. Wash the specimen with ethanol or an alcohol-acetone solution, then wash
with water.
5. Wash the specimen to remove excess iodine. The specimen appears purple
in color. 
6. Wash the specimen with an ethanol or alcohol-acetone decolorizing solution.
7. Wash the specimen with water to remove the dye.
8. Apply the safranin stain to the specimen using an eyedropper. 
9. Wash the specimen. 
10. Use a paper towel and blot the specimen until the specimen is dry.
11. The specimen is ready to be viewed under the microscope. Gram-positive
bacteria appear purple and gram-negative bacteria appear pink. 
Here’s how to apply the Ziehl-Nielsen acid-fast stain to a specimen.
1. Prepared the specimen (see “Smear” earlier in this chapter).
2. Apply the red dye carbol-fuchsin stain generously using an eyedropper.
3. Let the specimen sit for a few minutes.
4. Warm the specimen over steaming water. The heat will cause the stain to
penetrate the cell wall.
5. Wash the specimen with an alcohol-acetone decolorizing solution con-
sisting of 3 percent hydrochloric acid and 95 percent ethanol. The hydro-
chloric acid will remove the color from non–acid-fast cells and the
background. Acid-fast cells will stay red because the acid cannot pene-
trate the cell wall.
6. Apply methylene blue stain on the specimen using an eyedropper. 
Special Stains
Special stains are paired to dye specific structures of microorganisms such as
endospores, flagella, and gelatinous capsules. One stain in the pair is used as a
negative stain. A negative stain is used to stain the background of the micro-
CHAPTER 3
Observing Microorganisms
63

organism, causing the microorganism to appear clear. A second stain is used to
colorize specific structures within the microorganism. For example, nigrosin
and India ink are used as a negative stain and methylene blue is used as a posi-
tive stain.
The Schaeffer-Fulton endospore stain is a special flagellar stain that is
used to colorize the endospore. The endospore is a dormant part of the bac-
teria cell that protects the bacteria from the environment outside the cell.
Here’s how to apply the Schaeffer-Fulton endospore stain.
1. Prepare the specimen (see “Smear” earlier in this chapter).
2. Heat the malachite green stain over a Bunsen burner until it becomes fluid.
3. Apply the malachite green to the specimen using an eyedropper.
4. Wash the specimen for 30 seconds. 
5. Apply the safranin stain using an eyedropper to the specimen to stain parts
of the cell other than the endospore.
6. Observe the specimen under the microscope.
Quiz
1. What is a nanometer?
(a) 1/1,000,000,000 of a meter
(b) 1/100,000 of a meter
(c) 1/1,000,000 of a meter
(d) 1,000,000,000 meters
CHAPTER 3
Observing Microorganisms
64
Year
Scientists
Contribution
1884
Hans Christian Gram
Developed the Gram stain used to stain and identify
bacteria.
Franz Ziehl and 
Developed the Ziehl-Nielsen acid-fast stain used 
Friedrick Nielsen
to stain bacteria.
Table 3-5.
Scientists and Their Contributions

2. What magnification is used if you observe a microorganism with a
microscope whose object is 100× and whose ocular lens is 10×?
(a) 1000× magnification
(b) 100× magnification
(c) 10× magnification
(d) 10,000× magnification
3. What is the function of an illuminator?
(a) To control the temperature of the specimen
(b) To keep the specimen moist
(c) An illuminator is the light source used to observe a specimen under
a microscope
(d) To keep the specimen dry
4. What is the area seen through the ocular eyepiece called?
(a) The stage
(b) The objective
(c) The display
(d) The field of view
5. How do you maintain good resolution of a specimen at magnifications
greater than 100×?
(a) Display the specimen on a television monitor.
(b) Use a single ocular eyepiece.
(c) Immerse the specimen in oil.
(d) Avoid moving the specimen.
6. What is a micrograph?
(a) A microscopic photograph taken by an electron microscope
(b) A microscopic diagram of a specimen
(c) A microscopic photograph taken by a light microscope
(d) A growth diagram of a specimen
7. What is a smear?
(a) A smear is a preparation process in which a specimen is spread on a
slide.
(b) A smear is a preparation process in which a specimen is dyed. 
(c) A smear is a process in which a specimen is moved beneath a micro-
scope.
(d) A smear is a process used to identify a specimen.
CHAPTER 3
Observing Microorganisms
65

8. What process is used to cause a specimen to adhere to a glass slide?
(a) The heat fixation process
(b) Wet mount 
(c) White glue
(d) Clear glue
9. Why is a specimen stained?
(a) A stain is used to label a specimen.
(b) A stain is used to determine the size of a specimen.
(c) A stain adheres to the specimen, causing more light to be reflected
by the specimen into the microscope.
(d) A stain is used to determine the density of a specimen.
10. When would you use a wet mount?
(a) A wet mount is used to observe a dead specimen under a micro-
scope.
(b) A wet mount is used to observe a live specimen under a microscope.
(c) A wet mount is used to observe an inorganic specimen under a
microscope.
(d) A wet mount is the first step in preparing a specimen.
CHAPTER 3
Observing Microorganisms
66

4
CHAPTER
67
Prokaryotic Cells 
and Eukaryotic Cells
What do you and Athletes Foot have in common? You’ll recall from Chapter 1
that Tinea pedis is the scientific name for athlete’s foot and that it is caused by
the Trichophyton fungus. Both of you are alive. Sometimes it’s hard to imagine
that microorganisms are alive because we can’t see them with our naked eye—
although they make their presence known to us in annoying ways. 
Humans, Trichophyton, and all other living things are alive because they
carry on the six life processes, something non-living things do not do. The six life
processes require a living thing to:
• Metabolize. Breakdown nutrients for energy or extract energy from the
environment.
• Be responsive. React to internal and external environmental changes.
• Move. Whether it is the entire organism relocating within its environment,
cells within that organism or the organelles inside those cells.
• Grow. Increase the size or number of cells.
• Differentiate. The process where cells that are unspecialized become spe-
cialized. (An example would be a single fertilized human egg, developing
into an individual). Prokaryotic cells do not differentiate.
• Reproduce. Form new cells to create a new individual. 
Copyright © 2005 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

Have a cellular structure. Cells that metabolize, respond to changes, move,
grow, and reproduce.
For additional information, see Table 4-1.
In this chapter, you will learn about cellular structure by exploring two kinds of
cells. These are prokaryotic cells and eukaryotic cells. Bacteria are prokaryotic
organisms. Animals, plants, algae, fungi and protozoa are eukaryotic organisms. See
Table 4-2 for a summary of differences between prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells.
Prokaryotic Cells
A prokaryotic cell is a cell that does not have a true nucleus. The nuclear struc-
ture is called a nucleoid. The nucleoid contains most of the cell’s genetic mate-
CHAPTER 4
Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells
68
Eukaryotic
Prokaryotic
Process
Cells
Cells
Viruses
Metabolism: Sum of 
Yes
Yes
Uses their host’s cells for
all chemical reactions
metabolism
Responsiveness: 
Yes
Yes
Some viruses react and multiply
Ability to react to 
once they enter a host cells
environmental stimuli
Movement: Motion of
Yes
Yes
Virions (viruses outside of a host
individual organelles,
cell) are nonmotile
a single cell, or entire 
Use Brownian movement
organism
(random collision)
Growth: Increase in size
Yes
Yes
No
Differentiate
Yes
No
No
Reproduction: 
Yes
Yes
Inside host cells 
Increase in number
Cellular structures
Yes
Yes
No cytoplasmic membrane
No cell structure
Table 4-1.
Basic Life Processes in Microorganisms

rial and is usually a single circular molecule of DNA. Karyo- is Greek for “ker-
nel.” A prokaryotic organism, such as a bacterium, is a cell that lacks a mem-
brane-bound nucleus or membrane-bound organelles. The exterior of the cell
usually has glycocalyx, flagellum, fimbriae, and pili (Fig. 4-1). 
CHAPTER 4
Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells
69
Characteristics
Prokaryotic Cells
Eukaryotic Cells
Cell wall
Include peptidoglycan 
Chemically simple 
Chemically complex
Plasma membrane
No carbohydrates 
Contain carbohydrates
No sterols
Contain sterols
Glycocalyx
Contain a capsule or 
Contained in cells that 
a slime layer
lack a cell wall
Flagella
Protein building blocks
Multiple microtubules
Cytoplasm
No cytoplasmic streaming
Contain cytoskeleton 
Contain cytoplasmic streaming
Membrane-bound 
None
Endoplasmic reticulum
organelles
Golgi complex
Lysomes
Mitochondria
Chloroplasts
Ribosomes
70S
80S
Ribosomes located in 
Organelles are 70S
Nucleus
No nuclear membrane
Have a nucleus
No nucleoli 
Have a nuclear membrane
0.2–2.0 mm in diameter
Have a nucleoli
10–100 mm in diameter
Chromosomes
Single circular chromosome
Multiple linear chromosomes 
No histones
Have histones
Cell division
Binary fission
Mitosis
Sexual reproductions
No meiosis
Meiosis
DNA transferred in fragments
Table 4-2.
Differences between Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells

PARTS OF PROKARYOTIC CELLS
Glycocalyx
Glycocalyx is a sticky, sugary envelope composed of polysaccharides and/or
polypeptides that surround the cell. Glycocalyx is found in one of two states. It can
be firmly attached to the cell’s surface, called capsule, or loosely attached, called
slime layer. A slime layer is water-soluble and is used by the prokaryotic cell to
adhere to surfaces external to the cell. 
Glycocalyx is used by a prokaryotic cell to protect it against attack from the
body’s immune system. This is the case with Streptococcus mutans, which is a
bacterium that colonizes teeth and excretes acid that causes tooth decay. Normally
the body’s immune system would surround the bacterium and eventually kill it,
but that doesn’t happen with Streptococcus mutans. It has a glycocalyx capsule
state, which prevents the Streptococcus mutans from being recognized as a foreign
microorganism by the body’s immune system. This results in cavities.
Flagella
Flagella (Fig. 4-2) are made of protein and appear “whip-like.” They are used by
the prokaryotic cell for mobility. Flagella propel the microorganism away from
CHAPTER 4
Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells
70
Ribosomes
Capsule
Cell wall
Plasma
membrane
Chromosome
(DNA)
Nucleoid
Inclusion
body
Flagellum
Fimbriae
S-layer
Fig. 4-1.
A prokaryotic cell.

harm and towards food in a movement known as taxis. Movement also occurs in
response to a light or chemical stimulus. Movement caused by a light stimulus
is referred to as phototaxis and a chemical stimulus causes a chemotaxis move-
ment to occur.
Flagella can exist in the following forms:
• Monotrichous: One flagellum.
• Lophotrichus: A clump of flagella, called a tuft, at one end of the cell. 
• Amphitrichous: Flagella at two ends of the cell. 
• Peritrichous: Flagella covering the entire cell.
• Endoflagellum: A type of amphitrichous flagellum that is tightly wrapped
around spirochetes. A spirochete is a spiral-shaped bacterium that moves
in a corkscrew motion. Borrelia burgdorferi, which is the bacterium that
causes lyme disease, exhibits an endoflagellum.
Fimbriae
Fimbriae are proteinaceous, sticky, bristle-like projections used by cells to attach
to each other and to objects around them. Neisseria gonorrhoeae, the bacterium
that causes gonorrhea, uses fimbriae to adhere to the body and to cluster cells of
the bacteria.
Pili
Pili are tubules that are used to transfer DNA from one cell to another cell sim-
ilar to tubes used to fuel aircraft in flight. Some are also used to attach one cell
CHAPTER 4
Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells
71
Fig. 4-2.
A flagellum has a long tail that extends
from the cell.

to another cell. The tubules are made of protein and are shorter in length than
flagella and longer than fimbriae. 
CELL WALL
The prokaryotic cell’s cell wall is located outside the plasma membrane and
gives the cell its shape and provides rigid structural support for the cell. The cell
wall also protects the cell from its environment. 
Pressure within the cell builds as fluid containing nutrients enters the cell. It
is the job of the cell wall to resist this pressure the same way that the walls of a
balloon resist the build-up of pressure when it is inflated. If pressure inside the
cell becomes too great, the cell wall bursts, which is referred to as lysis. 
The cell wall of many bacteria is composed of peptidoglycan, which covers
the entire surface of the cell. Peptidoglycan is made up of a combination of pep-
tide bonds and carbohydrates, either N-acetylmuramic acid, commonly referred
to as NAM, or N-acetylglucosamine, which is known as NAG.
The wall of a bacterium is classified in two ways:
• Gram-positive. A gram-positive cell wall (Fig. 4-3) has many layers of
peptidoglygan that retain the crystal of violet dye when the cell is stained.
This gives the cell a purple color when seen under a microscope.
CHAPTER 4
Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells
72
Periplasmic
space
Peptidoglycan
Plasma
membrane
Lipoteichoic acid
Teichoic acid
Fig. 4-3.
Gram-positive cell wall.

• Gram-negative. A gram-negative cell wall (Fig. 4-4) is thin. The inside is
made of peptidoglycan. The outer membrane is composed of phospholipids
and lipopolysaccharides. 
The cell wall does not retain the crystal of violet dye when the cell is stained.
The cell appears pink when viewed with a microscope.
CYTOPLASMIC MEMBRANE
The prokaryotic cell has a cell membrane called the cytoplasmic membrane that
forms the outer structure of the cell and separates the cell’s internal structure
from the environment. The cytoplasmic membrane is a membrane that provides
a selective barrier between the environment and the cell’s internal structures. 
The cytoplasmic membrane (Fig. 4-5) provides a selective barrier, allowing
certain substances and chemicals to move into and out of the cell. The cyto-
plasmic membrane is a bilayer of phospholipids that has polar and nonpolar
parts, which is referred to as being amphipathic. The nonpolar parts share elec-
trons of atoms equally. The polar parts share electrons unequally. Each polar
part has a head that contains phosphate and is hydrophilic (“water-loving”).
Each nonpolar part has two tails composed of long fatty acids that are hydro-
phobic (“water-fearing”). 
CHAPTER 4
Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells
73
Phospholipid
Integral protein
Lipopolysaccharide
Peptidoglycan
O-specific
side chains
Porin
Braun’s
lipoprotein
Outer
membrane
Periplasmic
space and
peptidoglycan
Plasma
membrane
Fig. 4-4.
Gram-negative cell wall.

The heads always face a watery fluid such as the extracellular fluid on the
outside of the cell and the intracellular fluid inside the cell. Tails align back to
back preventing the watery fluid from crossing the cytoplasmic membrane. 
The Fluid Mosaic Model
In 1972, S. J. Singer and G. L. Nicolson developed the Fluid Mosaic Model,
which describes the structure of the cytoplasmic membrane. They called this a
mosaic because proteins within the cytoplasmic membrane are arranged like
tiles in a mosaic artwork. The term fluid is used to imply that membrane proteins
and lipids flow freely within the cytoplasmic membrane. There are two kinds of
proteins within the cytoplasmic membrane. These are:
• Integral proteins. An integral protein extends into the lipid bilayer.
Integral proteins are typically glycoproteins that act like a molecular sig-
nature that cells use to recognize each other. Glycoproteins have a carbo-
hydrate group attached to them. Two examples are: 
• Transmembrane protein. A transport protein that regulates the move-
ment of molecules through the cytoplasmic membrane.
• Channel protein. A channel protein forms pores or channels in the
cytoplasmic membrane that permit the flow of molecules through the
cytoplasmic membrane.
CHAPTER 4
Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells
74
Integral
protein
Glycolipid
Oligosaccharide
Hydrophobic
α helix
Integral
protein
Hopanoid
Phospholipid
Peripheral
protein
Fig. 4-5.
The cytoplasmic membrane enables some substances to pass into and out
of the cell.

• Peripheral proteins. Peripheral proteins are on the inner and outer surface
of the cytoplasmic membrane and have the characteristics of a polar and
non-polar regions.
The Function of the Cytoplasmic Membrane
The cytoplasmic membrane regulates the flow of molecules (such as nutrients)
into the cell and removes waste from the cell by opening and closing passages
called channels. In photosynthetic prokaryotes, the cytoplasmic membrane func-
tions in energy production by collecting energy in the form of light. 
The cytoplasmic membrane is selectively permeable because it permits the
transport of some substances and inhibits the transport of other substances. Two
types of transport mechanisms are used to move substances through the cyto-
plasmic membrane. These are passive transport and active transport.
Passive Transport
Passive transport moves substances into and out of the cell down a gradient
similar to how a rock rolls downhill, following the gradient. There are three
types of passive transport. These are: 
• Simple diffusion. Simple diffusion is the movement of substances from a
higher-concentration region to a lower-concentration region (net move-
ment). Only small chemicals (oxygen and carbon dioxide) or lipid-soluble
chemicals (fatty acids) diffuse freely through the cytoplasmic membrane,
using simple diffusion. Large molecules (monosaccharide and glucose) are
too large to enter the cell.
• Facilitated diffusion. Facilitated diffusion is the movement of substances
from a higher-concentration region to a lower-concentration region (net
movement) with the assistance of an integral protein across a selectively
permeable membrane. The phospholipid bilayer prevents the movement of
large molecules across the membrane until a pathway is formed using
facilitated diffusion. The integral protein acts as a carrier by changing the
shape of large molecules so the protein can transport the large molecules
across the membrane.
• Osmosis. Osmosis is the net movement (diffusion) of a solvent (water in
living organisms) from a region of higher water concentration to a region
of lower concentration.
CHAPTER 4
Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells
75

Active Transport
Active transport is the movement of a substance across the cytoplasmic mem-
brane against the gradient by using energy provided by the cell. This is similar
to pumping water against gravity through a pipe. Energy must be spent in order
for the pump to work.
A cell makes energy available by removing a phosphate (P) from adenosine
triphosphate (ATP). ATP contains chemical potential energy that is released by
a chemical reaction within the cell. It is this energy that is used to change the
shape of the integral membrane protein-enabling substances inside the cell to be
pumped through the cytoplasmic membrane. For example, active transport is
used to pump sodium (Na
+) from a cell.
Group Translocation
Group translocation is a diffusion process that immediately modifies a substance
once the substance passes through the cytoplasmic membrane. The cell must
expend energy during group translocation, which is supplied by high-energy
phosphate compounds such as phosphoenolpyruvic acid (PEP). Group trans-
location occurs in prokaryotic cells. 
Endocytosis and Exocytosis
Endocytosis and exocytosis are processes used to move large substances or lots
of little ones into and out of a cell. Large substances enter the cell by endocyto-
CHAPTER 4
Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells
76
How Osmosis Works
• Isotonic solution. “Iso” means the same if a cell is placed in an isotonic solu-
tion. This means that there is the same concentration of solute and solvent
(water) inside and outside of the cell. There is an equal movement of sub-
stances into and out of the cell.
• Hypertonic solution. In a hypertonic solution, the cell is placed in an envi-
ronment where there is a higher concentration of solute. What happens is that
the water inside the cell will move out of the cell by osmosis causing it to
shrink. This shrinking of the cell is called crenation.
• Hypotonic solution. When a cell is placed in a hypotonic solution, there is
more water outside of the cell than inside. This means there is more solute con-
centration inside of the cell. The water outside will move into the cell by osmo-
sis causing the cell to swell and ultimately break apart. This is called lysis.

sis. There are two kinds of endocytosis. These are phagocytosis and pinocytosis.
Phagocytosis engulfs solid substances (large molecules) while pinocytosis
engulfs liquid substances (small molecules). Exocytosis is the process that cells
use to remove large substances, which is the way waste products and useful mate-
rial as hormones and neurotransmitters are expelled from a cell through vesicles. 
Cytosol and Cytoplasm
The cytosol is the intracellular fluid of a prokaryotic cell that contains proteins,
lipids, enzymes, ions, waste, and small molecules dissolved in water, com-
monly referred to as semifluid. Substances dissolved in cytosol are involved in
cell metabolism. 
The cytosol also contains a region called the nucleoid, which is where the
DNA of the cell is located. Unlike human cells, a prokaryotic microorganism has a
single chromosome that isn’t contained within a nuclear membrane or envelope.
Cytosol is located in the cytoplasm of the cell. Cytoplasm also contains the
cytoskeleton, ribosomes, and inclusions. 
Ribosomes
A ribosome is an organelle within the cell that synthesizes polypeptide. There
are thousands of ribosomes in the cell. You’ll notice them as the grainy appear-
ance of the cell when viewing the cell with an electron microscope. 
A ribosome is comprised of subunits consisting of protein and ribosomal
RNA, which is referred to as rRNA. Ribosomes and their subunits are identified
by their sedimentation rate. Sedimentation rate is the rate at which ribosomes
are drawn to the bottom of a test tube when spun in a centrifuge. Sedimentation
rate is expressed in Svedberg (S) units. A sedimentation rate reflects the mass,
size, and shape of a ribosome and its subunits. It is for this reason why the sed-
imentation rates of subunits of a ribosome do not add up to the ribosome’s
sedimentation rate.
Ribosomes in prokaryotic cells are uniquely identified by the number of pro-
teins and rRNA molecules contained in the ribosome and by sedimentation rate.
Prokaryotic ribosomes are relatively small and less dense than ribosomes of
other microorganisms. For example, bacterial ribosomes have a sedimentation
rate of 70S compared to the 80S sedimentation rate of a eukaryotic ribosome,
which you’ll learn about later in this chapter.
Ribosomes and their subunits are targets for antibiotics that kill a bacterium
by inhibiting the bacterium’s protein synthesis. These antibiotics only kill cells
that have a specific ribosome sedimentation rate. Cells with a different ribosome
CHAPTER 4
Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells
77

sedimentation rate are unaffected by the antibiotic. This enables the antibiotic to
kill bacterium and not the body that is infected by the bacterium.
For example, erythromycin and chloramphenicol, popular antibiotics, kill
bacteria whose subunits have a sedimentation rate of 50S. Streptomycin and
gentamycin affect bacteria whose subunits have a 30S sedimentation rate.
Inclusions
An inclusion is a storage area that serves as a reserve for lipids, nitrogen, phos-
phate, starch, and sulfur within the cytoplasm. Scientists use inclusions to iden-
tify types of bacteria. Inclusions are usually classified as granules. 
• Granule inclusion. Membrane-free and densely packed, this type of inclu-
sion has many granules each containing specific substances. For example,
polyphosphate granules, also known by the names metachromatic gran-
ules and volutin, have granules of polyphosphate that are used to synthe-
size ATP and are involved in other metabolic processes. A polyphosphate
granule appears red under a microscope when stained with methylene blue. 
• Vesicle inclusion. This is a protein membrane inclusion commonly found
in aquatic photosynthetic bacteria and cyanobacteria such as phytoplank-
ton, which suspends freely in water. These bacteria use vesicle inclusions
to store gas that give the cell buoyancy to float at a depth where light, car-
bon dioxide (CO2), and nutrients—all required for photosynthesis—are
available.
Eukaryotic Cells
A eukaryotic cell (Fig. 4-6) is larger and more complex than a prokaryotic cell
and found in animals, plants, algae, fungi, and protozoa. When you look at a
eukaryotic cell with a microscope you’ll notice a highly organized structure of
organelles that are bound by a membrane. Each organelle performs a specialized
function for the cell’s metabolism. Eukaryotic cells also contain a membrane-
bound nucleus where the cell’s DNA is organized into chromosomes.
Depending on the organism, a eukaryotic cell may contain external projec-
tions called flagella and cilia. These projections are used for moving substances
along the cell’s surface or for moving the entire cell. Flagella move the cell in a
wavelike motion within its environment. Cilia move substances along the cell’s
CHAPTER 4
Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells
78

surface and also aid in movement of the cell. Flagella and cilia are comprised of
axoneme microtubules. An axoneme microtubule is a long, hollow tube made 
of protein called a tubulin. 
CELL WALL
Many eukaryotic cells have a cell wall. The composition of the cell wall differs
with each organism. For example, the cell walls of many fungi are composed of
chitin cellulose. Chitin is a polysaccharide, which is a polymer of N-acetylglu-
cosamine (NAG) units. The cell wall of other fungi is made of cellulose, which
is also a polysaccharide. Cellulose is also found in the cell wall of plants and
many algae. Yeast has a cell wall composed of glucan and mannan, which are
two polysaccharides. 
In contrast, protozoa have no cell wall and instead have a pellicle. A pellicle
is a flexible, proteinaceous covering. Eukaryotic cells of other organisms (such
as animals) that lack a cell wall have an outer plasma membrane that serves as
an outside cover for the cell. The outer plasma membrane has a sticky carbo-
CHAPTER 4
Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells
79
CI
PV
F DV
GA
SV
PL
AV
RB
GE
C
CHMT
N
M
P
CR
NU
P
RER
R
M
G
SER
PM
LD
Fig. 4-6.
A eukaryotic cell.

hydrate called glycocalyx on its surface. Glycocalyx is made up of covalently
bonded lipids and proteins in order to form glycolipid and glycoprotein in the
plasma membrane. Glycolipid and glycoprotein anchor the glycocalyx to the cell,
giving the cell strength and helping the cell to adhere to other cells. Glycocalyx
is also a molecular signature used to identify the cell to other cells. White blood
cells use this to identify a foreign cell before destroying it. 
A eukaryotic cell lacks peptidoglycan, which is critical in fighting bacteria
with antibiotics. A bacterium is a prokaryotic cell. Peptidoglycan is the frame-
work of a prokaryotic cell’s cell wall. Antibiotics such as penicillin attack
peptidoglycan resulting in the destruction of the cell wall of a bacterium.
Eukaryotic cells invaded by the bacterium remain unaffected because eukary-
otic cells lack peptidoglycan.
PLASMA MEMBRANE
The plasma membrane is a selectively permeable membrane enclosing the
cytoplasm of a cell. This is the outer layer in animal cells. Other organisms
have a cell wall as the outer layer and the plasma membrane is between the
cell wall and the cell’s cytoplasm. The cell wall is the outer covering of most
bacteria, algae, fungi, and plant cells. In eubacterium, which is a prokaryotic micro-
organism, the cell wall contains peptidoglycan. 
The plasma membrane surrounds a eukaryotic cell and serves as a barrier
between the inner cell and its environment. The cytoplasmic membrane is com-
posed of proteins and lipids. Carbohydrates are used to uniquely identify the
cell to other cells. Lipids, known as sterols, help prevent the destruction of the cell
when there is an increase in osmotic pressure and are mainly used for stability.
Lysis is the destruction of a cell. Prokaryotic cytoplasm lacks certain features
that are found in eukaryotic cytoplasm, such as a cytoskeleton. In a eukaryotic
microorganism, the cytoskeleton provides support and shape for cells and helps
transport substances through the cell. 
The plasma membrane of a eukaryotic cell functions like the plasma mem-
brane of a prokaryotic cell, which you learned about previously in this chapter.
That is, substances enter and leave the cell through the cytoplasmic membrane
by using simple diffusion, facilitated diffusion, osmosis, and active transport. 
Eukaryotic cells extend parts or sections of plasma membrane. The exten-
sions of the plasma membrane are called pseudopods. The word pseudopod
means “false foot,” and these “feet” enable the cell to have amoeboid motion.
An amoeboid motion consists of muscle-like contractions that move the cell over
a surface. Pseudopods are used to engulf substances and bring them into the cell,
CHAPTER 4
Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells
80

which is called endocytosis (a type of active transport). There are two types of
endocytosis. These are phagocytosis (eat) and pinocytosis (drink). In phago-
cytosis, solid particles are engulfed by the cell. An example is when a white
blood cell engulfs and destroys a bacteria cell. In pinocytosis, liquid particles are
brought into the cell. An example is when extracellular fluid containing a sub-
stance is destroyed by the cell. 
CYTOPLASM AND NUCLEUS
The cytoplasm of a eukaryotic cell contains cytosol, organelles, and inclusions,
which is similar to the cytoplasm of the prokaryotic cell. Eukaryotic cytoplasm
also contains a cytoskeleton that gives structure and shape to the cell and assists
in transporting substances throughout the cell. 
The nucleus of a eukarytoic cell contains DNA (hereditary information) and
is contained within a nuclear envelope. DNA is also found in the mitochondria
and chloroplasts. Depending on the organism, there can be one or more nucleoli
within the nuclear envelope. A nucleolus (little nucleus) is the site of ribosomal
RNA synthesis, which is necessary for ribosomes to function properly. 
In the nucleus, the cell’s DNA is combined to form several proteins called
histones. The combination of about 165 pairs of DNA and nine molecular of his-
tones make up the nucleosome. When a eukaryotic cell is not in the reproduc-
tion phase, the DNA and its proteins look like a threaded mass called chromatin.
When the cell goes through nuclear division, the strands of chromatin condense
and coil together, producing rod-shaped bodies called chromosomes. 
A eukaryotic cell uses a method of cell division during reproduction called
mitosis. This is the formation of two daughter cells from a parent cell. 
ENDOPLASMIC RETICULUM
The endoplasmic reticulum contributes to the mechanical support and distribu-
tion of the cytoplasm and is the pathway for transporting lipids and proteins
throughout the cell. The endoplasmic reticulum also provides the surface area
for the chemical reaction that synthesizes lipids, it stores lipids and proteins until
the cell needs them.
The endoplasmic reticulum consists of cisterns, which are a network of flat-
tened membranous sacs. The end of these cisterns can be pinched off to become
membrane-enclosed sacs called secretory vesicles. Vesicles transport synthe-
sized material in the cell. 
CHAPTER 4
Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells
81

There are two kinds of endoplasmic reticula.
• Rough endoplasmic reticulum. Covered by ribosomes, which are the sites
for synthesizing protein.
• Smooth endoplasmic reticulum. Not covered by ribosomes, this is the site
for synthesizing lipids.
GOLGI COMPLEX
The Golgi complex is considered the “Fedex System” of the cell because it
packages and delivers proteins, lipids, and enzymes throughout the cell and to
the environment. The Golgi complex contains cisterns stacked on top of each
other. A cistern is a sac or vessel and is filled with proteins or lipids (packaged),
detached from the Golgi complex, and transported to another part of the cell. 
LYSOSOME
A lysosome is a sphere in animal cells that is formed by, but is separate from, the
Golgi complex, it contains enzymes used to digest molecules that have entered
the cell. Think of lysosomes as the digestive system of the cell. For example,
lysosomes in a white blood cell digest bacteria that is ingested by the cell dur-
ing phagocytosis. 
MITOCHONDRION 
The mitochondrion is an organelle that is comprised of a series of folds called
cristae that is responsible for the cell’s energy production and cellular respira-
tion. Chemical reactions occur within the center of the mitrochondrion, called
the matrix; it is filled with semifluid in which adenosine triphosphate (ATP) is
produced. ATP is the energy molecule in the cell. The mitochondrion is the
powerhouse of the cell.
CHLOROPLAST
Eukaryotic cells of green plants and algae contain plastids, one of which is chloro-
plast. Chloroplasts are organelles that contain pigments of chlorophyll and
carotenoids used for gathering light and enzymes necessary for photosynthesis.
Photosynthesis is the process that converts light energy into chemical energy. The
CHAPTER 4
Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells
82

pigment is stored in membranous sacs called thylakoids that are arranged in stacks
called grana. 
CENTRIOLE
A centriole is a pair of cylindrical structures near the nucleus that is comprised
of microtubules and aids in the formation of flagella and cilia. The centriole also
has a part in eukaryotic cell division. 
Quiz
1. A gram-positive cell wall has 
(a) many layers of peptidoglygan, which repels the crystal of violet dye
when the cell is stained
(b) many layers of peptidoglygan, which retains the crystal of violet dye
when the cell is stained
(c) one layer of peptidoglygan, which retains the crystal of violet dye
when the cell is stained
(d) one layer of peptidoglygan, which repels the crystal of violet dye
when the cell is stained
2. A cytoplasmic membrane is 
(a) a membrane that provides a selective barrier between the nucleus
and the cell’s internal structures
(b) the cell wall
(c) a membrane that provides a barrier between the cell’s internal 
structures
(d) a membrane that provides a selective barrier between the cell wall and
the cell’s internal structures
3. Amphipathic means
(a) that the cytoplasmic membrane of a cell is bilayered and contains
both polar and nonpolar parts
(b) that the cytoplasmic membrane of a cell is unilayered and contains
polar parts
(c) that the cytoplasmic membrane of a cell is unilayered and contains
nonpolar parts
(d) that the cytoplasmic membrane of a cell is resistant to all substances
residing outside the cell
CHAPTER 4
Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells
83

4. What is the function of the nonpolar part of the cytoplasmic membrane?
(a) The cytoplasmic membrane does not have a nonpolar part.
(b) The nonpolar part of the cytoplasmic membrane prevents extra-
cellular fluid from leaving the cell and intracellular fluid from enter-
ing the cell.
(c) The nonpolar part of the cytoplasmic membrane is hydrophobic and
prevents extracellular fluid from entering the cell and intracellular
fluid from exiting the cell.
(d) The nonpolar part of the cytoplasmic membrane is to position organ-
elles within the cell. 
5. The function of the transport protein is 
(a) to regulate cell division
(b) to regulate the positioning of organelles within the cell
(c) to regulate movement of molecules through the cytoplasmic membrane
(d) to give a cell its color
6. The function of the channel protein is
(a) to direct movement of a cell through channels in its environment
(b) to channel substances among organelles within the cell
(c) to form pores (called channels) in the cytoplasmic membrane that
permit the flow of molecules through the cytoplasmic membrane
(d) to form pores (called channels) in the nucleus membrane that permit
the flow of molecules through the nuclei of the cell
7. Passive transport is 
(a) the process of moving substances through the cytoplasmic mem-
brane without expending energy by using a concentration gradient
(b) the process of moving substances through the cytoplasmic mem-
brane without expending energy by using a transport protein
(c) the process of moving substances through the cytoplasmic mem-
brane by expending energy by using a concentration gradient
(d) the process of moving substances through the nucleus membrane
without expending energy by using a concentration gradient
8. What is facilitated diffusion?
(a) A passive transport process in which molecules or ions of a sub-
stance move from a region of lower concentration to a region of
higher concentration without the assistance of an integral protein
(b) A passive transport process in which molecules or ions of a sub-
stance move from a region of lower concentration to a region of
higher concentration with the assistance of an integral protein
CHAPTER 4
Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells
84

(c) An active transport process in which molecules or ions of a sub-
stance move from a region of higher concentration to a region of
lower concentration with the assistance of an integral protein
(d) A passive transport process in which molecules or ions of a sub-
stance move from a region of higher concentration to a region of
lower concentration with the assistance of an integral protein 
9. Active transport is
(a) the movement of a substance across the cytoplasmic membrane in
the direction of the gradient by using energy provided by the cell
(b) the formation of pores (called channels) in the cytoplasmic mem-
brane that permit the flow of molecules through the cytoplasmic
membrane
(c) the movement of a substance across the cytoplasmic membrane
against the gradient by using energy provided by the cell 
(d) is a process in which molecules or ions of a substance move from a
region of higher concentration to a region of lower concentration
with the assistance of an integral protein
10. What are the two types of endocytosis?
(a) Facilitated diffusion and passive transport
(b) Phagocytosis and pinocytosis
(c) Hydrolysis and cytosol
(d) Nucleoid and cytosol
CHAPTER 4
Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells
85

This page intentionally left blank.

5
CHAPTER
87
The Chemical 
Metabolism
Those of us who need to shed a few pounds tend to blame our weight gain on our
slow metabolism. Metabolism is the collection of biochemical reactions that hap-
pen in our bodies; an example would be the series of reactions that occur when
our digestive system breaks down the food that we eat to energy. All living organ-
isms have a metabolism, including microorganisms. In this chapter you will learn
about the metabolism of the smallest living part of any organism—the cell.
Riding the Metabolism Cycle
The components of a cell, including its plasma membrane and cell wall (and
organelles in eukaryotic organisms), are composed of macromolecules that are
linked together to form these structures. The macromolecules are assembled from
building blocks called precursor metabolites. Think of precursor metabolites as
the bricks that are used to build a wall and the wall as the macromolecule. With
Copyright © 2005 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

the energy from ATP (adenosine triphosphate), these precursor metabolites are
used to construct or build larger molecules. ATP is the short term energy storage
molecule of the cell. Think of it as the battery pack of the cell. Cells use energy
from ATP and enzymes to connect smaller molecules to form macromolecules.
The cell grows as macromolecules are linked together and continue to grow into
cellular structures such as organelles, plasma membranes, and cell walls.
Catabolic and Anabolic: 
The Only Reactions You Need
A biochemical reaction is called a metabolic reaction. Metabolic reactions fall
into one of two classifications. These are catabolic reactions (catabolism) and
anabolic reactions (anabolism).
A catabolic reaction is a metabolic reaction that releases energy as large
molecules that are broken down (metabolized) into small molecules. An example is
when triglycerides and diglycerides are metabolized into glycerol and fatty acids. 
An anabolic reaction requires energy as small molecules are combined to
form large molecules. This type of reaction is called endergonic because it uses
free energy. For example, an anabolic reaction is the synthesis of phospholipids
from glycerol and fatty acids in order to build the cell plasma membrane.
A Little Give and Take: 
Oxidation-Reduction
Metabolic reactions sometime involve the transfer of electrons from one mole-
cule to another. One molecule donates an electron and another molecule
accepts the electron. This transfer of electrons is called oxidation-reduction or
redox reaction. A redox reaction is comprised of two events. The first event
happens when a molecule donates an electron. This is called oxidation. The sec-
ond event happens when another molecule accepts the donated electron. This is
called reduction.
The cell uses electron carrier molecules to carry electrons between areas within
the cell. Think of these carrier molecules as “shuttle buses.” Carrier molecules are
necessary because the cytoplasm of the cell does not contain free electrons.
CHAPTER 5
The Chemical Metabolism
88

Two important electron carrier molecules that are used in cell metabolism are
• nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+)
• flavine adenine dinucleotide (FAD)
• nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADP+)
For example, when synthesizing ATP, NAD+ carries electrons of a hydrogen
(H) atom, making NADH. FAD carries two electrons of hydrogen making
FADH2. Very often electrons of hydrogen atoms are the electrons transported by
the carrier molecule. NADP+ is used to reduce CO2 to carbohydrates during the
Dark Phase of photosynthesis.
Making Power: ATP Production
When enzymes break down nutrients (larger molecules) into smaller molecules,
the energy that is released can be stored and used for future anabolic reactions. 
Here are the steps to form ATP:
1. Substrate-level phosphorylation: Phosphate is transferred from another
phosphorylated organic compound to ADP to make ATP during an exer-
gonic reaction. 
2. Oxidative phosphorylation: Energy from redox reactions of biochemical
respiration is used to attach an inorganic phosphate to ADP to make ATP.
3. Photophosphorylation: Energy from sunlight is used to phosphorylate ADP
with inorganic phosphate.
What’s Your Name: 
Naming and Classifying Enzymes
Enzymes are named according to the substrate that they act upon, and most end
in the suffix “-ase.” Enzymes are classified into six major groups based on their
actions. These classifications are:
• Hydrolases: Enzymes in the hydrolases group increase a catabolic reaction
by introducing water into the reaction. This reaction is called hydrolysis.
For example, lipase (lipid + ase) is an enzyme that is used to break down
lipid molecules.
CHAPTER 5
The Chemical Metabolism
89

• Isomerases: Enzymes in the isomerase group rearrange atoms within the
substrate rather than add or subtract anything from the reaction. Phospho-
glucoisomerase is an example of an isomerase because it converts glucose
6-phosphate into fructose 6-phosphate during the breakdown of glucose.
• Ligases: These are anabolic reactions. These enzymes join molecules together
and use energy in the form of ATP. An example is DNAligase to synthesis DNA.
• Lyases: Enzymes in the lyases group split molecules without using water in
a catabolic reaction. For example, 1,6-biphosphate aldolase splits fructose
1,6 biphosphate into G-3P and DHAP during glycolysis. These are anabolic
reactions.
• Oxidoreductases: Enzymes in the oxidoreductases group oxidize (remove)
electrons or reduce (add) electrons to a substrate in both catabolic and ana-
bolic reactions. An example is lactic acid dehydrogenase, which oxidizes
pyruvate to form lactic acid during fermentation.
• Transferases: Enzymes in the tranferases group transfer functional groups from
one molecule or another substrate in an anabolic reaction. A functional group
could be amino acids, a phosphate group, or an acetyl group. For example,
hexokinase transfers a phosphate group from ATP to glucose in the first step in
the breakdown of glucose during the process of gycolysis.
Brewing Up Protein
Most enzymes are proteins that can be inactive or active. An inactive enzyme does
not act as a catalyst to increase the speed of a metabolic reaction. An active enzyme
is a catalyst. An inactive enzyme is composed of apoenzyme; when an apoenzyme
binds to its cofactor the enzyme becomes active and is called a holoenzyme.
A cofactor is a substance that is either an inorganic ion, such as iron, mag-
nesium, or zinc, or an organic molecule. Organic cofactors are called coen-
zymes. A coenzyme is a molecule that is required for metabolism. NAD, NADP,
and FAD are examples of coenzymes. Some vitamins are coenzyme precursors.
The Magic of Enzymes: Enzyme Activities
All chemical reactions including those that occur in metabolism, need a boost of
energy to get started. The energy needed to begin a chemical reaction is called
activation energy. An enzyme catalyzes a reaction by lowering the activation
energy. Heat can lower the activation energy and set off a reaction. However, the
CHAPTER 5
The Chemical Metabolism
90

temperature would be so high that the cell would die before the activation energy
threshold could be reached. 
Enzymes are needed for metabolism to occur in a timely fashion. The activ-
ity of enzymes depends upon how closely their functional sites fit with their
substrates. The shape of the enzyme’s functional site is called its active site. This
site fits in regard to the shape of the substrate. The active site of the enzyme
compliments the shape of its substrate. A perfect fit does not occur until the
substrate and enzyme bind together to form an enzyme-substrate complex.
PH
The chemical denaturing of enzymes is caused by very high or very low pH.
H
+ ions that are released from acids and accepted by bases interfere with hydro-
gen bonding. If we change the pH of the environment of unwanted microorgan-
isms, we can control their growth by denaturing their proteins. An example is
vinegar, which is acetic acid; it has a pH of 3.0. Vinegar acts as a preservative 
in “ pickling” vegetables. Ammonia has a pH of 11. Ammonia is a base, and for
this reason we use ammonia as a cleaner and disinfectant.
ENZYME SUBSTRATE CONCENTRATION
As substrate concentrations increase, enzyme activity also increases. When all
enzyme binding sites have bound to a substrate, the enzymes have reached their
saturation point. If more substrate is added, the rate of enzyme activity will not
increase. One way organisms regulate their metabolism is by controlling the
quantity and timing of enzyme synthesis.
The Right Influences: Factors Affecting Enzymes
The ability of an enzyme to lower the activation required for metabolism is
influenced by three factors. These are pH, temperature, and the concentration of
enzyme, substrate, and product.
Temperature
Changes in temperature change the shape of the active site, and therefore, influ-
ence the fit between the active site and the substrate. Enzymes in humans work
best at about 37 degrees Celsius. This is the same temperature at which en-
zymes work best for some pathogenic microorganisms, too. Once the tempera-
CHAPTER 5
The Chemical Metabolism
91

ture reaches the point that radically changes the shape of the active site, the bond
between the active site and the substrate is broken and makes the enzyme in-
effective. This is called thermal denaturation. Denatured enzymes lose their
specific three-dimensional shape, making them nonfunctional. For example, the
clear liquid portion of an egg turns to a white solid when the egg is heated. 
The clear liquid is made up of proteins. Heating these proteins denatures them.
Inhibitors
There are substrates that block active sites from bonding to a substrate. These sub-
stances are called inhibitors. There are two kinds of inhibitors: competitive and
noncompetitive. A competitive inhibitor is a substance that binds to the active site
of an enzyme, thus preventing the active site from binding with the substrate. For
example, sulfa drugs contain the chemical sulfanilamid. Sulfa drugs inhibit micro-
bial growth by fitting into the active site of an enzyme required in the conversion
of paraaminobenzoic acid (PABA) into the B vitamin folic acid. Folic acid is
needed for DNA synthesis in bacteria and thus prevents bacteria from growing. A
noncompetitive inhibitor binds to another site on the enzyme called the allosteric
site and in doing so alters the shape of the active site of the enzyme. The shape of
the active site no longer complements the corresponding site on the substrate and
therefore no binding occurs. Noncompetitive inhibitors do not bind to active sites.
CARBOHYDRATE METABOLISM
Carbohydrates are the main energy source for metabolic reactions and glucose is
the most used carbohydrate in metabolism. Energy is produced by breaking
down (catabolized) glucose in a process called glycolysis, which takes place in
the cytoplasm of most cells. Glycolysis, also known as the Embden-Meyerhof
pathway, is the oxidation of glucose to pyruvic acid. In glycolysis, which
originated from the Greek word glykys meaning “sweet” and lysein meaning
“loosen,” enzymes split a six-carbon sugar into two three-carbon sugars, which
are then oxidized. Oxidation releases energy and rearranges atoms to form two
molecules of pyruvic acid. It is during this process that NAD
+ is reduced to
NADH with a net production of two ATP molecules.
In the presence of O2 (aerobic environment), pyruvic acid enters the bridging
pathway and becomes connected to acetyl CoA. It then enters the Krebs cycle,
which will result in the production of three NADH and, one FADH2 molecules. In
the absence of O2 (anaerobic environment), the NADH produced during glycoly-
sis is oxidized and an organic compound accepts the electrons. This process is
called fermentation. This pathway of fermentation results in fewer ATP molecules.
CHAPTER 5
The Chemical Metabolism
92

Embden-Meyerhof Pathway
The Embden-Meyerhof pathway (Fig. 5-1) is used by some bacteria to catabo-
lize glucose to pyruvic acid. For example, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, which is
the bacteria that infects burn victims, uses the Embden-Meyerhof pathway. The
Embden-Meyerhof pathway yields one molecule of ATP.
CHAPTER 5
The Chemical Metabolism
93
Glucose
Glucose 6-phosphate
Fructose 6-phosphate
Fructose 1, 6-diphosphate
Dihydroxyacetone
(DHAP) 
Glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate (G-3P) 
Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate (G-3P)
1,3-diphosphoglyceric  acid
3-phosphoglyceric acid
2-phosphoglyceric acid
Phosphoenolpyruvic acid (PEP)
Pyruvic acid
2 ATP
2 NADH
2 ATP
2 H2O
ATP
ADP
ATP
ADP
2 ADP
2 ADP
2 NAD +
Fig. 5-1.
Diagram of glycolysis: Embden-Meyerhoff pathway.

Pyruvic Acid
Before entering the Krebs cycle, the pyruvic acid produced from the breakdown
of glucose must be further processed by converting it to acetyl-coenzyme A.
This is accomplished by the enzyme complex pyruvate dehydrogenase. CO2 is
removed from pyruvic acid and the product is an acetyl group (a two carbon
group). The acetyl group is attached to coenxzyme A and the product is called
acetyl-CoA. The removal of CO2 is called decarboxylation.
The Krebs Cycle
The Krebs cycle (Fig, 5-2) is a series of biochemical reactions that occur in the
mitochondria of eukaryotic cells and in the cytoplasm of prokaryotes. The Krebs
CHAPTER 5
The Chemical Metabolism
94
Acetyl CoA 
Citric acid
Pyruvic acid 
NAD+
CO2
Isocitric acid
Alpha -Ketoglutaric acid
Succinyl CoA
Succinic acid 
Fumaric acid 
Malic acid 
Oxaloacetic acid 
CO2
NAD+
CO2
CoA
FADH2
CoA
NADH + H+
NADH
CoA
NAD+
FAD
ADP
ATP
GDP
GTP
NADH + H+
NAD+
NADH + H+
Fig. 5-2.
The Krebs Cycle: Citric Acid Cycle

cycle, also known as the citric acid cycle and the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle,
is named for Sir Hans Krebs, a biochemist, who in the 1940s explained how
these reactions work. In the Krebs cycle, acetyl-CoA is split into carbon dioxide
and hydrogen atoms. 
The carbon dioxide diffuses out of the mitochondria in eukaryotic cells and
eventually out of the cell itself. This series of reactions is called a cycle because
as one acetyl group enters the Krebs cycle and is metabolized, oxaloacetate com-
bines with another acetyl group to form citric acid and coenzyme A, which go
through the cycle again. As each acetyl group goes through the cycle, two mole-
cules of CO2 are formed from the oxidation of its two carbon atoms. 
Three pairs of electrons are transferred to NAD and one pair to FAD. These
coenzymes are important because they carry large amounts of energy. For every
molecule of acetyl-CoA that enters the Krebs Cycle, a molecule of ATP is pro-
duced. The Krebs cycle also provides substances for bacteria and other prokary-
otic cellular activities. 
THE NEW CHAIN GANG: 
THE ELECTRON TRANSPORT CHAIN
Glycolysis, the bridging reaction, and the Krebs cycle result in the synthesis of
only four ATP molecules when one glucose is oxidized to six CO2 molecules.
Most of the ATP that is generated comes from the oxidation of NADH and
FADH2 in the electron transport chain. 
The electron transport chain, which occurs in the mitochondria in eukaryotic
cells and in the cytoplasm of prokaryotic cells, is composed of a series of elec-
tron carriers that transfer electrons from donor molecules, such as NADH and
FADH2 to an acceptor atom like O2. The electrons move down an energy gradi-
ent, like water flowing down a series of waterfalls in rapids. 
The difference in free energy that occurs between O2 and NADH releases
large amounts of energy. The energy changes that occur at several points in the
chain are very large and can provide the eventual production of large amounts
of ATP. The free energy that electrons have entering the electron transport chain
is greater in the beginning than at the end. It is this energy that enables the pro-
tons (H
+) to be pumped out of the mitochondrial matrix. 
When the electrons move through the chain they transfer this energy to the
pumps within the plasma membrane. The electron transport chain will separate
the energy that is released into smaller sections, or steps. The reactions of the
electron chain take place in the inner membrane of the mitochondria in eukary-
CHAPTER 5
The Chemical Metabolism
95

otic cells or in the plasma membrane in prokaryotic cells. In the mitochondria
this system is set up into four complexes of carriers. 
Each of these carriers transports electrons part of the way to O2 (which is the
final electron acceptor). The carriers, coenzyme Q and cytochrome C, connect
these complexes. This process by which energy comes from the electron trans-
port chain is provided by protons (H
+) and are used to make ATP.
Three ATP molecules can be synthesized from ADP and Pi when two elec-
trons pass from NADH to an atom of O2.
The electron transport chain used by bacteria and other prokaryotes can differ
from the mitochondrial chain used in eukaryotic organisms. Bacteria, for exam-
ple, vary in their electron carriers. Bacteria use cytochromes, heme proteins that
carry electrons through the electron transport chain. (A heme is an organic com-
pound, the center of which contains an iron atom surrounded by four nitrogen
atoms.) Electrons can enter at several points and leave through terminal oxidases.
Prokaryotic and eukaryotic electrons work using the same fundamental princi-
ples, although they differ in construction. 
The electron transport chain in E. coli bacteria, for example, transports elec-
trons from NADH to acceptors and moves protons across the plasma membrane.
The E. coli electron transport chain is branched and contains different cyto-
chromes. The two branches are cytochrome d and cytochrome o. Coenzyme Q
donates electrons to both branches. These chains operate in different conditions.
For example, the cytochrome d branch will function when O2 levels are low and
does not actively pump protons, whereas the cytochrome o branch operates in
higher O2 concentrations and is a proton pump.
During the aerobic metabolism of a single glucose molecule, ten pairs of elec-
trons from NAD produce thirty ATP molecules, and two pairs of FAD produce
four ATP molecules, making a total of 34 ATP molecules. Four substrate-level
ATPs make a total of 38 molecules of ATP from one molecule of glucose.
The energy captured occurs through a process called chemiosmosis, formu-
lated by British biochemist Peter Mitchell, who won the Nobel Prize in 1978. In
chemiosmosis electrons flow down their electrochemical gradient across the
inner mitochondrial membrane in eukaryotes and the cell membrane in prokary-
otes through ATP syntase.
If the organism is in an aerobic environment, there are enzymes that can break
down harmful chemicals. An example of such a chemical is hydrogen peroxide
(H2O2). If the organism is in an anaerobic environment, they do not possess or
cannot produce these aerobic enzymes and are susceptible to damage by O2. An
example is the free radical superoxide. Organisms that follow this pathway pro-
duce less ATP. An example of these types of organisms is lactobacillus. 
CHAPTER 5
The Chemical Metabolism
96

Fermentation
Fermentation is the partial oxidation of glucose or another organic compound to
release energy; it uses an organic molecule as an electron acceptor rather than an
electron transport chain. In a simple fermentation reaction, NADH reduces pyru-
vic acid from glycolysis to form lactic acid. Another example involves two reac-
tions. The first is a decarboxylation reaction where CO2 is given off (this is the
CO2 that causes bakery items to rise), followed by a subsequent reduction reac-
tion that produces ethanol.
The essential function of fermentation is the regeneration of NAD
+ for glycol-
ysis so ADP molecules can be phosphorylated to ATP. The benefit of fermentation
is that it allows ATP production to continue in the absence of O2. Microorganisms
that ferment can grow and colonize in an anaerobic environment.
Microorganisms produce a variety of fermentation products. The products of
fermentation of cells are waste products of the cells, but many are useful to
humans. These include ethanol (the alcohol that humans can drink, like in beer,
wine, and liquor), acetic acid (vinegar), and lactic acid (found in cheese, sauer-
kraut, and pickles). Other fermentation products are very harmful to humans. An
example is the bacterium Clostridium perfringens, which ferments hydrogen and
is associated with gas gangrene. Gangrene is involved in necrosis or the “death”
of muscle tissue.
Other Catabolic Pathways
There are two other important catabolic pathways. These are lipid catabolism
and protein catabolism. Both of these convert substances (lipids and proteins)
into ATP, providing the microorganism with energy. 
LIPID CATABOLISM
Lipids, including fats, which consist of glycerol and fatty acids, can be involved
in ATP production. Enzymes called lipases hydrolyze the bonds attaching the
glycerol to the fatty acid chains. Glycerol is converted to dihydroxyacetone phos-
phate (DHAP), which is oxidized to pyruvic acid in glycolysis. The fatty acids
are broken down in catabolic reactions called beta-oxidation. In beta-oxidation,
CHAPTER 5
The Chemical Metabolism
97

enzymes split off pairs of hydrogenated carbon atoms that make up the fatty acids.
The enzymes then join these pairs to coenzyme A to form acetyl-CoA. This hap-
pens until the entire fatty acid has been converted to molecules of acetyl-CoA.
Acetyl-CoA is utilized in the cycle to generate ATP.
PROTEIN CATABOLISM
Most organisms break down proteins only when glucose and fats are unavail-
able. Some bacteria that spoil food, pathogenic bacteria, and fungi normally
catabolize proteins as energy sources.
Proteins are too large to cross the cell membrane. Microorganisms secrete an
enzyme called protease, which splits the protein into amino acids outside the
cell. Amino acids are then transported into the cell, where specialized enzymes
split off amino groups in reactions called deamination. These molecules then
enter the Krebs cycle. 
These are examples of how the catabolism or breakdown of proteins, carbo-
hydrates, and lipids can be sources of electrons and proteins during cellular res-
piration. The pathways of glycolysis and the Krebs cycle are catabolic roadways
or tunnels where high-energy electrons from these organic molecules can flow
through on their energy-releasing journey.
Photosynthesis
Some organisms use anabolic pathways to synthesize organic molecules from
inorganic carbon dioxide. Most of these phototrophic organisms are autotrophic
and are capable of surviving and growing on carbon dioxide as their only carbon
source. The energy from sunlight is used to reduce CO2 to carbohydrates. This pro-
cess is called photosynthesis. The ability of an organism to “photosynthesize”
depends on the presence of light-sensitive pigments, called chlorophyll, or related
compounds. These pigments are found in plants, algae, and certain bacteria. 
The growth of these photosynthetic organisms can be explained by two sep-
arate types of reactions. In light reactions, light energy is converted into chemi-
cal energy and dark reactions in which the chemical energy from the light
reactions is used to reduce carbon dioxide (CO2) to carbohydrates. For the
growth and survival of autotrophic organisms, energy is supplied in the form of
an ATP molecule. Electrons for the reduction of CO2 come from NADPH.
CHAPTER 5
The Chemical Metabolism
98

NADPH is produced from the reduction of NADP
+ by electrons from electron
donors such as water.
Purple and green bacteria use light most of the time to form ATP. They pro-
duce NADPH from reducing materials present in their environment, such as
reduced sulfur compounds (H2S), organic compounds, as photosynthetic elec-
tron donors for CO2 fixation. Green plants, algae, and cyanobacteria do not use
reduced sulfur compounds or organic compounds to obtain reducing power.
Instead, they obtain electrons for NADP
+ reduction by splitting water molecules.
By splitting water, oxygen (O2) is produced as a byproduct. The reduction of
NADP
+ to NADPH by these organisms is dependent on light and therefore a
light-mediated event. Due to the production of molecular oxygen (O2) the
process of photosynthesis in these organisms is called oxygenic photosynthesis.
In contrast, the purple and green bacteria do not produce oxygen. This process
is called anoxygenic photosynthesis.
These photosynthetic organisms capture the light with pigment molecules. An
important pigment molecule is chlorophyll. There are different structures of
chlorophyll, the most common of which are chlorophyll a and chlorophyll b.
Chlorophyll a is the principal chlorophyll of higher plants, most algae, and
cyanobacteria. Purple and green bacteria have chlorophylls of a different struc-
ture, called bacteriochlorophyll.
Accessory pigments, such as carotenoids and phycobilins, are also involved
in capturing light energy. Carotenoids play a photoprotective role, preventing
photooxidative damage to the phototrophic cell. Phycobilins serve as light-
harvesting pigments.
Cells arrange numerous molecules of chlorophyll and accessory pigments
within membrane systems called photosynthetic membranes. The location of
these membranes differs between eukaryotic and prokaryotic microorganisms.
In eukaryotic organisms, photosynthesis occurs in specialized organelles called
chloroplasts. The chlorophyll pigments are attached to “sheet-like” membrane
structures of the chloroplasts. These photosynthetic membrane structures are called
thylakoids. These thylakoids are arranged in stacks called grana. Thylakoids
resemble stacks of pennies. Each stack is called a granum.
In prokaryotic organisms, there are no chloroplasts. The photosynthetic pigments
are integrated in a membrane system that arises from the cytoplasmic membranes.
PHOTOSYSTEMS I AND II
Electron flow in oxygenic phototrophs involves two sets of photochemical
reactions. Oxygenic phototrophs use light energy to generate ATP and
CHAPTER 5
The Chemical Metabolism
99

NADPH. The electrons from NADPH come from the splitting of H2O to get
oxygen (O2) and electrons (H
+). The two systems of light reactions are called
photosystem I and photosystem II. Photosystems I and II function together in
the oxygenic process. Under certain conditions many algae and some
cyanobacteria can carry out cyclic photophosphorylation using only photosys-
tem I. These organisms can obtain reducing power from sources other than
water. This requires the presence of anaerobic conditions and a reducing sub-
stance, such as H2 or H2S. Photosystem II is responsible for splitting water to
yield H2 + O.
Dark Phase Reactions
Many photosynthetic bacteria contain carboxysomes in their cytoplasm. These
carbosomes contain many copies of the complex enzyme Rubisco (the most
abundant and probably the most important enzyme on the planet) to start the
Calvin Cycle.
The fixation of CO2 by most photosynthetic and autotrophic organisms in-
volves the biochemical pathway called the Calvin Cycle. The Calvin Cycle is a
reductive, energy-demanding process in which reducing equivalents from
NADPH and energy from ATP are used to reduce CO2 to small carbohydrates that
are metabolized to glucose and ultimately to more complex carbohydrates such as
starch, sucrose and glycogen. Other substances with carbon can be used but CO2
is preferred. 
Quiz
1. What is the energy storage molecule?
(a) ATP
(b) Adenosine oxidate
(c) Phospholipids
(d) NAAD
2. What reaction releases energy as large molecules are broken down into
small molecules?
(a) Anabolic reaction
(b) Catabolic reaction
CHAPTER 5
The Chemical Metabolism
100

(c) Anabolism
(d) Hydrolase reaction
3. What reaction combines small molecules to form large molecules?
(a) Anabolic reaction
(b) Catabolic reaction
(c) Anabolism
(d) Hydrolase reaction
4. The energy needed to begin a chemical reaction is called?
(a) Metabolism
(b) Activation energy
(c) Saturation point
(d) Inhibitors
5. What process is used to break down glucose?
(a) Anabolic reaction
(b) Catabolic reaction
(c) Anabolism
(d) Hydrolase reaction
6. What pathway is used by some bacteria to catabolize glucose to pyruvic
acid?
(a) Pyruvic acid pathway
(b) Enter-Doudoroff pathway
(c) Pseudomonas pathway
(d) Aeruginosa pathway
7. What is acetyl-CoA split into in the Krebs cycle?
(a) Hydrogen and oxygen
(b) Oxygen and carbon
(c) Carbon dioxide and hydrogen
(d) Carbon and hydrogen
8. What process partially oxidizes sugar to release energy using an organic
molecule as an electron acceptor?
(a) Fermentation
(b) Oxidation
(c) Oxidation reduction
(d) Lactation
CHAPTER 5
The Chemical Metabolism
101

9. What is caused when there is a chemical denaturing of enzymes?
(a) Protein creation
(b) Lipid creation
(c) Very high or low pH
(d) Saturation point is reached
10. What blocks active sites from bonding to a substrate?
(a) Carbohydrates
(b) Temperature
(c) Inhibitors
(d) Pyruvic acid
CHAPTER 5
The Chemical Metabolism
102

6
CHAPTER
103
Microbial Growth 
and Controlling 
Microbial Growth
Microorganisms use chemicals called nutrients for growth and development.
They need these nutrients to build molecules and cellular structures. The most
important nutrients are carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, and oxygen. Microorganisms
get their nutrients from sources in their environment. When these microorgan-
isms obtain their nutrients by living on or in other organisms, they can cause dis-
ease in that organism by interfering with their host’s nutrition, metabolism, and,
thus disrupting their host’s homeostasis, the steady state of an organism.
Organisms can be classified in two groups depending on how they feed them-
selves. Organisms that use carbon dioxide (CO2) as their source of carbon are
called autotrophs. These organisms “feed themselves,” auto- meaning “self” and
-troph meaning “nutrition.” Autotrophs make organic compounds from CO2
and do not feed on organic compounds from other organisms. Organisms that
obtain carbon from organic nutrients like proteins, carbohydrate, amino acids,
Copyright © 2005 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

and fatty acids are called heterotrophs. Heterotrophic organisms acquire or feed
on organic compounds from other organisms. 
Organisms can also be categorized according to whether they use chemicals
or light as a source of energy. Organisms that acquire energy from redox re-
actions involving inorganic and organic chemicals are called chemotrophs.
Organisms that use light as their energy source are called phototrophs.
Chemical Requirements for Microbial Growth
A microorganism requires two chemical elements in order to grow. These ele-
ments are carbon and oxygen. 
CARBON
Carbon is one of the most important requirements for microbial growth. Carbon
is the backbone of living matter. Some organisms, such as photoautotrophs, get
carbon from carbon dioxide (CO2).
OXYGEN
Microorganisms that use oxygen produce more energy from nutrients than micro-
organisms that do not use oxygen. These organisms that require oxygen are called
obligate aerobes. Oxygen is essential for obligate aerobes because it serves as
a final electron acceptor in the electron transport chain, which produces most
of the ATP in these organisms. An example of an obligate aerobe is micrococ-
cus. Some organisms can use oxygen when it is present, but can continue to
grow by using fermentation or anaerobic respiration when oxygen is not avail-
able. These organisms are called facultative anaerobes. An example of a fac-
ultative anaerobe is E. coli bacteria, which is found in the large intestine of
vertebrates, such as humans.
Some bacteria cannot use molecular oxygen and can even be harmed by it.
Examples include Clostridium botulinum, the bacterium that causes botulism,
and Clostridium tetani, the bacterium that causes tetanus. These organisms are
called obligate anaerobes. Molecular oxygen (O2) is a poisonous gas to obligate
anaerobes. Toxic forms of oxygen are:
CHAPTER 6
Microbial Growth and Controlling It
104

• Singlet oxygen, which is in an extremely active, high-energy state. This is
present in cells that use phagocytosis to ingest foreign bacteria cells.
• Superoxide free radicals, which is formed during normal respiration of
organisms that use oxygen as a final electron acceptor. In obligate anaer-
obes, they form some superoxide free radicals in the presence of oxygen.
These superoxide free radicals are incredibly toxic to cellular components.
In order for organisms to grow in atmospheric oxygen they must produce
the enzyme superoxide dimutase or (SOD). Superoxide dimutase neutral-
izes superoxide free radicals. Aerobic bacteria, facultative anaerobes grow-
ing aerobically, and aerotolerant anaerobes produce SOD, which converts
the superoxide free radical into molecular oxygen (O2) and hydrogen per-
oxide (H2O2). This can be seen when you place hydrogen peroxide on a
wound infected with bacteria. When hydrogen peroxide is placed on the
colony of bacterial cells that are producing catalase, oxygen bubbles are
released. This is the “foaming” you see when you place hydrogen perox-
ide on a cut. Human cells also produce catalase, which converts hydrogen
peroxide to water and oxygen.
• Hydroxyl radical (OH
−); this is a hydroxide ion. Most aerobic respiration
produces some hydroxyl radicals. Aerotolerant anaerobes can tolerate
oxygen, but cannot grow in an oxygen-rich environment. Aerotolerant bac-
teria ferment carbohydrates to lactic acid. Lactic acid inhibits the growth
of aerobic competitors, establishing a good opportunity for the growth of
these organisms. An example of a lactic acid–producing aerotolerant bac-
terium is lactobacillus, used in fermented food such as pickles and yogurt.
Culture Media
A culture medium is nutrient material prepared in the laboratory for the growth
of microorganisms. Microorganisms that grow in size and number on a culture
medium are referred to as a culture.
In order to use a culture medium must be sterile, meaning that it contains no
living organisms. This is important because we only want microorganisms that
we add to grow and reproduce, not others. We must have the proper nutrients, pH,
moisture, and oxygen levels (or no oxygen) for a specific microorganism to grow. 
Many culture media are available for microbial growth. Media are constantly
being developed for the use of identification and isolation of bacteria in the
research of food, water, and microbiology studies.
CHAPTER 6
Microbial Growth and Controlling It
105

The most popular and widely used medium used in microbiology laboratories
is the solidifying agent agar. Agar is a complex polysaccharide derived from red
algae. Very few microorganisms can degrade agar, so it usually remains in a
solid form. Agar media are usually contained in test tubes or Petri dishes. The
test tubes are held at a slant and are allowed to solidify on an angle, called a
slant. A slant increases the surface area for organism growth. When they solid-
ify in a vertical tube it is called a deep. The shallow dishes with lids to prevent
contamination are called Petri dishes. Petri dishes are named after their inventor,
Julius Petri, who in 1887 first poured agar into glass dishes.
CHEMICALLY DEFINED MEDIA
For a medium to support microbial growth, it must provide an energy source,
as well as carbon, nitrogen, sulfur, phosphorous, and any other organic growth
factors that the organism cannot make itself, source for the microorganisms 
to utilize. 
A chemically defined medium is one whose exact chemical composition is
known. Chemically defined media must contain growth factors that serve as a
source of energy and carbon. Chemically defined media are used for the growth
of autotrophic bacteria. Heterotrophic bacteria and fungi are normally grown on
complex media, which are made up of nutrients, such as yeasts, meat, plants, or
proteins (the exact composition is not quite known and can vary with each mix-
ture). In complex media, the energy, carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur needed for
microbial growth are provided by protein. Proteins are large molecules that some
microorganisms can use directly. Partial digestion by acids and enzymes break
down proteins into smaller amino acids called peptones. Peptones are soluble
products of protein hydrolysis. These small peptones can be digested by bacteria. 
Different vitamins and organic growth factors can be provided by meat and
yeast extracts. If a complex medium is in a liquid form it is called a nutrient
broth. If agar is added, it is called a nutrient agar. Agar is not a nutrient; it is a
solidifying agent.
ANAEROBIC GROWTH
Because anaerobic organisms can be killed when exposed to oxygen, they must
be placed in a special medium called a reducing medium. Reducing media con-
tain ingredients like sodium thioglycolate that attaches to dissolved oxygen and
depletes the oxygen in the culture medium.
CHAPTER 6
Microbial Growth and Controlling It
106

SELECTIVE AND DIFFERENTIAL MEDIA
In health clinics and hospitals, it is necessary to detect microorganisms that are
associated with disease. Selective and differential media are therefore used.
Selective media are made to encourage the growth of some bacteria while
inhibiting others. An example of this is bismuth sulfite agar. Bismuth sulfite agar
is used to isolate Salmonella typhi from fecal matter. Salmonella typhi is a gram-
negative bacterium that causes salmonella. Differential media make it easy to
distinguish colonies of desired organisms from nondesirable colonies growing
on the same plate. Pure cultures of microorganisms have identifiable reactions
with different media. An example is blood agar. Blood agar is a dark red/brown
medium that contains red blood cells used to identify bacterial species that
destroy red blood cells. An example of this type of bacterium is streptococcus
pyogenes, the agent that causes strep throat.
MacConkey agar is both selective and differential. MacConkey agar contains
bile salts and crystal violet, which inhibit the growth of gram-positive bacteria,
and lactose, in which gram-negative bacteria can grow.
Enrichment cultures are usually liquids and provide nutrients and environ-
mental conditions that provide for the growth of certain microorganisms, but
not others.
PURE CULTURES
Infectious material or materials that contain pathogenic microorganisms can be
located in pus, sputum, urine, feces, soil, water, and food. These infectious
materials can contain several kinds if bacteria. If these materials are placed on
a solid medium, colonies will form that are the exact copies of that same
microorganism. A colony arises from a single spore, vegetative cell, or a group
of the same organism that attaches to others like it into clumps or chains.
Microbial colonies have distinct appearances that distinguish one microorgan-
ism from another.
The streak plate method is the most common way to get pure cultures of bac-
teria. A device called an inoculating loop is sterilized and dipped into a culture
of a microorganism or microorganisms and then is “streaked” in a pattern over
a nutrient medium. As the pattern is made, bacteria are rubbed off from the loop
onto the nutrient medium. The last cells that are rubbed off the loop onto the
medium are far enough apart to allow isolation of separate colonies of the orig-
inal culture. (See Fig. 6-1.)
CHAPTER 6
Microbial Growth and Controlling It
107

PRESERVING BACTERIAL CULTURES
Two common methods of preserving microbial cultures are deep freezing and
lyophilization or (freeze drying). Deep freezing is a process in which a pure cul-
ture of microorganisms is placed in a suspending liquid and frozen quickly at
temperatures ranging from −50 to −95 degrees Celsius. With this type of freez-
ing method, cultures can usually be thawed and used after several years.
Lyophilization, or freeze drying, quick freezes suspended microorganisms at
temperatures from −54 to −72 degrees Celsius while water is removed by using
a high-pressure vacuum. While under the vacuum the container is sealed with a
torch. The surrounding microbes in the sealed container can last for years. The
organisms can be retained and revived by hydrating them and placing them into
a liquid nutrient medium.
GROWING BACTERIAL CULTURES
Bacteria normally reproduce by a process called binary fission: 
1. The cell elongates and chromosomal DNA is replicated. 
2. The cell wall and cell membrane pinch inward and begin to divide. 
3. The pinched parts of the cell wall meet, forming a cross wall completely
around the divided DNA. 
4. The cells separate into two individual cells. 
CHAPTER 6
Microbial Growth and Controlling It
108
Fig. 6-1.
Streak plate method used
to isolate bacteria.

Some bacteria reproduce by budding. A small outgrowth or bud emerges from
the bacterium and enlarges until it reaches the size of the daughter cell. It then
separates, forming two identical cells. Some bacteria, called filamentous bac-
teria (or actinomycetes), reproduce by producing chains of spores located at 
the tips of the filaments. The filaments fragment and these fragments initiate the
growth of new cells.
GENERATION TIME
The generation time is the amount of time needed for a cell to divide. This varies
among organisms and depends upon the environment they are in and the temper-
ature of their environment. Some bacteria have a generation time of 24 hours,
although the generation time of most bacteria is between 1 to 3 hours. Bacterial
cells grow at an enormous rate. For example, with binary fission, bacteria can dou-
ble every 20 minutes. In 30 generations of bacteria (10 hours), the number could
reach one billion. It is difficult to graph population changes of this magnitude
using arithmetic numbers, so logarithmic scales are used to graph bacterial growth.
Phases of Growth
There are four basic phases of growth: the lag phase, the log phase, the station-
ary phase, and the death phase.
THE LAG PHASE 
In the lag phase there is little or no cell division. This phase can last from one
hour to several days. Here the microbial population is involved in intense meta-
bolic activity involving DNA and enzyme synthesis. This is like a factory “shut-
ting down” for two weeks in the summer for renovations. New equipment is
replacing old and employees are working, but no product is being turned out.
THE LOG PHASE 
In the log phase, cells begin to divide and enter a period of growth or logarith-
mic increase. This is the time when cells are the most active metabolically. This
CHAPTER 6
Microbial Growth and Controlling It
109

is the time when the product of the factory must be produced in an efficient mat-
ter. In this phase, however, microorganisms are very sensitive to adverse condi-
tions of their environment.
THE STATIONARY PHASE 
This phase is one of equilibrium. The growth rate slows, the number of dead
microorganisms equals the number of new microorganisms, and the population
stabilizes. The metabolic activities of individual cells that survive will slow
down. The reasons why the growth of the organisms stops is possibly that the
nutrients have been used up, waste products have accumulated, and drastic harm-
ful changes in the pH of the organisms environment have occurred.
There is a device called a chemostat that drains off old, used medium and
adds fresh medium. In this way a population can be kept in the growth phase
indefinitely.
THE DEATH PHASE 
Here the number of dead cells exceeds the number of new cells. This phase con-
tinues until the population is diminished or dies out entirely. 
Measurements of Microbial Growth
A plate count is the most common method of measuring bacterial growth. This
method measures the number of viable cells. Plate counts may take 24 hours or
more for visible colonies to form.
A plate count is performed by either a pour plate method or a special plate
method. With the pour plate method either 1.0 milliliter or 0.1 milliliters of a
bacterial solution is placed into a Petri dish. Melted nutrient agar is added, which
is then gently agitated, or mixed. When the agar has solidified, the plate is then
placed under incubation. With this technique, heat-sensitive microorganisms can
be damaged by the melted agar and be unable to form colonies. To avoid death
of cells due to heat, the spread plate method is mostly used. Here a 0.1-milliliter
bacterial solution is added to the surface of a prepored, solid nutrient agar. The bac-
terial solution is then spread evenly over the medium.
CHAPTER 6
Microbial Growth and Controlling It
110

When the amount of bacteria is very small, as in lakes and pure streams, bac-
teria can be counted by filtration methods. Here 100 milliliters of water are
passed through a thin membrane, whose pores are too small for the bacteria to
pass through. The bacteria that are retained from the filter are placed on a Petri
dish containing a pad soaked with liquid nutrient. An example of bacteria that
are grown using this method is coliform bacteria, which are indicators of fecal
pollution of food or water.
When using the direct microscopic count method, a measured volume of bac-
teria is suspended in a liquid placed inside a designated area of a microscopic slide.
For example, a 0.01-milliliter sample is spread over a marked square centimeter of
a slide, stained, and viewed under the 0.1 immersion objective lens. The area for
the viewing field is obtained. Once the number of bacteria is obtained or deter-
mined in several different fields, an average can be taken of the number of bacte-
ria per viewing field. From this data, the number of bacteria in the square
centimeter over which the sample has been spread can be calculated. Because the
area on the slide contained 0.01 milliliters of sample, the number of bacteria in
each milliliter of the suspension is the number of bacteria in the sample times 100.
Establishing Bacterial Numbers 
by Indirect Methods
Not all microbial cells must be counted to establish their number. With some
types of work, estimating the turbidity is a practical way of monitoring micro-
bial growth. Turbidity is the cloudiness of a liquid or the loss of transparency
because of insoluble matter.
The instrument used to measure turbidity is a spectrophotometer or col-
orimeter. In the spectrophotometer, a beam of light is transmitted through the
bacteria that are suspended in the liquid medium to a photoelectric cell. As bac-
teria growth increases, less light will reach the photoelectric cell. The change of
light will register on the instrument’s scale as the percentage of transmission.
The amount of light striking the light-sensitive detector on the spectrophotome-
ter is inversely proportional to the number of bacteria under normal cultures: the
less light, the more bacteria.
Another indirect way of measuring bacterial growth is to measure the meta-
bolic activity of the colony. In this method it is assumed that metabolic waste
products, CO2 (carbon dioxide) and acid, are in direct proportion to the number
CHAPTER 6
Microbial Growth and Controlling It
111

of bacteria present. The more bacteria we have, the more waste products we will
also have. 
For filamentous organisms, such as molds, a way to measure growth is by dry
weight. The fungus is removed from its growth medium, filtered, and placed in
a weighing bottle dried in a dessicator (a dessicator is a device that removes
water). In bacteria the culture is removed from the medium by centrifugation. 
Controlling Microbial Growth
It is very important to control microbial growth in surgical and hospital settings,
as well as in industrial and food preparation facilities. There are many terms
used to describe the fight to control microorganisms.
Sterilization is the destruction of all microorganisms and viruses, as well as
endospores. Sterilization is used in preparing cultured media and canned foods.
It is usually performed by steam under pressure, incineration, or a sterilizing gas
such as ethylene oxide. 
Antisepsis is the reduction of pathogenic microorganisms and viruses on liv-
ing tissue. Treatment is by chemical antimicrobials, like iodine and alcohol.
Antisepsis is used to disinfect living tissues without harming them.
Commercial sterilization is the treatment to kill endospores in commercially
canned products. An example is the bacteria Clostridium botulinum, which
causes botulism.
Aseptic means to be free of pathogenic contaminants. Examples include proper
hand washing, flame sterilization of equipment, and preparing surgical environ-
ments and instruments.
Any word with the suffix -cide or –cidal indicates the death or destruction of
an organism. For example, a bactercide kills bacteria. Other examples are fungi-
cides, germicides and virucides. Germicides include ethylene oxide, propylene
oxide, and aldehydes. For the same reason, these germicides are also used in pre-
serving specimens in laboratories. 
Disinfection is the destruction or killing of microorganisms and viruses on
nonliving tissue by the use of chemical or physical agents. Examples of these
chemical agents are phenols, alcohols, aldehydes, and surfactants.
Degerming is the removal of microorganisms by mechanical means, such as
cleaning the site of an injection. This area of the skin is degermed by using an
alcohol wipe or a piece of cotton swab soaked with alcohol. Hand washing also
removes microorganisms by chemical means.
CHAPTER 6
Microbial Growth and Controlling It
112

Pasteurization, as noted in Chapter 1, uses heat to kill pathogens and reduce
the number of food spoilage microorganisms in foods and beverages. Examples
are pasteurized milk and juice. 
Sanitation is the treatment to remove or lower microbial counts on objects
such as eating and drinking utensils to meet public health standards. This is usu-
ally accomplished by washing the utensils in high temperatures or scalding
water and disinfectant baths. Bacterostatic, fungistatic, and virustastic agents—
or any word with the suffix -static or -stasis—indicate the inhibition of a partic-
ular type of microorganism. These are unlike bactericides or fungicides that kill
or destroy the organism. Germistatic agents include refrigeration, freezing, and
some chemicals.
Microbial Death Rates
Microbial death is the term used to describe the permanent loss of a microor-
ganism’s ability to reproduce under normal environmental conditions. A tech-
nique for the evaluation of an antimicrobial agent is to calculate the microbial
death rate. When populations of particular organisms are treated with heat or
antimicrobial chemicals, they usually die at a constant rate. 
The effectiveness of antimicrobial treatments is influenced by the number of
microbes that are present. The larger the population, the longer it takes to destroy
it. The different variations of certain microorganisms influence death rate because,
for example, endospores are difficult to kill. 
Environmental influences, such as the presence of blood, saliva, or fecal mat-
ter, inhibits the action of chemical antimicrobials. Time of exposure to heat or
radiation is also important. Many chemical antimicrobials need longer exposure
times to be effective in the death of more resistant microorganisms or endospores.
Action of Antimicrobial Agents
There are two categories that chemical and physical antimicrobial agents fall
into: those that affect the cell walls or cytoplasmic membranes of the microor-
ganism and those that affect cellular metabolism and reproduction. As stated in
Chapter 4, the cell wall is located outside the microorganism’s plasma mem-
CHAPTER 6
Microbial Growth and Controlling It
113

brane. The cell’s plasma membrane regulates substances that enter and exit 
the cell during its life. Nutrients enter the cell as waste products exit the cell.
Damage to the plasma membrane proteins or phospholipids by physical or
chemical agents allows the contents of the cell to leak out. This causes the death
of the cell.
Proteins act as regulators in cellular metabolisms, function as enzymes (which
are important in all cellular activities), and form structural components in cell
membranes and cytoplasm. The function of a protein depends on its three-dimen-
sional shape. The hydrogen and disulfide bonds between the amino acids that
make up the protein maintain this shape. Extreme heat, certain chemicals and
very high or low pH can easily break some of these hydrogen bonds. This break-
age is referred to as the denaturing of the protein. The protein’s shape is changed,
thus affecting the function of the protein and ultimately bringing death to the cell. 
Certain chemicals, radiation, and heat can damage nucleic acids. The nuclear
acids, DNA and RNA, carry the cell’s genetic information. If these are damaged,
the cell can no longer replicate or synthesize enzymes, which are important in
cell metabolism.
Chemical Agents That Control Microbial Growth
The growth of a microorganism can be controlled through the use of a chemical
agent. A chemical agent is a chemical that either inhibits or enhances the growth
of a microorganism. Commonly used chemical agents include phenols, pheno-
lics, glutaraldehyde, and formaldehyde.
PHENOLS AND PHENOLICS
Phenols are compounds derived from pheno (carbolic acid) molecules. Pheno-
lics disrupt the plasma by denaturing proteins; they also disrupt the plasma
membrane of the cell. As mentioned in Chapter 1, Joseph Lister used phenol in
the late 1800s to reduce infection during surgery.
Alcohols are effective against bacterial fungi and viruses. However, they, are
not effective against fungal spores or bacterial endospores. Alcohols that 
are commonly used are isopropanol (rubbing alcohol) and ethanol (the alcohol
we drink). 
CHAPTER 6
Microbial Growth and Controlling It
114

Alcohols denature proteins and disrupt cytoplasmic membranes. Pure alcohol
is not as effective as 70 percent because the denaturing of proteins requires
water. Alcohols are good to use because they evaporate rapidly. A disadvantage
is that they may not contact the microorganisms long enough to be effective.
Alcohol is commonly used in swabbing the skin prior to an injection. 
Halogens are nonmetallic, highly resistive chemical elements. Halogens are
effective against vegetative bacterial cells, fungal cells, fungal spores, proto-
zoan cysts, and many viruses. Halogen-containing antimicrobial agents include
iodine, which inhibits protein function. Iodine is used in surgery and by
campers to disinfect water. An iodophur is an iodine-containing compound 
that is longer-lasting than iodine and does not stain the skin. Other halogen
agents include:
• Chlorine (Cl2). Used to treat drinking water, swimming pools, and in
sewage plants to treat waste water. Chlorine products such as sodium
hypochlorite (household bleach) are effective disinfectants.
• Chlorine dioxide (ClO2). A gas that can disinfect large areas.
• Chloroamines. Chemicals containing chlorine and ammonia. They are
used as skin antiseptics and in water supplies.
• Bromine. Used to disinfect hot tubes because it does not evaporate as
quickly as chlorine in high temperatures.
• Oxidizing agents. Fill microorganisms by oxidizing their enzymes, thus
preventing metabolism. Hydrogen peroxide, for example, disinfects and
sterilizes inanimate objects, such as food processing and medical equip-
ment, and is also used in water purification.
Arsenic, zinc, mercury, silver, nickel, and copper are called heavy metals due
to their high molecular weights. They inhibit microbial growth because they
denature enzymes and alter the three-dimensional shapes of proteins that inhibit 
or eliminate the protein’s function. Heavy metals are bacteriostatic and fungi-
static agents. 
An example is silver nitrate. At one time, hospitals required newborn babies
to receive a one percent cream of silver nitrate to their eyes to prevent blindness
caused by Neisseria gonorhoeae, which could enter the baby’s eyes while pass-
ing through the birth canal of a mother who was infected. Today, antibiotic oint-
ments that are less irritating are used. Another example is the use of copper in
swimming pools, fish tanks, and in reservoirs to control algae growth. Copper
interferes with chlorophyll, thus affecting metabolism and energy.
CHAPTER 6
Microbial Growth and Controlling It
115

Aldehydes function in microbial growth by denaturing proteins and inactivat-
ing nucleic acids. Two types are glutaraldehyde that is a liquid and formaldehyde
that is a gas.
GLUTARALDEHYDE AND FORMALDEHYDE
Glutaraldehyde is used in a two percent solution to kill bacteria, fungi, and
viruses on medical and dental equipment. Healthcare workers and morticians
dissolve gaseous formaldehyde in water, making a 37 percent solution of for-
malin. Formalin is used in disinfecting dialysis machines, surgical equipment,
and embalming bodies after death.
Gaseous agents, such as ethylene oxide, propylene oxide, and beta-propiolactone,
are used on equipment that cannot be sterilized easily with heat, chemicals, or
radiation. Certain items, like pillows, mattresses, dried or powered food, plastic-
ware, sutures, and heart-lung machines, are placed in a closed chamber, then filled
with these gases. Gaseous agents denature proteins.
SURFACTANTS
Surfactants are chemicals that act on surfaces by decreasing the tension of water
and disrupting cell membranes. Examples are household soaps and detergents.
Quiz
1. What microorganisms can use oxygen when it is present and continue to
grow without it?
(a) Obligate aerobes 
(b) Facultative anaerobes
(c) Obligate anaerobes
(d) Free radicals
2. What microorganisms require oxygen?
(a) Obligate aerobes 
(b) Facultative anaerobes
CHAPTER 6
Microbial Growth and Controlling It
116

(c) Obligate anaerobes
(d) Free radicals
3. What microorganisms do not use oxygen and can actually be harmed by it?
(a) Obligate aerobes 
(b) Facultative anaerobes
(c) Obligate anaerobes
(d) Free radicals
4. What is not a toxic form of oxygen?
(a) Singlet oxygen
(b) Facultative oxygen
(c) Superoxide free radicals
(d) Hydroxyl radical
5. What is a sterile culture medium?
(a) A hydroxyl radical medium 
(b) A medium containing no living organisms
(c) A chemically defined medium 
(d) A moisture-filled medium 
6. What must chemically defined media contain?
(a) Growth factors
(b) Complex media
(c) Peptone complex
(d) Protein hydrolysis
7. What is agar?
(a) A nutrient
(b) Vitamins 
(c) A solidifying agent
(d) Broth
8. What is an enrichment culture?
(a) Something that provides growth for all microorganisms
(b) Something that inhibits growth for all microorganisms
(c) An infectious culture
(d) Something that provides growth for a certain microorganism but not
for others
CHAPTER 6
Microbial Growth and Controlling It
117

9. What is an inoculating loop?
(a) A tool used to streak a microorganism in a pure culture
(b) A tool used to place agar in a pure medium
(c) A tool used to count colonies of microorganisms
(d) A tool used to view colonies of microorganisms
10. How can preserved bacteria cultures can be revived?
(a) Oxygenation
(b) Hydration
(c) Hydration and liquid nutrient medium
(d) Oxygenation and liquid nutrient medium
CHAPTER 6
Microbial Growth and Controlling It
118

7
CHAPTER
119
Microbial Genetics
“Who does she look like, mom or dad?” That’s probably one of the first few
questions everyone asks when hearing about a new arrival in the family. “Does
she have Aunt Jane’s eyes? Uncle Joe’s nose?” “How about Gramps’ sandy
hair?” These are some of the many noticeable characteristics that can be passed
down from family members.
What is really being asked is what genetic traits did the current generation
inherit from previous generations. Think of genetic traits as our computer
program; it provides us with instructions on how to do everything needed to
stay alive. Some instructions are passed along to the next generation while other
instructions are not. 
If microorganisms could speak, they might also ask the same questions as
we do when a new offspring arrives, because microorganisms also pass along
genetic traits to new generations of their species. Those traits preprogram new
microorganisms on how to identify and process food, how to excrete waste prod-
ucts, and how to reproduce, as well as nearly everything the microorganism
needs to know to survive. 
In this chapter you’ll learn how microorganisms inherit genetic traits from
previous generations of microorganisms. 
Copyright © 2005 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

Genetics
Genetics is the branch of science that studies heredity and how traits (expressed
characteristics) are passed to new generations of species and between microor-
ganisms. Scientists who study genetics are called geneticists and are interested in
how traits are expressed within a cell and how traits determine the characteristics
of an organism. 
Think of a trait as an instruction that tells an organism how do something,
such as how to form a toe. Each instruction is contained in a gene. As you can
imagine, there are thousands of genes (instructions) necessary for an organism
to grow and flourish. This is why if a youngster looks and behaves like her
mother, family members tend to say she has her mother’s genes—that is, she has
more genes (instructions) from her mom than from her dad.
Genes are actually made up of segments or sections of deoxyribonuclear acid
(DNA), or in the case of a virus, ribonucleic acid (RNA) molecules. These seg-
ments are placed in a specific sequence that code for a functional product.
DNA Replication: 
Take My Genes, Please!
In 1868, Swiss biologist Friedrich Miescher carried out chemical studies on the
nuclei of white blood cells in pus. His studies led to the discovery of DNA. DNA
was not linked to hereditary information until 1943 when work performed by
Oswald Avery, Colin MacLeod, and Maclyn McCarty at the Rockefeller Institute
revealed that DNA contained genetic information. These studies also revealed
that genetic information is passed from “parent cells” to “daughter cells,” creat-
ing a pathway through which genetic information is passed to the next genera-
tion of an organism. 
Scientists were baffled about how the exchange of DNA occurred. The answer
came in 1953 when American geneticist James Watson and English physicist
Francis Crick discovered the double-helical structure of DNA at the University
of Cambridge in England. Discovery of the double-helical structure was the key
that enabled Watson and Crick to learn how DNA is replicated. 
In the late 1950’s, Mathew Meselson and Franklin Stahl first described the
DNA molecule and how DNA replicates in a process called semiconservative
CHAPTER 7
Microbial Genetics
120

replication. DNA is replicated by taking one parent double-stranded DNA mol-
ecule, unzipping it and building two identical daughter molecules. Bases along
the two strands of double-helical DNA complement each other. One strand of the
pair acts as a template for the other.
DNA is replication requires complex cellular proteins that direct the sequence
of replication. Replication begins when the parent double-stranded DNA mole-
cule unwinds; then the two strands separate. The DNA polymerase enzyme uses
a strand as a template to make a new strand of DNA. The DNA polymerase
enzyme examines the new DNA and removes bases that do not match and then
continues DNA synthesis. 
The point at which the double-stranded DNA molecule unzips is called 
the replication fork (Fig. 7-1). The two new strands of DNA each have a base
CHAPTER 7
Microbial Genetics
121
Parental helix
C
G
A
T
G
C
T
A
T
A
G
C
A T
A
A
T
G
C
C
G
A
T
A
T
G
G
C
A
T
A
T
C G
C
T A
T
A
G
C
Parental
New
New
5′
3′
5′
5′
3′
3′
Parental
A
T
A
T
G
C
A
T
A
T
C G
C
T A
T
A
G
C
Replication fork
Replicas
G
Fig. 7-1.
In semiconservative replication, new strands are synthesized
after the replication fork.

sequence complimentary to the original strand. Each double-stranded DNA
molecule contains one original and one new strand. In bacteria, each daughter
receives a chromosome that is identical to the parent’s chromosome. 
THE CHROMOSOME CONNECTION
Chromosomes are structures that contain DNA. DNA consists of two long chains
of repeating nucleotides that twist around each other, forming a double helix. A
nucleotide in a DNA chain consists of a nitrogenous base, a phosphate group,
and deoxyribose (pentose sugar). 
The two DNA chains are held together by hydrogen bonds between their nitro-
genous bases. There are two major types of nitrogenous bases. These are purines
and pyrimidines. There are two types of purine bases: adenine (A) and guanine(G).
There are also two types of pyrimidine bases: cytosine (C) and thymine (T). Purine
and pyrimidine bases are found in both strands of the double helix. 
Base pairs are arrangements of nitrogenous bases according to their hydrogen
bonding. Adenine pairs with thymine and cytosine pairs with guanine. Adenine is
said to be complementary to thymine and cytosine is said to be complementary
with guanine. This is known as complementary base pairing and is shown in
Table 7-1. 
Genetic information is encoded by the sequence of bases along a strand of
DNA. This information determines how a nucleotide sequence is translated into
an amino acid which is the basis of protein synthesis. The translation of genetic
information from genes to specific proteins occurs in cells.
CHAPTER 7
Microbial Genetics
122
Messenger
Double-Helical Strand 
RNA Base
DNA Molecule Base 
Adenine (A)
Thymine (T) 
Guanine (G)
Cytosine (C) 
Cytosine (C)
Guanine (G) 
Uricil (U)
Adenine (A) 
Table 7-1.
Complementary Messenger RNA
Bases and DNA Bases

Protein Synthesis
Protein synthesis is the making of a protein and requires ribonucleic acid
(RNA), which is synthesized from nucleotides that contain the bases A, C, G,
and U (uracil). There are three types of RNA. These are:
• Ribosomal RNA (rRNA), which is the enzymatic part of ribosomes.
• Transfer RNA (tRNA), which is needed to transport amino acids to the
ribosomes in order to synthesize protein. 
• Messenger RNA (mRNA), which carries the genetic information from
DNA into the cytoplasm to ribosomes where the proteins are made. 
An enzyme called RNA polymerase is required to make (synthesize) rRNA,
tRNA, and mRNA.
Protein synthesis begins with the transcription process, in which DNA
sequences are replicated producing mRNA. The mRNA carries genetic informa-
tion from the DNA to ribosomes. Ribosomes are organelles and the site of pro-
tein synthesis. 
Nucleotides contained in DNA are duplicated by enzymes before cell division,
enabling genetic information to be carried between cells and from one generation
to the next. This is referred to as gene expression and happens in RNA only. 
During transcription, the bases A, C, G, and uracil (U) pair with bases of the
DNA strand that is being transcribed. The G base in the DNA template pairs with
the C base in the mRNA. The C base in the DNA template pairs with the G base
in the mRNA. The T base in the DNA template pairs with an A in the mRNA.
An A base in the DNA template pairs with the U in the mRNA. This happens
because RNA contains a U base instead of a T base. 
Transcription begins when the RNA polymerase binds to DNA at the promo-
tor site. The DNA unwinds. One of the DNA strands, called a coding strand,
serves as a template for RNA synthesis. RNA is synthesized by pairing free
nucleotides of the RNA with nucleotide bases on the DNA template strand. The
RNA polymerase moves along the DNA as the new RNA strand grows. This
continues until the RNA polymerase reaches the terminator site on the DNA or
is physically stopped by a section of RNA transcript. The new single-stranded
mRNA and the RNA polymerase are released from the DNA.
Here is what’s happening: Information of the nucleic acid assembles a protein.
The mRNA strand consists of several sections, one being the reading frame. The
reading frame is made up of codons. These are AUG, AAA, and GGC. Each codon
contains information for a specific amino acid. The sequence of codons on the
RNA determines the sequence that amino acids are used to synthesize proteins. 
CHAPTER 7
Microbial Genetics
123

Once the transcription process is completed, information of the mRNA is
turned into protein in the translation process. The translation process is one 
in which genetic information encoded in mRNA is translated into a specific
sequence of amino acids that produce proteins. 
Appropriate amino acids are brought to the translation site in the ribosomes
and are assembled into a growing chain. It is here that tRNA recognizes specific
codons. Each tRNA molecule has an anticodon, which is a sequence of three
bases that is complementary to the bases on the codon. These bases are then
paired, and amino acids are brought to the chain. 
This process continues until a polypeptide is produced. The polypeptide is
removed from the ribosome for further processing. The polypeptide may be
stored in the Golgi body of a eukaryotic organism. The mRNA molecule degen-
erates and the nucleotides are returned to the nucleus. The tRNA molecule is
returned to the cytoplasm and combines with new molecules of amino acids. 
GENOTYPE AND PHENOTYPE: REALIZING 
YOUR POTENTIAL 
The genetic makeup of an organism is called a genotype and represents that
organism’s potential properties. Some properties may not have developed. Those
that do develop are called an organism’s phenotype. The phenotype represents
expressed properties, such as blue eyes and curly hair. 
A genotype is the organism’s DNA (a collection of genes). The phenotype is
a collection of proteins. The majority of the cell’s properties comes from the
structures and functional properties of these proteins.
Controlling Genes: You’re Under My Spell
The process of making proteins (remember, polypeptides become proteins either
after they are combined with other polypeptides or when they become biologi-
cally functional) begins with the copying of the genetic information found in
DNA, into a complimentary strand of RNA. This copying is called transcription.
Messenger RNA (mRNA) will carry the coded information or instructions for
assembling the polypeptides from DNA to the ribosomes of the cell’s endoplas-
mic reticulum where the polypeptides will be made. 
CHAPTER 7
Microbial Genetics
124

The actual building of polypeptides is called translation. Translation involves
the deciphering of nucleic acid information and converting that information into
a language that the proteins can understand.
THE OPERON MODEL
In 1961 Francois Jacob and Jacques Monod formulated the operon model that
described how transcription of mRNA is regulated. Transcription of mRNA is
regulated in two ways. These are repression and induction. 
Repression inhibits gene expression and decreases the synthesis of enzymes.
Proteins called repressors stop the ability of RNA polymerase to initiate tran-
scription from repressed genes. Induction activates transcription by producing
inducer, which is the chemical that induces transcription. 
Jacob and Monod identified genes in E. coli as structural genes, regulatory
genes, and control regions. Collectively these form a functional unit called the
operon. Certain carbohydrates can induce the presence of enzymes needed to
digest those carbohydrates. 
For example when lactose is present, E. coli synthesize enzymes needed to
breakdown lactose. Lactose is an inducer molecule. If lactose is absent, a regu-
lator gene produces a repressor protein that binds to a control region called the
operator site, preventing the structural genes from encoding the enzyme for lac-
tose digestion. Lactose binds to the repressor at the operator site when lactose is
present, freeing the operator site. The structural genes are released and produce
their lactose-digesting enzymes. 
Mutations: Not a Pretty Copy
A mutation is a permanent change in the DNA base sequence (Table 7-2). Some
mutations have no expressive effect while other mutations have an expressive
effect. When a gene mutates, the enzyme encoded by the gene can become less
active or inactive because the sequence of the enzyme amino acids may have
changed. The change can be harmful or fatal to the cell, or it can be beneficial—
especially if the mutation creates a new metabolic activity. 
The most common type of mutation is point mutation, which is also known
as base substitution mutation. Point mutation occurs when an unexpected base
is substituted for a normal base, causing alteration of the genetic code, which is
then replicated.
CHAPTER 7
Microbial Genetics
125

If the mutated gene is used for protein synthesis, the mRNA transcribed from
the gene carries the incorrect base for that position. The mRNA may insert an
incorrect amino acid in the protein. If this happens, the mutation is called a
missence mutation. 
Mutations that change or destroy the genetic code are called nonsense muta-
tions. If nucleotides are added or deleted from mRNA, the mutation is called a
frame shift mutation. 
A mutation occurring in the laboratory is called an induced mutation; muta-
tions occurring outside the laboratory are called spontaneous mutation. A spon-
taneous mutation occurs when a mutation-causing agent is present. 
Base substitution and frame shift mutations occur spontaneously. Agents in
the environment or those introduced by industrial processing can directly or
indirectly cause mutations. These agents are called mutagens. Any chemical 
or physical agent that reacts with DNA can potentially cause mutations. 
CHAPTER 7
Microbial Genetics
126
Type of Mutation
Description
Point mutation
Also known as base substitution, this is the most common
type of mutation and involves a single base pair in the
DNA molecule. In point mutation, a different base is sub-
stituted for the original base, causing the genetic code to 
be altered. The substituted base pair is used when DNA is
replicated.
Missence mutation
A mutation when a new amino acid is substituted in the
final protein by the messenger RNA during transcription.
Nonsense mutations
A mutation when a terminator codon in the messenger
RNA appears in the middle of a genetic message instead 
of at the end of the message, which causes premature
termination of transcription.
Frame shift mutation
Pairs of nucleotides are either added or removed from a
DNA molecule.
Loss-of-function mutation
This mutation causes a gene to malfunction.
Spontaneous mutation
Naturally occurring mutation that happens without the
presence of a mutation-causing agent.
Induced mutation
Induced in a laboratory.
Table 7-2. Types of Mutations

Certain mutations make microorganisms resistant to antibiotics or increase
their pathogenicity. There are many naturally occurring mutagens, such as radi-
ation from x-rays, gamma rays, and ultraviolet light. These rays break the cova-
lent bonds between certain bases of DNA-producing fragments. 
Ultraviolet light binds together adjacent thymines in a DNA strand, forming
thymine dimers that cannot function in protein synthesis. Unless repaired, these
dimers cause damage or death to cells due to improper transcription or replica-
tion of DNA. Some bacteria can repair damage caused by ultraviolet radiation
by employing light-repairing enzymes that separate the dimer into the original
two thymines. This process is called photoreactivation. 
MUTATION RATE
Mutations occur naturally and can be induced by mutation-causing agents in the
environment. However, not all cells experience mutation even if they are exposed
to mutation-causing agents. 
Scientists measure the impact that mutation has on an organism by determin-
ing the mutation rate. The mutation rate is the number of mutations per cell divi-
sion. For example, suppose you observe the growth of 100 cells that began from
a parent cell. If 90 of those cells replicate the parent cell and 10 cells are muta-
tions, than the mutation rate is 10 percent. 
Measuring the mutation rate is a way to compare the number of mutations
that occur naturally to the number of mutations that occur when a cell is exposed
to a potential mutation-causing agent. 
First, scientists measure the mutation rate that occurs naturally when a cell is
not exposed to a potential mutation-causing agent. Next, the mutation rate is cal-
culated when a cell is not exposed to a potential mutation-causing agent. The
results of these two observations are compared. If both mutation rates are rela-
tively the same, then the substance being tested is not a mutation-causing agent.
However, the substance is a mutation-causing agent if its mutation rate is appre-
ciably higher than the natural mutation rate. 
Quiz 
1. The point at which the double-stranded DNA molecule unwinds is called
(a) polymerase
(b) replication fork
(c) hydrogen bonding
(d) ribosomes
CHAPTER 7
Microbial Genetics
127

2. Protein synthesis begins with the
(a) transcription process
(b) translation process
(c) polypeptide process
(d) genotyping
3. Expressed properties such as whether you have blue eyes and curly hair
is called
(a) genotype
(b) exons
(c) introns
(d) phenotype
4. Which of the following is not a type of RNA?
(a) rRNA
(b) uRNA
(c) tRNA
(d) mRNA
5. What is RNA polymerase?
(a) An enzyme used in the synthesis of RNA
(b) An enzyme used in the synthesis of ribosomes
(c) An enzyme used in the synthesis of protein
(d) An enzyme used in the synthesis of pre-DNA
6. What is the promotor site?
(a) The site where RNA polymerase binds to DNA
(b) The site where RNA polymerase binds to protein
(c) The site where RNA polymerase binds to free nucleotides
(d) The site where RNA polymerase binds to AAA
7. The mRNA language consists of three nucleotides called
(a) amino acid
(b) codons
(c) introns
(d) exons
8. What do repressors do?
(a) They activate transcriptions.
(b) They increase synthesis.
CHAPTER 7
Microbial Genetics
128

(c) They increase gene expression.
(d) They stop the initiation of transcription.
9. An operon consists of structural genes, regulatory genes, and control
genes.
(a) True
(b) False
10. Spontaneous mutation occurs as a result of laboratory intervention in
DNA replication.
(a) True
(b) False
CHAPTER 7
Microbial Genetics
129

This page intentionally left blank.

8
CHAPTER
131
Recombinant 
DNA Technology
Our genes are a strong determining factor of who we are and what we are going
to be because genes program our bodies to express specific characteristics. Some
of those characteristics enable us to carry out basic life functions, such as con-
verting food to energy, while others make us stand out in a crowd, such as being
a seven-foot professional basketball player. The same concept holds true with
microorganisms. A microorganism’s genes determine characteristics expressed
by that microorganism. 
Genetic information is encoded in our DNA by the linkage of nucleic acids in
a specific sequence, which you learned about in the previous chapter. Think of
what would happen if you could change the sequence. You could reprogram
genes to express desirable characteristics and to repress undesirable characteris-
tics, such as those that cause diseases. 
Reordering genetic information is called genetic engineering. In this chapter,
you’ll learn about genetic engineering and how to use recombinant DNA tech-
nology to alter the genetic program of an organism. 
Copyright © 2005 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

Genetic Engineering: Designer Genes
The modification of an organism’s genetic information by changing its nucleic
acid genome is called genetic engineering and is accomplished by methods
known as recombinant DNA technology. Recombinant DNA technology opens
up totally new areas in research and applied biology and is an important part of
biotechnology, a field that is increasingly growing. Biotechnology is the term
used for processes in which organisms are manipulated at the genetic level to
form products for medicine, agriculture, and industry.
Recombinant DNA is DNA with a new sequence formed by joining fragments
from different sources. One of the first breakthroughs leading to recombinant
DNA, or rDNA, technology was the discovery of microbial enzymes that make
cuts into the double-stranded DNA. These were discovered by Werner Arber,
Hamilton Smith, and Dan Nathans in the late 1960s. These enzymes recognize
and cleave specific sequences of four to eight base pairs and are known as restric-
tion enzymes. These enzymes recognize specific sequences in DNA and then cut
the DNA to produce fragments called restriction fragments. The enzymes cut the
bonds of the DNA backbone at a point along the exterior of the DNA strands.
There are three types of restriction enzymes. Types I and III cleave DNA away
from recognition sites. Type II restriction endonucleases cleave DNA at specific
recognition sites. The type II enzymes can be used to prepare DNA fragments con-
taining specific genes or portions of genes. A gene can be defined as a segment of
DNA (a segment is a sequence of nucleotides) that codes for a functional product.
ECORI cleaves the DNA between guanine (G) and adenine (A) in the 
base sequence GAATTC. In the double-stranded condition, the base sequence
GAATTC will base pair with a sequence, which runs in the opposite direction.
ECORI cleaves both DNA strands between the G and the A. When the two DNA
fragments separate they contain single-stranded complementary ends called
sticky ends.
Each restriction enzyme name begins with the first three letters of the bac-
terium that produces it. This is illustrated in Table 8-1.
In 1972, David Jackson, Robert Symons, and Paul Berg generated recombi-
nant DNA molecules. They allowed the sticky ends of the fragments to base pair
with each other and covalently joined the fragments with the enzyme DNA lig-
ase. The enzyme DNA ligase links the two sticky ends of the DNA molecules at
the point of union. In 1973, Stanley Cohen and Herbert Boyer constructed the
first recombinant plasmid capable of being replicated within a bacterial host. A
plasmid is a circular DNA molecule that a bacterium can replicate without a
chromosome.
CHAPTER 8
Recombinant DNA Technology
132

In 1975, Edwin M. Southern developed procedures for detecting specific DNA
fragments so that a particular gene could be isolated from a complex DNA mix-
ture. This technique is called the Southern blotting technique. DNA fragments are
separated by size with agarose gel electrophoresis. Gel electrophoresis takes
advantage of the chemical and physical properties of DNA to separate the frag-
ments. The phosphate groups in the backbone of DNA are negatively charged.
This makes the DNA molecules attracted to anything that is positively charged.
In gel electrophoresis the DNA molecules are placed in an electric field so that
they migrate towards the positive charge.
The DNA is placed in agarose, a semi solid gelatin, and placed in a tank of
buffer. When electrical current is applied, the DNA molecules migrate through
the agarose gel, separate, and travel toward the positive poles of the electric
fields. The entire DNA fragments migrates through the gel. The larger DNA frag-
ments have a harder time moving than the smaller ones, so the small fragments
travel farther through the gel.
ARTIFICIAL DNA: PUTTING TOGETHER THE PIECES
Oligonucleotides, from the Greek word oligo meaning “few,” are short pieces 
of DNA or RNA that are 2 to 30 nucleotides long. The ability to synthesize DNA
oligonucleotides of a known sequence is incredibly important and useful. A
DNA probe is used to analyze fragments of DNA. A DNA probe is a single-
stranded fragment of DNA that recognizes and binds to a complementary sec-
tion of DNA in a mixture of DNA molecules. 
DNA probes can be synthesized and DNA fragments can be prepared for use
in molecular techniques such as polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Polymerase
chain reaction is a technique that was developed by Kary Mullis in 1985. It pro-
CHAPTER 8
Recombinant DNA Technology
133
Microbial 
Recognition
Cleavage
Enzyme
Source
Sequence
Sites (↓,↑)
End Product
EcoRI
Escherichia coli
GAATTC
G↓AATTC
G
AATTC
CTTAAG
CTTAA↑G
CTTAA
G
Table 8-1.
Recombinant DNA Is DNA with a New Sequence Formed by Joining Recognition
Sequence Fragments from Different Sources

duces large quantities of a DNA fragment without needing a living cell. Starting
with one small piece of DNA, PCR can make billions of copies in a few hours.
These large quantities of DNA can be easily analyzed.
PCR and DNA probes have been of great value to the areas of molecular biol-
ogy, medicine, and biotechnology. Using these tools, scientists can detect the
DNA associated with HIV (the virus that causes AIDS), Lyme disease, chlamy-
dia, tuberculosis, hepatitis, HPV (human papilloma virus), cystic fibrosis, mus-
cular distrophy, and Huntington’s disease.
Gene Therapy: Makes You Feel Better
Gene therapy is a recombinant DNA process, in which cells are taken from the
patient, altered by adding genes, and returned to the patient. A type of genetic
surgery called somatic gene therapy may be possible. Cells of a person with a
genetic disease could be removed, cultured, and transformed with cloned DNA
containing a normal copy of the defective gene. They could be reintroduced into
the individual. If these cells become established, the expression of the normal
genes may be able to cure the patient.
In the early 1990s, gene therapy of this type was used to correct a deficiency
of the enzyme adenosine deaminase (ADA). An immune deficiency disease
patient lacking the enzyme adenosine deaminase, an enzyme that destroys toxic
metabolic byproducts, had been treated. Some of the patient’s lymphocytes were
removed. Lymphocytes are a type of white blood cell that fights infection. The
lymphocytes were given the adenosine deaminase gene with the use of a modi-
fied retrovirus—which served as a vector—and placed back into the patient’s
body. Once established in the body, the cells with altered genes began to make
the enzyme adenosine deaminase (ADA) and alleviated the deficiency.
DNA Fingerprinting: Gotcha
DNA fingerprinting is an area of molecular biology that involves analyzing
genetic material. It involves the use of restriction enzymes, which cut DNA mol-
ecules into pieces. When DNA samples obtained from different individuals are
cut with the same restriction enzyme, the number and size of restriction frag-
ments produced may be different. This difference provides the basis for DNA
CHAPTER 8
Recombinant DNA Technology
134

fingerprinting. The use of DNA fingerprinting depends upon the presence of
repeating base sequences. These sequences are called restriction fragment length
polymorphosis, or the RFLP pattern, which is unique for every individual. 
This is a sort of molecular signature or fingerprint. In order to perform DNA
fingerprinting, DNA must be taken from an individual. Samples can be taken
from hair, blood, skin, cheek cells, or other tissue. The DNA is taken from the
cells and is broken down with enzymes. The fragments are separated with elec-
trophoresis. The DNA fragments are then analyzed for RFLPs using DNA
probes. An evaluation enables crime lab scientists (forensic pathologists) to
compare a person’s DNA with the DNA taken from a scene of a crime. This tech-
nique has a 99 percent degree of certainty that a suspect was at a crime scene.
INDUSTRIAL APPLICATION: SHOW ME THE MONEY
Industrial applications of recombinant DNA technology include manufacturing
protein products by the use of bacteria, fungi, and cultured mammal cells. The
pharmaceutical industry is producing several medically important polypeptides
using biotechnology. An example is bacteria that metabolize petroleum and
other toxic materials. These bacteria are constructed by assembling catabolic
genes on a single plasmid and then transforming the appropriate organism.
Another example is vaccines. The hepatitis B vaccine is made up of viral protein
manufactured by yeast cells, which have been recombined with viral particles.
AGRICULTURAL APPLICATIONS: CROPS AND COWS
Recombinant DNA and biotechnology have been used to increase plant growth
by increasing the efficiency of the plant’s ability to fix nitrogen. Scientists take
genes for nitrogen fixation from bacteria and place the genes into plant cells.
Because of this, plants can obtain nitrogen directly from the atmosphere. The
plants can produce their own proteins without the need for bacteria. Another way
to insert genes into plants is with a recombinant tumor-inducing plasmid Ti plas-
mid. This is obtained from the bacterium Agrobacterium tumefaciens. This bac-
teria invades plant cells and its plasmids insert chromosomes that carry the genes
for tumor induction. An example of recombinant DNA with livestock is the
recombinant bovine growth hormone that has been used to increase milk pro-
duction in cows by 10 percent. 
U.S. farmers grow substantial amounts of genetically modified crops. About
one-third of the corn and one-half of the soybean and cotton crops are genetically
CHAPTER 8
Recombinant DNA Technology
135

modified. Cotton and corn have become resistant to herbicides and insects. Soy-
beans have herbicide resistance and lower saturated fat content. Having herbicidal-
resistant plants is important because many crop plants suffer stress when treated
with herbicides. Resistant crops are not stressed by the chemicals that are used
to control weeds. 
Recombinant DNA Technology and Society: 
Too Much of a Good Thing
Genetically altering an organism raises scientific and philosophical questions.
Recombinant DNA technology has had a positive impact on society, although
there may be associated dangers with rDNA.
There have been concerns raised by the scientific community that genetically
engineered microorganisms carrying dangerous genes might be released into the
environment and cause widespread infection. Due to these worries, the federal
government has established guidelines to regulate and limit the locations and
types of experiments that are potentially dangerous.
Biomedical rDNA research has been regulated by the Recombinant DNA
Advisory Committee (RAC) of the Natural Institutes of Health. The Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) has principal responsibility in overseeing gene ther-
apy research. The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and state govern-
ments have jurisdiction over field experiments in agriculture. 
One of the biggest efforts in biotechnology has been the human genome proj-
ect, which began in 1990 and formally ended in 2001. The goal of this project
has been to determine the sequences of all human chromosomes. Advances like
this in biotechnology will make genetic screening incredibly effective.
Physicians will one day be capable of detecting genetic flaws in DNA long
before the disease becomes manifested in a patient. 
Another area of controversy is agriculture. Some scientists state that the re-
lease of recombinant organisms without risk assessment may disrupt the ecosys-
tem. Viral nucleic acids, inserted into plants to make them resistant to viruses,
might combine with the genome of an invading virus to make the virus even
stronger. Genetically modified food might even trigger an allergic response in
people or animals that consume them. As of this writing, obvious health or eco-
logical events have not been observed. However, due to the consensus of the
public, many food producers have stopped using genetically modified crops.
CHAPTER 8
Recombinant DNA Technology
136

Quiz 
1. The nucleotide genome consists of the sequence of nucleic acid that
encodes genetic information on DNA.
(a) True
(b) False
2. What enables scientists to take nucleotide fragments from other DNA
and reassemble fragments into a new nucleotide sequence?
(a) Enzyme DNA technology
(b) Enzyme technology
(c) Recombinant DNA technology
(d) Recombinant enzyme technology
3. What is used to cut DNA double-helix strand DNA along the exterior of
the strand?
(a) Overhang 
(b) Restriction enzymes
(c) Restriction fragment
(d) Recognition sequence
4. What is the particular nucleotide sequence of a double-helical segment
called?
(a) Overhang 
(b) Restriction enzymes
(c) Restriction fragment
(d) Recognition sequence
5. What is the end of the cut of a double-helical segment called?
(a) Overhang 
(b) Restriction enzymes
(c) Restriction fragment
(d) Recognition sequence
6. What results when two incisions are made in a double-helical segment?
(a) Overhang 
(b) Restriction enzymes
(c) Restriction fragment
(d) Recognition sequence
CHAPTER 8
Recombinant DNA Technology
137

7. The four nucleotides are adenine (A), cytosine (C), guanine (G) and
thymine (T).
(a) True 
(b) False
8. What is another name for a restriction enzyme?
(a) Vector
(b) Plasmid
(c) Restriction endonucleases
(d) Agarose gel
9. The Southern blotting technique is used for detecting specific restriction
fragments.
(a) True
(b) False
10. Scientists synthesize fragments of DNA and RNA using a process known
as polymerase chain reaction (PCR).
(a) True
(b) False
CHAPTER 8
Recombinant DNA Technology
138

9
CHAPTER
139
Classification 
of Microorganisms
It is uncanny how a stranger can be at a large family gathering and be able to pick
out who belongs to Mom’s family and who belongs to Dad’s family. Although
no two people at the gathering look the same, there are enough similarities among
some for the unbiased observer to deduce a relationship. 
Scientists group together microorganisms much the same way as a stranger
can group family members together. That is, scientists carefully observe micro-
organisms and classify them into groups based on similar characteristics. 
In this chapter, you’ll learn how to use scientific techniques to organize microor-
ganisms into standard classifications based on a microorganism’s characteristics. 
Taxonomy: Nothing to Do with the IRS
Organisms have traits that are similar to and different from other organisms.
Scientists organize organisms into groups by developing a taxonomy. Taxonomy
is the science of organisms based on a presumed natural relationship. 
Copyright © 2005 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

Scientists observe each organism, noting its characteristics. Organisms that
have similar characteristics are presumed to have a natural relationship and
therefore are placed in the same group. Classification tries to show this natural
relationship.
Taxonomy has three components:
• Classification. The arrangement of organisms into groups based on similar
characteristics, evolutionary similarity or common ancestry. These groups
are also called taxa. 
• Nomenclature. The name given to each organism. Each name must be
unique and should depict the dominant characteristic of the organism. 
• Identification. The process of observing and classifying organisms into a
standard group that is recognized throughout the biological community. 
Taxonomy is a subset of systemics. Systemics is the study of organisms in order
to place organisms having similar characteristics into the same group. Using
techniques from other sciences such as biochemistry, ecology, epidemiology,
molecular biology, morphology, and physiology, biologists are able to identify
characteristics of a organism. 
BENEFITS OF TAXONOMY
Taxonomy organizes large amounts of information about organisms whose mem-
bers of a particular group share many characteristics. Taxonomy lets scientists
make predictions and design a hypothesis for future research on the knowledge
of similar organisms. A hypothesis is a possible explanation for an observation
that needs experimentation and testing. 
If a relative of an organism has the same properties, the organism may also have
the same characteristics. Taxonomy puts microorganisms into groups with precise
names, enabling microbiologists to communicate with each other in an efficient man-
ner. Taxonomy is indispensable for the accurate identification of microorganisms.
For example, once a microbiologist or epidemiologist identifies a pathogen that
infects a patient, physicians know the proper treatment that will cure the patient. 
Nomenclature of Taxonomy: Name Calling 
In the mid-1700s, Swedish botanist Carl Linnaeus was one of the first scientists
to develop a taxonomy for living organisms. It is for this reason that he is known
CHAPTER 9
Classification of Microorganisms
140

as the father of taxonomy. Linnaeus’ taxonomy grouped living things into two
kingdoms: plants and animals.  
By the 1900s, scientists had discovered microorganisms that had characteris-
tics that were dramatically different than those of plants and animals. Therefore,
Linnaeus’ taxonomy needed to be enhanced to encompass microorganisms. 
In 1969 Robert H. Whitteker, working at Cornell University, proposed a new
taxonomy that consisted of five kingdoms (see Fig. 9-1). These were monera,
protista, plantae (plants), fungi, and animalia (animals). Monera are organisms
that lack a nucleus and membrane-bounded organelles, such as bacteria. Protista
are organisms that have either a single cell or no distinct tissues and organs, such
as protozoa. This group includes unicellular eukaryotes and algae. Fungi are
organisms that use absorption to acquire food. These include multicellular fungi
and single-cell yeast. Animalia and plantae include only multicellular organisms. 
Scientists widely accepted Whitteker’s taxonomy until 1977 when Carl Woese,
in collaboration with Ralph S. Wolfe at the University of Illinois, proposed a
CHAPTER 9
Classification of Microorganisms
141
Fig. 9-1.
Whitteker’s five-kingdom taxonomy.
Animalia
Vertebrates
Anthropods
Plantae
Green Algae
Fungi
Molds
Yeast
Monera
Archaea
Mycoplasmas
Gram Positive Bacteria
Gram Negative Bacteria
Protista
Red Algae
Water Molds
Amoebas

new six-kingdom taxonomy. This came about with the discovery of archaea,
which are prokaryotes that lives in oxygen-deprived environments. 
Before Woese’s six-kingdom taxonomy, scientists grouped organisms into
eukaryotes animals, plants, fungi, and one-cell microorganisms (paramecia)—
and prokaryotes (microscopic organisms that are not eukaryotes).
Woese’s six-kingdom taxonomy consists of:
• Eubacteria (has rigid cell wall)
• Archaebacteria (anaerobes that live in swamps, marshes, and in the intes-
tines of mammals) 
• Protista (unicellular eukaryotes and algae)
• Fungi (multicellular forms and single-cell yeasts)
• Plantae
• Animalia
Woese determined that archaebacteria and eubacteria are two groups by study-
ing the rRNA sequences in prokaryotic cells. 
Woese used three major criteria to define his six kingdoms. These are:
• Cell type. Eukaryotic cells (cells having a distinct nucleus) and prokaryotic
cell (cells not having a distinct nucleus)
• Level of organization. Organisms that live in a colony or alone and one-cell
organisms and multicell organisms. 
• Nutrition. Ingestion (animal), absorption (fungi), or photosynthesis (plants). 
In the 1990s Woese studied rRNA sequences in prokaryotic cells (archae-
bacteria and eubacteria) proving that these organisms should be divided into two
distinct groups. Today organisms are grouped into three categories called domains
that are represented as bacteria, archaea, and eukaryotes.
The domains are placed above the phylum and kingdom levels. The term
archaebacteria (meaning from the Greek word archaio “ancient”) refers to the
ancient origin of this group of bacteria that appears to have diverged from
eubacteria. The archaea and bacteria came from the development of eukaryotic
organisms. 
The evolutionary relationship among the three domains is:
•
Domain Bacteria (eubacteria)
• Domain Archaea (archaebacteria)
• Domain Eulcarya (eukaryotes)
CHAPTER 9
Classification of Microorganisms
142

Different classifications of organisms are:
• Bacteria
• Eubacteria
• Archaea
• Archaebacteria
• Eukarya
• Protista
• Fungi
• Plantae
• Animalia
The three domains are archaea, bacteria, and eukarya (see Fig. 9-2). 
• Archaea lack muramic acid in the cell walls.
CHAPTER 9
Classification of Microorganisms
143
Fig. 9-2.
Three-domain taxonomy.
Eubacteria
Gram-positive bacteria
Mycoplasmas
Gram-negative bacteria
Eucarya
Animals
Plants
Fungi
Protists
Archaea
Halophiles
Methanogens
Thermo-acidophiles

• Bacteria have a cell wall composed of peptidoglycan and muramic acid.
Bacteria also have membrane lipids with ester-linked, straight-chained
fatty acids that resemble eukaryotic membrane lipids. Most prokaryotes
are bacteria. Bacteria also have plasmids, which are small, double-stranded
DNA molecules that are extrachromosomal.
• Eukarya are of the domain eukarya and have a defined nucleus and mem-
brane bound organelles. 
TAXONOMIC RANK AND FILE
A taxonomy has an overlapping hierarchy that forms levels of rank or category
similar to an organization chart. Each rank contains microorganisms that have sim-
ilar characteristics. A rank can also have other ranks that contain microorganisms. 
Microorganisms that belong to a lower rank have characteristics that are asso-
ciated with a higher rank to which the lower rank belongs. However, character-
istics of microorganisms of a lower rank are not found in microorganisms that
belong to the same higher rank as the lower-rank microorganism. 
Microbiologists use a microbial taxonomy (Fig. 9-3), which is different from
what biologists, who work with larger organisms, use. Microbial taxonomy is
commonly called prokaryotic taxonomy. The widely accepted prokaryotic tax-
onomy is Bergey’s Manual of Systematic Bacteriology, first published in 1923 by
the American Society for Microbiology. David Bergey was chairperson of the
editorial board.
In the taxonomy of prokaryotes, the most commonly used rank (in order from
most general to most specific) is:
Domain
Kingdom
Phyla
Class
Order
Family
Genus
Species
The basic taxonomic group in microbial taxonomy is the species. Taxonomists
working with higher organisms define their species differently than microbiolo-
gists. Prokaryotic species are characterized by differences in their phenotype and
CHAPTER 9
Classification of Microorganisms
144

145
Fig. 9-3.
Microbiologists use a microbial taxonomy.
α-Proteobacteria
β-Proteobacteria
γ-Proteobacteria
Proteobacteria
Bacteria
Class
Order
Phylum
Domain
δ-Proteobacteria
ε-Proteobacteria
Chromatiales
Thiotrichales
Genus
Enterobacter
Escherichia
Klebsiella
Proteus
Salmonella
Serratia
Shigella
Yersinia
Legionellales
Pseudomonadales
Vibrionales
Pasteurellales
Enterobacteriales
Family
Enterobacteriaceae
Species
S. boydii
S. dysenteriae
S. flexneri
S. sonnei

genotype. Phenotype is the collection of visible characteristics and the behavior
of a microorganism. Genotype is the genetic make up of a microorganism. 
The prokaryotic species are collections of strains that share many properties
and differ dramatically from other groups or strains. A strain is a group of
microorganisms that share characteristics that are different from microorganisms
in other strains. Each microorganism within a strain is considered to have
descended from the same microorganism. 
For example, Biovars is a species that contains strains characterized by differ-
ences in its biochemistry and physiology. Morphovars is also a species whose
strains differ morphologically and structurally. Serovars is another species that has
strains that are characterized by distinct antigenic properties (substances that stim-
ulate the production of antibodies). 
Microbiologists use the genus of the taxonomy to name microorganisms,
which you learned in Chapter 1. Microorganisms are given a two-part name. The
first part is the Latin name for the genus. The second part is the epithet. Together
these parts uniquely identify the microorganism. The first part of the name is
always capitalized and the second part of the name is always lowercase. Both
parts are italicized. 
For example, Escherichia coli is a bacterium that is a member of the Escherichia
genus and has the epithet coli. Sometimes the name is abbreviated such as 
E. coli. However, the abbreviation maintains the same style as the full name
(uppercase, lowercase, italic). 
Classification: All Natural 
A taxonomy is based on scientists’ ability to characterize organisms into a clas-
sification system. The most widely used classification system is called the natu-
ral classification. The natural classification requires that an organism be grouped
with organisms that have the same characteristics. 
In the mid-eighteenth century, Linnaeus developed the first natural classifi-
cation using anatomical characteristics of organisms. Other natural classifica-
tions use classical characteristics to group organisms. These characteristics are:
• Morphological. Morphological characteristics classify organisms by their
structure, which normally remain the same in a changing environment and
are good indications of phylogentic relatedness. 
• Ecological. Ecological characteristics classify organisms by the environ-
ment in which they live. For example, some microorganisms live in vari-
CHAPTER 9
Classification of Microorganisms
146

ous parts of the human intestines and others live in marine environments.
Ecological characteristics include the ability to cause disease, temperature,
pH, and oxygen requirements of an organisms, as well as an organism’s
life cycle.
• Genetic. Genetic characteristics classify organisms by the way in which
they reproduce and exchange chromosomes. For example, eukaryotic organ-
isms reproduce sexually by conjugation where two cells come together
and exchange genetic material. Prokaryotic organisms do not reproduce
sexually and instead use transformation to reproduce. Transformation
occurs between strains of prokaryotes if their genomes are dissimilar but
rarely between genera. 
In the early 1990s, T. Cavalier-Smith developed the two-empire and eight-
kingdom taxonomy based on phentic and phylogenetic characteristics. Phentic
measures the physical characteristics of an organism using a process called
numerical taxonomy. Numerical taxonomy is a phentic classification based on
physical measurements of an organism. Phylogenetic measures the evolutionary
relationship among organisms.
The two empires are bacteria and eukaryota. The bacteria domain contains
two kingdoms. These are eubacteria and archaeobacteria. The eukaryota empire
contains six kingdoms as shown in Table 9-1. 
CHAPTER 9
Classification of Microorganisms
147
Empire
Kingdom
Bacteria
Eubacteria—Large group of bacteria that have
rigid cell walls.
Archaeobacteria—nonrigid cell walls.
Eukaryota
Archezoa—Primitive one-cell eukaryotes.
Chromista—Photosynthetic organisms that
have chloroplasts within the lumen of the
rough endoplasmic reticulum.
Plantae—Photosynthetic organisms that have
chloroplasts in the cytoplasmic matrix.
Fungi—Absorb nutrients.
Animalia—Ingest nutrients.
Protozoa—Single-cell organism.
Table 9-1.
Cavalier-Smith Two-Empire and Eight-Kingdom Taxonomy

Quiz
1. Taxonomy is the classification of organisms based on a presumed natu-
ral relationship.
(a) True
(b) False
2. The arrangement of organisms into groups based on similar characteris-
tics is called
(a) nomenclature
(b) identification
(c) classification
(d) systemics
3. The name given to each group of organism is called
(a) nomenclature
(b) identification
(c) classification
(d) systemics
4. The process of observing and classifying organisms into a standard group
is called
(a) nomenclature
(b) identification
(c) classification
(d) systemics
5. The study of organisms in order to place organisms into groups is called
(a) nomenclature
(b) identification
(c) classification
(d) systemics
6. An animal is an organism that ingests food.
(a) True
(b) False
7. What acquires nutrients through absorption?
(a) Animals
(b) Plants
CHAPTER 9
Classification of Microorganisms
148

(c) Fungi
(d) Humans
8. What acquires nutrients through photosynthesis?
(a) Animals
(b) Plants
(c) Fungi
(d) Humans
9. Bacteria have a cell wall composed of peptidoglycan and muramic acid.
(a) True
(b) False
10. A genus consists of one or more lower ranks called species.
(a) True
(b) False
CHAPTER 9
Classification of Microorganisms
149

This page intentionally left blank.

10
CHAPTER
151
The Prokaryotes: 
Domains Archaea 
and Bacteria 
Mention the term bacteria and you probably think back to a time when you had
a bacterial infection. Some bacteria do cause disease, but other bacteria are ben-
eficial and live within our bodies, aiding in the digestion of food.
There are many different kinds of bacteria, all of which are prokaryotes.
Bacteria are divided into four divisions called phyla based on characteristics
of their cell wall. Each division is subdivided into sections according to other
characteristics, such as oxygen requirements, motility, shape, and Gram-stain
reaction. Each section is named based on these characteristics. Sections are fur-
ther subdivided into genera.
In this chapter, you’ll learn about major types of bacteria and their charac-
teristics.
Copyright © 2005 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

Archaea
Archaea can exist in very hot and very cold environments, making them resilient
microorganisms that can survive attacks that destroy other bacteria. For example,
archaea can survive and grow in an oxygen-free environment (anaerobic) and in
a high-salt (hypersaline) environment. 
There are three ways microbiologists identify archaea. Archaea:
• Have a unique sequence of rRNA.
• Have cell walls that lack peptidoglycan. The cell wall of most bacteria con-
tains peptidoglycan.
• Have a membrane lipid that has a branched chain of hydrocarbons con-
nected to glycerol ester links. The membrane lipid of most bacteria has
glycerol connected to fatty acids by ester bonds. 
Unfortunately, two of the more common techniques used to identify bacteria
are not very useful in identifying archaea. You’ll recall from Chapter 4 that
microbiologists identify bacteria by using the Gram stain. A bacterium is 
either gram-positive or gram-negative. However, archaea could be gram-positive
or gram-negative, which makes the Gram stain test useless when trying to iden-
tify archaea. 
The shape of a bacterium is another common way microbiologists identify bac-
teria. Many bacteria have a distinctive appearance. However, archaea are pleo-
morphic, which means they can have various shapes. Sometimes archaea are spiracle,
spiral, lobed, plate-shaped, or irregularly shaped.
Archaea also have various types of metabolism. Some archaea are organ-
otrophs while others are autotrophs. Archaea also break down (catabolize) glu-
cose for energy in various ways. It is these variations that enable archaea to
survive in environments that are fatal to other bacteria. 
THE ARCHAEA CLAN
Archaea are not bacteria and can be organized into subgroups. Microbiologists
use one of two subgroup classifications for archaea. One classification method
divides archaea into five subgroups. These are:
• Methanogenic archaea. A single-celled archaea that produces methane
and carbon dioxide (CO2) through the fermentation of simple organic car-
bon compounds or the oxidation of H2 without oxygen to produce CO2.
CHAPTER 10
The Prokaryotes
152

• Sulfate reducers. Archaea that function in the presence of air.
• Extreme halophiles. Archaea that live in an extremely salty environment.
• Cell wall–less archaea. Archaea that do not have a cell wall. 
• Extremely thermophilic S-metabolizers. Archaea that need sulfur for growth.
The other method used to organize archaea into subgroups is used in Bergey’s
Manual of Systematic Bacteriology that you learned about in Chapter 9; it con-
sists of two branches (phyla). These are: 
• Phylum crenarchaeota. Archaea that are within the phylum crenarchaeota
branch are anaerobes (they live in the absence of oxygen) and grow in a sul-
fur-enriched soil or water environment that is at a temperature between 88
and 100 degrees Fahrenheit and has a pH between 0 and 5.5. Extremely
thermophilic S-metabolizers are within the phylum crenarchaeota subgroup.
• Phylum euryarchaeota. The phylum euryarchaeota branch consists of the
following five major groups: 
• Methogenic archaea. Methogenic archaea, the largest group of phylum
euryarchaeota, are anaerobic archaea that synthesize organic compounds
in a process called methanogenesis, which produces methane. They also
use inorganic sources (autotrophic) such as H2 and CO2 for growth.
Methogenic archaea thrive in swamps, hot springs, and fresh water as
well as in marshes. They digest sludge and transform undigested food, in
animal intestines and in the rumen of a ruminant, into methane. A rumi-
nant is a herbivoir that has a stomachs which is divided into four com-
partments. The rumen is the expanded upper compartment of the
stomach that contains regurgitated and partially digested food called a
cud. Methogenic archaea transform regurgitated and partially digested
food into methane (CH4), which is a clean-burning fuel. For example, a
cow can belch up to 400 liters of methane a day. Sewage treatment plants
also use methogenic archaea to transform organic waste into methane.
Although methane is a source of energy, it is also a cause for the green-
house effect. Methogenic archaea are further organized into five orders.
These are: methanobacterioles, methanococcales, methanomicrobiales,
methanosareinales, and methanopyrales. 
• Extreme halophiles. Extreme halophiles, also known as halobacteria,
absorb nutrients from dead organic matter absorb nutrients in the presents
of oxygen (aerobic chemoheterotrophs). They require proteins, amino
acids, and other nutrients for growth in a high concentration of sodium
chloride. Extreme halophiles can be motile or nonmotile and are found
CHAPTER 10
The Prokaryotes
153

in salt lakes and in salted fish and turn lakes and fish red when there is
an abundance of Extreme halophiles.
• Halobacterium salinarium. Halobacterium salinarium is an archaea that
acquires energy through photosynthesis. However, it is able to do so with-
out the need of chlorophyll or bacteriochlorophyll. Halobacterium sali-
narium synthesizes the bacteriorhodopsin protein,which shows as a deep
purple color under high-intensity lighting in a low-oxygen environment.
• Thermophilic archaeon. Thermophilic archaeons are known as thermo-
plasma and grow in hot (55 to 59 degrees Celsius), acidic (pH of 
1 to 2) refuse piles of coalmines that contain iron pyrite. These refuse
piles become hot and acidic as chemolithotropic bacteria oxidize iron
pyrite into sulfuric acid. Thermophilic archaeons lack a cell wall.
• Sulfate-reducing archaea. Sulfate-reducing archaea are known as
archaeoglobi and extract electrons from various donors to reduce sulfur
to sulfide in an environment that is approximately 83 degrees Celsius
such as near marine hydrothermal vents (underwater hot springs).
Sulfate-reducing archaea are gram-negative and are shaped as irregular
spheres (coccoid cells). 
Aerobic/Microaerophilic, Motile, Helical/Vibroid, 
Gram-Negative Bacteria
Another kind of prokaryote is the aerobic/microaerophilic, motile, helical/vibroid,
gram-negative bacterium. This is a mouthful to say, but the name describes char-
acteristics of this group of prokaryote bacteria. 
Aerobic/microaerophilic means bacteria within this group require small amounts
of oxygen to grow. Motile implies that the bacterium is self-propelled, using fla-
gella at one or both poles to move in a corkscrew motion. Helical/vibroid indicates
that the bacterium takes the shape of a spiral (helical) or as a curved rod (vibroid).
Gram-negative means that when the bacterium is identified using the Gram stain,
the bacterium loses the violet stain when rinsed and appears red or pink. 
Aerobic/microaerophilic, motile, helical/vibroid, gram-negative bacteria thrive
in soil and are found on roots of plants such as the Azospirillum, which improves
a plant’s nutrient uptake. Bacteria within this group are also found in both fresh
and stagnant water. 
Some aerobic/microaerophilic, motile, helical/vibroid, gram-negative bacte-
ria cause diseases (pathogenic) such as Campylobacter fetus and Campylobacter
CHAPTER 10
The Prokaryotes
154

jejuni. Campylobacter fetus causes spontaneous abortion in domestic animals.
Campylobacter jejuni causes inflammation of the digestive tract (enteritis) result-
ing in food-borne intestinal diseases. Another common aerobic/microaerophilic,
motile, helical/vibroid, gram-negative bacterium that is pathogenic is Helicobacter
pylori. Helicobacter pylori cause gastric ulcers in humans. 
Gram-Negative Aerobic Rods and Cocci
Bacteria that are members of the gram-negative aerobic rods and cocci group
include many bacteria that cause disease in humans and bacteria that are impor-
tant to industry and the environment. There are 11 bacteria in this group:
• Pseudomonads. Pseudomonads are rod-shaped bacteria with polar flagella,
which give the bacteria mobility. They need oxygen to grow and obtain
energy by decomposing organic material. Pseudomonads are found in soil,
fresh water and marine environments. 
• Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a pathogenic bac-
terium that infects the urinary tract and wounds in humans. It also causes
infections in burn injuries. 
• Legionella pneumophilia. Legionella pneumophilia is a bacterium identi-
fied in 1976 when it infected and killed members of the American Legion
at their convention in Philadelphia. Infection caused by the Legionella
pneumophilia bacterium is commonly referred to as Legionnaire’s disease.
• Legionella micdadei. Legionella micdadei is the bacterium that infects lungs
and causes a strain of pneumonia commonly called Pittsburgh pneumonia.
• Moraxella lacunata. Moraxella lacunata is an egg-shaped (coccobacilli)
bacterium that can infect the membrane that lines eyelids called the con-
juntiva, causing a condition known as conjunctivitis (pink eye).
• Neisseria. Neisseria is a double-spherical (diplo-coccus) bacterium that
can live with or without oxygen (anaerobic) and is usually found on
mucous membranes of humans. One type of Neisseria called Neisseria
gonorrhoeae causes the sexually transmitted disease gonorrhea. Another
type is Neisseria meningitidis (N. meningitis), the bacterium that infects
the mucous membranes of the nose and throat (nasopharyngeal), causing
a sore throat. Neisseria meningitidis can cause meningitis if the bacterium
enters blood and cerebral spinal fluid where it can infect the protective
covering (meninges) of the brain and spinal cord. Meningitis is inflamma-
tion of the meninges. 
CHAPTER 10
The Prokaryotes
155

• Brucella. Brucella bacteria are very small coccobacillus that can not move
themselves (non-motile) and cause brucellosis or undulant fever—daily
episodes of fever and chills. Brucella multiply in white blood cells. 
• Bordetella pertussis. Bordetella pertussis is the bacteria that cause pertus-
sis, which is better known as whooping cough. Bordetella pertussis is rod-
shaped and non-motile. 
• Franeisella tularensis. Franeisella tularensis is a gram-negative coc-
cobacillus bacterium that lives in contaminated water or wild game. When
such water or wild game is ingested, the bacteria infects the lymph nodes
(lymphadenopathy), causing a disease called tularemia, which is com-
monly known as rabbit fever or deer-fly fever. Franeisella tularensis can
also be inhaled during the skinning of an infected animal or enter through
a lesion in the body.
• Agrobacterium tumefaciens. Agrobacterium tumefaciens is a bacterium
that causes tumor-like growths on plants called crowngull.
• Acetobacter and gluconobacter: Acetobacter and gluconobacter are bacte-
ria that synthesize ethanol to vinegar (acetic acid) and are used in the food
industry to make vinegar.
Facultatively Anaerobic Gram-Negative Rods
Facultatively anaerobic gram-negative rods are a group of bacteria that take on
a rod shape and can live without the presence of oxygen or when oxygen is pres-
ent can carry out metabolism aerobically. These bacteria are gram-negative.
These are three prominent members of the facultatively anaerobic gram-negative
rods bacteria group.
• Enterics. Enterics (Enterobacteriaceae) are small bacteria that are found in
the intestinal tracts of animals and humans (intestinal flora) and have flagella
all over their surface (peritirichous flagella) to move about. Enterics ferment
glucose and produce carbon dioxide and other gases. The word “enteric”
means “pertaining to the intestines.” More predominate Enterics are:
• Escherichia coli. Escherichia coli, commonly known as E.coli is an
example of an enteric bacteria, which makes up some of the normal
flora in the human intestines, but can cause infection if it enters other
CHAPTER 10
The Prokaryotes
156

parts of the body (for example, through the ingestion of water that is
contaminated with fecal matter.)
• Shigella. Shigella causes bacillary dysentery or shigellosis, more com-
monly known as traveler’s diarrhea.
• Salmonella. Salmonella is a group (genera) of enteric bacteria that has
members that can infect humans. Species include Salmonella typhi,
which causes typhoid fever and Salmonella choleraesuis and
Salmonella enteritides both of which are food-borne pathogens that
cause salmonellosis, a type of food poisoning.
• Klebsiella. The genera Klebsiella is a bacterium that cause bacterial
pneumonia.
• Erwinia. Erwinia is a bacterium that infects plants and causes what is
commonly called soft root rot.
• Enterobacter. The genus enterobacter consists of the species Enterobacter
cloace and Enterobacter aerogenes. Both of these organisms cause uri-
nary tract infections and nosocomial (hospital) infections in individuals
with a weakened immune system.
• Serratia marcescens, Serratia marcescens bacteria are found on catheters
and instruments that are allegedly sterile; this bacterium causes urinary
and respiratory infections.
• Yersinia pestis. Yersinia pestis, also known as Y.pestis, caused the
bubonic or black plague, which ravaged Europe during the Middle
Ages. It begins by causing abscesses of lymph nodes and then produces
pneumonia-like symptoms when it reaches the lungs, which is called
pneumonia plague. 
• Vibrios. Vibrios are facultative anaerobic gram-negative, comma-shaped
bacteria that inhibit aquatic environments and some also live in the intes-
tinal tracts of animals and humans. There are two important species of vib-
rios bacteria. These are:
• Vibrio cholerae. Vibrio cholerae is the bacteria that cause cholera, signs
and symptoms are abdominal pain and watery diarrhea. 
• Vibrio parahaemolyticus. Vibrio parahaemolyticus is the bacterium
that causes inflammation and irritation of the stomach and intestine—
better known as gastroenteritis—when contaminated shellfish is ingested
raw or undercooked.
CHAPTER 10
The Prokaryotes
157

• Pasteurella-Haemophilus. Pasteurella-Haemophilus are very small faculta-
tively anaerobic gram-negative, rod shaped bacteria, that are named for
Louis Pasteur.  Examples include:
• Pasteurella causes blood poisoning (septicemia) in cattle, chickens
(fowl cholera) and pneumonia in various animals.
• P. multocida, the species which was identified by Louis Pasteur, is
transmitted to humans by a dog or cat bite.
• Haemophilus. The genus Haemophilus (which means “blood loving”)
are bacteria that live in mucous membranes of the upper respiratory
tract, mouth, intestinal tract and vagina.
• H. ducreyi, the species of Haemophilus bacterium that causes chan-
croid, which is an infectious venereal ulcer.
• H. aegyptiusis the species that causes acute conjunctivitis or pink eye.
Anaerobic Gram-Negative Cocci and Rods
Anaerobic gram-negative cocci and rods can live in anaerobic conditions and are
non-motile. They do not form endospores, which are small spores that developed
inside the bacteria as a resistant survival form of the bacteria. 
Anaerobic gram-negative cocci are spherically shaped and form a single
chain or are clustered. Veillonella are common anaerobic gram-negative cocci
that are found between teeth and on gums. Veillonella is the cause of abscesses
of teeth and gums.
Anaerobic gram-negative rods are called Bacteroides and are members of the
Bacteriodaceae family of bacteria that live in the intestinal tract of humans.
Bacteroides can cause peritonitis, which is inflammation of the peritoneum due
to infection. Another kind of anaerobic gram-negative rod is Fusobacterium.
These are long slender rods that live in the gingival crevices of teeth and cause
gingivitis, which is a gum infection.
Rickettsias and Chlamydias
Rickettsias and Chlamydias are intracellular parasites that need a host in order
to reproduce and therefore enter the cell of a host. These bacteria were once
CHAPTER 10
The Prokaryotes
158

thought to be viruses that invaded cells. They are classified as bacteria because
they have bacterial cell walls and contain DNA and RNA, which is not the case
with a virus. Rickettsias and Chlamydias have no means of mobility because
they lack flagella. They are also gram-negative.
Rickettsias are small rod-shaped or spherical bacteria that live in the cells of
ticks, lice, fleas, and mites (arthropods) and can be transmitted to humans when
bitten by arthropods, causing rickettsial disease. Rickettsial disease causes cap-
illaries to become permeable resulting in a rash. Rickettsias reproduce by binary
fission where a cell wall forms across the cell and the two halves separate to
become individual cells.
Common Rickettsias are:
• Rickettsia prowazekii. Rickettsia prowazekii is transmitted by lice and
causes endemic typhus. 
• R. rickettsii. R. rickettsii is transmitted by ticks and causes Rocky Mountain
spotted fever.
• R. tsutsugamushi. R. tsutsugamushi is transmitted by arthropods and cause
scrub typhus that presents with fewer, rash and inflammation of the lymph
nodes. 
• Coxiella burnetti. Coxiella burnetti is transmitted by aerosols or contami-
nated milk and causes Q fever, which is similar to pneumonia. 
• Bartonella bacilliformis. Bartonella bacilliformis is transmitted by arthro-
pods and causes a wart-like rash called Oroya fever.
Chlamydias are very small spherical or coccoid bacteria that are non-motile
and can be transmitted from person-to-person contact or by airborne respiration.
Chlamydias are not transmitted by arthropods. They are so small that they mul-
tiply in host cells. There are three species of chlamydia:
• Chlamydia trachomatis. C.trachomatis causes trachoma, which is a com-
mon cause of blindness and the non-gonorrhea sexually transmitted dis-
ease urethritis (inflammation of the urethra).
• C. penemoniae causes a mild form of pneumonia in adolescence. 
• C. psittaci causes psittacosis.
Mycoplasmas
Mycoplasmas are very small facultatively anaerobic bacteria (some are oblig-
ately anaerobic) that have taken on many shapes (pleomorphic) and were once
CHAPTER 10
The Prokaryotes
159

thought to be viruses because they lack a cell wall. However, they have a cell
membrane, DNA and RNA, which distinguishes them from viruses.
Mycoplasmas can also resemble fungi because some Mycoplasmas produce
filaments that are commonly seen in fungi. It is these filaments that led scien-
tists to name it Mycoplasma. Myco means “fungus.” 
Many Mycoplasmas are unable to move by themselves because they do not
have flagella, but some are able to glide on a wet surface. 
Two of the more common types of Mycoplasma are:
• Mycoplasma pneumoniae. Mycoplasma pneumoniae is the cause of atypi-
cal pneumonia, commonly referred to as walking pneumonia. 
• Ureaplasma urealyticum. Ureaplasma urealyticum is a bacterium that is
found in urine and one that can cause urinary tract infection. 
Gram-Positive Cocci
Within the gram-positive cocci section are two genera. These are Staphylococcus
and Streptococcus, and each has an important role in medicine. 
• Staphylococcus. Staphylococcus bacteria have a grape-like cluster appear-
ance and grow in environments of high osmotic pressure and low moisture.
Osmotic pressure is the pressure required to prevent the net flow of water
by osmosis. Infections caused by the Staphylococcus bacteria are typically
called staph infections. Here are the commonly found Staphylococcus
bacteria:
• Staphylococcus aureus. Staphylococcus aureus, also called S. aureus, is a
bacterium that forms yellow-pigmented colonies that grows with oxygen
(aerobically) or without oxygen (anaerobically). S. aureus is the cause of
toxic shock syndrome that results in high fever, vomiting and sometimes
death. It produces enterotoxins, which affects intestinal mucosa. S. aureus
is also the cause of boils (skin abscess), impetigo (pus-filled blisters on
the skin), styes (an infection at the base of an eye lash), pneumonia,
osteomyelitis, acute bilateral endocarditis (inflammation of the internal
membranes of the heart) and scalded skin syndrome in very young chil-
dren that causes skin to strip off (denude) due to an exfoliative toxin. 
S. aureus is one of the major types of infections that occur in hospi-
tals because it is resistant to antibiotics such as penicillin. An infection
of S. aureus is usually identified by the presence of an abscess.
CHAPTER 10
The Prokaryotes
160

• Staphylococcus epidermis: Staphylococcus epidermis, also known as S.
epidermis, is the frequent cause of urinary tract infections in the elderly
and also causes subacute bacterial endocarditis, which is a chronic in-
fection of the endocardium (a thin layer of connective tissue that lines
the chambers of the heart) and heart valves. 
• Staphylococcus saprophyticus. Staphylococcus saprophyticus, also
known as S. saprophyticus, causes urinary tract infections, usually in
adolescent girls.
• Streptococcus. Streptococcus bacteria appear as a single, paired or chained
spherical gram-positive bacteria. Streptococci do not use oxygen, though
most are aerotolerant. Few may be obligately anarobic. Infections caused
by the Streptococcus bacteria are generally referred to as a strep infection.
Microbiologists classify Streptococcus bacteria in three ways.
• The type of hemolysis (destruction) of red blood cells caused by the
Streptococcus bacteria. There are three types characterized by:
• Alpha-hemolytic group. Incomplete lysis (destruction of the cell)
within green pigment surrounding the colony. 
• Beta-hemolytic group. Total lysis and a clear area around the colony. 
• Gamma-hemolytic group. Absence of lysis. This group is of no clin-
cal importance.
• The Lance Field classification. There are four groups:
• Group A Streptococci. Characterized by Streptococcus pyogenes and
secrete of erthrogenic exotoxins responsible for scarlet fever. 
• Group B Streptococci. Characterized by Streptococcus agalactiae,
which is part of normal oral and vaginal flora and causes urogenital
(urinary and reproductive systems) infections in females. 
• Group C Streptococci. Causes animal diseases.
• Group D Streptococci. Characterized by Streptococcus faecalis, which
is a normal part of oral and intestinal flora. Diseases of S. faecalis are
endocarditis, urinary tract infections and septicemia (blood poisoning).
• Ungrouped Streptococci. There are two kinds:
• Viridans streptococci. Characterized by Streptococcus viridans and
Streptococcus salvarius, which causes subacute bacterial endocardi-
tis, and Streptococcus mutans which causes a biofilm called plague
resulting in tooth decay. 
• Pneumococcal streptococci. Characterized by Streptococcus pneu-
moniae which causes lobar pneumonia and otitis media (middle ear
infection).
CHAPTER 10
The Prokaryotes
161

Endospore-Forming Gram-Positive Rods and Cocci
Endospore forming, gram-positive rods and cocci consist mainly of rod-shaped
bacteria of the genera Bacillus and Clostridium. Another cocci bacteria included
in this group are of the genus Sporosarcina. These bacteria have no clinical sig-
nificance and are saprophytic soil bacteria. Saphrophytes are organisms that feed
on dead organic matter.
These bacteria can be strict aerobes, facultative anaerobes, obligate anaerobes
or microaerophiles. Microaerophiles are bacteria that grow best in an environ-
ment that has a small amount of free oxygen.
The formation of endospores by bacteria is important in medicine and the food
industry because these endospores are resistant to heat and many chemicals.
There are three genera in this section. These are:
• Bacillus: Bacillus consists of the following bacterium:
• Bacillus anthracis. Bacillus anthracis causes anthrax, a severe blood
infection that infects cattle, sheep and horses and can be transmitted to
humans. B. anthracis is a non-motile facultative anaerobe and produces
exotoxin. Anthrax can result in central nervous system distress, respira-
tory failure, anoxia and death.
• Bacillus cereus. Bacillus cereus produces enterotoxin (a toxin that affects
the intestine) and causes gastroenteritis (food poisoning).
• Bacillus thuringiensis. Bacillus thuringiensis produces a toxin that attacks
the digestive system of insects, causing the insects to stop feeding by
causing paralysis of the insects guts.
• Sporosarcina. Sporosarcina are bacteria that inhabit the soil and receive
nutrients by feeding on dead organic matter.
• Clostridium. Clostridium are rod-shaped bacteria that exist in water, soil,
and in the intestinal tract of animals and humans. These bacteria do not
require oxygen. They release toxins that cause disease. Here are the com-
mon types of Clostridium: 
• Clostridium tetani. Clostridium tetani, also known as C. tetani, causes
tetanus, commonly referred to as lockjaw.
• Clostridium difficile. Clostridium difficile, also known as C. difficile,
causes gastroenteritis.
CHAPTER 10
The Prokaryotes
162

• Clostridium perfringes. Clostridium perfringes, also known as C. 
perfringes, causes myonecrosis—better known as gas gangrene—which
produces hydrogen gas in deep tissue wounds, resulting in cell death. 
• Clostridium botulinum. Clostridium botulinum, also known as C. botu-
linum is a cause of food poisoning usually as a result of improperly
canned food. It produces an exotoxin that causes flaccid paralysis
(weakness of muscle tone) due to the suppression of acetylcholine,
which is a neurotransmitter. The result is vomiting, difficulty speaking,
and difficulty swallowing, which can lead to respiratory paralysis and
death. Physicians use Clostridium botulinum as a neural block that
inhibits muscle contraction. Clostridium botilinum is also used cosmet-
ically to relax muscles that cause facial wrinkles (Botox injections). The
C. botulinum toxin blocks the exocytosis of synaptic vesicle of the neu-
romuscular junction, where motor neurons meet muscle.
Regular Nonsporing Gram-Positive Rods
Regular, non-sporing gram-positive rods are obligate or facultative anaerobes
that have a rod-shaped appearance as is implied by its name. They inhabit fer-
menting plants and animal products. There are four genera within this section.
These are:
• The genus, Lactobacillus are non-sporing gram-positive rods. These are
aerotolerant bacteria that produce lactic acid from simple carbohydrates.
The acidity inhibits competing bacteria. An example of a Lactobacillus
organism is the species Lactobacillus acidophilus.
• Lactobacillus acidophilus is found in the human intestinal tract, oral cav-
ity and adult vagina. They produce an acidic environment that inhibits the
growth of harmful bacteria by fermenting glycogen into lactic acid.
Lactobacillus acidophilus is also used commercially to produce an assort-
ment of food products including sauerkraut, pickles, buttermilk and yogurt.
Other examples of regular non-sporing gram-positive rod bacteria are:
• Listeria monocytogenes. Listeria monocytogenes contaminates food and
dairy products, if ingested can cause the disease listeriosis, which causes
an inflammation of the brain and meninges (meningitis).
CHAPTER 10
The Prokaryotes
163

• Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae. Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae causes erysi-
peloid, which is red, swollen and painful lesions, frequently seen in fisher-
men and meat handlers.
Irregular Nonsporing Gram-Positive Rods
These bacteria are irregular, non-sporing rods. Although this group of bacteria
are generally rod-shaped, their shape can vary (pleomorphic). Some resemble a
club while others are long, threadlike cylinders. There are three genera within
this section. These are:
• Corynebacteria. Corynebacteria are club-shaped and receive nutrients from
dead or decaying organic material (saprophytes). Corynebacteria inhabit
airy soil and water and cause diphtheria. Corynebacteria diphtheriae is the
organism which causes diphtheria.
• Propionibacterium. Propionibacterium infects wounds and causes abscesses.
An example would be Propionibacterium acnes.
• Actinomycetales. Actinomycetales is a long, threadlike cylinder (filament)
that inhibits soil and some provide nitrogen to plants. The species
Actinomycetale israelii, which causes actinomycosis, which destroys tis-
sues in the jaw, head, neck, and lungs. Actinomycetales was originally
classified as a fungus because of its shape.
Mycobacteria
Mycobacteria require oxygen (aerobic) and are acid-fast organisms that remain
red while most are blue. Large amounts of lipids in the Mycobacteria’s cell enve-
lope, resists basic dyes. Myco, which means “fungus-like” is how this organism
got its name.
• Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Mycobacterium tuberculosis causes tuberculosis.
• Mycobacterium leprae. Mycobacterium leprae, also known as M. leprae,
causes Hansen’s disease (leprosy).
• Mycobacterium bovis. Mycobacterium bovis, also known as M. bovis,
causes tuberculosis in cattle and can be transmitted to humans.
CHAPTER 10
The Prokaryotes
164

Nocardia Forms
Nocardia are a group of a long thread-like cylinder shaped bacteria that inhabits
soil and need oxygen to grow (aerobic). They are gram-positive and cannot
move by themselves (they are non-motile). 
Nocardia asteroids, also known as N. asteroids, is a common bacterium
within this group. It causes mycetoma, which causes abscesses on the hands and
feet and also causes lung infection.
Quiz
1. Archaea can exist in very hot and very cold environments, making them
a resilient microorganism that can survive attacks and destroy other
bacteria.
(a) True
(b) False
2. Archaea that function in the presence of air are called
(a) methanogenic archaea
(b) cell wall–less archaea
(c) sulfate reducers 
(d) extreme halophiles
3. Archaea that live in an extreme salty environment are called
(a) methanogenic archaea
(b) cell wall–less archaea
(c) sulfate reducers 
(d) extreme halophiles
4. Single-celled archaea that produce methane and carbon dioxide (CO2) by
fermenting simple organic carbon compounds or oxidizing H2 without
oxygen to produce CO2 are called
(a) methanogenic archaea
(b) cell wall–less archaea
(c) sulfate reducers 
(d) extreme halophiles
CHAPTER 10
The Prokaryotes
165

5. Archaea that do not have cell walls are called
(a) methanogenic archaea
(b) cell wall–less Archaea
(c) sulfate reducers 
(d) extreme halophiles
6. “Aerobic/microaerophilic” is a designation for bacteria that require small
amounts of oxygen to grow.
(a) True
(b) False
7. Rod-shaped bacteria with flagella at both ends of the rod, which give the
bacteria mobility, are called
(a) Pseudomonas aeruginosa
(b) Legionella pneumophilia
(c) pseudomonads
(d) Legionella micdadei
8. The bacteria that infects lungs and causes a strain of pneumonia com-
monly called Pittsburgh pneumonia is known as
(a) Pseudomonas aeruginosa
(b) Legionella pneumophilia
(c) pseudomonads
(d) Legionella micdadei
9. A pathogenic bacterium that infects the urinary tract and wounds in
humans is called
(a) Pseudomonas aeruginosa
(b) Legionella pneumophilia
(c) pseudomonads
(d) Legionella micdadei
10. This bacterium, discovered in 1976, infected and killed members of the
American Legion at their convention in Philadelphia.
(a) Pseudomonas aeruginosa
(b) Legionella pneumophilia
(c) pseudomonads
(d) Legionella micdadei
CHAPTER 10
The Prokaryotes
166

11
CHAPTER
167
The Eukaryotes: 
Fungi, Algae, 
Protozoa, and 
Helminths
Throughout this book you’ve learned that some kinds of microorganisms are
beneficial to us: They supply food, remove waste, and help prevent disease by
combating bacteria as antibiotics. Other microorganisms however, are patho-
genic; they cause or transmit disease.
In this chapter we take a close look at microorganisms called eukaryotes.
Eukaryotes are organisms within the kingdoms Fungi, Plants, Protists, and Animals.
These microorganisms are called fungi, algae, protozoa, and helminths. 
Copyright © 2005 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

Fungi
Fungi have been studied systematically for 250 years, although ancient peoples
learned of fermentation (enabled by fungi) thousands of years ago. Scientists
who practice mycology, the study of fungi, are called mycologists. In the early
days of microbiology, mycologists categorized fungi as plants because they
resemble plants in general appearance (they have cell walls) and because both
fungi and plants lack motility (neither can move under its own power).
Today, however, fungi and plants are considered two distinct groups of organ-
isms because plants use chlorophyll to obtain nutrients and fungi do not. Fungi
are heterotrophic: They absorb nutrients from organic matter and organic wastes
(saprophytes) or tissues of other organisms (parasites). Many fungi are multi-
cellular and are called molds. Yeasts are unicellular fungi.
Fungi can be both beneficial and harmful. For example, fungi called mycor-
rhizae are mutualistic and help roots of plants absorb water and minerals from
the soil. The cellulose and lignin of plants are important food sources for ants;
however, ants are unable to digest them unless fungi first break them down.
Ants are known to cultivate fungi for that purpose. Some fungi are beneficial to
humans as food (mushrooms). They are used in the preparation of food such as
bread and beer (yeast). Fungi are also used to fight off bacterial diseases
(antibiotics).
Some fungi can have a harmful effect because they feed on plants, animals,
and humans, causing plants and animals to decay and spoil as a source of nutri-
ents (rotting food). In humans, fungi cause various diseases such as athlete’s foot.
ANATOMY OF FUNGI
The body of a fungus (Fig. 11-1) is referred to as either a soma (meaning
“body”), which is equal to the term “vegetative” in plants, or thallus, which is
also applied to algae and bryophytes (nonflowering plants comprised of mosses
and liverworts). The body of a mold or fleshy fungus consists of long, loosely
packed filaments called hyphae.
Hyphae are divided by cell walls called septa (the singular form is septum). In
most molds the hyphae are divided into one cell units called septate hyphae.
In some fungi, the hyphae have no septa and look like long multinucleated
cells called coenocytic hyphae. Cytoplasm flows or streams throughout the hy-
phae through pores in the septa. Under the right environmental conditions the
hyphae grow to form a filamentous mass known as a mycelium. A fungus can
CHAPTER 11
The Eukaryotes
168

have a thallus many meters and penetrate its surroundings. In the hyphae of fungi
there is a portion called the vegetative hyphae. Vegetative hyphae are where nutri-
ents are obtained. The part of the hyphae responsible for reproduction is called
reproductive or aerial hyphae. 
Fungi can reproduce both sexually and asexually. Reproduction occurs with
the formation of spores. Spores are always nonmotile and are a common means
of reproduction among fungi. Do not confuse bacterial endospores with fungal
spores; they are different. Bacterial endospores are formed so that the bacterial
cell can survive in harsh environments. Once there is a less threatening env-
ironment, the bacterium leaves the endospore state and becomes active. The
endospore germinates into a single bacterial cell. Asexual reproduction occurs
when asexual spores are formed by the hyphae of one organism. When these
spores germinate, they are identical to the parent. Sexual reproduction happens
when the nuclei of sexual spores from two opposite mating strains of the same
fungus species fuse. Fungi that grow from sexual spores have genetic character-
istics of both parents.
YEASTS
Yeasts are fungi that are unicellular and reproduce using a process called fission,
although some can form filaments. Fission occurs when a cell divides evenly to
form two new cells. When the cell divides by budding, it divides unevenly.
Yeasts are nonfilamentous and have a spherical or oval shape. The white pow-
CHAPTER 11
The Eukaryotes
169
Fig. 11-1.
The body of a fungus contains
long filaments called hyphae.

dery substance that is sometimes found coating fruits and leaves is a yeast.
Yeasts can also reproduce sexually.
MOLDS
When a mold forms an asexual spore, the spore will detach itself from the par-
ent and then germinate into a new mold. This process is considered reproduction
because a second new organism grows from the spore.
FUNGI CLASSIFICATION
Asexual fungal spores are formed on hyphae of fungi. When these hyphal spores
germinate, they are identical to the parent. Asexual spores reproduce by the
process of cell division. In sexual cell reproduction, the spores are produced by
the fusion of nuclei from two opposite fungi of the same species. These fungi
will have the same characteristics of both parents. Asexual spores produce more
frequently than sexual spores. Asexual spores are present in virtually every envi-
ronment on the planet. 
Some fungi change their structure based on their natural habitat. This is
referred to as dimorphism, the property of having two forms of growth. For
example, some fungi appear non-filamentous when growing outside their natu-
ral habitat but filamentous when growing in their natural habitat. Such changes
of appearance can make it challenging to identify a particular type of fungus.
Fungal classification is based on the type of sexual spores they produce. 
Listed are examples of the divisions of the kingdom Fungi: 
• Zygomycota: Zygomycota are conjugative fungi. They reproduce both sex-
ually (zygospores) and asexually (sporangiospores). An example is:
Rhizopus nigricans, a black bread mold.
• Ascomycota: Ascomycota, also called sac fungi, have sac-like cells called
asci. These are yeasts, truffles, morels, and common molds. Fungi in 
this group reproduce sexually and asexually. Their sexual spores (conidio-
sphores) freely detach with the slightest movement (conidia) and there-
fore can cause infection (opportunistic disease) or an allergic reaction.
Examples are:
• Blastomyces: Blastomyces causes blastomycosis, which is a general pul-
monary disease.
• Histoplasma: Histoplasma is a fungus found in bird and bat droppings;
it causes histoplasmosis, which is known as the fungus flu.
CHAPTER 11
The Eukaryotes
170

• Basidiomycota: Also called club fungus, basidiomycota includes mush-
rooms, toadstools, smuts, and rusts. Sexually produced basidiospores are
formed externally on a base pedestal, producing a club-shaped structure
called a basidium (basidia, plural). Basidia can be found on visible fruit-
ing bodies called basidiocarps, which are positioned on stalks. A mush-
room is a basidiocarp. Some mushrooms, such as Amanita, produce toxins
and are poisonous to humans, while others are very nutritious.
• Deuteromycota: Deutermycota, also known as fungi imperfecti, have no
sexual reproduction (or none that can be observed). They cause pneumo-
cystis which infects people who have a compromised immune system.
Examples are: 
• Penicillium notatum, which produces penicillin. 
• Candida albicans, which causes vaginal yeast infections in humas.
FUNGUS NUTRITION
Fungi receive nutrients by absorptive nutrition (chemoheterotrophic), which is
somewhat similar to how bacteria obtain nutrients. Fungi team up with bacteria
to break down organic molecules and are the principal decomposers on earth.
Fungi can metabolize complex carbohydrates, such as the lignin in wood.
Fungi can decompose substances that have very little moisture and substances
that live in an environment with a pH of 5. Almost all molds are aerobic and
most yeasts are facultative anaerobes.
Algae
Algae are very simple unicellular or multicellular eukaryotic organisms that
obtain energy from sunlight (photoautotrophs). They live in various water envi-
ronments (oceans and ponds) on moist rocks and trees, and in soil.
REPRODUCTION OF ALGAE
Sexual reproduction occurs in most species of algae. In these species the algae
reproduce asexually for generations until there is a change in environmental
conditions; then the algae reproduce sexually. Other types of algae alternate in
CHAPTER 11
The Eukaryotes
171

how they reproduce. The algae that reproduce sexually will latter reproduce
asexually. All algae reproduce asexually. Unicellular algae divide by mitosis and
cytokinesis. Multicellular algae that contain thalli and filaments can fragment.
Each new piece can form a thallus and a filament.
TYPES OF ALGAE
Chrysophytes
Chrysophytes are unicellular algae that live in fresh water and contain chloro-
phyll a and chlorophyll c, which are photosynthetic pigments used to transform
sunlight into energy. These are also known as golden algae because they have
golden silica scales. There are 500 known species of chrysophytes. Some chrys-
ophytes are amoeboid that attack bacteria by engulfing and destroying it.
Diatoms
Diatoms are unicellular algae that have a hard, double outer shell made of silica.
Nutrients pass through pores in the shell, then through the diatom’s plasma mem-
brane contained within the shell. There are 5,600 known species of diatoms, most
of which are phototrophic and contain chlorophyll a and chlorophyll c pigments.
They also contain carotenoids, which are yellow and orange pigments. Some
diatoms are heterotrophs and break down and use organic matter as nutrients.
Diatoms accumulate at the bottom of the sea and are commercially mined for both
their value as an abrasive and their filtering and insulating capabilities (used in the
filters in pools).
Dinoflagellates
Dinoflagellates are unicellular algae that have the capability of self-movement
through the use of tail-like projections called flagella. The flagella are located
between grooves in the cellulose plates that cover the dinoflagellate’s body. These
flagella pulsate in both an encircling motion around the body and in a perpendi-
cular motion, causing the dinoflagellates to rotate like a top. There are about
1,200 known species of dinoflagellates that inhabit both fresh water and seawater.
Dinoflagellates live in seawater. Some are heterotrophs and break down
organic matter for nutrients. Some seawater dinoflagellates are luminous, giving
a twinkle to the sea at night. Freshwater dinoflagellates are phototrophic: They
synthesize nutrients from sunlight using photosynthesis.
CHAPTER 11
The Eukaryotes
172

Many dinoflagellates have chlorophyll a and c pigments as well as the yellow
and orange pigments, carotenoids. Depending on their photosynthetic pigment,
dinoflagellates can appear yellow-green, green, brown, blue, or red. When
dinoflagellates undergo a population explosion, the sea changes color from an
ocean blue to a sea of red or brown.
Some dinoflagellates, such as Gonyaulax (plankton), can be fatal to humans
because they produce neurotoxins. These dinoflagellates are eaten by fish and are
absorbed by oysters, clams, and other shellfish (mollusks). The neurotoxins build
up in their tissues, making the seafood poisonous to humans. These dinoflagel-
lates also cause “red tides” that have a devastating effect on the fish population. 
Red Algae
Red algae, also known as Rhodophyta, are algae that form colonies in warm
ocean currents and in tropical seas. They contribute to the formation of coral
reefs that can be found as deep as 268 meters below the surface of the ocean.
Their stone-like appearance is caused by a build-up of calcium carbonate
deposits on their cell walls.
There are 4,000 known species of red algae, of which fewer than 100 are
found in fresh water. Red algae get their color from the phycobilins and chloro-
phyll a pigments contained in their cells. Phycobilins pigment absorbs green,
violet, and blue light, which are light waves that are capable of penetrating the
deepest waters. It is for this reason that red algae can survive at great depths. The
pigment that makes the algae red is called phycoerythrin.
As you learned in Chapter 6, red algae are used to make agar. Agar is the cul-
ture medium that is extracted from the cell wall of red algae and is used to grow
bacteria. Red algae are also used as a moisture-preserving agent in cosmetics and
baked goods. Red algae are used as a setting agent for jellies and desserts.
Brown Algae
Brown algae, also known as phaeophyta, are multicellular organisms. Some
brown algae are commonly called kelp; they live in the northern rocky shores of
North America and can grow up to 30 meters. There are 1,500 known species of
brown algae. 
Brown algae have chlorophyll a and b photosynthetic pigments. They also
have carotenoids. Brown algae can appear dark brown, olive-green, and even
golden depending on the type of pigments in their cells. The pigment that makes
the algae brown is called fucoxanthin. Algin is a gummy substance found in the
cell walls of some species of brown algae and is used as a thickening, emulsify-
CHAPTER 11
The Eukaryotes
173

ing, and suspension agent for ice cream, pudding, frozen foods, toothpaste, floor
polish, cough syrup, and even jelly beans.
The organic matter that kelp produces supports the life of invertebrates,
marine mammals, and fish.
Green Algae
Green algae can live in moist places on land, such as tree trunks and in the soil,
as well as in water. There are 7,000 species of green algae that are diverse in
size, morphology, lifestyle, and habits. Scientists believe that some members of
the species are linked structurally and biochemically to the Plant kingdom.
Two common green algae are:
1. Spirogyra: Spirogyra are freshwater algae that have tiny filaments, each
containing spiraling bands of chloroplasts.
2. Volvox: Volvox are colonial multicellular green algae that have flagella and
live in marine, brackish, and freshwater environments.
LICHENS
Lichens are filaments of a fungus and cells of algae (this is a symbiotic rela-
tionship) that are found on exposed soil or rock, on trees, on rooftops, and on
cement structures. There are about 20,000 known species of lichens.
Survival of the green algae and the fungus are interdependent in a symbiotic
association. Neither can live without the other. However, each grows independ-
ently. Lichens are delicate and beautiful in appearance.
Protozoa
This organisms are members of the Kingdom Protista. There are about 20,000
known species of protozoa that live in water and soil. Some feed on bacteria
while others are parasites and feed off their hosts.
Most protozoa are asexual and reproduce in one of three ways. These are:
• Fission: Fission occurs when a cell divides evenly to form two new cells.
• Budding: Budding occurs when a cell divides unevenly.
CHAPTER 11
The Eukaryotes
174

• Multiple fission (schizogony): Multiple fission is when the nucleus of the
cell divides multiple times before the rest of the cell divides. Forms around
each nucleus when the nucleus divides then each nuclei separates into a
daughter cell.
Some protists are sexual and exchange genetic material from one cell to
another through conjugation, which is the physical contact between cells.
A protist can survive in an adverse environment by encapsulating itself with
a protective coating called a cyst. The cyst defends the protist in extreme tem-
peratures against toxic chemicals and even when there is a lack of oxygen, mois-
ture, and food.
PROTOZOA NUTRITION
Protists receive nutrients by breaking down organic matter (heterotrophic) and
can grow in both aerobic and anaerobic environments, such as protists that live
in the intestine of animals. Some protists, such as Euglena, receive nutrients
from organic matter and through photosynthesis because they contain chloro-
phyll. These protists are considered both algae and protozoa.
Protists obtain food in one of three ways:
• Absorption: Food is absorbed across the protist’s plasma membrane.
• Ingestion: Cilia outside the protist create a wave-like motion to move food
into a mouth-like opening in the protist called a cytosome. An example is
the paramecium.
• Engulf: Pseudopods (meaning “false feet”) on the protist engulf food, then
pull it into the cell using a process called phagocytosis. An example of this
type of protist is the amoeba.
Food is digested in the vacuole after the food enters the cell. The vacuole is
a membrane-bound organelle. Waste products are excreted using a process
called exocytosis.
AMEBA
Here are common amebas (Fig. 11-2):
• Entamoeba histolytica: Also known as E. histolytica, this microorganism
is transmitted between humans through the ingestion of cysts that are
CHAPTER 11
The Eukaryotes
175

excreted in the feces of infected people. It is the causative agent of amebic
dysentery.
• Naegleria fowleri: This ameba causes primary amebic meningoenceph-
alitis (PAM) that results in headache, fever, vomiting, stiff neck, and loss
of bodily control. N. fowleri enters the body through the mucous mem-
branes (when the person swims in warm water) and travels to the brain and
spinal cord.
• Acanthamoeba polyphaga: This ameba lives in water (including tap water)
and infects the cornea of the eye leading to blindness. It can also cause
ulcerations of the eye and the skin. A. polyphaga is also known to invade
the central nervous system, resulting in death.
Flagellates move by structures called flagella. They have two or more spindle-
shaped flagella in the front of the cell that they use to pull themselves through
their environment. Food enters flagellates through a mouth-like grove called a
cytosome.
Here are common flagellates:
• Trichomonas vaginalis: Commonly known as T. vaginalis, this flagellate 
is the cause of trichomoniasis, which is a sexually transmitted disease. 
T. vaginalis is found in the male urinary tract and the vagina of females.
• Giardia lamblia: This flagellate is commonly known as G. lamblia and
causes giardiasis. Giardiasis causes nausea, cramping, and diarrhea when
food or water contaminated by fecal material is ingested. G. lamblia lives
in the small intestines of humans and other mammals.
CHAPTER 11
The Eukaryotes
176
Fig. 11-2.
A common type of ameba is the
Amoeba proteus.

CHAPTER 11
The Eukaryotes
177
BLOOD AND TISSUE PROTOZOA
Hemoflagellates are protozoa that are carried by blood-feeding insects and are
transmitted into the blood stream by the insect’s bite. Here are commonly found
hemoflagellates:
• Trypanosoma gambiense: T. gambiense is transmitted in the saliva of the
tsetse fly as a result of a bite and causes trypanosomiasis, which is better
known as African sleeping sickness.
• Trypanosoma cruzi: T. cruzi is carried by the Reduviid bug or “kissing
bug,” which is commonly called the kissing bug because it bites the face. T.
cruzi causes Chagas’ disease. Chagas’ disease is thought to have made
Charles Darwin sick during his voyage on the H.M.S. Beagle. Typically
there aren’t any symptoms for months after the bite. During this time T.
cruzi spreads through organs of the body, weakening the heart, intestines,
and esophageal. It also cause, both eyes to swell (Romaña’s sign).
CILIATES
Ciliates (Fig. 11-3) are protozoa that have shorter hair-like structures called
cilia that are found in rows on the outer surface of the cell. These cilia are used
to move the protozoa through the environment and are used to bring food into
the cell.
An example of a ciliate is Balantidium coli. It is the only ciliate that causes
disease in humans. When ingested, it enters the large intestine, causing severe
dysentery.
Fig. 11-3.
Ciliates are protozoa that have cilia.

APICOMPLEXANS
Apicomplexans are protozoa that live and grow inside another living organism
(obligate intracellular parasites) and cannot move by themselves (nonmotile).
Apicomplexans have an apical complex of organelles that form an apex (tip).
This tip contains enzymes that enable it to penetrate the tissues of a host.
Here are common Apicomplexans:
• Plasmodium: Plasmodium lives in the female Anopheles mosquito and
causes malaria when the mosquito bites a human. Symptoms of malaria
include severe chills and fever or “rigor” (a sudden chill or coldness that is
followed by fever).
• Bebesia microti: B. microti lives in ticks and causes bebesiosis when the
tick bites someone. B. microti then enters red blood cells where it multi-
plies quickly. At first there aren’t any symptoms (asymptomatic). However,
soon afterwards there is a high fever, headache, and muscle pain as B.
microti destroys red blood cells. This causes the person to become anemic
(insufficient hemoglobin because of the reduction in the number of red
blood cells) and show signs of jaundice (an increase in bile, causing the
skin and eye sclera—the white part of the eye—to yellow).
• Toxoplasma gondii, also known as T. gondii, lives in cat feces and raw
meat and causes lymphadenitis (infection of the lymph nodes), which can
have a devastating effect on people who are immunocompromised, such as
AIDS patients. T. gondii causes congenital infections in a fetus because it
can pass from the mother to the fetus through the placenta.
Helminths
Helminths are parasitic, multicellular eukaryotic animals. The majority of these
animals belong to the phyla Platyhelminthes and Nematoda. There are free-
living members of these phyla; however, in this section, only the parasitic organ-
isms are discussed. 
Many parasitic helminths do not have a digestive system and instead absorb
nutrients from the food that is consumed by their host organism, the host’s body
fluids, and the host’s tissues. Parasitic helminths have a very simplistic nervous
system because they have to respond to very few changes in their host’s environ-
ment. They lack or have reduced means of locomotion because they are transferred
CHAPTER 11
The Eukaryotes
178

from one host to another. Parasitic helminths have a very complex reproductive
system that produces fertilized eggs (zygotes) that infect the host organism.
LIFE CYCLE OF HELMINTHS
The life cycle of parasitic helminths that go through a developmental larval stage
involves an intermediate host.
Dioecious adult helminths are of one sex. That is, one individual has a male
reproductive system and another has a female reproductive system. When these
two adult helminths with different sex organs occupy the same host organism,
sexual reproduction can occur. Monoecious adult helminths are hermaphroditic
(an organism that has both female and male reproductive organs). Some of
these monoecious helminths can fertilize themselves while others may fertilize
each other.
FLATWORMS
Flatworms, also known as platyhelminths, are mostly parasitic, aquatic organ-
isms that range in size from 1 millimeter to 10 meters, as in the case of a tape-
worm. There are more than 15,000 known species of flatworms. A flatworm has
both male and female reproductive parts (monoecious). Most but not all of their
oxygen and nutrients is absorbed through their body wall.
There are two types of flatworms:
• Flukes: Flukes are flat, leaf-shaped bodies that have an oral and a ventral
sucker that are used to hang on to the body of a host. Flukes live is inside
the intestines or on tissues of humans. Three common flukes are:
• Schistosoma: This genus of flukes causes the disease schistosomiasis, a
debilitating disease that causes portal hypertension and liver cirrhosis. 
• Paragonimus westermani: P. westermani causes paragonimiasis, which
is the result of the fluke’s depositing eggs into the bronchi of the lung.
• Clonorchis sinensis: C. sinensis, also known as Chinese liver fluke,
causes clonorchiasis, which occurs when the fluke latches inside the
liver.
• Tapeworms: Tapeworms have a knob-like “head,” called a scolex, with
hooks that allow it to attach to the wall of the intestine of vertebrate ani-
mals (including humans). Tapeworms have a series of flat, rectangular
CHAPTER 11
The Eukaryotes
179

body units called proglottids (compartments that contain reproductive
organs). Proglottids eventually break away from the tapeworm and are
excreted in feces. However, new proglottids take their place. A tapeworm
continues to grow as long as its scolex and neck are intact.
• Taenia saginata: T. saginata, also called beef tapeworm, lives in raw or
poorly cooked beef and can cause taeniasis. T. saginata can grow to a
length of 25 meters in the intestines of a human, leading to an intestinal
blockage and malnutrition as the tapeworm absorbs nutrients intended
for the person.
• Tania solium: T. solium, also called the pork tapeworm, lives in raw or
poorly cooked pork and can cause taeniasis. T. solium can grow to a
length of 7 meters in the intestines leading to an intestinal blockage and
malnutrition.
• Echinococcus granulosus: E. granulosus is a tapeworm that is spread to
humans through contact with an infected dog and is transmitted when a
dog licks a person. This can lead to infection, anaphylactic shock, and
death if the tapeworm enters the body. E. granulosus can lay eggs that
produce cysts called hydatid cysts in the lungs, liver, and brain.
• Hymenolepis nana: H. nana is a tapeworm that lays eggs in cereals and
foods that are contaminated with infected parts of insects. When some-
one ingests the cereal or food he or she also ingests the tapeworm. The
tapeworm then attaches to the intestines, leading to diarrhea, abdominal
pain, and convulsions.
• Diphyllobothrium latum: D. latum is a broad fish tapeworm that lives in
raw or poorly cooked fish. The tapeworm attaches to the intestines of
the fish where it then lays eggs. While attached, the tapeworm absorbs
large quantities of vitamin B12 from the intestine eventually causing the
person to develop vitamin deficiency anemia. This is also, called perni-
cious anemia because there is insufficient vitamin B12 to make red
blood cells.
ROUNDWORMS (NEMATODES)
Roundworms are also known as nematodes and live in soil, fresh water, and salt-
water. Most of the over 80,000 species of roundworms are parasites and live in
plants or animals such as insects. They have a primitive body that consists of a
cylindrical tube that has tapered ends and is covered with a thick protective layer
called a cuticle.
CHAPTER 11
The Eukaryotes
180

CHAPTER 11
The Eukaryotes
181
Common roundworms are:
• Ascaris lumbrieoides: A. lumbrieoides is a roundworm that is transmitted
by contaminated human fertilizer, food, or water. It causes ascariasis,
which is an infection of the small intestine.
• Strongyloides stercoralis: S. stercoralis is a roundworm whose larvae pen-
etrates human skin and spread into the small intestine where it causes
strongyloidiasis, which is an infection of the small intestine.
• Trichinella spiralis: T. spiralis is a roundworm whose larvae cause trichi-
nosis and live in undercooked meats, mainly pork. These juvenile worms
that are in the ingested meat mature in the small intestines of the host organ-
ism. The mature females burrow through the wall of the small intestines
and release their offspring (juveniles) into the blood of the host, where skele-
tal muscle is soon infected. It is these juveniles that burrow into the skeletal
muscle of the host. The larvae travel to the muscle where they form into a
sack (encyst), causing muscle pain and fever; this results in a large number
of eosinophilic leukocytes (eosinophilia). An eosinophilic leukocyte is a type
of white blood cell that increases with allergies and infections.
• Wuchereria bancrofti: W. bancrofti is a roundworm that lives in mosqui-
toes and causes elephantiasis when the infected mosquito bites a human.
The mosquito injects the larvae into the skin where they then migrate to the
lymph nodes, causing blockages.
• Onchocerca volvulus: O. volvulus is a roundworm that lives in the black
fly and causes river blindness when the black fly bites a human.
• Dracunculus medinensis: D. medinensis is a roundworm that lives in lob-
sters, crabs, shrimps, and other crustacea. When the infected crustacea is
ingested, this roundworm’s larvae migrate from the person’s intestines
through the abdominal cavity to subcutaneous tissue where they mature. 
D. medinensis releases a toxic substance that creates a skin ulcer, which is
the symptom of dracunculosis disease.
• Hookworms are roundworms that have tiny hooks that are used to attach 
it to a host, which is typically the intestine. Here are some common hook-
worms:
• Necator americanus: N. americanus, also known as the New World
hookworm, lives in the lower intestine and is the second most common
hookworm infection. Its eggs are passed into the feces. Once it comes
into contact with a human, it penetrates the skin and spreads into the
heart, lungs, and eventually the small intestine where it grows into an
adult. This can lead to severe blood loss and anemia.

CHAPTER 11
The Eukaryotes
182
• Ancylostoma duodenale: A. duodenale, also known as the Old World
hookworm, is similar to N. americanus, but is native to Southern Europe,
North Africa, Northern Asia, and parts of western South America.
• Ancylostoma braziliense: A. braziliense is a hookworm that exists in
cats and dogs and causes cutaneous larva migrans, which is also known
as creeping eruption. Its eggs are passed in feces and the larvae develop
in the soil. The larvae can tunnel into the epidermis of humans and can
cause an infection to develop. 
• Ancylostoma caninum: A. caninum is a hookworm that exists in dogs
and frequently infects puppies. It eats away at the tissues in the small
intestine and sucks blood from the dog. This can result in diarrhea,
weight loss, anemia, and death. The larvae can tunnel into the epidermis
of humans and can cause an infection to develop.
PINWORMS
Pinworms can be up to 10 millimeters long and live in the large intestine.
Female pinworms crawl out the anus to lay eggs on the perianal skin.
Afterwards, she dies. Pinworms infect about 10 percent of humans, although
the person may not know he or she is infected: Pinworms cause few or no
symptoms besides a mild gastrointestinal upset and perianal itching, which can
lead to bacterial infections. Pinworms are highly contagious and can be trans-
mitted in bed linens and clothing that has been contaminated with eggs. A com-
mon pinworm is Enterobius vermicularis. Also known as E. vermicularis, it 
is the most common pinworm in the United States. E. vermicularis causes
enterobiasis, in which the skin around the anus is so itchy that a person might
not be able to sleep.
QUIZ
1. Helminths are
(a) fungi
(b) algae
(c) protozoa
(b) worms

CHAPTER 11
The Eukaryotes
183
2. Fungi are different from plants because
(a) fungi have chlorophyll
(b) plants have chlorophyll
(c) plants absorb nutrients from organic matter
(d) plants absorb nutrients from organic wastes
3. Mushrooms are
(a) fungi
(b) protozoa
(c) helminths
(d) algae
4. The body of a mold or fleshy fungus is made up of long, loosely packed
filaments called
(a) soma
(b) hyphae
(c) thallus
(d) mycelium
5. Fungi imperfecti can reproduce
(a) sexually
(b) do not reproduce
(c) asexually
(d) both (a) and (b)
6. These are unicellular algae that have a hard, double outer shell made of
silica
(a) diatoms
(b) chrysophytes
(c) dinoflagellates
(d) phaeophyta
7. What are hemoflagellates?
(a) Protists
(b) Nematodes
(c) Scolex
(d) Proglottids
8. What are platyhelminths?
(a) Ringworms
(b) Nematodes

(c) Flatworms
(d) Hookworms
9. An example of a fluke would be
(a) H. ana
(b) D. latum
(c) C. sinensis
(d) E. vermicularis
10. Some protists use cilia to move food into a mouth-like opening called
(a) pseudopods
(b) a cytosome
(c) a vacuole
(d) exocytosis
CHAPTER 11
The Eukaryotes
184

12
CHAPTER
185
Viruses, Viroids, 
and Prions
In this chapter, you will learn about viruses, how they work, and the diseases
they cause. You will also learn about viroids and prions. A viroid is a small
“naked” infectious RNA molecule that has similar properties of a virus. Prions
are particles of proteins and cause infections.
Viruses
In 1889, Dutch plant microbiologist Martinus Beijerinck described the concept
of viruses through his studies of Tobacco Mosaic Disease. Nobel prize–winner
Sir Peter Medawar described how microbiologists feel about viruses when he
said, “A virus is a piece of bad news wrapped in a protein.”
Viruses are strands of nucleic acids that are encased within a protein coat,
making them difficult to destroy. A microorganism needs both DNA and RNA in
order to reproduce. A virus cannot express genes without a host, because a virus
has either DNA or RNA but not both.
Copyright © 2005 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

A virus (Latin for “poison”) is an obligate intracellular parasite that can only
replicate inside a living host cell. Once inside the living host cell, a virus
becomes integrated in the metabolism of its host, making a virus difficult to con-
trol by chemical means. You cannot kill a virus with antibiotics. Drugs that
destroy the host’s ability to be used by a virus for replication tend to also be
highly toxic and have a negatively and sometimes deadly effect on the host cell.
Before a virus enters a cell, it is a free virus particle called a virion. A virion
cannot grow or carry out any biosynthetic or biochemical function because it is
metabolically inert. Viruses are not cells. They vary in size from 20 nanometers
(polio virus) to 300 nanometers (smallpox virus) and cannot be seen under a
light microscope.
In 1933, microbiologist Wendell Stanley of the Rockefeller Institute for Medical
Research showed that viruses could be regarded as chemical matter rather than
as living organisms. 
VIRAL STRUCTURE
The major components of a virus are:
• Nucleic acid core. The nucleic acid core can either be DNA or RNA that
makes up the genetic information (genome) of the virus. RNA genomes
only occur in viruses.
• Capsid. A capsid is the protein coat that encapsulates a virus and protects
the nucleic acid from the environment. It also plays a role in how some
viruses attach to a host cell. A capsid consists of one or more proteins that
are unique to the virus and determine the shape of the virus. 
• Envelope. An envelope is a membrane bilayer that some viruses have out-
side their capsid. If a virus does not have an envelope, the virus is called a
naked virus. Examples of diseases caused by naked viruses are chickenpox,
shingles, mononucleosis, and herpes simplex. A naked virus is more resist-
ant to changes and is less likely to be affected by conditions that can dam-
age the envelope. Environmental factors that can damage the envelope are:
• Increased temperature
• Freezing temperature
• pH below 6 or above 8
• Lipid solvents
• Some chemical disinfectants (chlorine, hydrogen peroxide, and phenol)
Naked viruses are more resistant to changes in temperature and pH. Examples
of diseases caused by naked viruses include poliomyelitis, warts, and the com-
mon cold.
CHAPTER 12
Viruses, Viroids, and Prions
186

SHAPES OF VIRUSES
A virus can have one of two structures. These are:
• Helical virus. A helical virus is rod- or thread-shaped. The virus that causes
rabies is a helical virus. 
• Icosahedral virus. An icosahedral virus is spherically shaped. Viruses that
cause poliomyelitis and herpes simplex are icosahedral viruses.
HOW VIRUSES REPLICATE
The easiest way to understand how viruses replicate is to study the life cycles of
viruses called bacteriophages. Bacteriophages replicate by either a lytic cycle or
a lysogenic cycle. The difference in these two cycles is that the cell dies at the
end of the lytic cycle and remains alive in the lysogenic cycle.
The first two scientists to observe bacteriophages were Frederic Twort of
England and Felix d’Herelle of France in the early 1900s. The name bacterio-
phage is credited to d’Herelle and means “eaters of bacteria.”
Lytic Cycle
The most studied bacteriophage is the T-even bacteriophage. The virions of T-
even bacteriophages are big, complex, and do not contain envelopes. The T-even
bacteriophages are composed of a head-and-tail structure and contain genomes
of double-stranded DNA. The lytic cycle of replication begins with the collision
of the bacteriophage and bacteria, called attachment. The tail of the bacterio-
phage attaches to a receptor site on the bacterial cell wall. After attachment, the
bacteriophage uses its tail like a hypodermic needle to inject its DNA (nucleic
acid) into the bacterium. This is called penetration. The bacteriophage uses an
enzyme called lysozyme in its tail to break down the bacterial cell wall, enabling
it to inject its DNA into the cell. The head or capsid of the bacteriophage remains
on the outside of the cell wall. After the DNA is injected into the host’s bacter-
ial cell’s cytoplasm, biosynthesis occurs. Here the T-even bacteriophage uses the
host bacterium’s nucleotides and some enzymes to make copies of the bacterio-
phage’s DNA. This DNA is transcribed to mRNA, which directs the synthesis of
viral enzymes and capsid proteins. Several of these viral enzymes catalyse reac-
tions that make copies of bacteriophage DNA. The bacteriophage DNA will then
direct the synthesis of viral components by the host cell.
Next maturation occurs. Here the T-even bacteriophage DNA and capsids are
put together in order to make virions.
CHAPTER 12
Viruses, Viroids, and Prions
187

The last stage is the release of virions from the host bacterium cell. The bac-
teriophage enzyme lysozyme breaks apart the bacterial cell wall (lysis) and the
new virus escapes. The escape of this new bacteriophage virus will then infect
neighboring cells and the cycle will continue in these cells.
The Lysogenic Cycle
Some viruses do not cause lysis and ultimate destruction of their host cells which
they infect. These viruses are called lysogenic phages or temporate phages. These
bacteriophages establish a stable, long-term relationship with their host called
lysogeny. The bacterial cells infected by these phages are called lysogenic cells.
The most studied bacteriophage, which multiplies using the lysogenic cycle,
is the bacteriophage Lambda. This bacteriophage infects the bacterium E. coli.
When the bacteriophage Lambda penetrates an E. coli bacterium, the bacte-
riophage DNA forms a circle. The circle recombines with the circular DNA of
the bacteria. This bacteriophage DNA is called a prophage.
Every time the bacteria host cell replicates normally, so does the prophase
DNA. On occasion, however, the bacteriophage DNA can break out of the
prophage and initiate the lytic cycle.
ANIMAL VIRUSES
Animal viruses infect and replicate animal cells. They differ from bacterio-
phages in the way they enter a host cell. For example, DNA viruses enter an ani-
mal host in this way:
• Attachment. Animal viruses attach to the host cell’s plasma membrane pro-
teins and glycoproteins (host cell receptors).
• Penetration. Animal viruses do not inject nucleic acid into the host eukary-
otic cell. Instead, penetration occurs by endocytosis, where the virion
attaches to the microvillus of the plasma membrane of the host cell. The
host cell then enfolds and pulls the virion into the plasma membrane, form-
ing a vesicle within the cell’s cytoplasm.
• Transcription in the nucleus by host RNA polymerase.
• Translation by host cell ribosomes.
• DNA replication by host DNA polymerase in the nucleus.
• Assembly of viral particles.
• Release from cell by lysis or exocytosis.
CHAPTER 12
Viruses, Viroids, and Prions
188

RNA Viruses
• Attachment to host cell receptor.
• Fusion with membrane of host.
• Nucleocapsid enters the cytoplasm.
• Transcription in cytoplasm by viral RNA polymerase.
• Translation by host cell ribosomes.
• Assembly of viral particles.
• Release from cell.
VIRUSES AND INFECTIOUS DISEASE
Viruses are classified by the type of nucleic acid they contain, chemical and
physical properties, shape, structure, host range, and how they replicate.
DNA viruses
DNA viruses are viruses that have DNA but no RNA. Common DNA viruses are:
• Hepadnaviruses. Hepadnaviruses cause serum hepatitis. The hepatitis B
virus (HBV) is a common form of this virus that enters the body via hypo-
dermic needles, blood transfusion, or sexual relations. (Hepatitis A, C, D,
E, F, and G are not related and are RNA viruses).
• Herpesviridae. Herpesviridae causes the herpes virus. There are about 100
forms of herpes viruses including:
• Herpes simplex virus type I (HSV-1). Herpes simplex virus type I causes
encephalitis and enters the body through lesions on the lip, skin, or eyes.
• Herpes simplex virus type 2 (HSV-2). Herpes simplex virus type 2 is
sexually transmitted, affects the genital and lip area, and can lead to
carcinomas.
• Varicella-Zoster Virus (V2V). Varicella-Zoster virus causes chicken-
pox in the acute form and shingles in the latent form. Shingles appears
as vesicles along a nerve resulting in severe pain along the course of
the nerve.
• Cytomegalovirus (CMV). Cytomegalovirus causes an infection that usu-
ally goes unnoticed unless the person’s immune system is compromised,
CHAPTER 12
Viruses, Viroids, and Prions
189

such as in the bodies of AIDS patients or in infants whose immune sys-
tems are not fully developed. This virus can be fatal to some infants.
• Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV). Epstein-Barr virus causes infectious mono-
nucleosis.
• Papovaviridae—Papovaviruses such as the human papilloma virus (HPV),
which causes warts (papillomas) and tumors (polyomas).
• Poxviridae. Poxviridae causes pox (pus-filled lesions) diseases such as
smallpox.
• Adenoviridae. Adenoviruses cause acute respiratory disease, which is the
common cold virus.
RNA virus
An RNA virus is a virus that contains RNA but not DNA. Common RNA
viruses are:
• Flaviviridae. Flaviviruses, such as the Dengue virus that causes Break
Bone Fever, are carried by mosquitoes. Break Bone Fever results in 
skin lesions, fever, and muscle and joint pain, and is often fatal. Other
Flaviviruses include:
• St. Louis encephalitis virus. St. Louis encephalitis virus causes an infec-
tion that is not easily recognized. Wild birds and mosquitoes carry St.
Louis encephalitis virus. Monkeys carry a form of this virus called yel-
low fever virus, which is transmitted to humans by mosquitoes and
leads to severe liver damage.
• Hepatitis C virus (HCV). Hepatitis C Virus is called non-A Hepatitis
virus and non-B Hepatitis virus and results in chronic infection. Humans
contract this virus from needle pricks and blood transfusions.
• Picornavirus. Picornavirus such as the Poliovirus causes Poliomyelitis and
kills motor neurons resulting in weakness and loss of muscle tone (flaccid
paralysis). Others include:
• Hepatitis A Virus (HAV). Hepatitis A virus (HAV) is also known as
infectious hepatitis and is transmitted through a fecal-oral route.
• Rhinovirus is the most frequent cause of the common cold. It causes
localized upper respiratory tract infections.
• Retroviridae. Retroviruses are a group of RNA viruses that include the fol-
lowing commonly recognized viruses:
• Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). (Lentivirus) human immunod-
eficiency virus is a virus that often results in acquired immunodeficiency
CHAPTER 12
Viruses, Viroids, and Prions
190

syndrome (AIDS) This virus kills T-cells. A T-cell is a white blood cell
that fights infection and kills spontaneously arising tumors. HIV causes
Kaposi’s sarcoma, which is a rare form of cancer, and Pneumocystic
carinii, which is an opportunistic infection and causes pneumonia in
AIDS patients.
• Human T-cell leukemia virus 1 and 2. Human T-cell leukemia virus 1
and 2 is the virus that causes acute T-cell lymphocytic leukemia and
often contains genes that cause cancer (oncogenic).
• Togaviruses. Togaviruses is a virus, such as Estera equine encephalitis,
that is mainly transmitted through blood-sucking insects (arbovirus), such
as mosquitoes. It causes severe encephalitis. Another is the:
• Rubella virus. The rubella virus causes German measles, which can be
very dangerous if contracted during the first 10 weeks of pregnancy.
The rubella vaccine is used to weaken the disease producing ability of
the rubella virus.
• Orthomytoviruses. Orthomytoviruses, such as influenza viruses A, B, and
C, cause localized infection of the respiratory tract, which is usually not
serious unless the infected person is elderly or the person is infected with
secondary bacterial pneumonia. Influenza viruses A and B can cause
Guillain-Barré Syndrome, which is an inflammation of the nerves that are
outside the brain and spinal cord (peripheral nerves); it appears 3 to 5
weeks after a person contracts the flu or after the person receives a flu vac-
cine. Influenza virus B causes Reyes syndrome, which is lethal to the liver
and the brain and causes a brain disease (encephalopathy) following a mild
flu, chickenpox, or the administration of aspirin.
• Paramyxovirus. Paramyxovirus, such as the parainfluenza virus (Sendai
virus) causes croup in infants. Two other types of paramyxovirus are:
• Mumps virus. The mumps virus causes an enlargement of one or both
parotid glands and swelling and pain in the testes and ovaries. There is
a vaccine to protect humans from the mumps virus.
• Measles virus. The measles virus, which is also known as rubeola,
causes measles. The measles virus causes a slow degeneration of the
nervous system of teenagers and young adults. If not treated, measles
can progress into encephalomyelitis or pneumonia.
• Rhabdovirus. Rhabdovirus, such as the rabies virus (Lyssavirus), causes
rabies following an animal bite. In rare cases, a person can be infected by
inhaling the virus. Some animals such as bats pass the rabies virus through
to their feces.
CHAPTER 12
Viruses, Viroids, and Prions
191

• Filoviridae. Filovirus, an example would be the ebola virus which causes
African hemorrhagic fever.
Oncogenic viruses
Oncogenic viruses are viruses that produce tumors when they infect humans.
The more common oncogenic viruses are:
• Human papillomavirus (HPV). Human papillomavirus causes common
warts but also is believed to cause cervical cancer.
• Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). Epstein-Barr virus causes Burkitt’s lymphoma,
which is a tumor of the jaw. It is seen mainly in African children and causes
a tumor in the nasopharyngeal (nasopharyngeal carcinoma).
• Herpes simplex virus 2 (HSV-2). Herpes simplex virus 2 causes genital
herpes, cervical cancer (cervical carcinoma), and oral lesions.
• Human T-cell leukemia virus 1 (HTLV-1). Human T-cell leukemia virus 1
causes acute T-cell lymphocytic leukemia, which is a cancer that affects T-
cell–forming tissues.
• Human T-cell leukemia virus 2 (HTLV-2). Human T-cell leukemia virus 2
causes atypical hairy cell leukemia.
Plant viruses
Some viruses cause diseases in plants.
RNA plant virus:
• Picornaviridae: Includes the bean mosaic virus.
• Reovirus: Includes the wound tumor virus.
DNA plant virus:
• Papovaviridae: Includes the cauliflower mosaic virus.
Viroids
In 1971, plant pathologist O.T. Diener discovered an infectious RNA particle
smaller than a virus that causes diseases in plants. He called it a viroid. Viroids
CHAPTER 12
Viruses, Viroids, and Prions
192

infect potatoes, causing potato, spindle tuber disease. They infect chrysanthe-
mums, stunting their growth. Viroids cause cucumber pale fruit disease. Millions
of dollars are lost each year in crop failures caused by viroids.
A viroid is similar to a virus in that it can reproduce only inside a host cell as
particles of RNA. However, it differs from a virus in that each RNA particle con-
tains a single specific RNA. In addition, a viroid does not have a capsid or an
envelope. Some viruses do not have an envelope.
Prions
A prion is a small infectious particle that contains a protein. Some researchers
believe that a prion consists of proteins without nucleic acids because a prion is
too small to contain a nucleic acid and because a prion is not destroyed by agents
that digest nucleic acids.
Prion diseases referred to as transmissible spongiform encephalopathies
(TSEs) are progressive neurological diseases that are fatal to humans and ani-
mals. Researchers believe that prions cause Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease is a neurological disease that causes progressive
dementia first observed by Hans Gerhard Creutzfeldt and Alfon Maria Jakob in
the 1920s. In 1976, Carlton Gajdusek won the Nobel prize for his work with the
TSE Kuru. Kuru is characterized by progressive ataxia incapacitation and death.
In 1982, neurobiologist Stanley Prusiner proposed that proteins cause the
neurological disease Scrapie, which is a degenerative neural conditon in sheep.
Prusiner named this infectious protein prion. Prions also cause other neurologi-
cal diseases such as Kuru and Gerstmann-Strausler-Sheinker syndrome.
However, scientists are still studying prions to learn their origins and how pri-
ons replicate and cause disease.
Quiz
1. A virion is:
(a) another name for a virus
(b) a virus particle
(c) a synthesized virus
(d) a mature virus
CHAPTER 12
Viruses, Viroids, and Prions
193

2. A naked virus is
(a) a virus without an envelope
(b) a virus without a capsid
(c) a virus without RNA
(d) a virus without DNA
3. A bacteriophage is:
(a) a virus that can be killed by antibiotics
(b) a virus that acts like a bacteria
(c) a bacteria that acts like a virus
(d) a naked virus that uses bacteria as a host cell
4. What does a lytic virus inject into a host cell?
(a) Nothing
(b) Cytoplasm
(c) Ribosomes
(d) Nucleic acid
5. What is a capsid?
(a) A capsid is the protein coat that encapsulates a virus
(b) A capsid is the membrane bilayer of a virus
(c) A capsid is another name for a bacteriophage
(d) A capsid is the envelope around a virus
6. The envelope of a virus is made of:
(a) pieces of the capsid
(b) pieces of the host cell’s membrane
(c) pieces of the nuclei of the virus
(d) pieces of the nuclei of the host cell
7. A state of lysogeny is:
(a) when the envelope virus and the host cell interact with each other
(b) when the envelope virus and the host cell don’t interact with each
other
(c) when the envelope of a virus interacts with the capsid
(d) when the envelope of a virus interacts with DNA or RNA
8. Oncogenic viruses
(a) cause tumors
(b) cause the common cold
(c) cause herpes
(d) cause influenza
CHAPTER 12
Viruses, Viroids, and Prions
194

9. What is a small infectious particle that contains a protein?
(a) Viroid
(b) Capsid
(c) Virion
(d) Prion
10. Genetic information of a virus is contained in:
(a) the envelope
(b) central nucleic acid
(c) the prion
(d) the viroid
CHAPTER 12
Viruses, Viroids, and Prions
195

This page intentionally left blank.

13
CHAPTER
197
Epidemiology 
and Disease
No one wants to give a friend a cold, so we always cover a sneeze with our
hands. However, the germs are still on our hands and are transferred to door-
knobs, the food we touch, and to friends when we greet them with a handshake. 
In this chapter, you’ll learn about diseases and how disease are spread from
one person to another. You’ll also learn ways that outbreaks of disease are con-
trolled and prevented by taking simple precautions.
What Is Epidemiology?
Epidemiology is the study of the distribution and determinants of diseases or
conditions of a population. The word originated from the two Greek words epi
(“among”) and demos (“people”), or “among the people.” An epidemiologist is
a scientist trained to identify and prevent diseases in a given population. They
are concerned with the etiology, or the specific cause of a disease in a given pop-
Copyright © 2005 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

ulation. Epidemiologists use this information to design ways of preventing and
controlling outbreaks of disease.
Epidemiology is considered a branch of microbiology because microorgan-
isms cause many diseases. It can also be considered a branch of ecology because
of the relationship among pathogens, their hosts, and the environment. The sci-
ence of epidemiology provides the methods and information that are used to
understand and control outbreaks of diseases in human populations, making it
important for public health. An epidemiologist is a person who is trained to iden-
tify and prevent diseases in a given population or a medical doctor who is trained
to identify and treat diseases in individual people. 
Epidemiologists are concerned with the frequency or prevalence of diseases
in a given population. An epidemiologist will identify the factors that cause dis-
ease or how that disease is transmitted and how the spread of communicable and
noncommunicable diseases can be prevented. The incidence rate of a disease is
the total number of new cases seen within a calendar year. The prevalence of a
disease is the number of people infected at any given time. The prevalence rate
is the total number of old and new cases of a disease. Frequencies are also
expressed as proportions of the total population. The morbidity rate is the state
of illness or the number of people in a given population that are ill. This is
expressed as the number of cases per 100,000 people per year. The mortality rate
is the number of people that are dead. This is measured as the number of deaths
from a specific cause per 100,000 people per year.
Classification of Disease
Epidemiologists measure the frequency of diseases within a given population in
regards to the geographical size of the area and the amount of damage the dis-
ease inflicts on the population. Diseases can be classified as endemic, sporadic,
epidemic, or pandemic.
An endemic disease is the average or normal number of cases of a disease in
a certain population.The number of people contracting the disease and the sever-
ity of the disease is so low that it raises little concern and does not constitute a
health problem. An example is the varicella-zoster virus (the virus that causes
chickenpox). Chickenpox is an endemic disease that usually affects children and
is seasonal. An endemic disease can give rise to epidemics. 
A sporadic disease occurs when there are small numbers of isolated cases
reported. Sporadic diseases do not threaten the population.
An epidemic disease arises when the level of disease in a certain population
exceeds the endemic level. This disease will cause an increase in mortality rate
CHAPTER 13
Epidemiology and Disease
198

and the rate of morbidity. The level of destruction will be so large that it will
cause a significant public health concern.
A disease becomes pandemic when it is distributed throughout the world. For
example, in 1918 the swine flu (influenza) reached pandemic proportions. Some
experts consider the HIV virus to be pandemic.
In a common source epidemic, large numbers of the population are suddenly
infected from the same source. These epidemics usually are attributed to a con-
taminated supply of water or improperly prepared or handled food. An example is
people who eat contaminated chicken salad at a college cafeteria. Everyone who
eats the chicken salad on this particular day will become infected and feel ill. The
epidemic will subside very fast, though, as the source of infection is eradicated. 
A propagated epidemic occurs from person-to-person contact. The disease-
causing agent moves from a person who is infected to a person who is not
infected. In a propagated epidemic, the number of new cases rises and falls
much slower than in common source epidemics, making the pathogen much
harder to isolate and thus eliminate. An example is a “flu” virus.
Pathognomonic is a word that refers to the specific characteristics of disease.
Immunity is the specific resistance to disease. Virulence is the degree of patho-
genicity or the capacity of an organism to produce disease. 
Pathology is the study of disease. It is derived from Pathos (“suffering”) and
logos which means (“science”). Pathology is that branch of discourse concerned
with the structural and functional changes that occur due to a disease-causing
agent or pathogen. A pathologist is a scientist or physician who studies the cause of
diseases, or etiology, and pathogenesis, the manner in which a disease develops.
Infection Sites
The sites where a microorganism can infect a host organism are called reservoirs
of infection. In these sites a microorganism can maintain its ability to cause
infection. Reservoirs of infection include humans, some animals, certain non-
living media, and inanimate objects.
HUMAN RESERVOIRS
Humans make good reservoirs because they can transmit organisms to other
humans. Certain disease-causing agents have an incubation period during which
they are contagious and can spread the disease even before a person exhibits
CHAPTER 13
Epidemiology and Disease
199

signs or symptoms. These disease-causing agents can even be contagious during
the recovery period.
When a person becomes symptomatic (feeling sick), the individual seeks
medical attention and receives treatment. In many cases, however, diseases are
spread from a person with subclinical findings—the symptoms are very mild and
not recognizable. These individuals can spread the disease to a healthy person.
Asymptomatic cases are a problem because infected people can infect other indi-
viduals without knowing they are infected. These individuals that are “carriers”
of disease are called disease carriers. 
Carriers of disease are classified as:
• Subclinical carriers. These individuals never develop clinical symptoms
of the disease.
• Incubatory carriers. These individuals transmit the disease before be-
coming symptomatic.
• Convalescent carriers are individuals are recovering from the disease; how-
ever, they can still infect other people.
• Chronic carriers. These individuals develop chronic infections and trans-
mit the infection for long periods of time.
ANIMAL RESERVOIRS
Many microorganisms can infect both humans and animals. Many of these dis-
ease-causing agents use animals as reservoirs of infection to infect humans.
Apes and monkeys are good examples of animals that serve as reservoirs for
human infection because they are physiologically similar to humans. When an
animal infects humans, the humans can also serve as reservoirs for the infection. 
A disease that is transmitted from domestic and wild animals to humans is
called zoonosis. Two examples of zoonoses are anthrax, which is a bacterial dis-
ease that causes infection in dogs, cats, cattle, and other domestic animals.
Humans become infected with direct contact with the animals, their wool, or
hides, contaminated soil, inhalation of spores, and ingestion of meat or milk.
Another is rabies, a virus that infects dogs, cats, skunks, wolves, and bats.
Humans become infected through infected saliva in bite wounds. Humans and
domestic animals can also be reservoirs for wild animals.
NONLIVING RESERVOIRS
Examples of nonliving reservoirs are water and soil. Soil is a good reservoir for
the bacterium Clostridium tetani, which causes the disease tetanus. Conta-
CHAPTER 13
Epidemiology and Disease
200

minated water infected with human or animal fecal matter can contain many
diseases-causing agents. An example is the bacterium Vibrio cholera, which
causes Asiatic cholera, a disease caused by feces contaminated water where san-
itation is poor. This organism invades the intestines and causes severe vomiting,
diarrhea, abdominal pain, and dehydration. 
Disease Transmission
A disease must have a portal of exit from the reservoir and a portal of entry to
the infected host. This is how diseases are spread and new cases of infection occur.
Examples of portal of exit are the respiratory tract, digestive tract, urinary tract,
skin, and utero transmission. Diseases can spread by three different modes of trans-
mission: contact transmission, vehicle transmission, and vector transmission.
CONTACT TRANSMISSION
Contact transmission of a disease-causing agent can either be direct or indirect.
Direct contact transmission occurs from skin-to-skin contact, such as shaking
hands, kissing, sexual contact, or making contact with open sores. Examples of
diseases caused by contact transmission include herpes, syphilis, and staphylo-
coccal infections.
Indirect contact transmission occurs when infection is spread through any
nonliving, inanimate object. These contaminated inanimate objects are called
fomites and include bedding, towels, clothing, dishes, utensils, glasses and cups,
diapers, tissues, and even bars of soap. Examples of diseases caused by indirect
contact transmission include the rhinovirus, hepatitis B, and tetanus.
Droplet transmission is a form of contact transmission that occurs through
sneezing, coughing, and speaking in close contact with an infected individual.
Examples of diseases transmitting in this manner are pneumonia, influenza, the
common cold, and whooping cough.
VEHICLE TRANSMISSION
In vector transmissions, pathogens can be spread through the air and in water,
food products, and body fluids (such as blood and semen). Airborne microor-
ganisms mainly come from animals, plants, water, and soil. These microorgan-
CHAPTER 13
Epidemiology and Disease
201

isms can transmit disease through air. They can travel one meter or more through
an air medium to spread infection. 
Airborne pathogens have the greatest chance of infecting new individuals when
these individuals are crowded together indoors or in a climate-controlled build-
ing where heating and air conditioning units regulate temperature and very
little fresh air enters the building. Airborne pathogens can fall to the floor and
combine with dust particles. This dust can then be stirred up with walking, dry
mopping, or changing bedding and clothing. Examples of diseases that are trans-
mitted by airborne transmissions and dust particles are measles, chickenpox, histo-
plasmosis, and tuberculosis.
Waterborne microorganisms that cause pathologies do not grow in pure water.
They can survive in water with small amounts of nutrients but thrive in polluted
water, such as water contaminated with fertilizer and sewage (which is rich in
nutrients). Waterborne pathogens are usually transmitted in contaminated water
supplies by either untreated or inadequately treated sewage. Indirect fecal-oral
transmission of pathogens occurs when the disease-causing microorganism liv-
ing in the fecal matter of one organism infects another organism. Bacterial
pathogens infect the digestive system, causing gastrointestinal signs and symp-
toms. Examples of waterborne diseases are shigellosis and cholera.
Foodborne pathogens are normally transmitted through improperly cooked
or improperly refrigerated food, or unsanitary conditions. Improper hygiene of
the part of food handlers also plays a key role in foodborne transmission. Food-
borne pathogens can produce gastrointestinal signs and symptoms. Examples of
foodborne diseases are salmonellosis, typhoid fever, tapeworm, and listeriosos.
Vector Transmission
Vector spread is the transmission of an infectious agent by a living organism
to humans. Most vectors are ticks, flies, and mosquitoes. These organisms are
called arthropods. Vectors can transmit disease in two ways. First, mechanical
vectors can passively transmit disease with their bodies. An example is the
common housefly. 
These animals commonly feed on fecal matter. They then fly to feed on human
food, transmitting pathogens along the way. Keeping mechanical vectors away
from food preparation and eating areas are means of prevention. Remember: The
fly that is walking across your picnic lunch may have just walked across dog or
cat feces. Examples of a few diseases transmitted by mechanical vectors are
diarrhea caused by E. coli bacteria, conjunctivitis, and salmonellosis.
The second type of vectors are biological vectors and can actively transmit
disease-causing pathogens that complete part of their life cycle within the vector.
In most vector-transmitted diseases, a biological vector is the host for a phase of
CHAPTER 13
Epidemiology and Disease
202

the life cycle of the pathogen. An example of a host organism is a mosquito that
infects a human with malaria. Other diseases caused by biological transmission
vectors are yellow fever, the plague, typhus, and Rocky Mountain spotted fever.
To cause infection, a microorganism must enter the body and have access to
body tissues. The sites where microorganisms enter the body are called portals
of entry. The portal of entry is similar to the portal of exit for the host to be sus-
ceptible for a certain disease. The portals of entry include the skin, digestive
tract, respiratory tract, and urinary tract. Microorganisms can invade tissues
directly or cross the placenta to infect the fetus. Skin that is intact prevents most
microorganisms from entering the body, although some enter the ducts of sudo-
riferous glands (sweat glands) and hair follicles to gain entrance into the body. 
Fungi can invade cells on the surface of the body and some can even invade
other tissues. The larvae of parasitic worms can work their way through the skin
and enter tissues. An example of a parasitic worm is the hookworm.
Mucous membranes make direct contact with the external environment. This
allows microorganisms to enter the body. Examples of mucous membranes are
the eyes, nose, mouth, urethra, vagina, and anus. The respiratory tract is an area
of the body where microorganisms typically enter on dust particles that are
inhaled with air or in aerosol droplets. Microorganisms that infect the digestive
tract, are normally ingested with contaminated water or food, or even from bit-
ing the nails of contaminated fingers. 
Many genitourinary infections are the result of sexual contact. Skin that is not
intact due to injury, surgery, injections, burns, and bites makes it easy for invad-
ing microorganisms to penetrate body tissues. Common portals of entry are
insect bites. Many parasitic diseases are caused by the bites of insects. Some dis-
eases can affect the fetus through the placenta of an infected mother. Viruses
such as the HIV virus, rubella (German measles), and the bacteria that cause
syphilis behave in this way. 
The transmission of disease by carriers causes epidemiological problems
because carriers usually do not know they are infected and spread the disease,
causing sudden outbreaks. Carriers can transmit disease by direct and indirect
contact or through vehicles, such as water, air, and food.
The Development of Disease
In order for a pathogen to infect a host, there must be a susceptible host for the
disease to be transmitted. If a host’s resistance is low (resistance is the ability to
ward off disease), its susceptibility increases (its chances of becoming infected
increase). Primary defense mechanisms of the body for resistance include intact
CHAPTER 13
Epidemiology and Disease
203

skin (no cuts or abrasions), mucous membranes, a good cough reflex, normal
gastric juices, and normal bacterial flora.
If a microorganism penetrates these defenses the development of a disease
process begins. First there may be an incubation period. This is the time between
the initial exposure and start of the infection to the first appearance of signs and
the feeling of symptoms. Different microorganisms have different incubation
periods. An examples is the Epstein-Barr virus, which causes infectious mono-
nucleosis and has an incubation period of two to six weeks. 
The varicella-zoster virus, which causes varicella (chickenpox), has an incu-
bation period of two weeks. The human immunodeficiency virus, the virus that
causes AIDS, has an incubation period of 7 to 11 years. During this phase, the
disease can be spread from the infected individual to a non-infected individual.
The prodromal period follows the incubation period. This period presents
with mild symptoms.
The period of illness is the acute phase of the disease. Here the individual
presents with signs and symptoms of the disease. Signs are objective findings
that an observer or physician can see. These are physical changes that can be
measured. Examples of signs are fever, skin color or lesions, blood pressure,
inflammation, and paralysis. 
Symptoms are subjective and cannot be seen by an observer. Symptoms pres-
ent as changes in bodily functions, such as pain, numbness, chills, general fatigue,
or gastrointestinal discomfort. It is in this period of the disease where white blood
cells may increase and the individual’s immune system responds to combat the
disease-causing pathogen. If the individual’s defense mechanism of the immune
system does not successfully overcome the disease or if the disease is not treated
properly, the person can die.
During the period of decline, the individual’s signs and symptoms subside
and the person feels better. This period may take 24 hours to several days.
During this time, the individual is prone to secondary infections.
The period of convalescence is the phase where recovery has occurred. The
body regains strength and is returned to a state of normality. During this phase,
infection can also be spread.
Epidemiological Studies
Epidemiological studies began in 1855 with the work of English physician John
Snow. Snow conducted studies relating to the cholera outbreak in London,
England. Snow, through careful analysis of deaths related to cholera, case histo-
ries of victims, and interviews with survivors, traced the source of the epidemic
CHAPTER 13
Epidemiology and Disease
204

to a water pump. He concluded that individuals who died from cholera drank
water contaminated with human feces. Snow’s study and his method of analyz-
ing where and when a disease could occur and the transmission of that disease
within a given population gave way to a new approach in medical research and
epidemiological studies.
It was not until 1883 that the cholera bacterium Vibrio cholerae was identi-
fied by Robert Koch. After the studies of Snow, other investigators conducted
epidemiological studies. Epidemiologists now use three types of studies when
determining the occurrence of disease: descriptive, analytical, and experimental.
Descriptive epidemiology is the collection of all data described in the occur-
rence of disease. This data includes the number of cases, which portion of the
population was infected, where the cases occurred, and information about 
the affected individuals (race, sex, age, occupation, marital status, and socio-
economic status).
Analytical epidemiology analyzes the cause of a disease and the effect of the
disease in a given population. Here epidemiologists compare a group of people
who have the disease with people who do not have the disease.
Experimental epidemiology are studies designed to test hypotheses for the
source of a particular disease. Experiments are conducted on human or animal
subjects to test the hypothesis. An example is the testing of an experimental drug
designed to control a specific disease. A group of infected individuals is divided
randomly so that one group receives the drug and the other receives a placebo.
A placebo is a substance that has no effect on the individual receiving it, but the
individual believes he or she is receiving treatment. If those people who were
treated with the drug recover faster than those taking the placebo, investigators
can conclude that the drug treatment is effective.
Control of Communicable Diseases
There are different ways of controlling or limiting the spread of communicable
diseases. These methods include isolation, quarantine, immunization, and vec-
tor control.
Isolation requires that a patient infected with a communicable disease be pre-
vented from making contact with the general public. The Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention has designated five categories of isolation: strict, pro-
tective, respiratory, enteric, and wound and skin.
Quarantine requires the separation of animals and humans that have been
infected or exposed to a communicable disease from the general public.
CHAPTER 13
Epidemiology and Disease
205

Immunization is an effective means of controlling the spread of communica-
ble diseases by the use of safe vaccines. A vaccine is a preparation of killed, atten-
uated, inactivated, or fully virulent organisms that are administered to induce or
produce artificially acquired active immunity.
Vector control is a good way of controlling the spread of infectious disease
when the vector, such as rodents or insects, is identified. This vector’s habitats
and breeding grounds can be treated with insecticides and poisons. Also, barri-
ers such as window screens, netting, and repellents can provide protection against
bites and infection.
Nosocomial Infections
A nosocomial infection is an infection that is the result of a pathogen that was
acquired in a hospital or clinical care facility. Nosocomial is derived from the
Latin word nosocomium, which means “hospital.” These are the diseases that a
patient can obtain when he or she is being cared for in a hopital. These diseases
can also affect the caregivers, such as the hospital staff, nurses, doctors, aides, and
even visitors or anyone else who has contact with a hospital or medical facility.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimate that among the
patients that are admitted to hospitals, 5 to 15 percent acquire some type of noso-
comial infection. Nosocomial infections result directly in over 20,000 deaths
and indirectly in about 60,000 deaths.
Nosocomial disease-causing pathogens come from either endogenous or
exogenous sources. Endogenous infections are caused by pathogens that were
brought into the hospital by the patient; the opportunistic pathogen is among the
patient’s own microbiota. 
Exogenous infections are caused by organisms that enter the patient’s body
from the external environment. These organisms can be acquired from animate
sources, such as hospital staff, other patients, or people visiting the hospital.
Organisms can also come from inanimate sources, like hospital equipment,
intravenous and respiratory therapy equipment, catheters, computer keyboards,
bathroom fixtures, doorknobs, soaps, and even certain disinfectants.
Who Is Susceptible?
A person who is susceptible to a nosocomial infection is one who has a com-
promised immune system. Compared to the general public, patients in hospitals
CHAPTER 13
Epidemiology and Disease
206

have a lowered resistance to disease, thus making them more susceptible to
infections. Many of these patients are said to be “compromised hosts”—they
have breaks in their skin due to accidental or surgical wounds (lesions, bedsores,
or burns). Others may have compromised mucous membranes that line the res-
piratory tract, the digestive tract, or the urinary and reproductive system, mak-
ing them more susceptible to disease-causing pathogens. 
Prevention and Control 
of Nosocomial Infections
Most hospitals and clinical facilities have control measures and procedures
aimed at preventing nosocomial infections. For a hospital to be accredited, it
must have a designated person responsible for developing and implementing
policies and procedures that would control infections and communicable dis-
eases. This person can be a registered nurse or an epidemiologist.
PUBLIC HEALTH ORGANIZATIONS: 
THE CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL
Public health agencies have been created in cities, countries, states, and at the
federal level. The United States has recognized the importance of identifying
and controlling infectious diseases since the eighteenth century. The Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) is a branch of the United States Public
Health Service (USPHS). The CDC is located in Atlanta, Georgia, and is the
central source of epidemiological study and information. The CDC is responsi-
ble for the control and prevention of disease, public education, and occupational
health and safety.
Quiz 
1. The number of people infected by a disease at any point in time is called 
(a) incidence
(b) prevalence
(c) morbidity rate
(d) prevalence rate
CHAPTER 13
Epidemiology and Disease
207

2. The total number of old and new cases of a disease is called
(a) incidence
(b) prevalence 
(c) morbidity rate 
(d) prevalence rate
3. The number of people in a given population who are ill is called
(a) incidence
(b) prevalence 
(c) morbidity rate 
(d) prevalence rate
4. What is a disease called when there is a worldwide distribution of the
disease?
(a) Pandemic
(b) Sporadic disease
(c) Source epidemic
(d) Propagated epidemic
5. What is it called when a disease arises from person-to-person contact?
(a) Pandemic
(b) Sporadic disease
(c) Source epidemic
(d) Propagated epidemic
6. What is it called when large numbers of a population are infected suddenly
from a common source?
(a) Pandemic
(b) Sporadic disease
(c) Source epidemic
(d) Propagated epidemic
7. What is it called when there are small isolated occurrences of a disease
reported?
(a) Pandemic
(b) Sporadic disease
(c) Source epidemic
(d) Propagated epidemic
CHAPTER 13
Epidemiology and Disease
208

8. What is the period of time called when a disease is contagious and com-
municable before showing signs and symptoms and during recovery?
(a) Symptomatic
(b) Incubation period
(c) Asymptomatic
(d) Carrier period
9. Incubatory carriers are individuals who transmit the disease before becom-
ing symptomatic.
(a) True
(b) False
10. Convalescent carriers are individuals who develop chronic infections and
transmit the infection for long periods of time.
(a) True
(b) False
CHAPTER 13
Epidemiology and Disease
209

This page intentionally left blank.

14
CHAPTER
211
Immunity
There’s a battle going on beneath your skin. Thousands of microbes crawl into
every nook and cranny of your body in a daily invasion. Yet you rarely notice
because an army of B cells, T cells, natural killer cells, and other parts of your
immune system counterattack, ripping most microbes to pieces. Those that sur-
vive give you a runny nose, cough, and feverish feeling, and, on rare occasions,
more serious illness. 
The immune system fights invading bacteria, viruses, and pollen and venom
from bees. Anything foreign that enters your body is surrounded and either
neutralized or destroyed by your immune system before it can cause damage to
your body. 
In this chapter, you’ll learn the parts of the immune system and how each
functions to give you protection days and years from now.
What Is Immunity?
An immune system is an organism’s protection from invading organisms and for-
eign substances, such as bacteria, viruses, fungi, helminths, protozoa, pollen,
Copyright © 2005 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

transplanted tissues, and insect venom. Parts of these substances are called anti-
gens, or immunogens. Antigens can be polysaccharides or proteins and provoke
a specific immune response in organisms. Immunity is a specific defensive
response of a host when a foreign substance or organism invades it. 
The body reacts to the foreign substance (antigen) by forming antibodies.
Antibodies are proteins that are made by the body in response to an antigen and
can combine specifically with that antigen. 
The immune system recognizes a body or substance within the organism as
self or nonself. Self is any body or substance that belongs to the organism. Non-
self is any body or organism that doesn’t belong to the organism. An antigen is
recognized as nonself by the immune system. 
An antigen causes the organism to form antibodies and specialized lympho-
cytes that target the specific antigen. If the antigen invades again, these antibod-
ies and specialized lymphocytes attack the antigen, making the antigen inactive
or destroyed. This is called an immune response against an antigen. 
Cells that become cancerous are recognized as foreign and can be destroyed.
Cancerous cells, once established as a tumor, might have a dreadful effect on the
organism because the immune system is not be able to fight them.
ACQUIRED IMMUNITY
The development of antibodies and specialized lymphocytes is called acquired
immunity because it is acquired over an organism’s life through naturally
acquired immunity and artificially acquired immunity means. 
Acquired immunity is the protective defense mechanism an organism devel-
ops against foreign substances and microorganisms. This type of immunity is
established throughout an individual’s life. 
There are two types of acquired immunity. These are active and passive.
When an individual is exposed to a disease-causing microorganism or foreign
substance, the person’s own immune system responds by making its own anti-
bodies and lymphocytes. 
In passive immunity, already-made antibodies are introduced or passed on
to an individual. The individual does not make its own antibodies. 
Naturally acquired active immunity occurs when an individual is exposed to
an infectious disease. The individual’s immune system responds by making its
own antibodies and lymphocytes (T cells and B cells) on its own. 
Naturally acquired passive immunity occurs when antibodies (IgG) are made
by a mother and passed on to the fetus through the placenta. IgA antibodies are
CHAPTER 14
Immunity
212

also passed to the baby in the first secretion of breast milk, called colostrum,
during breast-feeding. 
Artificially acquired active immunity occurs when an individual is given a
vaccine. A vaccine is a substance that contains the weakened or dead organisms.
These antigens stimulate the immune response, but do not cause major sickness.
The body remembers the antigen with memory cells the next time there is expo-
sure to the antigen. 
Artificially acquired passive immunity occurs when antibodies are developed
outside the individual and intravenously injected into the body. This form of
immunity helps the body’s own defenses in combating infection. 
Serum and Antibodies
Serum is the fluid that remains after the blood has clotted and the serum is sep-
arated from the blood cells and clotted material. Electrophoresis is a laboratory
technique that introduces electrical current into a serum placed in a gel. This
causes proteins within the serum to move across the gel at different rates, which
represents different globulins. 
There are three globulins. These are called alpha, beta, and gamma globulins.
Gamma globulin contains the most antibodies. A serum rich in antibodies is
called either gamma globulin or serum globulin. 
Gamma globulin can be taken from a person who is immune to an antigen and
injected into a person who lacks the antigen, who then immediately becomes
immune from the antigen. However, the immunity lasts for about three weeks,
at which time the antibodies degrade.
Types of Immunity
ANTIBODY-MEDIATED IMMUNITY
Antibody-mediated immunity, which is also known as humoral immunity, uses
antibodies in extracellular fluids, such as mucus secretions, blood plasma, and
lymph, to combat antigens. These antibodies, produced from B cells, which are
also known as B lymphocytes, primarily attack bacteria, bacterial toxins, and
viruses that invade body fluids. They also attack transplanted tissues. 
Antibody-mediated immunity was discovered by German scientist Emil von
Behring at the turn of the twentieth century in his quest to create an immuniza-
tion against diphtheria. Behring called this humoral immunity because the med-
ical community called body fluids humors. 
CHAPTER 14
Immunity
213

CELL-MEDIATED IMMUNITY
Cell-mediated immunity involves specialized lymphocytes called T cells, also
known as T lymphocytes, to attack foreign organisms rather than using antibod-
ies. T cells are also effective against helminths, fungi, and protozoa. In addition,
T cells regulate aspects of the immune system. 
Cell-mediated immunity was explained by Russian biologist, Elie
Metchnikoff, who in the early 1900’s noticed that phagocytic cells were much
more effective in animals that were immunized. This immunity was used in the
mid-twentieth century to protect people against tuberculosis.
A Closer Look at Antigens
An antibody identifies its corresponding antigen by one or more regions on the
antigen known as the epitopes, which are also called antigenic determinants. The
epitope must be the right size, shape, and chemical structure for the antibody to
bind to the epitope and then proceed to disable or destroy the antigen. 
Antigens tend to have a molecular weight of 10,000 or more yet some foreign
substances might have a lower molecular weight and are not antigens. They are
called haptens and must attach themselves to a large carrier molecule in order to
become antigenic. Antibodies only attack the hapten and not the carrier molecule. 
Penicillin is a common hapten. Penicillin does not have an antigen effect in
most people. However, when penicillin attaches to serum proteins an allergic
reaction results in some people. These people are said to be allergic to penicillin.
An allergic reaction is a typical immune response. 
Antigens can be proteins, large polysaccharides, lipids, or nucleic acids.
However, antigens that are lipids and nucleic acids must be combined with pro-
teins and polysaccharides; otherwise they are not antigens.
A Closer Look at Binding
Antibodies are known as immunoglobulins (Igs), which is a group of soluble
proteins. An antigen can cause the production of different antibodies if the anti-
gen has several epitopes. Epitopes or antigenic determinants, are known as antigen-
CHAPTER 14
Immunity
214

binding sites. The number of antigen-binding sites is called the antibody’s val-
ence. There are at least two antigen-binding sites on each antigen where a human
antibody can bind. This is referred to as a bivalent antibody because the anti-
body’s valence value is two. 
The structure of a bivalent antibody is called a monomer and consists of four
protein chains that are named after their relative molecular weights. These are
two light (L) chains and two heavy (H) chains. 
These protein chains are joined together to form a Y-shaped molecule that is
flexible enough to form a T-shaped molecule. There are two regions of the pro-
tein chain. These are the variable (V) region and the constant (C) region.
The variable region is located at the ends of the arms of the Y. These are the
sites where the antibody binds with an antigen. The variable region is a three-
dimensional structure of amino acid sequences whose structure reflects the epi-
topes of the antigen. 
The constant region is the stem of the Y and is called the Fc region. The Fc
region binds adjacent complementary antibodies if both antigen-binding sites
are attached to an antigen; otherwise the adjacent complementary antibodies are
free to attach and react with antigen. 
There are five types of constant regions each associated with the five classes
of immunoglobulin.
IgG
IgG immunoglobulin neutralizes bacterial toxins and attacks circulating bacteria
and viruses by enhancing the effectiveness of phyagocytic cells. Nearly 80 per-
cent of the antibodies in serum are IgG. IgG can cross blood vessel walls and the
placenta and can enter tissue fluids. 
IgM
IgM immunoglobulin is the first antibody to respond to an antigen or initial infec-
tion and makes up about 10 percent of antibodies in serum. IgM is relatively large
in size and has a pentamer structure of five monomers bonded together by a join-
ing (J) chain. This chain is a polypeptide. Because of its size, IgM remains in
blood vessels and not in tissue fluids. IgM responds to the ABO blood group anti-
gens and enhances the effectiveness of phyagocytic cells. When initial exposure
to an antigen occurs, IgM antibodies are the first to appear. 
CHAPTER 14
Immunity
215

IgA
IgA immunoglobulin is the most common antibody in body secretions and in
mucous membranes. It consists of about 15 percent of the antibodies in a serum.
IgA protects infants from gastrointestinal infections and fights antigens that
affect the respiratory tract. Plasma cells in the mucous membrane form secretory
IgA, which is then passed through the mucosal cell and attacks antigens on the
mucosal surface such as bacteria and viruses. IgA is short-lived
IgD
IgD immunoglobulin is found in blood and lymph fluid and is an antigen re-
ceptor on the surface of B cells. This also provides protection against para-
sitic worms.
IgE
IgE immunoglobulin binds to basophil cells and mast cells that release chemical
mediators, such as histamine, that cause an allergic reaction. When pollen is the
antigen, the allergic reaction is referred to as hay fever. IgE is less than one per-
cent of serum antibodies. This provides protection against parasitic worms.
B Cells 
B cells are cells that develop from stem cells in the bone marrow and the liver
of fetuses. They are transported to the lymph nodes and spleen where they use
antigen receptors, also known as antigen-binding sites, on the cell’s surface to
seek out antigens. 
Once an antigen is detected, the B cell with T cells activates a special group
of lymphocytes that produces antibodies used in the antibody-mediated immu-
nity response. T cells do not make antibodies. When B cells come in contact with
extracellular antigens, the B cell transforms into plasma cells, that produce anti-
bodies at about 2,000 antibodies per second to combat that antigen. 
CHAPTER 14
Immunity
216

Memory cells are also produced when a B cell is stimulated by an antigen. A
memory cell provides the organism with long-term immunity to the antigen. 
B cells react to one kind of antigen that is referred to as its complementary
antigen and are able to identify that antigen because antigen receptors bind to
one specific antigen. Here’s how it works: Once the antigen binds to the antigen
receptor, the B cell replicates into a clonal selection. A clonal selection is a large
cluster of clone cells. 
An antibody attaches to an antigen at an antigen-binding site to form an
antigen-antibody complex. This complex is very specific. However, when there
are large quantities of antigens, the antigens attach to antibodies where they do
not exactly fit. This makes for less-than-perfect matches for the antigen-anti-
body complex. These antibodies are said to have less affinity to the antigen.
B cells under go apoptosis if the B cell does not come in contact with an anti-
gen. Apoptosis is a programmed death of the B cell that causes phagocytes to
remove the cell from the organism. 
STRATEGIES FOR COMBATING ANTIGENS
The formation of antigen-antibody complexes is useful in the response to in-
fectious organisms or foreign substances because they remove the infectious
agent from the body. Protective methodology of binding antibodies to antigens
is accomplished by agglutination, opsonization, neutralization, antibody-depend-
ent cell-mediated cytotoxicity, and the activation of complement.
• Agglutination generates antibodies that clump together antigens, making
them easy to ingest by phagocytes. 
• Opsonization coats the antigen with antibodies to make it easy for phago-
cytic cells to ingest and for lysis. 
• Neutralization blocks antigens from attaching to targeted cells, thereby
neutralizing the antigen. 
• Antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity coats the foreign cell with
antibodies. Nonspecific immune cells then destroy the foreign cell from
the outside. This is used for organisms that are too large for phagocytic cells
to ingest. 
• The activation of complement is used when infectious agents are coated with
reactive proteins that cause IgG and IgM antibodies to attach to the agent,
causing lysis of the cell membrane and resulting in ingestion by phagocytes. 
CHAPTER 14
Immunity
217

Lasting Immunity
When antigens are first encountered, the primary immune response occurs caus-
ing an increase in the antibody titer. The antibody titer is the amount of anti-
bodies in serum of the infected organism. There are no or undetectable levels of
antibodies when the antigen first attacks the organism. Then the antibody titer
gradually increases and then declines as the antigen is destroyed or neutralized. 
When antigens are encountered for the second time, the secondary immune
response occurs, causing memory cells to quickly transform into plasma cells
that produce antibodies. The secondary immune response is also known as the
anamnestic response or memory response. A memory cell is a B lymphocyte that
was generated in the primary immune response but did not became an antibody-
producing plasma cell at that time.
Antibodies Used for Diagnosing Diseases
Antibodies are useful in diagnosing diseases since a particular antibody is pro-
duced only if a complimentary antigen is present in the organism. This is useful
in identifying an unknown disease-causing pathogen.
Antibodies can be produced in the laboratory by a clone of cultured cells that
make one type of antibody. These antibodies are called monoclonal antibodies.
Malignant cells of the immune system called myeloma cells are used because
they divide forever. This is why malignant cells (cancer cells) are so devastating
to our body. These myeloma cells are then mixed with lymphocytes that have
been designed to produce a specific antibody. When these cells are mixed to-
gether, they fuse to become one cell called a hybridoma. Hybridomas divide
indefinitely because they have the gene from the myeloma cell. They can produce
large amounts of antibodies because they have the gene from the lymphocyte. 
Monoclonal antibodies are used to diagnose streptococcal bacteria and
chlamydial infections. Some over the counter pregnancy tests use monoclonal
antibodies to detect the hormones found in urine during pregnancy. 
Chemical Messengers
Cells in the immune system communicate with each other by using chemical
messengers sending signals to trigger activities. These chemical messengers are
known as cytokines. There are 60 known cytokines.
CHAPTER 14
Immunity
218

Cytokines used for communication between leukocytic cells are called 
interleukins. There are 17 known interleukins that are identified by numbers
assigned to them by an international committee. Table 14-1 lists important
interleukins. 
Cytokines are used as therapeutic agents to combat disease. For example, Inter-
leukin-1 is used to stop blood flow to tumors in animals, thereby killing the tumor. 
T Cells
T cells develop from stem cells in bone marrow and migrate to the thymus gland
where they mature. They then migrate to the lymphatic system to begin their
fight against antigens. The “T” stands for thymus gland. Once the organism
reaches late adulthood, the ability to create new T cells diminishes, resulting in
a weaker immune system as the organism ages. 
A T cell attacks a specific antigen that is displayed on the surface of the cell.
These cells are called antigen-presenting cells (APCs), such as, macrophages
and dendritic cells. After the antigen is ingested by the APC, fragments of the
antigen are placed on the surface of the cell. These fragments must be near the
cell-surface self-molecules. Self-molecules are part of the histocompatibility
complex (MHC), which is a group of proteins that are unique to a person and
used to distinguish self from nonself.
When an antigen receptor encounters fragments of the complimentary anti-
gen, the T cell transforms into the effector T cell that carries out the immune
response. An effector T cell is an antigen-stimulated cell. Some T cells attack
CHAPTER 14
Immunity
219
Interleukins
Description
Interleukin-1
Stimulates T cells 
Attracts phagocytes in an inflammatory response
Interleukin-2
Stimulates B cell production
Stimulates T cell production
Interleukin-8
Attracts phagocytes to the inflammation site
Interleukin-12
Stimulates the differentiation of CD4-type T cells
Table 14-1.
Important Interleukins

the antigen in a primary immune response, while others become memory cells
and take on a secondary immune response role when the antigen is encountered
later on. 
There are four types of T cells, each identified by characteristics of their sur-
face molecules. These are
• Helper T (TH) cells. These cause the formation of cytotoxic T cells, activate
macrophages, produce cytokines, and are essential to the formation of anti-
bodies by B cells.
• Cytotoxic T (TC) cells. These destroy cells that have been infected by viruses
and bacteria. 
• Delayed hypersensitivity T (TD) cells. These are associated with allergic
reactions. 
• Suppressor T (TS) cells. These turn off the immune response when there
are no antigens.
T cells are also identified by their surface receptors, called clusters of differ-
entiation (CD). There are two types of clusters of differentiation. These are:
• CD4—Helper T cells
• CD8—Cytotoxic T cells and suppressor T cells
Macrophages and 
Natural Killer Cells
Macrophages are phagocytic cells that ingest antigens. They are in a resting state
until they receive a cytokine from the helper T cell, at which point they become
large and ruffled and ready to attack the antigens. Macrophages destroy virus-
infected cells and bacteria in intracellular locations. They also eliminate some
cancerous cells. 
Natural killer cells (NK) are lymphocytes that destroy other cells such as
tumor cells. Natural killer cells are always active and searching for an infected
cell. These are different from other cells in the immune system, which become
activated only when stimulated by an antigen. 
CHAPTER 14
Immunity
220

Quiz
1. What triggers the immune response when a foreign substance invades the
body? 
(a) Acquired immunity
(b) Antigen
(c) Antibody
(d) Self
2. Immunity where a mother passes antibodies to her fetus is called
(a) passive naturally acquired immunity
(b) active naturally acquired immunity
(c) passive artificially acquired immunity
(d) active artificially acquired immunity
3. Immunity where antibodies are developed outside the organism in an
immune serum is called
(a) passive naturally acquired immunity
(b) active naturally acquired immunity
(c) passive artificially acquired immunity
(d) active artificially acquired immunity
4. Immunity where the organism produces antibodies and specialized lym-
phocytes to fight an antigen is called
(a) passive naturally acquired immunity
(b) active naturally acquired immunity
(c) passive artificially acquired immunity
(d) active artificially acquired immunity
5. Immunity where antigens are injected into an organism as a vaccine is called
(a) passive naturally acquired immunity
(b) active naturally acquired immunity
(c) passive artificially acquired immunity
(d) active artificially acquired immunity
6. A serum that contains most antibodies is called
(a) alpha globulin
(b) gamma globulin
CHAPTER 14
Immunity
221

(c) beta globulin
(d) antibody degrade
7. What immunity uses antibodies in extracellular fluids?
(a) Antibody-mediated immunity
(b) Cell-mediated immunity 
(c) Epitopes
(d) Haptens
8. What kind of immunity uses specialized lymphocyte cells called T cells?
(a) Antibody-mediated immunity
(b) Cell-mediated immunity 
(c) Epitopes
(d) Haptens
9. The number of antigen-binding sites is called the antibody’s valence.
(a) True
(b) False
10. The structure of a bivalent antibody is called a monomer
(a) True
(b) False
CHAPTER 14
Immunity
222

15
CHAPTER
223
Vaccines and 
Diagnosing Diseases
Would you pay your doctor to inject you with the flu virus? Of course not, but
that’s what millions of people do each year—and you might be one of them if you
get an annual flu vaccine. The flu vaccine contains some form of the flu virus or
an attenuated form.
Vaccines prevent you from catching a disease because they contain an ele-
ment of the disease. This element triggers your body to create an army of anti-
bodies that are trained to stamp out the disease if you contract it in the future. 
There are many kinds of vaccines, each designed to prevent certain diseases.
You’ll learn about vaccines in this chapter. You’ll also learn how your immune
system is used to diagnose diseases.
What Is a Vaccine?
A vaccine is a suspension that contains a part of a pathogen that induces the
immune system to produce antibodies that combat the antigen. The concept of a
Copyright © 2005 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

vaccine stems from the variolation process that was used in eighteenth-century
England to protect people from smallpox. 
The variolation process requires that a needle tip of smallpox be placed in the
vein of a patient. Nearly all the patients contracted a mild case of smallpox, which
left them with antibodies that protected them from contracting the disease. Half
of the patients who contracted smallpox died. By contrast, only one percent who
received the variolation process died. 
Edward Jenner noticed that dairymaids who contracted cowpox, which is
related chemically to smallpox, were immune to smallpox. Jenner discovered
that injecting cowpox into the skin of a healthy person prevented them from
developing smallpox. Jenner’s discovery enabled Louis Pasteur to develop the
technique of creating vaccines.
The injection of an antigen induces the primary immune and secondary
immune responses in the patient. The primary immune response produces anti-
bodies and the secondary immune response produces memory cells that attack
a future invasion of the antigen (see Chapter 14). 
Vaccines play an important role in controlling the spread of viruses. A virus
cannot be treated with antibiotics. However, you can minimize catching the flu
by getting a flu shot, which is a vaccine against a particular strain of flu virus. 
Vaccines also prevent bacterial infections such as typhoid, but are not as
effective on bacteria as they are on viruses. However, bacteria infections are treat-
able with antibiotics, which is a common method of combating bacterial diseases. 
Scientists use vaccines to provide herd immunity to a population. Herd
immunity requires that most—not all—of the population be immunized in order
to prevent an epidemic of a disease. An outbreak of a disease would be isolated 
to a small percentage of the population and therefore have a minimum effect.
Types of Vaccines
There are six types of vaccines. These are:
Attenuated whole agent. These vaccines are designed for people who have a nor-
mal immune system. The attenuated whole agent vaccine uses weakened living
microbes to mimic the real infection to produce 95 percent immunity over a long
term without the need of a supplemental vaccination called a booster. Common
attenuated whole agent vaccines include those for tuberculosis bacillus, measles,
rubella, Sabin polio, and mumps. There is a risk that live microorganisms or virus
can regain their strength resulting in the patient contracting the disease. 
CHAPTER 15
Vaccines and Diagnosing Diseases
224

Inactivated whole agent. These vaccines are not designed for people who have
an abnormal immune system. The inactivated whole agent vaccine uses dead
microbes that were killed by phenol or formalin. Common inactivated whole
agent vaccines include those for pneumonia, Salk polio, rabies, influenza, typhoid,
and pertussis (commonly known as whooping cough).
Toxoids. The toxoid vaccine is made of toxins produced by a virus or bacteria
that has been inactive. They are then used against toxins that are produced by a
disease-causing microorganism. Patients require a booster vaccination every 10
years because the toxoid vaccine does not provide lifelong immunity. Common
toxoid vaccines include those for diphtheria and tetanus.
Subunit. These vaccines have few side effects. The subunit vaccine uses frag-
ments of a microorganism to create an immune response. Subunit vaccines are
produced by using genetic engineering techniques to insert the genes of an anti-
gen into another organism are called recombinant vaccines. Common subunit
vaccines include those for hepatitis B.
Conjugated. These are fairly new in development and are designed for children
under 24 months whose immune system normally does not respond well to vac-
cines based on capsular polysaccharides. These polysaccharides are T-independent
antigens. The vaccine is produced by combing the polysaccharides with a protein.
Nucleic acid. These vaccines are in the animal testing stage. The nucleic acid
vaccine, which is also called the DNA vaccine, contains plasmids of naked DNA
and is designed to produce protein that stimulates an immune response. The
nucleic acid vaccine has a strong effect on large parasites and viruses. 
Developing a Vaccine
Vaccines are developed by cultivating a large quantity of pathogen, which is
a disease causing organism. Some pathogens, such as the rabies virus, can be
cultivated in animals. For example, a chick embryo is commonly used to grow
viruses and is the method used to develop the influenza vaccine.
When vaccines were first introduced against measles and polio they would
only grow in humans. However, with the development of cell culture tech-
niques, cells from humans and primates enable large-scale viral growth. Scientists
CHAPTER 15
Vaccines and Diagnosing Diseases
225

use recombinant vaccines because they do not need an animal host to grow the
microorganism. An example is hepatitis B. 
Diagnosing Diseases
The reaction between an antibody and complementary antigen is used in
conjunction with observing symptoms to diagnosis a disease. You have prob-
ably seen this diagnosis technique used when you were tested for tubercu-
losis. This test required that a suspension of Mycobacterium tuberculosis be
injected into your skin. If the site becomes red in a couple of days, then you
tested positive for tuberculosis. The redness is a reaction between antibodies
and antigen.
Scientist use eight types of reactions to diagnose diseases. Each determines if
a specific antibody or a specific antigen is present based on its complementary
antibody or antigen. These are:
Precipitation reaction. IgG or IgM antibodies are combined with soluble anti-
gens. If the antibody and antigen are in an optional ratio, they form an antigen-
antibody complex called a lattice. The reaction occurs immediately, however
the lattice may not form until minutes after the reaction begins. There are three
commonly used precipitation reaction tests. These are:
• Precipitin ring test. A ring appears in the area of the optimal ratio, which
is called the zone of equivalence.
• Immunodiffusion test. A line is visible in the area of the optimal ratio.
• Immunoelectrophoresis test. Uses electrophoresis to identify separated
proteins in human serum. The test is called the Western blot test and is used
in AIDS testing.
Agglutination reaction. Particulate antigen or soluble antigens that adhere par-
ticles are introduced to antibodies to form an aggregate reaction called aggluti-
nation (clumping of cells). There are two types of agglutination reaction tests.
These are:
• Direct agglutination test. Uses a plastic microtiter plate to detect antibody
reaction with large cellular antigens. The microtiter plate contains a series
of wells. Each well has the same amount of antigen and successively
diluted serum of the antibody. The direct agglutination test measures the
titer antibodies in the serum. The titer is lower at the onset of the disease
and higher later in the disease. 
CHAPTER 15
Vaccines and Diagnosing Diseases
226

• Indirect agglutination test. Soluble antigens are absorbed onto the surface
of latex spheres where they react to antibodies. This has a relatively short
reaction time, enabling a diagnosis in 10 minutes. Indirect agglutination test
is commonly used to diagnosis streptococci, which cause sore throats.
Hemagglutination reaction. This type of reaction uses red blood cell surface
antigens and complimentary antibodies to determine if red blood cells clump in
reaction to the antibodies. This test is used in typing blood and in diagnosing
infectious mononucleosis. If the antigen is a virus the reaction is called viral
hemagglutination.
Neutralization reaction. This reaction uses antibodies as an antitoxin to block
the extoxin or toxoid of bacteria or a virus. Extoxin is an active toxin and toxoid
is an inactive toxin. A serum containing the antibody for a particular antigen is
placed in a cell culture that contains cells and the antigen. If the antigen does not
destroy (cytopathic effect) cells, then the extoxin is neutralized. Therefore, the
antigen is complementary to the antibody. Tests that use the neutralization re-
action are called vitro neutralization tests. One such test is the hemagglutination
inhibition test, which is used to diagnose a number of infections including measles,
influenza, and mumps. 
Complement-fixation reaction. This reaction uses a group of serum proteins
called a complement to bind with the antigen-antibody complex. The serum is
said to be fixed when the serum total binds to the antigen-antibody complex.
Fluorescent-antibody (FA) reaction. This reaction combines fluorescent dyes
with an antibody, making the antibody fluorescent when exposed to ultraviolet
light, and is used to detect a specific antibody in a serum. The fluorescent-antibody
reaction is used to test for rabies. There are two types of fluorescent-antibody re-
action tests. These are: 
• Direct FA test. The antigen and the fluorescien-labeled antibodies are
combined on a slide and then incubated. The slide is washed to remove
any antibodies that did not attach to the antigen and then observed under a
fluorescence microscope for yellow-green fluorescence.
• Indirect FA test. The antigen and the serum containing the antibody are
combined on a slide. Fluorescein-labeled antihuman immune serum globu-
lin (antiHISG) is also added to the slide, which reacts to human antibody
on the slide. The slide is incubated and washed, then observed under a
fluorescence microscope. If the antigen is fluorescent, then the comple-
mentary antigen is on the slide. 
CHAPTER 15
Vaccines and Diagnosing Diseases
227

Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). This is an objective test for either
antigens or antibodies using a reagent. There are two types of test. These are:
• Direct ELISA. The objective is to identify the antibody for a specific anti-
gen. The antibody is placed in the microtiter plate wells where it adsorbs
to the surface of the well. The antigen is then placed in each well. Wells are
then washed. The antigen that reacts to the antibody will be retained and
remain there after the washing. Next a second antibody for the antigen is
added and adsorbed to the well wall. The antigen is sandwiched between
two antibody molecules if the test is positive; otherwise the test is negative.
Direct ELISA is used to detect drugs in urine.
• Indirect ELISA. The objective is to identify the antigen for a specific anti-
body. A known antigen is placed in the microtiter plate wells where it
adsorbs to the surface of the well. The antibody is placed in each well and
will bind to the antigen to form an antigen-antibody complex. The wells
are washed to remove antibodies that did not bind. AntiHISG that has
been linked with an enzyme is then placed into the well and reacts to the
antigen-antibody complex in the well. All unbound HISG is rinsed. A
substrate for the enzyme is added. If there is a color change, then the 
test is positive.
Radioimmunoassay (RIA). Uses radioactive tags to mark antigens and antibodies.
Samples are then scanned to determine the presence of the tag. 
Quiz
1. What process requires that a needle tip of antigen be placed in a vein of
a patient to give the patient immunity to the antigen?
(a) Half-life process
(b) Jenner process
(c) Variolation process
(d) Antiviral process
2. Herd immunity requires an entire population to be immunized against an
antigen.
(a) True
(b) False
CHAPTER 15
Vaccines and Diagnosing Diseases
228

3. What type of vaccine contains a live antigen?
(a) Attenuated whole agent
(b) Inactivated whole agent
(c) Toxoids
(d) Subunit
4. What type of vaccine uses fragments of a dead antigen?
(a) Attenuated whole agent
(b) Inactivated whole agent
(c) Toxoids
(d) Subunit
5. What type of vaccine uses a dead antigen killed by phenol or formalin?
(a) Attenuated whole agent
(b) Inactivated whole agent
(c) Toxoids
(d) Subunit
6. Aconjugated vaccine is used for children who are under the age of 24 months.
(a) True
(b) False
7. What genetic engineering process is used to create a vaccine?
(a) Toxoid
(b) Recombinant
(c) Active whole agent
(d) Inactive whole agent
8. What test uses electrical current in a gel to increase the reaction time be-
tween an antigen and antibody?
(a) Electrophoresis
(b) Electrosynthesis
(c) Gel separation
(d) Gel division
9. A toxoid is an active toxin.
(a) True
(b) False
10. A booster is required for all immunization.
(a) True
(b) False
CHAPTER 15
Vaccines and Diagnosing Diseases
229

This page intentionally left blank.

16
CHAPTER
231
Antimicrobial Drugs
Probably the first thing you ask for when you’re sick is a pill to make you feel
better. Typically you don’t care how the pill works as long as it does work. 
Physicians have an arsenal of substances that combat disease. These substances
are chemical agents called drugs and taking drugs to cure a disease is called
chemotherapy. Throughout this book you learned about pathogenic microorgan-
isms that are harmful when they invade a body. However, there are some microor-
ganisms that actually prevent the harmful effect of pathogenic microorganisms. 
A microorganism that destroys a pathogenic microorganism and used to cure
a disease is referred to as an antimicrobial drug. You’ll learn about antimicro-
bial drugs in this chapter. 
Chemotherapeutic Agents: The Silver Bullet
When we hear the term chemotherapy, we tend to think of an ongoing treatment
for cancer. While this is true, chemotherapy is any treatment that introduces a
chemical substance into the body to destroy a pathogenic microorganism. The
chemical substance is a chemotherapeutic agent. 
Copyright © 2005 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

The chemotherapeutic agent must do two things. First, it must only cause
minimal damage (or no damage) to host tissues. A host is the term scientists use
to refer to the patient who is receiving chemotherapy; host tissues are tissues of
the patient’s body. This simply means that the chemotherapeutic agent must not
injure the patient or, if there is injury, that the injury is minimal and the patient’s
body will regenerate the destroyed tissues once chemotherapy is finished. 
The second thing that the chemotherapeutic agent must do is to destroy 
the pathogenic microorganism that is causing the disease. The way in which a
chemotherapeutic agent destroys a pathogenic microorganism is called the
chemotherapeutic agent’s action. The pathogenic microorganism that is attacked
by the chemotherapeutic agent is called the chemotherapeutic agent’s target.
There is generally one of two actions that a chemotherapeutic agent takes
when combating a target. One is to kill the pathogenic microorganism outright,
which is referred to as bactericidal action. The other is to inhibit the growth of
the pathogenic microorganism, which is called bacteriostatic action. You’ll learn
more about bactericidal and bacteriostatic throughout this chapter. 
A LOOK BACK
The idea of chemotherapy was the brainchild of Paul Ehrlich, a Germany scien-
tist, who in the early twentieth century predicted that chemotherapeutic agents
could be used to treat diseases that were caused by microorganisms. Ehrlich
based his prediction on the result of a wayward experiment. He tried to stain
only the bacteria in a tissue sample without staining the tissue. 
This became a major hurdle in the discovery of chemotherapeutic agents.
Finding a chemotherapeutic agent to kill a pathogenic microorganism wasn’t
difficult, but chemotherapeutic agents also harmed and sometimes killed the
patient, too. The challenge was to discover a chemotherapeutic agent that cured
the disease and not kill or severely injure the patient. 
A breakthrough came in 1929 when Alexander Fleming was growing
Staphylococcus aureus, a bacterium, in a Petri dish. A colony of a mold that con-
taminated the Petri dish surrounded the Staphylococcus aureus and prevented
the bacterium from growing. The mold was Penicillium notatum. Fleming was
able to isolate the part of the Penicillium notatum that stopped the growth of
Staphylococcus aureus, which is referred to as the active compound. Fleming
named this active compound penicillin. 
The action of a compound to inhibit the growth of a microorganism is called
antibiosis. From the word antibiosis comes the word antibiotic, which is any
CHAPTER 16
Antimicrobial Drugs
232

substance that a microorganism produces, in small amounts, that inhibits the
growth of another microorganism. Therefore, penicillin is an antibiotic produced
by the Penicillium notatum microorganism that inhibits the growth of the
Staphylococcus aureus bacterium. 
It took ten years since Fleming discovered penicillin before the first clinical
trials were successful. These clinical trials proved to everyone that penicillin
cured diseases caused by the Staphylococcus aureus bacterium. The next chal-
lenge was to mass-produce penicillin. This required a highly productive strain of
Penicillium. The break-through came with the isolation of a highly productive
strain of Pennicillium isolated from a cantaloupe fruit.
Many of the antibiotics in use today are produced from the Streptomyces
species. Streptomyces are bacteria that live in the soil. Other antibiotics come
from the genus Bacillus bacteria and the genera Cephalosporium and
Penicillium which are molds. 
Antimicrobial Activity: Who to Attack?
The way in which an antibiotic attacks a pathogenic microorganism is called the
antimicrobial activity. You might say this is the way the antibiotic identifies the good
guys from the bad guys. The good guys are eukaryotic cells and the bad guys are
prokaryotic cells (bacteria). Human cells do not chemically resemble bacteria
cells, this is the reason why the antibiotic can differentiate between the good guys
and the bad guys. 
Eukaryotic cells and prokaryotic cells are different in a number of ways, such
as the presence or absence of cell walls and their chemical make up. There are
also differences in their respective metabolisms and structures of their organelles,
such as the ribosome. It is these differences that antibiotics target so that only the
prokaryotic cells are destroyed.
Sometimes there can be a problem, especially when the disease-causing
agents are other eukaryotic cells. While bacteria cells are dissimilar to human
cells, the same cannot be said of other pathogenic microorganisms such as
helminths, fungi, and protozoa. These microorganisms are comprised of eukary-
otic cells that resemble human cells. Therefore antibacterial agents are not effec-
tive against helminths, fungi, and protozoa. Likewise, antibiotics are of no use
against viruses because a virus invades a human cell and reprograms the human
cells with the virus’ genetic information to create new viruses. Since the virus is
inside the human cell, the antibiotic is ineffective. 
CHAPTER 16
Antimicrobial Drugs
233

SPECTRUM OF ANTIMICROBIAL ACTIVITY: 
SOME BAD GUYS GET AWAY
The number of different types of pathogenic microorganisms that an antibiotic
can destroy is called the spectrum of antimicrobial activity. These are referred to
as broad-spectrum antibiotic or narrow-spectrum antibiotic. 
A broad-spectrum antibiotic is an antibiotic that destroys many types of bac-
teria, such as both gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. A narrow-spectrum
antibiotic is an antibiotic that destroys a few types of bacteria, such as only gram-
negative bacteria.
The deciding factor in the spectrum of antimicrobial activity is porins in the
lipopolysaccharide outer layer of gram-negative bacteria. A porin is a water-
filled channel that forms in the lipopolysaccharide outer layer, enabling sub-
stances on the outside of the cell to enter the cell. 
In order for an antibacterial drug to destroy the bacteria the drug must enter
the bacteria cell through the porin channel. However, to do so, the drug must be
relatively small and hydrophilic. Hydrophilic means that the antibacterial drug
has an affinity for water, which is contained in the porin channel. Some drugs
are relatively large or are lipophilic. Lipophilic means that the antibiotic has an
affinity for lipids and is attracted to the lipopolysaccharide outer layer of the cell
(rather than the water in the porin channel). 
THE BATTLE OF THE PATHOGENS: 
SOME BAD GUYS ARE GOOD GUYS TOO
Our bodies contain many microorganisms that are normal and beneficial. Others
simply are unable to grow to the level where they become pathogenic because
they compete with other microorganisms for nutrients required for growth. 
This situation causes scientists concern when giving a broad-spectrum anti-
biotic to a patient when the pathogen is not known. A pathogen is a disease-
causing organism. A broad-spectrum antibiotic is likely to destroy the pathogen,
but it is also likely to destroy other microorganisms. This could cause an imbal-
ance with competing microorganisms, resulting in a competitor being killed.
This in turn enables the surviving microorganism to become an opportunistic
pathogen. The increased growth of opportunistic pathogens is called superinfec-
tion. Microorganisms that develop resistance to the antibiotic also cause a super-
infection by replacing the antibiotic-sensitive strain. 
CHAPTER 16
Antimicrobial Drugs
234

The Attack Plan
As previously discussed in this chapter, an antimicrobial drug uses one of two
strategies to combat a pathogen. These are bactericidal or bacteriostatic. The
bactericidal strategy is a direct hit, killing the pathogen and preventing it from
spreading. Baceriostatic prevents the growth of microorganisms. In bacteriosta-
sis, the host’s immune system fights the pathogen through phagocytosis and the
production of antibodies.
THE BACTERIOSTATIC STRATEGY
One of the first targets of attack of the bacteriostatic strategy is the cell wall of
the pathogen. The objective is to weaken the cell wall, causing the cell to undergo
lysis. The key to this attack is the structure of the cell wall itself. Bacteria cell
walls are comprised of a network of marcromolecules called peptidoglycan.
Certain antibiotics inhibit the making of peptidoglycan (synthesis), thus weak-
ening the cell wall. Antibiotics that affect the synthesis of the cell wall of bacte-
ria are bacitracin, vancomycin, penicillin, and cephalosporins. 
Attacking Protein Synthesis
Another target of attack of the bacteriostatic strategy is the pathogen’s capabil-
ity to make protein. Protein is necessary for both eukaryotic and prokaryotic
cells. If the antibiotic can inhibit protein synthesis, then the cell dies. The prob-
lem is for the antibiotic to identify only prokaryotic cells (bacteria) and not
eukaryotic, which includes human cells. 
The solution lies within the structure of ribosomes in eukaryotic and prokary-
toic cells. Ribosomes are the sites of protein synthesis.
Eucaryotic cells have 80S ribosomes and procaryotic cells have 70S. The
numbers are Svedberg units and indicate the relative sedimentation rates during
centrifugation. Prokaryotic ribosomes consist of a small subunit referred to as
30S and a large subunit called 50S. The 30S subunit contains one molecule of
rRNA and the 50S subunit contains two molecules of rRNA. 
Antibiotics use the differences in ribosomes to identify the prokarytoic cell
from the eukaryotic cell, thereby interfering with protein synthesis only for the
prokarytoic cells. Some antibiotics interfere with the 50S subunit while other
antibiotics attack the 30S subunit. These antibiotics include chloramphenicol,
erythromycin, streptomycin, and tetracycline.
CHAPTER 16
Antimicrobial Drugs
235

Chloramphenicol interferes with the 50S subunit by preventing peptide bonds
from forming. Erythromycin is a narrow-spectrum antibiotic that also interferes
with the 50S subunit but only for gram-positive bacteria. Tetracycline inter-
feres with the 30S subunit and prevents the tRNA from carrying amino acids and
prevents amino acids from attaching to the polypeptide chain. Streptomycin
interferes with the 30S subunit by changing its shape, causing an incorrect read-
ing of the genetic code on the mRNA. Streptomycin is an example of what is
called an aminoglycoside antibiotic. (An aminoglycoside is made up of amino
carbohydrates and an aminocyclitol ring).
Attacking Plasma Membrane
Still another target of attack of antibiotics is the pathogen’s plasma membrane.
The plasma membrane is permeable, allowing substances in and out of the cell
as part of normal cell metabolism. 
Some antibiotics change the permeability of the plasma membrane, thereby
disrupting the metabolism of the pathogen. One such antibiotic is polymyxin B,
which attaches to the phospholipids of the plasma membrane, inhibiting perme-
ability of the membrane. 
Antifungal drugs also destroy fungus using a similar technique the cell mem-
branes of fungi are made predominately of erogosterol. The plasma membrane
of fungi have ergosterol. Antifungal drugs combine with sterols to inhibit the
permeability of the membrane. Popular antifungal drugs include amphotericin
B, ketoconazole, and miconazole.
Attacking Synthesis of Nucleic Acid
Nucleic acids are blueprints for the reproduction of every cell; these are DNA
and RNA. A commonly used bacteriostatic strategy is to interfere with the mak-
ing of nucleic acid by using rifampin, quinolones, and other similar antibiotics.
Although disrupting the formation of nucleic acid results in the destruction of
the pathogen, scientists are careful when choosing the antibiotic for this purpose
because the antibiotic might interfere with the host’s DNA and RNA. 
Attacking Metabolities
A metabolite is a substance (such as an enzyme) that is necessary for cell metab-
olism. The bacteriostatic strategy interferes with a metabolite and prevents the
growth of the pathogenic organism.
CHAPTER 16
Antimicrobial Drugs
236

For example, pathogens require the substrate para-aminobenzoic acid (PABA)
in order to synthesize folic acid. Folic acid is a coenzyme that is involved in the
synthesis of purine and pyrimidine nucleic acid bases and many amino acids. 
The antimetabolite called sulfanilamide, which is a sulfa drug, resembles
PABA. When sulfanilamide is introduced into the pathogenic microorganism,
the enzyme used in making folic acid combines with sulfanilamide instead of
PABA. This then disrupts the formation of folic acid and eventually prevents the
pathogenic microorganism from synthesizing purine and pyrimidine.
Exploring Antimicrobial Drugs
Antimicrobial drugs are classified by their antimicrobial activity. These classifi-
cations are cell wall inhibitors, protein inhibitors, plasma membrane inhibitors,
nucleic acid inhibitors, antimetabolites, and antifungal drugs, antiviral drugs,
and enzyme inhibitors, antiprotozoan drugs, and antihelminthic drugs.
Let’s take a close look at each of these classifications.
CELL WALL INHIBITORS
A cell wall inhibitor is an antimicrobal drug that inhibits the growth or function-
ality of the cell wall of a pathogen. The more common cell wall inhibitors follow:
Penicillin
Penicillin is a group of antibiotics that have a b-lactam ring the core structure of
penicillins. This core structure is referred to as a “nucleus.” Each member of the
group has a different side chain that is attached to the b-lactam ring. Penicillin
can be natural or semisynthetic. 
• Natural penicillin. Natural penicillin is extracted from the Penicillium
mold. The major disadvantage of natural penicillin, except for Penicillin V,
is that it is negatively affected by stomach acid, meaning that the most
effective way to administer natural penicillin is an intramuscular injection.
Another problem is that penicillin itself can be attacked by the enzyme peni-
cillinase. Penicillinases, also known as b-lactamases, are enzymes produced
by many bacteria that attach to the b-lactam ring of the penicillin, render-
ing penicillin ineffective. The more common natural penicillins are:
CHAPTER 16
Antimicrobial Drugs
237

• Penicillin G is the prototype compound for natural penicillin as is used
in defense of staphylococci, streptococci, and several spirochetes.
Natural penicillin has a narrow spectrum of activity. Penicillin G lasts
up to six hours when injected intramuscularly.
• Procaine penicillin is a combination of the drugs procaine and penicillin
G and lasts up to 24 hours, although the concentration of procaine peni-
cillin diminishes after four hours. 
• Benzathine penicillin is a combination of benzathine and penicillin G
and can last for up to four months. 
• Penicillin V is not inhibited by acid in the stomach and can be taken orally. 
• Semisynthetic penicillin. Semisynthetic penicillins are chemically altered
natural penicillins that are designed to overcome disadvantages of natural
penicillins. There are two ways in which scientists modify natural peni-
cillins. They stop the natural synthesis of a Penicillium molecule and use
the penicillin nucleus. The other way is to modify the side chains from the
natural penicillin and insert a new side chain that overcomes the disadvan-
tage of the original side chain. This is the technique used to combat peni-
cillinase. Common types of semisynthetic penicillin are:
• Methicillin was the first semisynthetic penicillin developed to resist
penicillinase.
• Oxacillin is a newer semisynthetic penicillin that resists penicillinase
and has replaced methicillin.
• Ampicillin is a semisynthetic penicillin that overcomes the narrow spec-
trum of activity of natural penicillin by attacking gram-negative and
gram-positive bacteria. Ampicillin is not resistant to penicillinases.
• Amoxicillin is similar to ampicillin.
• Carbenicillin is a member of the carboxypenicillin group and has a
broad spectrum of activity against gram-negative bacteria and is used to
fight Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
• Ticarcillin is similar to carbenicillin.
• Mezlocillin is a member of the ureidopenicillins group of penicillins and
is a modification of ampicillin, giving it a broader spectrum of activity
against bacteria.
• Azlocillin is similar to mezlocillin.
• Augmentin (which is the trade name) is a combination of amoxicillin
and potassium clavulanate, which is produced by streptomycete. Amoxi-
cillin attacks gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria and potassium
clavulanate resists penicillinase.
CHAPTER 16
Antimicrobial Drugs
238

Monobactams
Monobactams are synthetic antibiotics that have a single lactam ring and re-
sist penicilinase. Monobactams destroy only areobic gram-negative bacteria
such as E. coli.
Cephalosporins
Cephalosporins are resistant to penicillinases and destroy gram-negative bac-
teria. The disadvantage of cephalosporins is they can be made ineffective by 
b-lactamases.
Carbapenems
Carbapenems have a broad spectrum of activity that prevents the breakdown of
the antibiotic by the kidneys. These antibiotics inhibit the synthesis of cell walls.
An example is Primax (trade name). Primax has proved effective against 98 per-
cent of all organisms that were isolated from patients in hospitals.
Bacitracin
Bacitracin is used against staphylococci and streptococci and other gram-positive
bacteria and is used as a topical antibiotic for superficial infections. 
Vancomycin
Vancomycin has a very narrow spectrum of activity and is the most effective
antibiotic against staphylococci that produce penicillinase. Vancomycin is used
in the treatment of endocarditis. However, vancomycin can be toxic to humans.
Isoniazid
Isoniazid (INH) inhibits mycolic acid, which is needed for synthesizing the cell
wall of Mycobacteria tuberculosis. Isoniazid is only effective fighting mycobac-
teria tuberculosis.
Ethambutol
Ethambutol is similar to isoniazid and is used as a secondary treatment to avoid
Mycobacteria tuberculosis becoming resistant to isoniazid.
CHAPTER 16
Antimicrobial Drugs
239

PROTEIN INHIBITORS 
A protein inhibitor drug interferes with the pathogen’s capability to synthesize
protein. The commonly used protein inhibitor drugs follow.
Aminoglycosides
Aminoglycosides are a group of antibiotics that were the first to attack gram-
negative bacteria. Their disadvantage is that they can cause permanent damage
to the auditory nerve and cause kidney damage. Commonly used members of
this group of antibiotics are:
• Streptomycin is used as a secondary treatment to tuberculosis. It was dis-
covered in 1944 and today is used sparingly because of its toxic effect on
humans and the fact that bacteria quickly become resistant to it.
• Neomycin is a topical antibiotic used for superficial infections. 
• Gentamicin is an antibiotic used to combat Pseudomonas aeruginosa
infections. 
Tetracyclines
Tetracycline is a broad-spectrum antibiotic that attacks both gram-positive 
and gram-negative bacteria. Tetracyclines are able to combat pathogens that
invade cells because they can enter body tissues. They are used against uri-
nary tract infections, rickettsial infection, and chlamydial infections. Tetra-
cyclines are also used as the secondary treatment for gonorrhea and syphilis.
The disadvantages of tetracyclines are discoloration of teeth in children and
liver damage in pregnant women. Common members of the tetracycline group
of antibiotics are:
• Oxytetracycline is a commonly used form of tetracycline that is also known
as Terramycin. 
• Chlortetracyline is another commonly used form of tetracycline that is also
known as Aureomycin. 
• Doxycycline is a semisynthetic form of tetracycline that has a longer-lasting
effect than the natural form of tetracycline.
• Minocyline is a semisynthetic form of tetracycline.
CHAPTER 16
Antimicrobial Drugs
240

Chloramphenicol
Chloramphenicol is a broad-spectrum antibiotic that is small enough to effect
areas of the body that are too small for other antibiotics to enter. Chloramphenicol
is an antibiotic of last resort because it inhibits formation of blood cells, causing
aplastic anemia. 
Macrolides
Macrolides are a group of antibiotics that have a similar effect as that of peni-
cillin G. They affect the organism by inhibiting its ability to synthesize protein
and are a secondary drug when penicillin G is unavailable or the organism has
become resistant to penicillin G. Macrolide antibiotics can be administered
orally, making them the choice for treating children who have streptococcal and
staphylococcal infections. The most commonly used macrolide is Erythromycin,
which is used to treat legionellosis, mycoplasmal pneumonia, and streptococcal
and staphylococcal infections.
PLASMA MEMBRANE INHIBITORS
Plasma membrane inhibitors are antibiotics that interfere with the functionality
of the plasma membrane of a pathogen. The commonly used plasma membrane
inhibitor antibiotic is Polymyxin B, which combats gram-negative bacteria such
as Pseudomonas. Today, when combined with neomycin, it is used in nonpre-
scription topical antibiotics for superficial infections. 
NUCLEIC ACID INHIBITORS 
Nucleic acid inhibitors interfere with the formation of nucleic acids. The com-
monly used nucleic acid inhibitor antibiotics follow.
Rifamycins
Rifamycins comprise a group of antibiotics that inhibit mRNA synthesis. They
are used to treat tuberculosis and leprosy. Rifamycins can reach the cere-
brospinal fluid and enter tissues and abscesses. The disadvantage of rifamycins
is that they cause urine, feces, saliva, sweat and tears to appear an orange-red
CHAPTER 16
Antimicrobial Drugs
241

color. A commonly used rifamycin is rifampin, which is used to attack myco-
bacteria that cause tuberculosis and leprosy.
Quinolones
Quinolones interfere with DNA gyrase (an enzyme), which is involved in DNA
replication. Quinolones are used only for infections of the urinary tract.
Fluoroquinolones
Fluoroquinolones comprise a group of antibiotics that have a broad-spectrum
of activity and target urinary tract infections. Fluoroquinolones are able to
enter cells to attack pathogens. The disadvantage of fluoroquinolones is that
they may interfere with cartilage development, making them unsafe for preg-
nant women and children. Two examples that are mostly used are norfloxacin
and ciprofloxacin.
ANTIMETABOLITES
Antimetabolites are a group of drugs that interfere with metabolite, which is a
substance (such as an enzyme) that is necessary for cell metabolism. Common
antimetabolites follow.
Sulfonamides
Sulfonamides or sulfa drugs are used to treat urinary tract infections and control
infections in burn patients. These were among the first synthetic antimicrobial
drugs used. Commonly used sulfonamides are:
• Silver sulfadiazine is used to control infections common in burn patients.
• TMP-SMZ is a combination of trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole and is
used to combat intestinal tract and urinary tract gram-negative pathogens. 
ANTIFUNGAL DRUGS
Antifungal drugs inhibit the growth of fungi. The commonly used antifungal drugs
follow:
CHAPTER 16
Antimicrobial Drugs
242

Polyenes
Polyenes are a group of antifungal antibiotics that combine with the ergosterol in the
plasma membrane of fungi. This causes the plasma membrane to become extremely
permeable, ultimately resulting in the death of the fungi. A commonly used poly-
ene is amphotericin B, which is used to treat histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis,
and blastomycosis. However, amphotericin B is toxic to kidneys. Enclosing ampho-
tericin B in liposomes when administering the drug reduces its toxicity.
Imidazoles
Imidazoles interfere with fungal ergosterol synthesis. Commonly used imida-
zoles are:
• Clotrimazole is used to treat cutaneous mycoses. Two example are athlete’s
foot and vaginal yeast infections.
• Miconazole is similar to clotrimazole. Both drugs are used topically and
sold without a prescription.
Triazoles
Triazoles are similar to imidazoles, but are less toxic than other antifungals.
Griseofulvin
Griseofulvin is an antibiotic used to treat dermatophytic fungal infections of the
hair and nails. This includes tinea capitis. Griseofulvin is taken orally and enters
the keratin of skin, hair, and nails. Its purpose is to interfere with fungal mitosis,
inhibiting reproduction.
Tolnaftate
Tolnaftate is a topical treatment for athlete’s foot. Its mechanism for action is
unknown.
ANTIVIRAL DRUGS
Antiviral drugs interfere with the replication of viruses. Commonly used antivi-
ral drugs follow.
CHAPTER 16
Antimicrobial Drugs
243

Amantadine
Amantadine prevents a virus from entering the cell or from uncoating once the
virus enters the cell. It is used (though it has limited usefulness) to prevent
influenza A, but has no practical effect once the virus infects the cell.
Nucleoside analogs
Nucleoside analog antiviral drugs affect the synthesis of viral DNA or RNA.
Commonly used nucleoside analogs are: 
• Acyclovir is used to combat viruses that cause herpes. 
• Ribavirin is used to treat rotavirus-caused pneumonia in infants.
• Ganciclovir is used fight cytomegalovirus infections that are common in
transplant patients and patients who have AIDS.
• Trifluridine is used to treat the eye infection caused by acyclovir-resistant
herpes keratitis.
• Zidovudine (AZT) is used in HIV infection. This drug blocks the synthesis
of DNA from RNA by the enzyme reverse transcriptase. 
ANTIPROTOZOAN DRUGS
Antiprotozoan drugs are used to combat parasitic infection, such as the disease
malaria. Commonly used antiprotozoan drugs follow.
Chloroquine
Chloroquine is a replacement for quinine, which was the traditional treatment
for malaria. 
Mefloquine
Mefloquine is a secondary treatment for malaria when there is a resistance to
chloroquine. 
Quinacrine
Quinacrine is used to treat giardiasis.
CHAPTER 16
Antimicrobial Drugs
244

Diiodohydroxyquin
Diiodohydroxyquin is used to treat intestinal amoebic diseases. However,
diiodohydroxyquin can cause damage to the optic nerve if the dosage is not care-
fully controlled.
Metronidazole
Metronidazole combats parasitic protozoa and obligate anaerobic bacteria. It is
used to treat vaginitis caused by Trichomonas vaginalis, giardiasis, and amoebic
dysentery.
Nifurtimox
Nifurtimox is used to combat Chagas’ disease. However, nifurtimox can cause
side effects, such as nausea and convulsions. 
ANTIHELMINTHIC DRUGS
Antihelminthic drugs are used to combat helminths, which are parasitic flat-
worms. Commonly used antihelminthic drugs follow.
Niclosamide
Niclosamide is used to treat tapeworm infections. This drug inhibits ATP pro-
duction in aerobic conditions. 
Praziquantel
Praziquantel is also used to destroy tapeworm infections and is used to treat
schistosomiasis and other fluke-caused diseases. This drug alters the permeabil-
ity of the organism’s plasma membrane.
Mebendazole
Mebendazole is used to combat intestinal helminthic infections, such as ascaria-
sis, whipworms, and pinworms.
CHAPTER 16
Antimicrobial Drugs
245

Chemotherapy Tests
A chemotherapy test is a scientific test that determines which antibiotic combats
a particular pathogen. These tests are used to determine which antibiotic to pre-
scribe to treat a specific disease. The antibiotic is called a chemotherapeutic agent. 
There are two popular chemotherapy tests: diffusion methods and the broth
dilution method.
DIFFUSION METHODS
Diffusion methods are tests that place a paper disk or plastic strip that is coated
with a chemotherapeutic agent in touch with a pathogen to determine if the
chemotherapeutic agent inhibits the pathogen. There are two commonly used
diffusion methods. These are the disk-diffusion method and the minimal
inhibitory concentration method.
The disk-diffusion method, also known as the Kirby-Bauer test, uses a filter
paper disk that is coated with the chemotherapeutic agent being tested. The
paper disk is placed in a Petri plate that contains an agar medium that has been
contaminated with the pathogen. The Petri plate is then incubated during which
the chemotherapeutic agent diffuses onto the agar. A zone of inhibition can be
seen in the agar medium. A zone of inhibition is the area where the pathogen
does not grow because the chemotherapeutic agent inhibits it. Scientists meas-
ure the diameter of the zone of inhibition and compare the diameter to a stan-
dard table for the chemotherapeutic agent. The table indicates whether the
pathogen is sensitive, intermediate, or resistant to the chemotherapeutic agent.
The minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) test is an advanced diffusion
method that determines the lowest concentration of the chemotherapeutic agent
that inhibits the visible growth of bacteria. This test uses a plastic coated strip that
contains a gradient concentration of the chemotherapeutic agent. The strip is then
exposed to the pathogen, after which the strip is compared to a printed scale to
determine the minimal inhibitory concentration of the chemotherapeutic agent.
BROTH DILUTION METHOD
The broth dilution method is used to determine the minimal inhibitory concen-
tration and the minimal bactericidal concentration (MBC) of the chemothera-
CHAPTER 16
Antimicrobial Drugs
246

peutic agent. The minimal bactericidal concentration is the lowest concentration
of a chemotherapeutic agent needed to kill a pathogen. 
The broth dilution test requires that a broth containing the drug be placed in
wells of a plastic tray in a sequence of decreasing concentrations of the drug.
Each well is inoculated with the bacteria. After an incubation period, each well
is examined to determine the effectiveness of the concentration of the chemo-
therapeutic agent. The well that shows no pathogen growth with the lowest con-
centration of the chemotherapeutic agent signifies the MIC and MBC that should
be used to treat the disease caused by the pathogen.
Clinical laboratories used an automated broth dilution test where a computer
scans wells and reports results. 
Quiz
1. Antibiosis is
(a) an inactive compound
(b) an antibiotic
(c) narrow-spectrum
(d) broad-spectrum
2. Prokaryotic cells are human cells that are targeted by bacteria.
(a) True
(b) False
3. The way in which an antibiotic attacks a pathogenic microorganism is
called
(a) lipophilic
(b) hydrophilic
(c) lipopolysaccharide
(d) antimicrobial activity
4. A superinfection is caused by
(a) a pathogen that is resistant to the antibiotic
(b) an infection in deep tissues of the body
(c) an infection that covers a large area of the body
(d) an infection that infects more than two organs
CHAPTER 16
Antimicrobial Drugs
247

5. What destroys many types of bacteria?
(a) Narrow-spectrum antibiotics
(b) Broad-spectrum antibiotics
(c) Porins
(d) Hydrophilic
6. The bacteriostatic strategy is a direct hit, killing the pathogen.
(a) True
(b) False
7. What is the spectrum of antimicrobial activity?
(a) Broad-spectrum antibiotic
(b) Narrow-spectrum antibiotic
(c) The minimum number of different types of pathogenic microorgan-
isms that an antibiotic can destroy
(d) The number of different types of pathogenic microorganisms that an
antibiotic can destroy
8. Sulfanilamide is a
(a) Cell wall inhibitor
(b) Protein inhibitor
(c) Antimetabolite
(d) DNA inhibitor
9. The bacteriostasis strategy causes the host’s immune system to fight the
pathogen through phagocytosis.
(a) True
(b) False
10. Penicillin is a cell wall inhibitor.
(a) True
(b) False
CHAPTER 16
Antimicrobial Drugs
248

249
Final Exam
1. What microorganisms can be harmed by oxygen?
(a) Obligate aerobes
(b) Facultative anaerobes
(c) Obligate anaerobes
(d) Free radicals
2. An inoculating loop is used to insert a pathogen into the patient's mouth.
(a) True
(b) False
3. Which microorganisms can use oxygen when present and continue to
grow without it? 
(a) Obligate aerobes 
(b) Facultative anaerobes
(c) Obligate anaerobes
(d) Free radicals
4. Facultative anaerobes require oxygen.
(a) True
(b) False
Copyright © 2005 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

5. A medium containing no living organisms is called a 
(a) sterile culture medium
(b) an obligate medium 
(c) a chemically defined medium 
(d) a moisture-filled medium 
6. A chemically defined medium must contain growth factors.
(a) True
(b) False
7. What is agar?
(a) A nutrient
(b) A vitamin 
(c) A solidifying agent
(d) A broth
8. What culture provides growth of a certain microorganism but not others?
(a) Inherited culture
(b) Inhibited culture
(c) An infectious culture
(d) An enrichment culture
9. How can preserved bacteria cultures be revived?
(a) Oxygenation
(b) Hydration
(c) Hydration and liquid nutrient medium
(d) Oxygenation and liquid nutrient medium
10. A microorganism is a small organism that intakes and breaks down food
for energy and nutrients, excretes unused food as waste, and is capable of
reproduction. 
(a) True
(b) False
11. A pathogenic microorganism is a microorganism that causes disease in a
host.
(a) True
(b) False
Final Exam
250

12. A prokaryotic organism is a one-celled organism that does not have a dis-
tinct nucleus.
(a) True
(b) False
13. Why is a fungus called a eukaryotic microorganism?
(a) Because it has a nucleus, nuclear envelope, cytoplasm, and organelles.
(b) Because it has a nucleus and no nuclear envelope.
(c) Because it has a nucleus, nuclear envelope, and cytoplasm, but no
organelles.
(d) Because it has no nucleus, no nuclear envelope, no cytoplasm, and
no organelles.
14. Phagocytosis is the process by which a cell engulfs and digests solid
materials through the use of pseudopods or “false feet.” 
(a) True
(b) False
15. Germ Theory states that a disease-causing microorganism should be
destroyed.
(a) True
(b) False
16. Adenisine triphosphate is the preferred energy-storage molecule.
(a) True
(b) False
17. What reaction requires energy as small molecules are combined to form
large molecules?
(a) Anabolic reaction
(b) Catabolic reaction
(c) Anabolism
(d) Hydrolases reaction
18. What reaction releases energy as large molecules are broken down
(metabolized) into small molecules?
(a) Anabolic reaction
(b) Catabolic reaction
(c) Anabolism
(d) Hydrolases reaction
Final Exam
251

19. Activation energy is the energy required to begin a chemical reaction. 
(a) True
(b) False
20. What process is used to break down glucose?
(a) Anabolic reaction
(b) Catabolic reaction
(c) Anabolism
(d) Hydrolases reaction
21. What is it called when a molecule donates electrons?
(a) Oxidation 
(b) Reduction
(c) Oxidation reduction
(d) Lactation
22. What is caused when there is a chemical denaturing of enzymes?
(a) Protein creation
(b) Lipid creation
(c) Very high or very low pH
(d) Saturation point is reached
23. Pyruvic acid blocks active sites from bonding to a substrate.
(a) True
(b) False
24. The spontaneous decaying and giving off of particles of radium is called
(a) catalyst
(b) chemically stable
(c) half-life
(d) radioactivity
25. A differential element is the name given to a chemical element whose
atoms have a different number of neutrons.
(a) True
(b) False
26. The valence shell is used in bonding together two
(a) stable atoms
(b) inorganic stable atoms
Final Exam
252

(c) organic stable atoms
(d) unstable atoms
27. A reaction that breaks the bond between atoms of a molecule or com-
pound is called a decomposition reaction.
(a) True
(b) False
28. What kind of reaction performs synthesis and decomposition?
(a) Endergonic reaction
(b) Fusion reaction
(c) Fission reaction
(d) Exchange reaction
29. The reaction rate is increased by 
(a) temperature
(b) pressure
(c) orientation
(d) all of the above
30. The enzyme temporarily bonds to the substrate and then positions the sub-
strate to increase the likelihood that the substrate will collide with another
atom, ion, or molecule and thereby bring about a chemical reaction.
(a) True
(b) False
31. Describe a gram-positive cell wall. 
(a) A gram-positive cell wall has many layers that repels the crystal of
violet dye when the cell is stained. 
(b) A gram-positive cell wall has many layers of peptidoglygan that
retain the crystal of violet dye when the cell is stained. 
(c) A gram-positive cell wall has one layer that retains the crystal of vio-
let dye when the cell is stained.
(d) A gram-positive cell wall has one layer of peptidoglygan that repels
the crystal of violet dye when the cell is stained.
32. The cytoplasmic membrane is a membrane that provides a selective bar-
rier between the nucleus and the cell’s internal structures.
(a) True
(b) False
Final Exam
253

33. What regulates the movement of molecules through the cytoplasmic
membrane?
(a) Channel proteins
(b) Transmembrane proteins
(c) Peripheral proteins
(d) Fluid proteins
34. What forms channels in the cytoplasmic membrane and permits the flow
of molecules through the cytoplasmic membrane?
(a) Integral proteins
(b) Transmembrane proteins
(c) Peripheral proteins
(d) Lipoproteins
35. What is it called when a substance moves from a higher-concentration
region to a lower-concentration region?
(a) Osmosis
(b) Cytoplasmic diffusion
(c) Facilitated diffusion
(d) Simple diffusion
36. What is it called when water moves from a higher region of concentra-
tion to a region of lower concentration?
(a) Osmosis
(b) Cytoplasmic diffusion
(c) Facilitated diffusion
(d) Simple diffusion
37. Passive transport is the movement of a substance across the cytoplasmic
membrane against the gradient by using energy provided by the cell.
(a) True
(b) False
38. What are the two types of exocytosis?
(a) Facilitated diffusion and passive transport
(b) Phagocytosis and pinocytosis
(c) Hydrolysis and cytosol
(d) None of the above
Final Exam
254

39. What is a nanometer?
(a) 1/1,000,000,000 of a meter
(b) 1/100,000 of a meter
(c) 1/1,000,000 of a meter
(d) 1,000,000,000 meters
40. Immersing a specimen in oil maintains good resolution at magnifications
greater than 100×.
(a) True
(b) False
41. A photograph taken by an electron microscope is called
(a) a TEM
(b) a micrograph
(c) a SEM
(d) a palladium
42. You stain a smear using 
(a) crystal violet
(b) caboxymethyl cellulose
(c) cellulose
(d) a fixation process
43. Why is a specimen stained?
(a) A stain is used to label a specimen.
(b) A stain is used to determine the size of a specimen.
(c) A stain adheres to the specimen, causing more light to be reflected
by the specimen into the microscope.
(d) A stain is used to determine the density of a specimen.
44. You use a wet mount to observe an inorganic specimen under a microscope.
(a) True
(b) False
45. The naming convention used to group organisms is called
(a) identification
(b) nomenclature
(c) systemics
(d) classification
Final Exam
255

46. Fungi have a cell wall composed of peptidoglycan and muramic acid.
(a) True
(b) False
47. Identification is the process of observing and classifying organisms into
a standard group.
(a) True
(b) False
48. A genus consists of one or more lower ranks called species.
(a) True
(b) False
49. Which group acquires nutrients through absorption?
(a) animals
(b) plants
(c) fungi
(d) humans
50. Taxonomy is the classification of organisms based on a scientifically
proven natural relationship.
(a) True
(b) False
51. Which group acquires nutrients through photosynthesis?
(a) animals
(b) fungi
(c) humans
(d) none of the above
52. The arrangement of organisms into groups based on similar characteris-
tics is called
(a) nomenclature
(a) identification
(c) classification
(d) systemics
53. The Southern blot technique is used for detecting specific restriction
fragments.
(a) True
(b) False
Final Exam
256

54. What enables scientists to take nucleotide fragments from other DNA
and reassemble fragments into a new nucleotide sequence?
(a) enzyme DNA technology
(b) enzyme technology
(c) recombinant DNA technology
(d) recombinant enzyme technology
55. The result of two incisions made in a double-helical segment is called
(a) overhang 
(b) recognition sequence 
(c) restriction enzymes
(d) restriction fragment
56. Restriction enzymes are used to cut double stranded DNA along the exte-
rior of the strand.
(a) True
(b) False
57. What is another name for a restriction endonuclease?
(a) plasmid
(b) vector
(c) agarose gel
(d) restriction enzyme
58. The nucleotide genome consists of the seven nucleic acids that encode
genetic information on RNA.
(a) True
(b) False
59. The end of the cut of a double-helical segment is called _________ in
certain enzymes.
(a) restriction enzymes
(b) overhang
(c) recognition sequence
(d) restriction fragment
60. The four nucleotides are adenine (A), cytosine (C), guanine (G), and
thymine (T).
(a) True 
(b) False
Final Exam
257

61. Which of the following is not a type of RNA?
(a) rRNA
(b) uRNA
(c) tRNA
(d) mRNA
62. An operon consists of structural DNA, regulatory RNA, and control cells.
(a) True
(b) False
63. What process begins protein synthesis? 
(a) transcription
(b) translation
(c) polypeptide
(d) genotyping
64. The point at which the double-stranded DNA molecule unwinds is called
polymerase.
(a) True
(b) False 
65. What is the promotor site?
(a) A site where RNA polymerase binds to DNA.
(b) A site where RNA polymerase binds to protein.
(c) A site where RNA polymerase binds to free nucleotides.
(d) A site where RNA polymerase binds to ATP.
66. The unexpressed properties of heredity are called the
(a) genotype
(b) exons
(c) introns
(d) phenotype
67. An RNA polymerase is an enzyme that is used in the synthesis of RNA.
(a) True
(b) False 
68. The three nucleotide units withing the mRNA strand are called exons.
(a) True
(b) False 
Final Exam
258

69. An incubatory carrier is an individual who transmits the disease before
becoming symptomatic.
(a) True
(b) False
70. The number of people infected by a disease at any point in time is called
the 
(a) incidence
(b) morbidity rate
(c) prevalence
(d) none of the above
71. Morbidity rate is the number of people is a given population who 
are ill.
(a) True
(b) False 
72. When there are small isolated occurrences of a disease reported it is
called a
(a) pandemic
(b) source epidemic
(c) sporadic disease
(d) propagated epidemic
73. A disease is called an epidemic when there is a worldwide distribution of
the disease.
(a) True
(b) False 
74. When large numbers of a population are infected suddenly from a com-
mon source it is called a
(a) pandemic
(b) sporadic disease
(c) propagated epidemic
(d) none of the above
75. The carrier period is the period of time when a disease is contagious and
communicable before showing signs and symptoms and during recovery.
(a) True
(b) False 
Final Exam
259

76. The sum of old and new cases of a disease is called
(a) incidence
(b) prevalence rate
(c) morbidity rate 
(d) prevalence
77. Convalescent carriers are individuals who develop chronic infections and
transmit them for long periods of time.
(a) True
(b) False
78. A lytic virus injects nucleic acid into a host cell.
(a) True
(b) False 
79. A bacteriophage is
(a) a virus that can be killed by antibiotics
(b) a virus that acts like a bacterium
(c) a bacterium that acts like a virus
(d) none of the above
80. A small infectious particle that contains a protein is called a
(a) viroid
(b) capsid
(c) viron 
(d) none of the above
81. What is a capsid? 
(a) A capsid is the membrane bilayer of a virus.
(b) A capsid is the protein coat that encapsulates a virus.
(c) A capsid is another name for a bacteriophage.
(d) A capsid is the envelope around a virus.
82. A free virus particle is 
(a) another name for a virus 
(b) a synthesized virus
(c) a viron
(d) a mature virus
Final Exam
260

83. Pieces of the host cell's membrane make 
(a) the capsid
(b) the envelope of a virus
(c) the nuclei of the virus
(d) the nuclei of the host cell
84. The central nucleic acid contains the genetic information of a virus.
(a) True
(b) False 
85. Oncogenic viruses
(a) cause herpes
(b) cause the common cold
(c) cause tumors
(d) none of the above
86. A naked virus is a virus without a capsid.
(a) True
(b) False 
87. A state of lysogeny occurs when the envelope of a virus interacts with the
capsid.
(a) True
(b) False 
88. What are protists? 
(a) hemoflagellates
(b) nematodes
(c) proglottids
(d) scolex
89. Mushrooms are 
(a) protozoa
(b) fungi
(c) helminths
(d) algae
Final Exam
261

90. Which is not a layer of the body of helminths? 
(a) mesoderm
(b) ectoderm
(c) exoderm
(d) endoderm
91. Stipes support 
(a) blades
(b) thallus
(c) algae
(d) photoautotrophs
92. What is the method used by multicellular algae to reproduce?
(a) cytokinesis
(b) scolex
(c) nematodes
(d) none of the above
93. Fungi are different from plants because plants absorb nutrients from
organic matter.
(a) True
(b) False 
94. Some protists use cilia to move food into a mouth-like opening called
(a) pseudopods
(b) mesoderm
(c) vacuole
(d) none of the above
95. What are flatworms?
(a) platyhelminths
(b) nematodes
(c) ringhelminths
(d) hookhelminths
96. A helminth is an alga.
(a) True
(b) False 
Final Exam
262

97. A pneumatocyst is 
(a) a gas-filled bladder that enables algae to float
(b) a way for protozoa to absorb nutrients
(c) something that anchors fungi to rocks
(d) something that enables helminths to reproduce
98. A serum that contains most antibodies is called gamma globulin.
(a) True
(b) False 
99. What kind of immunity uses specialized lymphocyte cells called T cells?
(a) antibody-mediated immunity
(b) epitopes
(c) cell-mediated immunity
(d) none of the above
100. Immunity in which antibodies are developed outside the organism in an
immune serum is called active naturally acquired immunity.
(a) True
(b) False 
Final Exam
263

This page intentionally left blank.

265
Answers to Quiz 
and Exam Questions
CHAPTER 1
1. a
2. d
3. d
4. a
5. a
6. c
7. c
8. b
9. a
10. b
CHAPTER 2
1. d
2. c
3. d
4. c
5. b
6. b
7. a
8. a
9. a
10. c
CHAPTER 3
1. a
2. a
3. c
4. d
5. c
6. a
7. a
8. a
9. c
10. b
Copyright © 2005 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

CHAPTER 4
1. b
2. d
3. a
4. b
5. c
6. c
7. b
8. c
9. c
10. b
CHAPTER 5
1. a
2. b
3. a
4. b
5. b
6. b
7. c
8. a
9. c
10. c. 
CHAPTER 6
1. b
2. a
3. c
4. b 5. b
6. a
7. c
8. d
9. a
10. c
CHAPTER 7
1. a
2. b
3. d
4. b
5. a
6. a
7. b
8. d
9. a
10. b
CHAPTER 8
1. a
2. c
3. b
4. d
5. a
6. c
7. a
8. c
9. a
10. a
CHAPTER 9
1. a
2. c
3. a
4. b
5. d
6. a
7. c
8. b
9. a
10. a
CHAPTER 10
1. a
2. c
3. d
4. a
5. b
6. a
7. c
8. d
9. a
10. b
Answers
266

CHAPTER 11
1. d
2. b
3. a
4. b
5. c
6. a
7. a
8. c
9. c
10. b 
CHAPTER 12
1. b
2. a
3. d
4. d
5. a
6. b
7. b
8. a
9. d
10. b
CHAPTER 13
1. b
2. d
3. c
4. a
5. d
6. c
7. b
8. b
9. a
10. b
CHAPTER 14
1. b
2. a
3. c
4. b
5. d
6. b
7. a
8. b
9. a
10. a
CHAPTER 15
1. c
2. b
3. a
4. d
5. b
6. a
7. b
8. a
9. a
10. b
CHAPTER 16
1. b
2. b
3. d
4. a
5. b
6. a
7. d
8. c
9. a
10. a
FINAL EXAM
1. c
2. b
3. b
4. b
5. a
6. a
7. c
8. d
9. c
10. a
Answers
267

11. a
12. a
13. a
14. a
15. b
16. a
17. a
18. b
19. a
20. b
21. a
22. c
23. b
24. d
25. b
26. d
27. a
28. d
29. d
30. a
31. b
32. a
33. b
34. a
35. d
36. a
37. b
38. d
39. a
40. a
41. b
42. d
43. c
44. b
45. b
46. b
47. a
48. a
49. c
50. b
51. d
52. c
53. a
54. c
55. d
56. a
57. d
58. b
59. b
60. a
61. b
62. b
63. b
64. b
65. a
66. a
67. a
68. b
69. a
70. c
71. a
72. c
73. b
74. d
75. b
76. b
77. b
78. a
79. d
80. d
81. b
82. c
83. b
84. a
85. c
86. b
87. b
88. a
89. b
90. c
91. c
92. a
93. b
94. d
95. a
96. b
97. a
98. a
99. c
100. b
Answers
268

INDEX
Copyright © 2005 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

This page intentionally left blank.

#
271
A
Acanthamoeba polyphaga, 176
Acetic acid, 97
Acetobacter, 156
Acid-fast microorganisms, 62
Acids, 37
Acquired immunity, 212–213
Actinomycetales, 164
Activation energy, 90
Active transport, 76
Adenine (A), 122, 132
Adenosine deaminase (ADA), 134
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP), 44, 76, 82, 88–90,
92–96
Adenoviruses, 190
Agar, 106–107
Agarose gel electrophoresis, 133
Agglutination reaction, 226–227
Agrobacterium tumefaciens,156
AIDS (acquired immunodeficiency syndrome),
190–191
Alcohols, 114–115
Aldehydes, 116
Algae, 5
introduction, 171
lichens, 174
reproduction, 171–172
types of
brown algae, 173–174
chrysophytes, 172
diatoms, 172
dinoflagellates, 172–173
green algae, 174
red algae, 173
Algin, 173
Amantadine, 244
Aminoglycosides, 236, 240
Amoeba flagellates, 175–176
Amoeboid motion, 80
Amphipathic, definition of, 73
Anabolic reaction (anabolism), 34, 88
Animal reservoirs, 200
Anoxygenic photosynthesis, 99
Anthrax, 1, 4, 12–13
Antibiotics, 8, 17
Antibodies, 212, 218
Antibody-mediated immunity, 213
Antifungal drugs
griseofulvin, 243
imidazoles, 243
polyenes, 243
tolnaftate, 243
triazoles, 243
Antigen receptors, 216
INDEX
Copyright © 2005 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

Antigen-antibody complex, 217
Antigens, 212, 214, 217
Antihelminthic drugs, 245
Antimetabolites, 242
Antimicrobial drugs, 113–114
antifungal drugs. See Antifungal drugs
antihelminthic drugs, 245
antimetabolites, 242
antiprotozoan drugs. See Antiprotozoan drugs
antiviral drugs, 243–244
bacteriostatic strategy, 235–237
cell wall inhibitors. See Cell wall inhibitors
chemotherapeutic agents, 231–233
chemotherapy tests, 246–247
nucleic acid inhibitors, 241–242
plasma membrane inhibitors, 241
protein inhibitors. See Proteins, inhibitors
spectrum of, 234
types of cells attacked, 233
Antiprotozoan drugs
chloroquine, 244
diiodohydroxyquin, 245
mefloquine, 244
metronidazole, 245
nifurtimox, 245
quinacrine, 244
Antisepsis, 112
Antiviral drugs, 243–244
Apicomplexans, 178
Apoenzyme, 90
Apoptosis, 217
Arber, Werner, 132
Archaea, 152–154
Arthropods, 202
Aseptic, definition of, 112
Athlete’s foot, 67
Atomic mass (atomic weight), 25
Atomic number, 25
Atomic Theory, 24–25
Atoms, 24–25
ATP (adenosine triphosphate), 44, 76, 82, 88–90,
92–96
Autotrophic organisms, 23, 103
Avagadro’s number, 36
Avagadro, Amadeo, 36, 43
Avery, Oswald, 120
Axoneme microtubules, 79
B
B cells, 216–217
Bacillus, 1, 4, 13, 162, 233
Bacitracin, 239
Bacteria, 4
aerobic/microaerophilic, motile,
helical/vibroid, gram-negative bacteria,
154–155
anaerobic gram-negative cocci and rods, 
158
endospore-forming gram-positive rods and
cocci, 162–163
facultatively anaerobic gram-negative rods,
156–158
gram-negative aerobic rods and cocci,
155–156
gram-positive cocci
Staphylococcus, 160–161
Streptococcus, 161
irregular nonsporing gram-positive rods, 164
Mycobacteria, 164
Mycoplasmas, 159–160
Nocardia, 165
regular nonsporing gram-positive rods,
163–164
Rickettsias and Chlamydias, 158–159
Bacteriochlorophyll, 99
Bacteriology, 4
Bacteriophages, 187
Bacteroides, 158
Base pairs, 122
Bases, 37
Bebesia microti, 178
Beijerinck, Martinus, 185
Berg, Paul, 132
Bergey, David, 144
INDEX
272

Beta-oxidation, 97–98
Binary fission, 108
Binding, 214–216
Binominal nomenclature, 5
Biogenesis, Theory of, 11
Biosynthesis, 187
Biotechnology, 132
Black plague, 3, 157
Body defenses, 7–9
Bohr, Niels, 43
Bordetella pertussis, 156
Botulism, 104
Boyer, Herbert, 132
Bright-field microscope, 57–58
Brown algae, 173–174
Brucella, 156
Budding, 109, 174
Buffer, 39
C
Calvin Cycle, 100
Capsid, 186
Capsule, 70
Carbapenems, 239
Carbohydrates, 40–41, 92–94
Carbon, 39, 104
Carboxymethyl cellulose, 60
Carriers, disease, 200
Cartenoids, 99
Catabolic reaction (catabolism), 34, 88
Catalysts, 29
Cation, 31
CDC (Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention), 207
Cell theory, 9
Cell wall inhibitors
bacitracin, 239
carbapenems, 239
cephalosporins, 239
ethambutol, 239
isoniazid (INH), 239
monobactams, 239
penicillin, 237–238
vancomycin, 239
Cell-mediated immunity, 214
Cellular structure, 68
Cellulose, 40, 79
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC), 207
Cephalosporins, 239
Channel protein, 74
Chemical elements of microorganisms
catalysts, 35
chemical bonds, 29–31
chemical compounds, 35–36
chemical elements and atoms, 24–26
chemical notation, 31, 33
chemical reactions, 31, 33–35
inorganic compounds, 37
isotopes, 27, 29
mass, 24
matter, 24
molarity, 36–37
organic compounds. See Organic compounds
Periodic Table, 27–28
scientists and their contributions, summary of,
43
valence shells and chemical reactions, 29
Chemical messengers (cytokines), 218–219
Chemical metabolism. See Metabolism
Chemical reaction, 29, 31
Chemiosmosis, 96
Chemostat, 110
Chemotaxis, 71
Chemotherapeutic agents, 231–233
Chemotherapy tests, 246–247
Chickenpox, 4
Chitin, 79
Chlamydias, 158–159
Chloramphenicol, 236, 241
Chlorophyll, 99
Chloroplasts, 99
Chloroquine, 244
Chromosomes, 122
INDEX
273

Chrysophytes, 172
Cilia, 78–79, 177
Ciliates, 177
Class, 144–145
Classification of microorganisms
natural classification, 146–147
nomenclature, 140–144
ranking, 144–146
taxonomy, 139–140
Clostridium, 104, 162–163, 200
Coding strand, 123
Codons, 123
Coenzymes, 90
Cofactor, 90
Cohen, Stanley, 132
Cohn, Ferdinand, 12, 18
Competitive inhibitor, 92
Complement-fixation reaction, 227
Complementary base pairing, 122
Compounds, 30
Conjugation, 175
Contact transmission, 201
Contagious disease, 12
Coordinate covalent bond, 31
Corynebacteria, 164
Covalent bond, 31
Creutzfeldt, Hans Gerhard, 193
Crick, Francis, 120
Culture media, 105–109
anaerobic growth, 106
chemically defined media, 106
generation time, 109
growing bacterial cultures, 108–109
preserving bacterial cultures, 108
pure cultures, 107
selective and differential media, 107
Curie, Marie and Pierre, 27, 43
Cytokines, 218–219
Cytoplasm, 81
Cytosine (C), 122
Cytosol, 77
Cytosome, 176
D
Dalton (unit), 25
Dalton, John, 24–25, 43
Dark phase reactions, 89, 98, 100
Dark-field microscope, 58
Deamination, 98
Decay, rate of, 27
Decomposition reaction, 34
Degerming, 112
Dehydration synthesis, 39
Denaturing, 114
Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). See DNA
(deoxyribonucleic acid)
Diagnosing diseases, reactions used, 226–228
Diatoms, 172
Diatonic molecules, 30
Diener, O.T., 192
Differential interface contrast microscope
(Nomanski), 59
Differentiation, 67–68
Diiodohydroxyquin, 245
Dinoflagellates, 172–173
Dioecious helminths, 179
Disaccharides, 40–41
Disease and epidemiology. See Epidemiology
and disease
Disinfection, 112
DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid), 42–44
fingerprinting, 134–135
recombinant. See Recombinant DNA
technology
replication, 120–121
viruses, 188–190
Domains, 6–7, 142–145
Droplet transmission, 201
E
E. coli (Escherichia coli), 6, 61, 96, 104, 125,
146, 156–157
EBV (Epstein-Barr virus), 192
Ehrlich, Paul, 16, 18, 232
Eicosanoids, 41
INDEX
274

Electron carrier molecules, 88–89
Electron microscopes, 58–60
Electron transport chain, 95–96
Electrons, 25
Electrophoresis, 133, 135, 213
Elements. See Chemical elements of micro-
organisms
ELISA (enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay),
228
Embden-Meyerhof pathway, 93
Endemic disease, 198
Endergonic reaction, 88
Endocytosis, 76–77, 81
Endospores, 2, 64
Entamoeba histolytica, 175–176
Enterobacteria, 156–157
Enterobius vermicularis, 182
Envelope, 186
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA),
228
Enzymes, 35
coenzymes, 90
functions of, 90–91
inactive and active, 90
naming and classifying, 89–90
pH, 91
substrate concentration, 91–92
Epidemic disease, 198–199
Epidemiology and disease
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC), 207
control of communicable diseases, 205–206
disease classification, 198–199
disease development, 203–204
disease transmission
contact transmission, 201
introduction, 201
vector transmission, 202–203
vehicle transmission, 201–202
epidemiology, 197–198, 204–205
infection sites
animal reservoirs, 200
human reservoirs, 199–200
nonliving reservoirs, 200–201
nosocomial infections, 206–207
Epitopes, 214
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), 192
Erogosterol, 236
Erwinia, 157
Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae, 164
Erythromycin, 236
Escherichia coli (E. coli), 6, 61, 96, 104, 125,
146, 156–157
Ethambutol, 239
Ethanol, 97
Etiology, definition of, 197
Eukaryotic organisms
algae. See Algae
cells of
cell wall, 79–80
centriole, 83
chloroplast, 82–83
cytoplasm, 81
endoplasmic reticulum, 81–82
Golgi complex, 82
introduction, 78–79
lysosome, 82
mitochondrion, 82
nucleus, 81
plasma membrane, 80–81
prokaryotic cells, differences from, 69
fungi. See Fungi
helminths. See Helminths
protozoa. See Protozoa
Exchange reaction, 34
Exocytosis, 76–77, 175
F
Facilitated diffusion, 75
Facultative anaerobes, 104
Family, 144–145
Fermentation, 92, 97
Filoviruses, 192
Fimbriae, 71
INDEX
275

Fission, 169, 174
Flagella, 70–71, 78–79, 172, 176
Flatworms, 179–180
Flaviviruses, 190
Fleming, Alexander, 16–18, 232
Flora, 3
Flukes, 179
Fluorescent microscope, 58–59
Fluorescent-antibody reaction, 227
Fluoroquinolones, 242
Focal point, 53
Franeisella tularensis, 156
Fucoxanthin, 173
Fungi
anatomy, 168–169
classification, 170–171
introduction, 168
molds, 170
nutrition, 171
yeasts, 169
Fusobacterium, 158
G
Gajdusek, Carlton, 193
Gamma globulin, 213
Gangrene, 97
Gene expression, 123
Gene therapy, 134
Genes, controlling, 124–125
operon model, 125
Genetic engineering, 132–133
artificial DNA, 133–134
Genetics. See Microbial genetics
Genotype, 124, 146
Genus, 5, 144–145
Germ Theory, 12–14
Giardia lamblia, 1176
Gluconobacter, 156
Glutaraldehyde and formaldehyde, 116
Glycocalyx, 70, 80
Glycolipid, 80
Glycolysis, 92
Glycoprotein, 80
Golgi complex, 82
Gram, 50
Gram molecular weight, 36
Gram stain, 61–63
Gram, Hans Christian, 61, 64
Gram-negative cell wall, 73
Gram-positive cell wall, 72
Grana, 83
Green algae, 174
Griseofulvin, 243
Growth, 67–68
microbial. See Microbial growth
Guanine (G), 122, 132
H
Half-life, 27
Halogens, 115
Haptens, 214
Heat fixation process, 60
Helminths
flatworms, 179–180
hookworms, 181–182
introduction, 178–179
life cycle, 179
pinworms, 182
roundworms (nematodes), 180–181
Hemagglutination reaction, 227
Hemoflagellates, 177
Hepadnaviruses, 189
Herd immunity, 224
Herpesviruses, 2, 189–190, 192
Heterotopic organisms, 23, 104
HIV (human immunodeficiency virus), 
190–191
Holoenzyme, 90
Hooke, Robert, 9, 17
Hookworms, 181–182
Host, 232
Human papillomavirus (HPV), 192
Human reservoirs, 199–200
Human T-cell leukemia virus, 192
INDEX
276

Hybridomas, 218
Hydrogen bond, 31
Hydrolases, 89
Hydrolysis, 40
Hydroxyl radical, 105
Hypertonic solution, 76
Hyphae, 168–169
Hypotonic solution, 76
I
Imidazoles, 243
Immune response, 212
Immune system, 211–212
Immunity, 212
acquired, 212–213
antibodies used for diagnosing diseases, 218
antibody-mediated, 213
antigens, 214
B cells, 216–217
binding, 214–216
cell-mediated, 214
chemical messengers (cytokines), 218–219
combating antigens, 217
introduction, 211–212
lasting, 218
macrophages, 220
natural killer (NK) cells, 220
serum and antibodies, 213
T cells, 219–220
Immunization, 206
Immunoglobulins (Igs), 214–216
Immunology, 7, 15
Inclusions, 78
Innoculating loop, 107
Inorganic compounds, 37
Integral proteins, 74
Interleukins, 219
Introduction to microorganisms
body defenses, 7–9
friendly and unfriendly, 2–3
germ theory, 12–14
killing microorganisms, 16–17
microscope, history of, 9–10
naming and classifying, 5–7
resistance to sterilization, 12
scientists and their contributions, summary of,
17–18
size of, 7
spontaneous generation, disproving, 10–12
study of
bacteriology, 4
mycology, 5
parasitology, 5
phycology, 5
protozoology, 5
virology, 4
vaccination, 15
Ion, 31
Ionic bond, 30
Isolation, 205
Isomerases, 90
Isoniazid (INH), 239
Isotonic solution, 76
Isotopes, 27, 29
J
Jackson, David, 132
Jacob, Francois, 125
Jakob, Alfon Maria, 193
Janssen, Zacharias, 9, 17
Jenner, Edward, 15, 17, 224
K
Kilogram, 50
Kingdoms, 7, 144–145
Kirby-Bauer test, 246
Klebsiella, 157
Koch’s Postulates, 14
Koch, Robert, 12–14, 18, 205
Krebs cycle, 94–96
Krebs, Hans, 95
L
Lactic acid, 97
INDEX
277

Lactobacillus, 105, 163
Lactose, 125
Law of Chemical Periodicity, 27
Legionella, 155
Legionnaire’s disease, 155
Leukocytes, 15
Lichens, 174
Ligases, 90
Light compound microscopes, 57–59
Light reactions, 98
Linnaeus, Carl, 5, 140–141
Lipases, 97
Lipids, 41, 97–98
Lister, Joseph, 16, 18
Listeria monocytogenes, 163
Lyases, 90
Lymphocytes, specialized, 212
Lyophilization, 108
Lysis, 80
Lysogenic cycle, 188
Lytic cycle, 187
M
MacLeod, Colin, 120
Macrolides, 241
Macromolecule, 40
Macrophages, 220
Mass, 24
Matter, 24
McCarty, Maclyn, 120
Mebendazole, 245
Medawar, Peter, 185
Mefloquine, 244
Memory response, 218
Mendeleev, Dimitri, 27, 43
Meselson, Mathew, 120
Messenger RNA (mRNA), 123–124
Metabolism, 39, 67–68, 111
ATP production, 89
carbohydrate metabolism, 92–94
Embden-Meyerhof pathway, 93
pyruvic acid, 94
catabolic and anabolic reactions, 88
cycle, 87–88
definition of, 87
electron transport chain, 95–96
enzymes
coenzymes, 90
functions of, 90–91
inactive and active, 90
naming and classifying, 89–90
pH, 91
substrate concentration, 91–92
fermentation, 97
Krebs cycle, 94–96
lipid catabolism, 97–98
metabolism cycle, 87–88
oxidation-reduction, 88–89
photosynthesis, 98–100
dark phase reactions, 100
photosystems I and II, 99–100
protein catabolism, 98
Metchnikoff, Elie, 7, 15, 18, 214
Metric system, 8, 48–50
Metronidazole, 245
Microbial genetics
chromosomes, 122
controlling genes, 124–125
operon model, 125
DNA replication, 120–121
genetics, 120
genotype and phenotype, 124
introduction, 119
mutations, 125–127
rate of, 127
types of, 126
protein synthesis, 123–124
Microbial growth
antimicrobial agents, 113–114
chemical agents that control
glutaraldehyde and formaldehyde, 116
phenols and phenolics, 114–116
surfactants, 116
chemical requirements for
INDEX
278

carbon, 104
oxygen, 104–105
controlling, 112–113
culture media, 105–109
anaerobic growth, 106
chemically defined media, 106
generation time, 109
growing bacterial cultures, 108–109
preserving bacterial cultures, 108
pure cultures, 107
selective and differential media, 107
introduction, 103–104
measuring, 110–112
microbial death rates, 113
phases of
death phase, 110
lag phase, 109
log phase, 109–110
stationary phase, 110
Microbiology, 1, 4
Micrographs, 59
Microorganisms
basic life processes in, 67–68
chemical elements of. See Chemical elements
of microorganisms
classification of. See Classification of
microorganisms
definition of, 1
eukaryotic cells. See Eukaryotic organisms
introduction. See Introduction to 
microorganisms
metabolism. See Metabolism
observing. See Observing microorganisms
prions, 193
prokaryotic cells. See Prokaryotic organisms
viroids, 192–193
viruses. See Viruses
Microscopes
contrast, 56–57
description, 54–55
electron microscopes, types of
introduction, 59
scanning electron microscope, 58, 60
transmission electron microscope (TEM),
58–60
history of, 9–10, 54
introduction, 51
light compound microscopes, types of
bright-field microscope, 57–58
dark-field microscope, 58
differential interface contrast microscope
(Nomanski), 59
fluorescent microscope, 58–59
introduction, 58
phase-contrast microscope, 58
magnification, 51–56
preparing specimens
smears, 60
wet mounts, 60–61
resolution, 56
oil immersion, 57
staining specimens, 61–64
wavelength, 51–52
Miescher, Friedrich, 120
Mitchell, Peter, 96
Molarity, 36–37
Mole, 36
Monobactams, 239
Monod, Jacques, 125
Monoecious helminths, 179
Monomers, 39
Monosaccharides, 40
Moraxella lacunata, 155
Moseley, H.G.J., 27, 43
Movement, 67–68
Mullis, Kary, 133
Mutations, 125–127
rate of, 127
types of, 126
Mycelium, 168
Mycobacteria, 2, 164
Mycology, 5, 168
Mycoplasmas, 159–160
Myeloma cells, 218
INDEX
279

N
Naegleria fowleri, 176
Nathans, Dan, 132
Natural classification, 146–147
Natural killer (NK) cells, 220
Neisseria, 155
Nematodes, 180–181
Neutralization reaction, 227
Neutrons, 25
Niclosamide, 245
Nielsen, Frederick, 64
Nifurtimox, 245
Nocardia, 165
Nomanski microscope, 59
Nonliving reservoirs, 200–201
Nosocomial infections, 206–207
Nucleic acid inhibitors, 241–242
Nucleic acids, 42–44, 225
Nucleoid, 68, 77
Nucleolus, 81
Nucleoside analogs, 244
Nucleotides, 42–43, 122
Nucleus, 25
O
Obligate aerobes and anaerobes, 104
Observing microorganisms
microscopes. See Microscopes
size, 47–50
Oligonucleotides, 133
Oncogenic viruses, 192
Operon model, 125
Orbital, 25
Order, 144–145
Organic compounds, 37
ATP (adenosine triphosphate), 44
carbohydrates, 40–41
introduction, 37, 39–40
lipids, 41
nucleic acids, 43–44
pH scale, 38–39
proteins, 41–42
synthesis of, 42–44
Organism, definition of, 1
Orthomytoviruses, 191
Osmosis, 75–76
Oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction, 
88–89
Oxidoreductases, 90
Oxygen, 104–105
Oxygenic photosynthesis, 99
P
Papovaviruses, 190
Paramyxoviruses, 191
Parasites, 5, 168
Parasitology, 5
Passive transport, 75
Pasteur, Louis, 11–12, 18
Pasteurella-Haemophilus, 158
Pasteurization, 12, 113
Pathogenic microorganism, 2
Pathognomonic, definition of, 199
Pathology, 199
PCR (polymerase chain reaction), 
133–134
Pellicle, 79
Penicillin, 8, 16, 232–233, 237–238
Penicillin notatum, 16–17, 232–233
Peptidoglycan, 72, 80
Periodic Table, 27–28
Peripheral proteins, 75
Petri dish, 14
Petri, Richard, 14, 18
pH scale, 38–39, 91
Phaeophyta, 173
Phagocytes, 15
Phagocytosis, 7, 77, 81
Phase-contrast microscope, 58
Phenols and phenolics, 114–116
Phenotype, 124, 146
Phospholipids, 41
Photoreaction, 127
Photosynthesis, 82, 98–100
dark phase reactions, 100
photosystems I and II, 99–100
INDEX
280

Phototaxis, 71
Phycobilins, 99, 173
Phycology, 5
Phyla, 144–145, 151, 153
Picornaviruses, 190
Pili, 71–72
Pinocytosis, 77, 81
Pinworms, 182
Placebo, 205
Plasma membrane inhibitors, 241
Plasmid, 132
Plasmodium, 178
Polyenes, 243
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR), 133–134
Polymers, 39–40
Polysaccharides, 41
Porin, 234
Poxviridae, 190
Praziquantel, 245
Precipitation reaction, 226
Precursor metabolites, 87
Prions, 193
Prodromal period, 204
Product, 29, 34
Prokaryotic organisms, 4
archaea. See Archaea
bacteria. See Bacteria
cells of
cell wall, 72–73
cytoplasmic membrane
fluid mosaic model, 74–75
function of, 75–76
group translocation, 76
introduction, 73–74
cytosol and cytoplasm, 77
endocytosis, 76–77
eukaryotic cells, differences from, 69
exocytosis, 76–77
inclusions, 78
introduction, 68–69
parts of
fimbriae, 71
flagella, 70–71
glycocalyx, 70
pili, 71–72
ribosomes, 77–78
Promotor site, 123
Propionibacterium, 164
Protease, 98
Proteins, 41–42
catabolism, 98
inhibitors
aminoglycosides, 240
chloramphenicol, 241
macrolides, 241
tetracyclines, 240
synthesis, 42–44, 123–124
Protons, 25
Protozoa, 5
amoeba flagellates, 175–176
apicomplexans, 178
ciliates, 177
introduction, 174–175
nutrition, 175
of blood and tissue, 177
Protozoology, 5
Prusiner, Stanley, 193
Pseudomonads, 155
Pseudopods, 80, 175
Purines, 122
Pyrimidines, 122
Pyruvic acid, 94
Q
Quarantine, 3, 205
Quinacrine, 244
Quinolones, 242
R
Radioactivity, 27
Reactants, 29, 34
Reading frame, 123
Recombinant DNA technology, 132
agricultural applications, 135–136
DNA fingerprinting, 134–135
gene therapy, 134
INDEX
281

genetic engineering, 132–133
artificial DNA, 133–134
industrial applications, 135
introduction, 131
society and, 136
Red algae, 173
Redi, Francesco, 10–11, 17
Redox reaction, 88–89
Reducing medium, 106
Refraction, angle of, 53
Refractive index, 56
Replication, 120–121, 187–188
Reproduction, 68
Reservoirs of infection, 199–201
Resistance, 8, 203
Responsiveness, 67–68
Restriction enzymes, 132
Restriction fragment length polymorphosis, 
135
Restriction fragments, 132
Retroviruses, 190–191
Reversible reaction, 33–34
Rhabdoviruses, 191
Rhodophyta, 173
Ribosomal RNA (rRNA), 123
Ribosomes, 123
Rickettsias, 158–159
Rifamycins, 241–242
RNA (ribonucleic acid), 44, 123–124
viruses, 189–192
Roundworms (nematodes), 180–181
Rubisco, 100
Rutherford, Ernest, 27, 43
S
Salmonella, 157
Salts, 37
Sanitation, 113
Saprophytes, 168
Saturation point, 91
Scanning electron microscope, 58, 60
Schaeffer-Fulton endospore stain, 64
Schizogony (multiple fission), 175
Schleiden, Mathias, 9, 18
Schwann, Theodor, 9, 18
Sedimentation rate, 77
Semiconservative replication, 120–121
Semmelweis, Ignaz, 16, 18
Serratia marcescens, 157
Shigella, 156
Simple diffusion, 75
Slime layer, 70
Smallpox, 15
Smears, 60
Smith, Hamilton, 132
Snow, John, 204–205
Southern blotting technique, 133
Southern, Edwin M., 133
Species, 144–145
Specific epithet, 5–6
Specimens, preparing, 60–61
Spectrophotometer, 111
Spontaneous generation, disproving, 10–12
Sporadic disease, 198
Spores, 13
Sporosarcina, 162
Stahl, Franklin, 120
Stains, 52
Staphylococcus, 16–17, 61, 160–161
Sterilization, 112
Steroids, 41
Streak plate method, 107–108
Streptococcus, 70, 161
Streptomycin, 236, 240
Substrate, 35, 91
Sulfanilamide, 237
Sulfonamides, 242
Superinfection, 234
Superoxide free radicals, 105
Surfactants, 116
Svedberg (S) units, 77
Symons, Robert, 132
Synthesis reaction, 34
Système International d’Unités (SI system), 48
INDEX
282

T
T cells, 219–220
Tapeworms, 179–180
Tetanus, 104
Tetracyclines, 236, 240
Thermal denaturation, 92
Thylakoids, 83, 99
Thymine (T), 122
Thymine dimers, 127
Tinea pedis, 67
Togaviruses, 191
Tolnaftate, 243
Toxoplasma gondii (T. gondii), 178
Transcription process, 123–124
Transfer RNA (tRNA), 123–124
Transferases, 90
Translation process, 124–125
Transmembrane protein, 74
Transmission electron microscope (TEM), 58–60
Transmission, disease
Triazoles, 243
Trichomonas vaginalis, 176
Trichophyton fungus, 67
Triglycerides, 41
Trypanosoma, 177
Tuberculosis, 2
Tyndall, John, 12, 18
U
Uracil, 123
V
Vaccines, 135
developing, 15, 225–226
introduction, 223–224
types of, 224–225
Vacoule, 175
Valence shell, 29
Van Leeuwenhoek, Antoni, 10, 17, 54
Vancomycin, 239
Varicella-zoster virus, 4
Variola, 15
Variolation process, 224
Vector control, 206
Vector transmission, 202–203
Vehicle transmission, 201–202
Veillonella, 158
Vibrios, 157, 201, 205
Virchow, Rudolf, 9, 18
Virions, 187–188
Viroids, 192–193
Virology, 4
Viruses
definition of, 4, 186
DNA viruses, 188–190
in animals, 188–189
in plants, 192
infectious disease and, 189–192
introduction, 185–186
oncogenic viruses, 192
replication, 187–188
RNA viruses, 189–192
shapes, 187
structure, 186
Von Behring, Emil, 213
W
Watson, James, 120
Wet mounts, 60–61
Whitteker, Robert H., 141
Woese, Carl, 6, 141
Wolfe, Ralph S., 141, 143
Y
Yersinia pestis, 3, 157
Z
Ziehl, Franz, 64
Ziehl-Nielsen acid-fast stain, 61–63
Zoonosis, 200
INDEX
283

This page intentionally left blank.

Tom Betsy, D.C., teaches microbiology, anatomy, physiology, and other courses
in the nursing and allied health programs at Bergen Community College in
northern New Jersey. Dr. Betsy is widely admired by his students for his ability
to simplify complex subjects. He lives in Hillsdale, New Jersey.
Jim Keogh is a writer and teacher of computing at Columbia University. He is
the author of more than 60 books. This is the seventh book in the Demystified
series that he has authored. The others are Pharmacology Demystified, JavaScript
Demystified, ASP.NET Demystified, Data Structures Demystified, OOP Demys-
tified, and Java Demystified. He lives in Ridgefield Park, New Jersey.
285
ABOUT THE AUTHORS

