

This Is a Borzoi Book Published by Alfred A. Knopf Copyright © 2008 by Anne Mendelson All
rights reserved. Published in the United States by Alfred A. Knopf, a division of Random House,
Inc., New York, and in Canada by Random House of Canada Limited, Toronto.
www.aaknopf.com
Knopf, Borzoi Books, and the colophon are registered trademarks of Random House, Inc.

eBook ISBN: 978-0-38535121-8
Hardcover ISBN: 978-1-4000-4410-8
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Mendelson, Anne.
Milk : the surprising story of milk through the ages / by Anne Mendelson.—1st ed.
p.   cm.
Includes index.
ISBN 978-1-4000-4410-8
1. Milk—History.   2. Cookery (Milk)   I. Title.
SF251.M46 2008
641.3’7109—dc22      2008019620
Manufactured in the United States v3.1

IN MEMORIAM
M.I.
E.S.M.

ILLUSTRATIONS CREDITS
AMERICAN MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY LIBRARY, SPECIAL COLLECTIONS 1.1
(Richard Lydekker, Royal Natural History [vol. 2], 1894) 1.2 (Richard
Lydekker, Wild Oxen, Sheep, and Goats, 1898), 1.4 and 1.5 (John G.
Wood, Our Living World [American edition], 1885), 2.4 (William Youatt,
Cattle, 1834), 5.3 and 5.11 (John Lockwood Kipling, Beast and Man in
India, 1891) COLLECTIONS OF THE NEW YORK PUBLIC LIBRARY, ASTOR, LENOX AND
TILDEN FOUNDATIONS: 1.3 (Jean Francois Champollion, Monuments de
l’Egypte et de la Nubie, p. 1844–99), 1.6 (Illustrated London News, 1864),
1.7 (Edward Moor, The Hindu Pantheon, 1810), 1.8 and 2.5 (Charles
Louis Flint, Milch Cows and Dairy Farming, 1858), 2.1 (George W.
Thornbury, Old and New London [vol. 4], 1872), 2.3 (Frank Leslie’s
Illustrated, May 15, 1858), 6.4 (Magasin pittoresque, 1837) THE NEW-YORK
HISTORICAL SOCIETY 1.9 (The Cries of New York, 1845 edition, NYHS
negative #54406), 2.2 (Harper’s Weekly, August 17, 1878, NYHS
negative #80839d) THE STATE LIBRARY OF VICTORIA 4.1 (Australian Illustrated
Weekly, November 11, 1893) RALPH SELITZER, The Dairy Industry in
America, 1976 5.1, 5.9, 5.10
HEDWIG DORN, Zur Stütze der Hausfrau, 1918 5.5, 5.8, 5.12, 6.7, 6.8, 8.3

CONTENTS
Cover
Title Page
Copyright
Dedication
Preface
PART I
MILK, MILCH ANIMALS, AND COOKING
Beginnings and Traditions
THE STORY OF MODERN MILK
Or, Is This What We Really Want?
RAW VS. PASTEURIZED, ORGANIC VS. CONVENTIONAL
A Minority Opinion
WHITE MAGIC 101
PART II • RECIPES
FRESH MILK AND CREAM
YOGURT
CULTURED MILK AND CREAM

BUTTER AND TRUE BUTTERMILK
FRESH CHEESES (INCLUDING BRINED CHEESES)
A Note on Shopping Sources
Acknowledgments
Select Bibliography
Index
A Note About the Author
Other Books by This Author

T
PREFACE
his book has grown out of a lifelong love of milk and fresh dairy
products. It is the culinary guidebook, dairy-chemistry-for-cooks primer,
and eclectic recipe collection that I always vainly wished somebody had
written. And it developed into something else that I’d always wanted to
find: a geographical-historical exploration of the world’s milky ways,
including those that have shaped the modern American milk supply for
better or worse.
Milk itself would have been a fascinating subject at any time in
history. It is really and truly the First Food, at least for all members of
the mammal class. The practice of milking was an anchor of many
prehistoric civilizations, one of humanity’s oldest and deepest bonds
with domestic animals. The animals raised for the purpose are
remarkable creatures, though they remain nearly invisible to most of the
people who put milk on shopping lists. What they produce is a
biochemical marvel that modern science has not yet finished analyzing.
Its still-unplumbed complexities are exactly what make it irreplaceable
in a huge number of the world’s cuisines. In the ancient world it often
had religious significance as a ritual offering; in India it still has sacred
associations. On a more earthbound level, it has figured tremendously in
the farm econo-mies of most industrialized nations.
But I’m not sure that any previous historical juncture would have been
an equally fruitful—or fraught—moment for stepping back to survey the
many dimensions of milk, especially in the United States. It gets lots of
headlines these days, some of them pleasanter reading than others.
Among the most striking features of the early twenty-first-century dairy
scene are:
• Milk in many ways exemplifies an American love-hate relationship
with food, an endless tug-of-war between exalting and demonizing
things on the basis of medical claims and counterclaims.

• It is also an alarming example of farming and processing technology
somehow run amok, careening down ever more extreme paths with
less and less connection to anything recognizable as real milk.
• On a more encouraging note, a resurgence of small-scale dairying and
dairy farming is proceeding under our noses just as many people
become aware of a hunger for something not satisfied by featureless,
taken-for-granted, mass-produced milk and fresh dairy products.
Today we have unprecedented opportunities to taste milk, cream,
butter, fresh cheeses, and other simple milk-derived foods made by,
and for, people who know what flavor is.
• Most powerfully of all, milk today represents a time of change in
American culinary perspective, stemming from massive change in this
nation’s ethnic makeup. Part of the impetus behind this book was my
eagerness to share the voyages of culinary discovery that began for me
in immigrant neighborhoods of northern New Jersey and ended by
completely reshaping my understanding of milk’s place in world
history, not to say the world’s kitchens. What I learned, in a nutshell,
is that the usual American ways with milk and dairy products are only
a narrow, anomalous sidetrack from something immensely larger,
richer, and more ancient. It’s my hope that other people will be as
bowled over as I have been on seeing how much new Americans from
diverse cooking traditions have to teach us about this humble
substance.
My entry point to enlightenment was yogurt—not what I’d known from
American pop versions but the plain creamy yogurt that kept turning up
as sauce, drink, condiment, and just all-around player in small Greek,
Bosnian, Turkish, Israeli, Persian, Afghan, and Indian restaurants. Slowly
it dawned on me that in simple fermented yogurt I was tasting
something that might have been eaten or drunk by Old Testament
patriarchs, Sumerian lawgivers, Homeric heroes, Hindu gods, or the
flower of Persian chivalry. The uses I saw it being put to in modest little
eateries made me realize how little I’d really known about cooking with
milk and dairy products.
As the larger picture opened up to me and I began trying to delve into
chapters of the culinary past that no one else seemed to have written, I
gradually arrived at a thoroughly rearranged world view of milk and

things made from it.
In the first place, for most people in most parts of the world, milk has
always been not a blandly innocuous food but one with decided flavors
of its own. Historically it has come from not only cows—which give the
mildest-tasting milk of any dairy animal—but many other creatures,
suited to different climates and geographies, whose milk has distinctive
flavors peculiar to their species. (Goats’ milk is probably the most
familiar example in the United States.) Furthermore, sweet milk
—“sweet” in the sense of “unsoured”—is not really as old a part of
systematic foodways as milk fermented by friendly bacteria. Since
prehistory, most of the milk consumed in all dairying regions of the
world has been soured into yogurt or forms resembling today’s cultured
buttermilk. After all, fermentation is what happens to milk within a
short time of milking unless you artificially forestall the event through
refrigeration. And if you keep up with the story of lactose intolerance,
you will realize that more human beings can more easily digest soured
than sweet milk. To use an often-abused word, soured milk is in a very
real sense a more “natural” food for people past the age of weaning. Just
as crucial from a cook’s point of view, soured milk plays off against
other flavors with a many-dimensioned verve that’s missing in the sweet
counterpart.
Similarly, fresh cheeses made by a few simple forms of curd-setting
are not just primitive precursors of “real” cheeses that have been ripened
or aged. They are both older and more globally important than any other
kinds of cheese. In their own right they are anything but blah and
monotonous. Since ancient times they have been marked by infinite
nuances of flavor and texture, depending on local environments, the
animals that provide the milk, and the manner in which the curd is set.
Fresh cheeses preserved through brining, like the Greek variety we call
feta, are also more ancient than European-style ripened ones and figure
prominently throughout a wider geographical range—in fact, most of the
same geographical range as yogurt.
In the long territorial stretch of the Old World that I came to think of
as “Yogurtistan,” people have until recently been much closer than we
are to the primal origins of both dairying and cooking with dairy foods.
The Indian subcontinent also preserves more links with an ancient past.
So do the Russian reaches of western Asia along with adjacent Eastern

Europe; the dominant form of sour milk there isn’t yogurt, but continuity
still exists with a tradition in which milk was almost invariably
fermented before people thought of consuming it or cooking with it. The
big global exceptions to the pattern today are northwestern Europe,
Great Britain, and several parts of the world—including North America
—that became British or French colonies. In the mother countries
something happened, only a few centuries ago, to start a huge
commercial concentration on two forms of milk that had been little
known, or even unknown, among other dairying peoples. They were
fresh unsoured milk and its linear opposite: ripened or aged cheese.
Before this switch of direction, there hadn’t been anything remarkably
odd about these regions except that they had a high proportion of people
with the globally rare ability to digest the lactose in sweet milk
throughout their adult lives—a genetic fluke that didn’t stop sour milk
and fresh cheeses from being cornerstones of household dairying for
centuries or, more likely, millennia. But after cheeses proliferated as
specialties destined for particular markets and sweet milk for drinking
began to be produced in large volumes for urban clienteles,
northwestern Europe and Britain never looked back. (The first change
happened about four or five hundred years ago, the second toward the
start of the nineteenth century.) It’s this heritage that has chiefly shaped
American perceptions of dairy foods.
Few readers of this book will need to be convinced that whether or
not aged and ripened cheeses belong to the very oldest and most
widespread milky ways, they are a glorious contribution to the joy of
mankind. I have not tried to discuss them for the simple reason that
there are already many other works treating the subject with the love
and intelligence that it deserves—though sometimes also leaving the
mistaken impression that fresh dairy products are really cheese manqué.
The situation is very different with fresh milk and such offshoots as
fresh cream or sweet butter. They can indeed taste wonderful—I hope to
convey an idea of just how wonderful—when carefully and skillfully
brought to us in a state of true freshness. They can be invaluable in a
savvy cook’s arsenal of resources. But you will note that I’ve written
“can be,” not “are.” The triumph of drinkable fresh (or pseudo-fresh)
milk as the dominant popular Western form of milk started us off down
the garden path to the unfortunate consequences that I mentioned

before. It has left millions of us without access to genuinely fresh,
excellent milk—or any sense of what we’re missing.
This long deprivation is why the revival of small dairy farms and the
reawakening of interest in artisanal fresh dairy products is such cause for
rejoicing. It would have been a splendid turn of events at any stage in
the last fifty years. Great things are happening when more and more of
us have access to butter that tastes like cream, cream that tastes like
cream, and—still more important—flavorful unhomogenized milk
pasteurized by methods less “efficient” than those now standard in the
industry. But by happy coincidence, or maybe not mere coincidence,
these developments have arrived at the same moment as have waves of
immigrants from parts of the globe where older, non-Western traditions
of consuming and cooking with milk still prevail. Some of today’s small
farmers are developing an interest in ancient (and excellent) sources of
milk that once would have seemed ludicrously far-fetched—goats galore,
dairy sheep, and even water buffaloes. Anyone can see that very new
Americans from very ancient milking regions will shortly be looking
around for what they consider good milk, together with good yogurt or
other soured milk, fresh cheeses, and perhaps even their own preferred
versions of butter. I believe that with these on hand, America’s culinary
horizons will be rapidly and spectacularly enlarged.
As you will see, the book straddles several categories. From a pretty
early stage I knew that it would have to be part narrative history,
reaching back into the prehistoric past to make clear what extraordinary
creatures the milch animals are and including an unflinching look at the
course of modern factory-scale dairy farming and processing. People
today, after all, are starting to believe that they should know where their
food comes from. I was convinced that even a brief account of our
Goliath milk industry would make people stand up and cheer for the
hundreds of little Davids who are now appearing on the American
dairying scene. I saw also that the book would have to make at least a
quick foray into the chemical intricacies that are the reason milk isn’t
reproducible by phony substitutes. And I knew both that I wanted to
present an eclectic array of recipes from dramatically differing world
traditions and that what I wanted to show about the incredible
versatility of milk in cooking was not going to fit any usual organization
of recipes by menu category.

When all the pieces came together, they formed two pictures, both
taken from many angles. One is a broad overall look at where milk
comes from and what it is, the other a worldwide exploration of milk in
cookbook form.
The first section opens with a historical survey of milch animals and
milking traditions in the four great geographical zones where milk
became a defining culinary element. It goes on to trace the strange
fortunes of fresh (well, not very fresh) drinkable milk in modern Western
societies, leading up to an age of intensively bred-and-fed supercows,
increasingly bizarre forms of processing, and nutrition wars. And before
turning to actual recipes, I sketch the biological and chemical
underpinnings without which we would have neither milk nor any of the
things made from it.
The cookbook portion begins with the uses of fresh unfermented milk
and cream (as well as modern canned milk) and goes on to explore
yogurt in many guises, other forms of cultured milk and cream, butter
(with the true buttermilk that is part of the buttermaking process), and
fresh cheeses. The recipes have been chosen to suggest what a wealth of
experiences awaits any adventurous dairy-minded cook with the
enterprise to plumb both Western European traditions based on fresh
milk, cream, and butter and the still more exciting ones now reaching us
from entirely different cuisines.
At bottom, Milk springs from both a long-standing concern about our
troubled milk supply and a growing belief that we’re on the road to an
era of more delicious milk and simple dairy foods, including whole
complexes of cooking possibilities that many of us never dreamed of a
generation ago. I hope that I have done justice to the beauties of fresh
milk and cream, the less familiar miracles of their freshly fermented
counterparts (with yogurt occupying a position of special honor), and
the pleasures of fresh as well as brined cheeses. My love affair with the
subject has been a voyage of many discoveries. I will be happy if I can
bring other people along on it.


M
MILK, MILCH ANIMALS, AND COOKING
Beginnings and Traditions
any thousands of years ago, somebody saw an animal nursing her
young and had the eccentric, not to say dangerous, idea of getting in on
the act.
This “somebody” was most likely many Neolithic somebodies,
independently impelled to the same experiment. Students of prehistory
have never pinpointed an exact time or place for one definitively
successful attempt at milking. But they have educated guesses about
when and where people got the art down pat: probably some time
between 8000 and 6000 B.C., somewhere between the Anatolian plateau
and the Zagros Mountains of southwestern Iran. They also know one
thing about the animal in question: It wasn’t a cow.
A strange custom, this, using another creature’s milk for food. Even
today it is anything but universal among the world’s peoples. But where
it took hold, other animals’ milk became a staff of life and—odd though
it may seem to those reared on cows’ milk from cartons—a source of
varied, rich, exuberant, and even exciting flavors in many cooking
traditions from prehistory to the present.
The oldest places where humans mastered the skills of milking tend to
overlap with the region, where the world’s oldest documented cuisines
originated and where some ancestral preferences still survive. Today,
when mechanized or even computerized milking is a gigantic
commercial enterprise in advanced societies from Australia to Argentina,
food lovers everywhere can still learn much from the relationships
among humans, animals, and foodways that sprang up in those primal
areas, as well as patterns that followed over a few thousand years in
several other parts of the premodern world (the premodern Old World,
since milking was unknown in North and South America until after
Columbus).
Virtually all the most ingenious, flexible uses of milk as a food and
cooking ingredient can be traced to four seminal culinary zones of

ancient Asia and Europe, each marked by characteristic preferences for
certain milch animals as well as particular dairy foods. Starting with the
oldest, they can be conveniently thought of as the Diverse Sources Belt,
the Bovine and Buffalo Belt, the Northeastern Cow Belt, and the
Northwestern Cow Belt. The four primary zones correspond respectively
with the great east-west sweep from the Balkans to western Mongolia,
the Indian subcontinent, northeastern Europe from the Baltic into Russia,
and northwestern Europe.
You will notice one great omission fitting into none of these
categories: the milking regions and traditions of Africa. My reason for
leaving them out is that many crucial practices simply are not
reproducible in American kitchens. Even today the uses of milk in the
chief dairying areas (the east, southward from parts of Ethiopia and the
Sudan to Mozambique) are stamped by ancient pastoral, semi-nomadic
ways of life and particular techniques—for example, impregnating the
interior surface of milk-collecting gourds with smoke from fragrant
grasses or wood chips—that probably are impossible to translate into
meaningful terms for cooks in industrialized societies. At least, I’ve
found no sources of culinary information, though in the United States
we’re starting to get some picture of Ethiopian foodways, including a
few milk-based specialties.
THE DIVERSE SOURCES BELT
At the outset, today’s cooks should know that much of what’s worth
discovering about milk as a culinary treasure first emerged throughout a
certain broad swath of Eurasia centuries (at least) before milking spread
to regions north and south, and millennia before more specialized
approaches carried the day in industrialized Europe. The beginnings
were almost surely in the prehistoric Near East, several hundred miles
from the coastal Mediterranean sites where grain crops were first
domesticated: present-day Israel, Jordan, Syria, and Lebanon, starting at
some point before about 8000 B.C. Somewhat eastward and many
centuries later, other nameless pioneers applied the idea of
domestication to the animal kingdom. They began with a few local
creatures—possibly objects of sacrificial cults—that hunters had already

found to be promising sources of meat and hides. In time they, and
neighbors in gradually widening areas over a general eastward-westward
course, extended the new practice to more species, until people
throughout 
a 
several-thousand-mile 
range 
from 
the 
Balkans,
Mediterranean North Africa, and the northwestern fringes of Arabia far
into central Asia were herding and tending more than half a dozen kinds
of four-footed livestock. Unlike people in the other principal zones, they
have continued to use several if not most of these creatures as milk
sources to this day.
The practice of milking didn’t develop as early as other uses of
domestic animals. It must be seen in contexts quite unrelated to modern
milking—for example, climate and geography, which nowadays hardly
impinge at all on the lives of the largest dairy-cow herds.
The cradle of animal domestication, from Asia Minor eastward into
present-day Iraq and Iran, was not gentle. Most of the region was arid
and had brutally hot summers, a fact that would intensely stamp the
oldest chapters of dairying history. The geographic range of livestock
herding gradually expanded eastward and westward in ancient times to
embrace a greater range of terrains both more and less hospitable, but
largely sharing some harsh features of the eastern Mediterranean and
Anatolia.
Throughout the great east-west belt where milking first took root, the
chief livestock animals were goats, sheep, pigs, cattle, horses, asses, and
camels. Pigs were the odd ones out here. All the rest had at least dual
careers as sources of meat and milk, with some also doing duty as beasts
of burden.
What made them suitable for the milking part of the arrangement? Or
to put the question differently, why were pigs not used for milking? One
obvious reason is that pigs—as equal-opportunity scavengers of
vegetable and animal matter—are the only nonherbivores in the lineup.
No society has ever habitually consumed milk from any animal that
doesn’t live on grass and leaves. The preferred species have always been
ruminants (sheep, goats, cattle, the reindeer of far northern Europe, the
water buffaloes of India), other cud-chewing animals (dromedaries,
Bactrian camels), and a few non-cud-chewers fairly good at converting
vegetation into milk and meat (horses, asses).
It may be—I’ve never talked to anyone in a position to know—that

flesh eaters and omnivores communicate some flavor to their milk that
made prehistoric peoples reject it. But regardless of this point, anatomy
alone would have put them at a disadvantage for being milked. The club
of domestic milch animals consists of fairly, though not unmanageably,
large hoofed beasts standing high enough off the ground for human
hands to reach under them without great difficulty. Carnivores like dogs
and omnivores like pigs give birth to large litters, which means that the
mammary system is spread out along the whole length of the mother’s
belly. She nurses lying on her side, while with long-legged hoofed
mammals both mother and offspring stand during nursing. The large
grass eaters all bear single young, or at most twins or triplets. This
makes it possible for the mammary gland to assume the compact (and
from the human viewpoint, convenient) form of an udder beneath the
animal’s hindquarters. As a final advantage, all have nipples elongated
into teats that hands can easily grasp.
All the major Eurasian milch animals also live and move in herds,
ranging over sizable territories in search of food. They are well adapted
to open grasslands of different kinds, from dry steppes to steep hillside
pasturage to well-watered plains. (Pigs would starve on any such
ground.) The sparser the vegetation, the more widely they need to
wander. Thus they have always been a more natural fit with some form
of pastoral nomadism than with settled farming on limited tracts of land.
(The latter won out in most of the world, but without large-scale
technology and transportation it is a difficult balancing act.) The
tremendous east-west sweep of the globe running from Hungary and the
Balkans across the Hellespont through Asia Minor, south of the Black
and Caspian Seas and north of the Himalayas, on into Mongolia and
western China is remarkably rich in grasslands that must have been the
original habitats for the wild ancestors of today’s milch animals. Even
today, a few groups of pastoral nomads still tend roving herds of goats,
sheep, cattle, camels, and to an extent horses in parts of central and
western Asia. Milk has always been a prominent part of the bargain
because lactating females can in essence carry part of a tribe’s daily food
supply on the hoof, relieving people of the need to haul it around.
THE FLAVOR COROLLARIES

From a culinary point of view, there are striking implications. The part
of the world with the oldest and most deeply ingrained milking
traditions is also the one where milk came from the most varied sources
—animals whose milk generally had pronounced and diverse tastes.
Cows’ milk is blander than any of its competitors, though undoubtedly
this was less true of prehistoric cows that grazed in nomadic conditions
and gave scantier amounts of more concentrated milk than their modern
counterparts.
The prevalence of arid climates with fierce summer heat was also
significant. It meant that cows were seldom the dominant milk source,
because of all dairy animals they are the least able to tolerate heat.
(There are exceptions, of which more later, but not in the Diverse
Sources latitudes.) Then there were the seasonal reproductive cycles of
the major herd animals. Most give birth close to the time of new grass in
spring, so that the mother has the advantage of the year’s most plentiful
grazing just as she comes into milk. Lactation continues for some months
until the young are weaned, the supply dries up, and the mothers are
again ready to breed. People would therefore have done most of their
milking during the months when milk sours most quickly once it is taken
from the ewe, mare, goat, or other source.
Clearly the earliest milk-eating experiments must have been done with
milk fresh from the udder. But until very recently this did not become a
favorite form in the Diverse Sources Belt, except sometimes as a food for
young children. Set aside any assumptions based on the availability of
refrigerators, and you will see that the natural fate of milk left to sit
around in extreme summer heat is swift colonization by neighborhood
bacteria. Some kinds are harmful (in fact, occasionally lethal) and some
benign, but at ambient hot-weather temperatures one group of
nonharmful bacteria has a certain competitive advantage. They feed on
lactose, the special sugar of milk, converting it to lactic acid and
incidentally rendering the milk more digestible for grown-ups who have
lost the usual childhood tolerance for lactose. In the process, they lower
the pH of the milk enough to make it inhospitable to many disease-
carrying organisms. This isn’t to say that letting milk sour is an infallible
measure for keeping pathogens at bay, but it affords some protection.
The particular kinds of lactic-acid bacteria that would have got there
first in the blistering summers of the Middle East and Central Asia

produce something resembling yogurt, though until fairly recent times
no one used that name or sought to inquire whether one group’s milk-
souring bugs were identical to another’s. The crucial thing to realize is
that in nearly all of the Diverse Sources Belt—which, as I’ve suggested, is
nearly tantamount to “Yogurtistan”—the simplest way for most people
to consume milk was soured, in the form of yogurt or its close cousins.
Two other forms became universal enough over most of Yogurtistan to
suggest that they also go back to very ancient times. The first probably
was hit upon after a very young kid or lamb had been butchered and
eviscerated. Somehow milk came in contact with the lining of the
animal’s stomach and later was found to have curdled to a cheeselike
substance through the action of an enzyme peculiar to the digestive
systems of nurslings. Eventually people learned to use the mysterious
curdling agent (the modern name is “rennet”) in tandem with natural
souring to produce agreeable-tasting—though short-lived—fresh cheeses
in which the flavors of the original milk were both transmuted and
intensified.
The second step forward followed the discovery that a strong brine
solution would stop spoilage in such cheeses and enable them to be held
for weeks or months. Ripening or aging in the fashion of modern
European cheeses was impossible because the process requires cooler
surroundings at some crucial stages. In hot, arid climates, lightly salted
fresh cheeses can undergo some primitive flavor-altering and spoilage-
preventing changes simply through drying out. (French crottins are an
example.) But the requisite conditions for more sustained, complex
fermentations did not exist in prehistoric times. Brining, on the other
hand, was a convenient preservation technique for anyone with access to
salt. Most parts of the Diverse Sources Belt thus have had some long-
standing tradition of brined cheeses—that is, versions of what Americans
usually call “feta.”
Several features of this ancient milking landscape are bound to
surprise people used to modern commercial dairy products. Maybe the
most striking is the absence of blandness, not only in the milk itself but
in what’s done to it. For millennia, people in the oldest dairying regions
consumed milk that started out with distinctive flavors mirroring
individual animal sources and then acquired lively lactic-acid notes
when it became something we would recognize as yogurt or the related

versions of fermented milk now known as kefir or kumys (see this page).
(Cooks should also note that eventually the habit of heating or boiling
milk to be used for yogurt became almost universal, because it produces
a richer and silkier-textured result.) The oldest and most universally
eaten cheeses also tasted firmly of the original milk, with a briny tang
superimposed in the case of the feta relatives.
Many cuisines of the Diverse Sources Belt (though not all) also used
some form of butter. Where it existed, it was generally stronger-tasting
than ours both because of the animals the milk came from and because it
often underwent an extended period of storage, sometimes after a flavor-
intensifying treatment such as long simmering with or without herbs and
spices. Different versions of clotted cream—some with emphatically
ripened flavors—also seem to have been widespread for many centuries.
When we come to cheese, however, the range of possibilities was
seriously restricted until fairly recent times. Even today only a few kinds
of cheese other than fresh white cheese and feta are produced in the old
Diverse Sources Belt. For the most part their descent can be traced to
Western influence and modern European originals (e.g., Greek graviera,
which takes its name from Gruyère) rather than to ancient local
tradition.
As you will see from many of the recipes in this book, cooks of the
Diverse Sources Belt love to set off dairy foods with pungent flavors of
many kinds. Certain combinations or effects crop up again and again.
Pairing chunks of brined white cheese with green herbs and crunchy raw
vegetables is as natural in Bulgaria as two thousand miles away in
Uzbekistan. Romanians are as fond of cucumbers with yogurt as are
Iranians and Afghans, and yogurt-garlic sauces are loved from one end of
the zone to the other. Perhaps the most fascinating discovery for me was
the array of cereal products for soups and porridges that are made—like
Greek trahana and Turkish tarhana—by drying and crumbling a fresh or
fermented mixture of grain (or flour) and yogurt, often with the
enrichment of vegetables and herbs.
THE DRAMATIS PERSONAE: THE ORIGINAL BIG THREE
Only three of the major Diverse Sources Belt milch animals ever
achieved enough importance as milkers anywhere else to have crossed

the path of most American food lovers. Camels chiefly remained in the
drier areas of the primal milking zone. Horses (and their close equid
relatives, asses) spread nearly everywhere in the Old World, but the
intensely horse-centered way of life anciently pursued by some nomadic
tribes of Central Asia didn’t. In no other societies did mares’ milk enjoy
great popularity as a food. The Big Three that eventually adapted to
lands far north and south of the first milking belt were sheep, goats, and
cows. For the sake of practicality my recipes generally call for dairy
products based on cows’ milk, but I urge you to seek out the other two
wherever possible. Sheep’s and goats’ milk will give you at least a little
idea of how much wider some people’s dairying horizons used to be.
ANCESTRAL WILD SHEEP (MOUFLON)
Sheep and goats (to zoologists, Ovis aries and Capra hircus) go together
like firs and spruces, and were the core milch animals in more areas of
the Diverse Sources Belt than any other contenders. Apparently
descended from a common ancestor that lived before the last ice age,
they resemble each other in so many skeletal features that
zooarchaeologists often can’t tell whether a few stray bones belonged to
a goat or a sheep. The catchall term “caprines,” or more ponderously
“ovicaprids,” is often applied to both.
Caprines almost certainly were the subjects of the earliest Near
Eastern human milking experiments, after some centuries of being kept
for meat and skins. By classical times goats and sheep were being raised
side by side throughout the Diverse Sources Belt and had made their way
beyond it. There was great logic to their original tandem success in and
around mountainous reaches of the Near East, the region where they had

evolved. Both were born to thrive in this arid land of fierce summers and
bitter winters. They also had the advantage of being small enough for
people to tangle with and live to tell the tale, but large enough to give
amounts of milk that would repay the effort of collecting it. When raised
together, they complemented each other’s ways of getting the most out
of local resources. Goats are light and nimble enough to climb forbidding
rocky slopes—even shrubby trees—in search of food, while the heavier,
shorter-legged sheep efficiently work flat, grassy pastures. Goats eat
nearly anything with leaves and shoots; sheep (which seldom eat leaves)
can crop grass closer than any other herd animal. Sheep, being sheepish
in temperament, are also easy to keep track of and herd into folds, while
the more contrarian goats range adventurously in search of anything
edible.
ANCESTRAL WILD GOAT (PERSIAN WILD GOAT)
The world’s first pastoralists found that both sheep and goats
obligingly came into season in the fall and gave birth after roughly five-
month pregnancies, in time to reach peak milk production in late spring
and early summer. The milk of the two tasted as similar as you might
expect of such close evolutionary cousins. But the goats, even though
slightly smaller, managed to yield several times more milk than the
sheep. The latter contributed a meager amount of naturally rich,
concentrated milk that intensified the whole (goat-and-sheep dairyists
regularly pooled the two creatures’ milk, as is still common from the
Balkans into western Asia) beyond all proportion to its volume.

Cattle did not become realistic candidates for domestication and
milking until many centuries later. The most obvious obstacle was size,
coupled with a murderous disposition.
Modern cows and bulls are descended from a great creature called the
aurochs (plural, “aurochsen”), or urus, that evolved somewhere in
northwestern Asia in the last ice age. By the time the glaciers retreated,
the aurochs species, Bos primigenius, ranged widely throughout much of
the Old World. Wherever they went, the fierce and kingly beasts aroused
wonder, often to the point of religious awe. Full-grown bulls could stand
some six feet high at the shoulder; the largest must have weighed well
over a ton and a half. The huge, sweeping horns that still give pause to
people looking at the painted Lascaux specimens were accompanied by
an extremely short fuse.
As compared with the wild ancestors of goats and sheep, aurochsen
would have been difficult to bring into the domestic human orbit even if
they had not been innately menacing. They were large enough to have
trouble maintaining a stable body temperature in the hot summers of the
Diverse Sources Belt. (As mentioned earlier, the problem persists even
with their smaller descendants.) They were also poorly adapted to arid
conditions, could neither forage in the free spirit of goats nor crop short
grass as well as sheep, and needed several times more food per head
than the caprines. On the other hand, cows gave much more milk than
either ewes or “does” (the usual dairyman’s term for nanny goats).
Over many centuries or millennia, people succeeded in breeding
aurochsen to produce a domesticated species, Bos taurus, that was
smaller and gentler than its ancestor. All bovines also have the
advantage of pronounced sexual dimorphism: The females are much
smaller than the males and not nearly so hardwired for aggression. Bulls
still were, and are, much the most dangerous of all domestic animals.
But early on someone discovered that castrating them before they were
full-grown would produce oxen, which nearly matched the docility of
cows and are the world’s strongest draft animals other than water
buffaloes and elephants. Their muscle power would lead to a revolution
in the human food supply.
Cattle domestication had been established in the Near East by about
7000 to 6000 B.C. As with sheep and goats, milking apparently did not
follow for many centuries. By then, however, local societies had taken to

plowing with oxen or cows, a breakthrough comparable to the later
invention of tractors. Before that, would-be farmers had had to dig with
handheld sticks, and settled agriculture had been restricted to tiny plots
with very light soil. Neither goats, sheep, nor humans were able to drag
a larger, heavier version of a stick with enough force to penetrate dense
clayey soil or well-rooted sod. Domesticated cattle were the plowers that
literally broke the ground for the diffusion of grain farming beyond its
Near Eastern cradle.
AN EGYPTIAN COW GIVING BIRTH
The spread of the animals didn’t necessarily go with a taste for their
milk. To this day, cows’ milk is less dominant in the old Diverse Sources
Belt countries than in other parts of the world. Though they have been
milked there since antiquity—cows are depicted in scenes of milking
activity on a third-millennium B.C. frieze from Tell el-Obeid in southern
Iraq—they had to be carried into far southerly and northerly regions to
become the milch animal par excellence. No reader of Homer, the Old
Testament, or Virgil automatically thought of cows on hearing the word
“milk”; the main association was with goats and sheep. Locales where
cows came to be prime milk sources from early times were, and are,
marked by very different ways of life and culinary preferences. The first
of these places was India.
THE BOVINE AND BUFFALO BELT
As Jared Diamond has pointed out in Guns, Germs, and Steel, Old World

food crops and other resources had to overcome more obstacles in order
to move north and south than east and west. The reason is that the all-
important factor of temperature varies directly with latitude, not
longitude.
Some plants and animals brought to new environments managed to
cope with heat, cold, and other variables better than others. Goats,
horses, and sheep proved to be hardy under many conditions, but tended
to be challenged by tropical humidity. Cattle were another story. As
descendants of creatures that had flourished in glacial chill, they would
have been thoroughly defeated by Torrid Zone heat and humidity had it
not been for a timely genetic freak.
ZEBU COW AND CALF
People had been husbanding cattle for meat, draft purposes, and, to an
extent, milk in ancient Mesopotamia for centuries when a strange new
type appeared, probably between 3000 and 2500 B.C., somewhere
between southern Persia and the western Pakistan-Afghanistan fringes.
The same aberration may (no one is sure) have occurred independently
in another spot or two between the Middle East and Nilotic Africa. In
any case, the new creature—later christened Bos indicus by zoologists to
distinguish it from Bos taurus—was the reason that milking and milk-
based cuisine were able to penetrate throughout the Indian subcontinent
and much of Africa.
The most visible difference between ordinary cattle and the indicus
variant was the latter’s pronounced neck or shoulder hump. Eventually
naturalists started calling the humped cattle of India “zebus” and a
similar race in Africa “sangas.” To sidestep learned debates about zebu-

sanga classifications and whether indicus designates a subspecies or
separate species, I have lumped together both humped kinds as “zebu-
type.”
The hump, which was larger on bulls than cows, went along with a
pendulous dewlap, a narrow bony frame, thin skin, and many
environmental advantages. Zebu-type animals can tolerate sweltering
tropical heat, resist certain diseases and parasites, and subsist on more
meager pasturage than other cows. Today the zebu-type milch cows of
Nilotic Africa at least as far south as Tanzania support the world’s most
intensely cow-centered pastoral cultures, and those of India symbolize an
entire nation—at least, as seen by militant patriots.
JUNGLE, MOUNTAIN, RIVER
The Indian milch-animal scene is riddled with strange complexities,
puzzles, and paradoxes, one being that though the subcontinent is
framed by regions representing the most diverse bovine gene pool on
earth, most of India’s Asian neighbors scorn the creatures’ milk. From
Assam eastward into several Southeast Asian countries, wild bovine
jungle species, including gaur, kouprey, and banteng, still survive along
with some domesticated offshoots. But there is little local use of either
the tame animals’ milk or that of zebu cattle.
YAK
To the north, the picture is different. From the western Himalayas
through and beyond Mongolia, people have been herding a towering,
fur-draped bovine cousin, Bos grunniens, for about twenty-five hundred

years. Americans usually call it “yak,” though Tibetan speakers protest
that the correct word for the female is dri. In any case, not only is yak,
or dri, milk famously cherished wherever the creature is raised, but it is
traditional to exploit the phenomenon of “hybrid vigor” by
crossbreeding yaks with both zebu and taurine cattle for, among other
benefits, increased milk yields in female offspring. Western observers
who have tasted dri milk report that it is a lovely golden color with an
extraordinarily deep, rich flavor; some experiments with Western-style
cheeses have been made in Nepal and elsewhere, and it isn’t out of the
question that the few small yak-husbandry ventures that have recently
started in North America may generate a bit of local interest in the milk.
WATER BUFFALO
None of these bovine cousins encroaches on the milk-giving role of the
sacred zebu cow in India proper. But an entirely different creature does.
Strange as it may seem to anyone else, Indians rely less on the milk of
the sacred cow than on that of this nonbovine competitor, the fourth of
the world’s leading dairy animals. More than half the nation’s milk
supply actually comes from the “river” strain of the water buffalo,
Bubalus bubalis.
This formidable-looking ruminant is a long, massive, low-slung, splay-
footed beast with a hide like a hippopotamus and a pair of fearsome
ridged horns. Water buffaloes should not be confused with bison, which
strictly speaking aren’t buffaloes at all. The true buffalo’s closest
ancestors probably were staking out habitats in the wetlands of southern
Asia at about the same time that aurochsen began roaming their own

northern haunts.
Like oxen elsewhere, domesticated buffaloes were the great facilitators
of a certain staple crop—in this case rice, since they can pull plows
through muddy or semi-flooded paddies that other animals could never
negotiate. Their meat is considered at least equal to beef wherever both
are eaten. But for some reason, only India showed any interest in their
milk or developed a particular strain suitable for that purpose. All other
Far Eastern regions bred large, thickset draft buffaloes of the “swamp”
strain. The Indian “river” buffalo is a rangier, bonier type that diverts a
great deal of food energy into lactation. In fact, it may be the most
remarkable of all milch animals.
What sets river buffaloes apart from the rest of the crew is that they
produce not only richer milk but more milk than nearly all the rest—and
this with far less intensive breeding-and-feeding efforts than have gone
into increasing the yields of Western dairy cows, the only higher-volume
producers among the four major milch animals. Only sheep give milk
that is equally or more concentrated—but, as noted, there’s very little of
it. A good milking ewe can, under favorable conditions, yield two or
three quarts (four to six pounds) of milk a day, while two to three gallons
(sixteen to twenty-four pounds) is by no means exceptional for a buffalo.
Buffaloes’ milk has an odd glaucous appearance, suggesting that it
shouldn’t be nearly as creamy as cows’ milk. In fact, it is much creamier.
People who have tasted it fresh (I have not) say that it seems almost like
a concentrated milk reduction. Judging from the buffalo yogurt and
mozzarella that I have eaten, it seems to have some special earthy
dimension of its own quite unlike the goaty-sheepy flavors of caprines’
milk. What’s more, the animals thrive and produce copiously on cheaper
and coarser tropical forages than cows.
Though reliable statistics are hard to come by, there are known to be
many more zebu cows than buffaloes milked in India. But the latter
account for more than 50 percent of the nation’s commercial milk
supply. Why the animal itself never came to be revered is a mystery.
Zebu cows in India became important as domestic livestock and sources
of milk earlier than water buffaloes, and perhaps the quasi-divine status
that they eventually acquired did not admit of diminishment by being
shared with another beast.
Paradoxically, the very fact that water buffaloes are not considered

holy may have made Indian commercial milk producers willing to
undertake more aggressive, systematic management measures; though
millions of cows are left to wander the countryside without anyone
trying to improve their milk yield, dairying interests apparently feel
freer to intervene in buffalo destiny.
GODS AND DEMONS PULL ALTERNATELY ON OPPOSITE ENDS OF A GIANT SERPENT TO ROTATE THE
MIRACULOUS COSMIC “CHURN” OF HINDU MYTH.
Western dairyists’ lack of interest in buffaloes’ milk is equally
puzzling. When taken from the tropics, buffaloes are surprisingly good at
adapting to other surroundings. They probably ranged as far north as
southern Mesopotamia from ancient times, and since then have been
successfully introduced into Egypt, the Levant, and parts of Italy and the
Balkans. But only today are a handful of experimenters trying to see how
well water buffaloes can tolerate more northerly temperate climates.
Some British and American farmers have managed to generate a little
publicity for swamp buffaloes’ meat as an alternative to beef, and a very

few are trying to do the same for river buffaloes’–milk yogurt and
mozzarella cheese.
Possessing two milk sources of equal culinary importance makes India
unique among the world’s dairying countries. (There is some use of
goats’ milk in hilly northern regions, but nationally it ranks a very
distant third.) Cows’ milk and buffaloes’ milk are used all but
interchangeably for every kind of dairy product. But because buffaloes’
milk is more concentrated and gives higher yields of milkfat, protein,
and virtually any other milk-derived product per original pound of milk,
it is more commercially profitable. Cows’ milk enjoys higher prestige,
undoubtedly because of its association with the sacred animal.
Brahmins have long cherished an image of the cow as a crown jewel in
a complex, prohibition-fenced scheme of beliefs about the ritual purity
or pollution of food. In this worldview she is the wellspring of life in
palpable form, inexhaustibly pouring forth the miracle of milk, a holy
substance considered to have been purified by inner fires in the grass-
transforming alembic that is the cow’s body. (In fact, a Hindu creation
myth describes a primordial sea of milk as the stuff from which many
great gifts of the world were “churned” under the direction of Vishnu.)
The cow-mother also gradually became a symbol of Mother India—
originally, a benevolent symbol; now something more aggressive. Cow
worship never used to have anything like the frankly militant Hinduist
associations that it enjoys in today’s political-religious tinderbox. (Not
only is there a national prohibition against beef slaughter, but people
remarking too loudly that even Brahmins used to eat beef in Vedic times
are likely to incur harassment if not death threats.) Not surprisingly,
modern industrialized cow dairying has proceeded somewhat cautiously
in India despite a good deal of entrepreneurial interest and expertise,
and despite the fact that milk is more central to cooking there than in
any other nation. It is no exaggeration to say that, without milk, the
doctrine of ahimsa (the inviolability of animal as well as human life)
could not have achieved its primacy and the flowering of vegetarianism
throughout India would have been impossible.
THE SOUL OF A GREAT CUISINE
From prehistoric times, the sweltering Indian climate ensured that, as in

the Diverse Sources Belt, milk would be more often used soured than
fresh. But there are several critical differences. Not only Western-style
aged cheeses but the fresh and brined cheeses of the earlier milking
region are conspicuous by their absence from Indian tables. In fact, so
are most dairy foods made from raw rather than cooked milk.
Boiling milk after milking and before using it for most other purposes
seems to be a very ancient Indian culinary tradition. It changes the
milk’s receptiveness to different culturing organisms, discouraging those
that would produce fresh cheese. (A second anticheese factor is that
killing young animals for rennet would violate the principle of ahimsa.)
But boiling makes milk all the more suitable for yogurt, which depends
on having “thermophilic,” or heat-preferring, bacteria introduced at a
temperature close to 110°F. Most of the favorite Indian dairy products
start off with milk being boiled and allowed to cool until it reaches the
right stage to be inoculated with a little of yesterday’s yogurt.
You might not guess how thoroughly yogurt from both cows’ and
buffaloes’ milk pervades the cuisine from the many Anglo-Indian books
about food that insist on saying “curd” or “curds” for indigenous words
such as the Hindi dahi and Tamil thayir. Yogurt is a dish in its own right
and the foundation of various beverages and cold relishes, as well as an
element in innumerable sauces, dressings, soups, and desserts. It is also
the starting point of churned butter (Hindi makkan, Tamil vennai).
Because of its basis in yogurt, the buttermilk (Hindi chhas, Tamil moru)
resulting from butter churning has nuances that would be hard to
duplicate here in America.
In fact, anything based on yogurt—highly nonstandardized throughout
the subcontinent—is likely to taste different even from one Indian region
to another. In addition, there will be differences between the cows’-milk
and buffaloes’-milk versions. Buffalo yogurt starts out creamier and
denser, and yields more butter in churning. The butter itself is almost
pure white because it contains more finished vitamin A than the
yellowish precursor beta-carotene that predominates in most cows’ milk.
Freshly churned butter of either kind can be eaten as is, but is more
often slowly simmered to produce the ambrosial cooking fat called ghee
(Tamil neyyu), which is also yellow or white depending on the animal it
came from. The long, gentle cooking evaporates any remaining water
and makes it easier to “clarify” the milkfat, or separate it from any

residual milk solids; without such treatment it would be extremely
perishable.
Plain fresh milk does play a part in Indian cuisine, but there are
distinct regional preferences that perhaps reflect different degrees of
lactose tolerance. Though it is hard to sort out the many statistical
claims 
that 
have 
been 
published 
with 
very 
hazy 
scientific
documentation, people in the northern states appear much more likely to
maintain lactose-digesting ability into adulthood. In those regions,
people occasionally drink milk as a beverage—but usually when it has
been heated and partly cooled, and usually with some kind of
sweetening.
The north has also produced a milk-based specialty that arouses
curious reactions in other regions of India. It is a kind of curd made by
heating milk (sometimes buttermilk) and adding an acidulant like lemon
juice that causes casein (the major milk protein) to precipitate out of the
whey in a semisolid white mass. Called chhenna in that form, panir when
cut into cubes, this very bland and slightly rubbery substance often turns
up on English-language restaurant menus as “cheese” or something like
“cottage cheese,” “soft cheese,” or “pot cheese.” In fact it is none of the
above, never having been exposed to either rennet curdling or bacterial
fermentation. But it is a wonderfully versatile foil to rich-flavored sauces
and purées, and in the form of chhenna makes lovely patties and
dumplings.
The idea for this not-exactly-cheese may have come from either the
conquering Moghuls, who swept through India from north to south
starting in about 1525, or the Portuguese, who were already carving out
spheres of influence before the Moghuls arrived. There was a block to its
acceptance: the widespread Hindu belief that “breaking,” or “cutting,”
milk into “parts” (curd and whey) violated the holy substance’s integral
nature. For some reason, the taboo was soon overcome by northern
Hindus but frequently persists elsewhere. This is why chhenna and panir
never became everyday foods in regions where Moghul or Portuguese
influence was slight. Generally speaking, they are less important the
farther you get from the first Moghul strongholds in the north.
A more widely accepted northern contribution is unsoured milk
cooked down to different concentrations, usually with added sugar.
Among the passionately loved specialties based on reduced milk are

several forms of clotted cream (malai); various sweet, rich milk puddings
thickened with rice; and a fudgelike concentrate known as khoa, which
is the basis of an entire sweetmeat industry (especially in West Bengal
State and neighboring Bangladesh). For non-Indians, the huge repertoire
of reduced-milk confections and sweets tends to be at best an acquired
taste. On their home territory, however, they are as defining a
preference as whiskey in Scotland.
As in the Diverse Sources Belt, the practice of drinking milk fresh and
unflavored has historically been infrequent, even in zones of widespread
lactose tolerance. But today India has an aggressively progress-minded
dairy industry (though it is somewhat constrained by attitudes toward
cows), powerfully influenced by modern Western notions about milk
drinking and eager to be a model for Western-style dairying enterprises
in the less-developed Asian and African tropics. It is impossible not to
wonder how the older milk-based traditions will be affected by the
imposing of views originally shaped by radically different cultures and
geographies.
THE NORTHEASTERN COW BELT
It took many undocumented centuries for livestock husbandry, including
milking, to spread from the Diverse Sources Belt not only southward into
India but northward beyond the Black Sea and the Caucasus into another
east-west zone stretching from the western Russian steppes through
Ukraine and north of the Carpathian Mountains into Poland, parts of the
future Austro-Hungarian Empire, the Baltic lands, and the fringes of
Scandinavia (where there is also an admixture of other influences from
the west). With this third great dairying zone we move a little closer to
the preferences that most Americans understand and that are now being
exported all around the world.
Cattle held an advantage over the other domestic animals introduced
to northeastern Europe: They’d been there before. That is, they were
returning to parts of the chilly latitudes where their aurochs forebears
had been roaming when the last ice sheet decamped for the North Pole.
(Aurochsen were still at large in Neolithic times; they became more
elusive as human populations took over, but they didn’t absolutely
disappear until one last female died in Poland in 1627.) Long, cold

winters and brief, relatively cool summers with good amounts of rainfall
to keep pastures green were exactly what cattle needed to thrive and
produce milk. Wherever they were brought in these parts, they became
the dominant milch animals.
The number-one status of cows rested not only on their environmental
suitability but on a preference for their milk, clearly evident by modern
times. Goats had their niche as “the poor man’s cow” where grass was
too meager for a real one. Sheep were mostly relegated to wool or (more
sporadically) meat production, with milking a very minor priority. The
comparative blandness of cows’-milk products emerged as the way many
people thought dairy foods ought to taste. This preference was largely
shared by Slavs, Balts, and the Ashkenazic Jews who diffused into many
parts of the region. The contribution of Jews to local dairying from the
Middle Ages on must have been vast. No one else had any particular
religious motivation for exploiting varied uses of milk. Observant Jews,
however, were required to prepare either “meat” or “milk” meals with
no mixing of the two. Not only were “milk” meals cheaper, but it was
easier to turn milk into a range of delicious forms.
As in the two previously discussed zones, people very rarely made a
habit of drinking fresh milk as it came from the source—and this despite
the fact that at least some northeastern Europeans have a certain degree
of lactose tolerance (Ashkenazim less so). Even in northerly climes,
milking seasons used to coincide naturally with the warmest weather of
the year, when milk sours fairly fast without refrigeration. (Manipulation
of milking cycles for year-round production is a modern commercial
development.) Here and there, unsoured milk was used as a thrifty base
for soups in lieu of meat, or went into the cereal porridges that were the
crucial peasant mainstay everywhere. But for the most part milk was
consumed in cultured form, either drunk plain or made into fresh curd
cheeses. Renneted fresh cheeses from uncultured milk also had some
currency, but most kinds used a combination of souring and renneting.
The whey was yet another porridge vehicle. (Grain-based porridges were
the basic survival dishes of the Northeastern Cow Belt, and even small
amounts of milk or whey greatly increased their nutritional value.)
Brined cheeses like those of the Diverse Sources Belt never became
popular except in a few Central European areas of overlap with the
Balkans (for instance, Hungary and Romania). And generally speaking,

neither the local kinds of sour milk nor the local fresh cheeses closely
duplicated those of the more southerly milking zone. The reason is that
under slightly cooler conditions, different types of bacteria with slightly
different flavor effects are likely to work their will on milk either
spontaneously or through inoculation. To produce what traditional
yogurt eaters will recognize as yogurt, you need emphatically warm
temperatures (and preferably a preliminary heating of the milk). Milk
left to sit out at less sultry temperatures will attract “mesophilic”
bacteria like those responsible for souring today’s cultured buttermilk.
Add rennet at a strategic moment and you will get something not unlike
the pot cheese or farmer cheese familiar to many Americans, with a
softer or firmer curd depending on very small gradations of temperature.
But with patience you can arrive at a very similar, slightly tarter cheese
made without rennet—the practice of observant Jews, since milk could
not come in contact with an animal substance like rennet.
Cream in cultured form enjoyed greater importance in the
Northeastern Cow Belt than in the lands to the south. Because cows’ milk
separates more quickly and fully on standing than goats’ milk (though
not as readily as water buffaloes’ milk), it is easier to skim off the cream
for use by itself, fresh or sour. Cooler temperatures also aid the process.
Clotted cream, which is really cooked, did not become as important here
as in other regions. Sour cream, ranging from slightly runny to nearly as
thick as cream cheese, became a versatile cold sauce base, spread, and
enrichment for soups and other dishes.
Northern ideas about butter diverged sharply from those in the two
older milking zones. In both India and the Diverse Sources lands, butter
was commonly churned from whole-milk yogurt. (It was seldom made
from anything but cows’ or buffaloes’ milk, because producing butter
from goats’ milk with its very small fat globules was extremely difficult
before modern centrifuges. Sheep’s milk worked better, but was less
cost-effective given the small amounts of milk per animal.) Most often it
also underwent a slow simmering process, as for ghee. The northerners
took another tack by using cream (usually soured) rather than whole
milk for churning and omitting the prolonged cooking. This process
produced an entirely different substance, smooth and unctuous at
ambient temperatures where ghee and other forms of clarified butter
would be grainy, and also containing subtle flavor notes lost in

clarifying. The downside of using cream was that you got a smaller
amount of less flavorful buttermilk.
The northerners’ butter was also a cooking fat as excellent in its own
way as ghee—a fact of crucial importance, because the region lacked
any source of edible oil comparable to the Mediterranean olive or
Middle Eastern sesame seed. People could, of course, render lard, beef
suet, or poultry fat to be used in cooking. But the process required
amounts of time and fuel that butter churning didn’t. Once you had
butter, you had a marvelously versatile food that could be incorporated
into some kinds of rich bread and pastry doughs or spread on already-
baked bread, melted over cooked foods as a sauce, worked into fresh
skim-milk cheeses as an enrichment, or used as a sautéing medium that
imparted a lovely flavor to anything cooked in it. Its biggest drawback
was that it went rancid easily if stored long without refrigeration. As for
the buttermilk, it could be either a beverage in its own right or a
cooking liquid (especially for porridges).
The Northeastern Cow Belt also happens to be an unparalleled center
for all kinds of brine-pickled vegetables and fruits, from sorrel and
cabbage to apples and beets. Like sour milk, these depend on
fermentation of carbohydrates to lactic acid (though the starting point is
not milk sugar). The two kinds of lactic-acid products—bracingly sour
pickles (or their brine) and smooth, more gently tart cultured milk or
cream—make a wonderful marriage, especially when the pickles are
garlicky. This magical combination has produced a large family of cold
soups that are among the glories of Russian, Ukrainian, Polish, and other
cuisines. Like many yogurt dishes of the Middle East and India, they are
a lesson in milk’s affinities with partners that few American cooks would
have thought of a generation ago.
Until modern times the Northeastern Cow Belt shared the two older
milking regions’ general indifference to any kind of ripened cheese. For
centuries almost no cheese was produced there other than the small
fresh kinds that could be easily made at home. Of course, Jews faced the
obstacle that putting rennet in milk is almost automatically a violation of
kashruth. (“Almost” because under certain convoluted interpretations
not accepted by all, animal rennet can be judged to have lost its “meat”
status.) And for everybody including Jews, a broader limiting factor was
the absence of proven markets able to repay the sustained efforts

involved in producing and selling aged cheeses—which brings us to what
is in many ways the strangest of the world’s dairying zones.
THE NORTHWESTERN COW BELT
Geographically, this used to be the smallest of the major Old World
regions where strong traditions of fresh dairy foods developed. But after
some five millennia it suddenly ended up as the largest. Consequently it
is enmeshed in snarls of contradiction-laced history.
The core areas are northern Germany, the Low Countries, northern
France, and especially the British Isles. In southern Scandinavia, eastern
Germany and the western Baltic lands, France and Germany as far south
as the northern Alps, and some of the old Austro-Hungarian domains,
the zone shades into traditions more akin to the Northeastern Cow Belt
or the Diverse Sources Belt. And before modern times the links with such
eastern neighbors were stronger everywhere. The premodern history,
however, hasn’t been much explored. In fact, a general failure of
historical perspective set in at the dawn of the Industrial Revolution
after Great Britain exported its own milk-centered customs and attitudes
to all the Anglophone colonies including the future United States,
Canada, Australia, and New Zealand. For all practical purposes these are
now extensions of the original Northwestern Cow Belt.
From early times one huge factor has set apart the population of this
zone from most of the human race: a capacity for digesting lactose,
discussed from a biological standpoint in “The Story of Modern Milk.” A
second, almost equally important difference rooted in the northwestern
European transition from the medieval to the modern economy came
into play later (and as we shall see, decisively shaped the mentality of
modern dairying). But at least at the outset, the uses of milk in the
future Great Britain and its near European neighbors don’t seem to have
been decisively different from other people’s.

Livestock husbandry and dairying probably spread out from the Near
East into northwestern Europe at around 3000 B.C. As in the Northeastern
Cow Belt, cattle constitutionally liked the local weather and soon
became more dominant milch animals than sheep and goats. By
medieval times sheep’s milk was highly valued by many but
discouragingly labor-intensive to produce; where sheep were raised for
wool, people sometimes came to ignore any other purpose. Goats tended
to be preferred for milking in areas too steep or bleakly exposed for
cattle grazing (for example, parts of Norway and Scotland). But this is to
get ahead of the story.
How did prehistoric farmers of the northwest use cows’ or other
animals’ milk in the unrecorded millennia before the Romans arrived?
Set aside modern assumptions based on an industry that brings fresh
drinkable milk to millions, and the truth is that there’s very little to go
on. One crucial fact is that since Neolithic times the region has contained
one of the planet’s most remarkable pockets of “lactase persistence,” or
“lactose tolerance,” the ability to digest the lactose in unsoured milk

long beyond infancy. Archaeologists hypothesize that the genes
governing the condition occurred widely in a prehistoric culture that
occupied parts of southern Scandinavia, the Low Countries, north coastal
Germany, and the Baltic lands. (Other lactose-tolerant peoples are
scattered in Africa and northern India, and there may be still more
elsewhere.) But the ability to do something isn’t the same thing as a
preconditioned choice to do it all or even 50 percent of the time. There is
little evidence to prove that the early peoples of northwestern Europe
had as highly developed a preference for drinking milk fresh as their
modern descendants. Milk sours there as regularly as in the Near East
(though more slowly) and has the same advantages in that form.
WHAT THE ROMANS SAW
The first observers who might have cast some light on the prevalence or
nonprevalance of milk drinking were the Romans, who described what
they saw in breathtakingly unhelpful language. The problem in trying to
decipher their accounts of Gaulish foodways is that they brought a
distinctly southern perspective to every northern region they explored.
From a dairying viewpoint, things had taken very different turns north
and south of the Alps when agriculture diffused westward into Europe.
The Mediterranean coast from Italy to Iberia—the Romans’ “Cisalpine
Gaul”—developed a version of Diverse Sources Belt preferences without
quite as wide a range of milch animals; sheep and goats became the
primary sources, with cow dairying becoming competitive only in
pockets. It appears that, except for fresh cheeses, the fresh dairy
products that are the focus of this book either didn’t acquire as much
importance in the south as in the four major milking zones or were
relegated to a lesser role in early modern times, when consciously
market-oriented dairying choices began outstripping home-centered
ones. In any case, cheeses of all kinds eventually predominated over
other ways of consuming milk.
The Romans themselves were great pioneers in cheesemaking, because
parts of northern Italy were lucky enough to possess both rich grazing
lands and a climate cool enough for the prolonged fermentation
processes that aged cheeses require. Besides, the city of Rome at its
height was a magnet for specialized luxuries from the countryside that

would not be equaled in Europe until the end of the Middle Ages. But
the Romans had a hard time making sense of the non-Roman ways with
milk—perhaps cheese—peculiar to northerners.
Because cattle were more important to both Romans and Greeks as
beasts of burden than as sources of milk, neither civilization had deeply
explored all the culinary qualities of cows’ milk liked by other peoples.
Greek observers returning from Scythia on the southern fringes of the
Northeastern Cow Belt reported that people there consumed an alien
stuff for which they could find no better designation than “cow cheese,”
or boutyron—a word that makes a certain amount of sense, and that
became the Latin butyrum (and our “butter”). But when the Romans got
to “Transalpine Gaul,” or the Gaulish lands beyond the Alps, it is
difficult to sort out just what they meant to say about the uncouth
peoples’ dairy foods. Their accounts present major roadblocks for anyone
trying to establish in what form the peoples of the new Roman
possessions liked to consume milk.
Tacitus and Pliny the Elder, both of whom had been stationed in Gaul
after Julius Caesar’s conquests, unmistakably say that the barbarians ate
some form of curdled milk. The term Tacitus uses is not caseus
(“cheese”) but lac concretum (“solidified milk”), while Pliny marvels at
the very fact that cheese was not known among the Gaulish tribes; he
vaguely describes the usual form of milk as something that they “thicken
to a pleasant sour substance,” but doesn’t seem to distinguish this very
clearly from butter. Caesar laconically says that the Gauls ate “milk,
cheese, and meat,” which leaves us wondering about the contradiction
with Pliny (who presumably had more knowledge of the colony’s
peacetime domestic arts) and whether “milk” specifically meant fresh
milk.
All of which goes to show that despite the odd genetic makeup of the
peoples who were living in the Northwestern Cow Belt a couple of
thousand years ago, conclusions about how often they actually used
their unusual ability to drink unsoured milk are impossible. Certainly
they did turn milk into various curdled forms (meaning ones with most
of the lactose removed). But we also know that their better-documented
descendants during the Middle Ages sometimes drank cows’ and other
animals’ milk fresh, sometimes turned it into various soured products,
fresh cheeses, butter, and aged cheeses. It doesn’t seem unreasonable to

guess that the pre-Roman Gauls also enjoyed both fresh milk for
drinking and milk variously transformed by lactic-acid bacteria.
THE MEDIEVAL PICTURE
As in the other major dairying zones, no fresh milk industry existed in
medieval Europe, or could have. Milk didn’t change hands for money as
often as it was consumed by small householders with their own cow or
goat. Most farming was comparatively small-scale and unspecialized
except for a few great commodities like wool. Dairy husbandry was
usually a home enterprise, with peasants or smallholders milking an
animal or two (rarely many more) and sometimes drinking part of the
milk fresh or soured before making it into other simple products for their
own use. Where larger operations existed, they were usually part of
monastery or manor farms.
In most of northwestern Europe, butter was the cheapest and most
plentiful of fats rather than anything epicurean. Cream was not
particularly prized in cooking; when it was skimmed, it went into butter.
The ever-useful by-product of that process was true buttermilk. Not too
dissimilar from some of today’s cultured buttermilk was whole milk
fermented just long enough to become refreshingly tart but still liquid
enough to drink, perhaps close to Pliny’s “pleasant sour substance” and
analogous to the yogurt of southern regions. People do not seem to have
cooked with fresh milk nearly as much as we do; at any rate, it crops up
less often in surviving medieval cookbooks than almond milk.
The fresh cheeses that were ordinarily the most practical kinds for
householders to produce were based sometimes on the skim milk saved
from buttermaking, sometimes on whole milk. (In the latter case any
butterfat that drained off along with the whey was separately saved for
whey butter. The whey itself furnished a common drink; if people didn’t
consume it, it often ended up in pig swill.) Fresh cheeses ranged from
simple curds, eaten either along with the whey or after being drained of
it, to “green cheese,” or curds allowed to take on a cheesier nature but
eaten before aging. The curdling could be done by bacterial souring,
rennet, or a combination of the two, with the flavor and texture varying
according to how strong the action of the acid or enzyme was and how
far coagulation was allowed to proceed.

A NEW AGE DAWNS
So far, the region’s dairying preferences had much in common with
those of northeastern Europe—and even the older milking lands of the
Near East, when it came to the importance of soured milk and fresh
cheeses. But a few centuries or generations before Columbus, something
started happening that would propel western Europe and later North
America toward radically changed ideas of food, or rather of how to buy
and sell it.
One way to describe the change is that the economic center of gravity
began to revolve around cities, which (like imperial Rome in its day)
looked increasingly to the countryside to supply them with food.
Another way to look at it is that most kinds of specialized farming for
profit got to northwestern Europe sooner than anywhere else in the
world, foreshadowing the modern commercial production and transport
of many foods. One of the first results was an expanding interest in
ripened cheeses, already better known here than in any other stronghold
of dairying. The larger kinds were not economically feasible to produce
except through sizable cooperative ventures that pooled the milk and
labor of many farmers (or a whole village or district) and rested on the
knowledge that a market for the end result justified the expense of
production as well as transportation to towns and cities.
During the many European economic shakeups following the Age of
Discovery, more and more milk was diverted to large-scale manufacture
of aged and other specialized cheeses, usually from cows’ milk. Fresh
cheeses continued to be eaten in the northwest, but with snowballing
urbanization and the displacement of peasants from the countryside in
many areas, they were less often made and consumed in the households
of people who actually owned a cow or goat. The farmers who remained
either participated in large-scale cheesemaking based on milk pooled
from a group of farms or carried out independent small-scale dairying
for profit. Farmstead dairying was chiefly managed by women, who
produced butter and fresh or aged cheeses (often bearing regional
names) for nearby markets.
It began to be not only possible but highly desirable to target market
segments, to put forth products that might claim distinction by virtue of

novelty, unusual appearance, or manufacturing nuances reflected in
some fillip of flavor or texture. In other words, western European
dairyists were ready for a systematic commercial exploitation of
diversity more intensive than anything in older regions. The contents of
today’s more ambitious cheese shops reflect the aggressive, long-
continued pursuit of this aim—which incidentally diminished the
importance of simple fresh dairy products that before the age of
refrigeration could not be brought to market without spoiling.
Part of the reason that diversification triumphed was that the
strikingly varied, broken-up geography of western Europe itself created
an infinite number of environments. The seventeenth-century Dutch, still
engaged in the giant engineering projects that would give them fine
tracts of grazing land reclaimed from the sea, led the way in commercial
dairy specialization. From the Low Countries into southern Scandinavia
or southward to the Alps, westward to the Atlantic coast of France, or
beyond the North Sea in the diverse topographies of Great Britain, the
production of countless characteristic—even unique—local cheeses or
other dairy specialties consciously tailored to particular domestic or
foreign markets became an ever more lucrative enterprise. As
systematization 
advanced, 
the 
many 
northwestern 
European
microclimates enabled farmers to develop a large range of cattle, goat,
and sheep breeds for milking and also encouraged dairyists to work with
a great spectrum of naturally occurring microflora—bacterial strains that
might present some marvelously flavorful departure from the kinds in
the next district or the next valley. (This is why things that may look
alike on paper—for instance crème fraîche in Normandy and sour cream
in southern Germany—often seem to have come from unrelated planets
when you taste them.)
THE GROUND SHIFTS
With shrinking rural populations and the growing professionalization of
cheesemaking after the late Middle Ages, fresh milk for drinking became
a less prominent feature of everyday country diets. The focus of milk
consumption gradually began to center on towns and cities, where it was
increasingly sold for cash. As will be explained in “The Story of Modern
Milk,” the perishability of milk would limit the shift until the nineteenth

century. But meanwhile, other kinds of change were afoot in the kitchen
as medieval culinary models yielded to new ideas.
Both sweet cream and (in some regions) cream cultured to local
preferences became valued as tokens of luxury in Northwestern Cow Belt
cooking after the sixteenth century. Discerning consumers began to
recognize schools of elegant buttermaking. New families of butter-based
sauces gained prominence, especially in France, while sweet cream
began to find its way into ice creams and different kinds of sauces. In the
west of England it was made into the renowned local specialty called
clotted “Devonshire” or “Cornish” cream. Cream in whipped form was a
great discovery of this period, though whipping techniques were at first
limited by the comparatively primitive state of whisks (see this page).
In the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries unsoured milk had not yet
acquired the commanding position it was to achieve, but it became more
popular both drunk by itself and in sweetened beverages, roux-based
sauces, and sweet or savory custards. The soured counterpart seems to
have undergone a corresponding decline by the nineteenth century.

Rural Scandinavian cooks retained the most, English and American
cooks the least interest in different forms of soured milk with a real
lactic-acid tang. Even in the British Isles and the new United States, a
taste for true buttermilk (often though not always ripened) survived for
centuries, while other locales remained loyal to particular cultured milk
specialties.
Fresh cheeses had varied fortunes. Most ceased to be made at home
except in country districts. Regional preferences in fresh cheeses sold at
market went in highly varied directions; as a result, something like
German Quark is only crudely interchangeable with English or North
American opposite numbers. In France an impressive variety of forms
appeared as objects of great culinary interest in their own right. This
richness makes sense, because it was early French commercial dairyists
who worked most intensively to exploit subtly differentiated strains of
local bacteria—without microscopes, and long before the advent of the
large 
industrial 
laboratories 
that 
today 
maintain 
colonies 
of
microorganisms engineered to manufacturers’ preferences.
The range of English (and early American) fresh cheeses appears to
have been much smaller, though there was a demand for what was
called “cream cheese”—a term hard to interpret but certainly not much
like today’s factory product. Long after the general decline of home-
produced fresh cheeses, an occasional English observer would wistfully
comment on curd cheeses or “bonnyclabber,” still recalling the rural
British past in remote Scottish or Irish districts. In the American Deep
South, “clabber,” or “curds and cream,” was a beloved regional dish for
generations. After the mid-twentieth century, universal pasteurization
and homogenization of milk would wipe out many of these local
favorites.
The tangled paradoxes of the northwestern European legacy wouldn’t
be as glaring if not for the fact that people from the region eventually
became the voice of progressive diet-and-nutrition officialdom issuing
recommendations to the whole human race, with little understanding of
their own pre-industrial dairying past. Since at least the late nineteenth
century, Western manufacturers and nutritional experts have been
exporting versions of the modern Northwestern Cow Belt mentality to
Latin America, developing tropical countries, and even the far older
dairying zones of the Near East and India. This mind-set stacks up pretty

woefully against the deeper, broader heritage of northwestern European
dairy foods and milk-based cooking. Luckily for us, other possibilities are
gaining ground by the minute.
WHERE GLOBAL MILKY WAYS MEET: DAIRY FOODS IN
TODAY’S AMERICA
At the dawn of the twenty-first century, the far-flung areas constituting
the old Northwestern Cow Belt suddenly find themselves absorbing all
manner of contributions from the other three primary milking zones—
the gift of peoples who have immigrated from those regions. And
considering the predicament to which industrial dairying “progress” has
brought us here in the United States, they’re arriving not a moment too
soon.
In the late 1960s, just before immigration from every corner of the
globe had begun to skyrocket, the American food scene represented
either the collision course or the prolonged romance of two goals
reflecting opposite sides of the northwestern European market ideal. One
was to get as many differentiated products as possible before the buying
public, the other to weed out all possible alternatives that interfere with
profits. Both aims still merrily coexist, with lunatic results exemplified
by, let’s say, yogurt.
You can now walk into thousands of supermarkets and take your pick
of “amaretto cheesecake” or “lemon cream pie” nonfat yogurt; low-fat
yogurt with a choice of chocolate chips, granola, or Reese’s Pieces as
topping; or milk-free vanilla or chocolate soy yogurt—without
necessarily being able to find any item that people brought up on the
real thing would recognize as plain yogurt worth putting a spoon into.
The tide of immigration from the world’s older dairying strongholds
has redrawn the picture. Depending on where you live, you may have
access to grocery stores or even supermarkets with fresh, creamy, and
soul-satisfying plain yogurt made by small companies for particular
immigrant communities. What’s more, a taste for plain whole-milk
yogurt from sheep’s or combined sheep’s and goats’ milk has begun
crossing over from Turkish-or Greek-born consumers to growing
numbers of other Americans. Rich, intense Greek-made yogurt partly

drained of whey in true Yogurtistan tradition has developed a following
here among many food lovers.
Densely toothsome yogurt made from buffaloes’ milk now regularly
reaches some specialty food stores. Start frequenting small restaurants
specializing in south Indian dosas (fermented rice-batter crepes), and you
may soon find yourself adoring the southern-style yogurt-or buttermilk-
based cold beverages that they serve, laced with whole spices, garlic,
herb sprigs, and hot peppers. Where Russian immigrants have settled,
wonderful sour cream and farmer cheese, prostokvasha (a pourable
yogurt), and butter with the taste of clotted cream usually follow. The
list can only grow as foreign-born cooks and food lovers put down roots
here and find themselves able to introduce people raised in a narrow
modern version of the Northwestern Cow Belt mentality to some of the
“new” (though really old) fresh dairy products that have come to
America.
And this isn’t to mention a growing revolt against milk processed to a
fare-thee-well before any of us can get our hands on it. For all the
continued prominence of horrible examples to the contrary, today it is
more possible than it’s been in at least half a century for many of us to
find honest, unhomogenized whole milk from small herds and dairies
run by businesspeople who care about well-tended milch animals and
fresh milk flavor.
In short, I think it is realistic rather than naive to hope that the United
States will consummate the story of the great dairying zones by giving
the best elements of all four a chance to flourish on American soil. That
prospect makes a detailed historical look at the worst side of our own
dairying traditions less discouraging than it might be.

Y
THE STORY OF MODERN MILK
Or, Is This What We Really Want?
ou can love fresh dairy products as some of life’s best pleasures and
still be saddened by the spectacle of modern dairying. Milk deserves
many superlatives. But unfortunately, among them is the title of this
country’s most misunderstood food. Nothing more cruelly illustrates the
unholy wars between desire and fear, gratification and denial, cravings
and paranoias that now beset millions of American consumers.
As I have pointed out, signs of improvement are now dawning. In fact,
the unhappy story I’m about to sketch may be headed for a not-so-
unhappy outcome. American consumers may be ready to develop an
enlarged perspective on why milk matters, a question now sunk in great
historical amnesia. Even if we grew up on dull, featureless milk, we now
have the advantage of living alongside many people raised in livelier
traditions of milk-based cookery. And part of what they have to teach us
is that something very curious happened in the Western world’s use of
milk starting about two centuries ago.
The story gets—to borrow from Lewis Carroll—curiouser and
curiouser as it goes along. Its convolutions often reflect visions of dollar
signs dancing in various heads. It zigzags through human digestive
vagaries and cultural biases, science and pseudo-science, milk-processing
technology, animal breeding and feeding, obscure consequences of
refrigeration, the dawn of cyberfarming, and more. But little of all this
could have been foretold at the outset, when popular eighteenth-century
nutritional theory leapt to wrong conclusions that suggested new
entrepreneurial opportunities. Late in the century, residents of the area
that I’ve called the Northwestern Cow Belt—especially England and its
North American colonies—began placing great emphasis on one
particular way of consuming milk: in fresh drinkable form.
At that time, commercial trade in fresh milk was only slightly more
possible than trade in the morning dew. Up to a century or two earlier,
people who drank fresh milk had generally gotten it by milking their

own cow or goat. City dwellers willing to gamble could buy it from
someone who drove a cow or goat about the streets and milked a few
cups’ worth into a customer’s bowl or pot, or hawked it from pails. (The
gamble was on not being killed by any plagues carried by the animal,
milker, or pail.) But everyone was at least as used to soured as fresh milk
until an urban market specifically for fresh milk began to take shape,
fostered by ideas about health that in a few generations would make
fresh milk a nearly mandatory part of everyone’s diet, especially
children’s.
Now, many very real medical considerations are involved with milk
and linked with its modern commercial fortunes. But fear of catastrophe
through lack of fresh unsoured milk—that form specifically—is the least
rational of the lot. In fact, it is purely imaginary. It couldn’t have
originated if people in nineteenth-century England and North America
had known anything about another medically loaded issue that I’ve only
incidentally touched on until now: lactose tolerance or intolerance.
THE DIGESTIVE MAJORITY AND MINORITY
To summarize briefly: The lactose dissolved in whey is the principal
sugar of milk, an energy supplier otherwise unknown or almost
unknown in the animal or vegetable kingdom. Unlike milkfat and milk
proteins, it is the same in composition from one animal’s milk to
another. It belongs to the family of disaccharides (double-barreled sugar
molecules) and consists of a unit of simple glucose linked with a unit of
another simple sugar, galactose.
In healthy baby mammals drinking mother’s milk, an enzyme called
lactase severs the link between the two halves of the molecule in the
small intestine and frees the galactose to be converted (by yet another
enzyme) into glucose, eventually releasing into the bloodstream two
glucose molecules’ worth of energy from each original lactose molecule.
This feat of transformation becomes unnecessary when the child
advances to a milkless adult diet. At that point lactase production stops
—though in most cases not completely. Almost all human beings retain
at least a vestige of lactase activity throughout their lives. And a few
belong to odd mutant populations that never lose lactase activity in the
same way as do most people or animals, a condition known as lactase

persistence that is as anomalous as a fawn’s keeping its spots once they
have served their purpose. For most of the human race, when more than
small amounts of unsoured milk get into the digestive system, the lactose
in the whey passes almost intact into the small intestine. It draws
diarrhea-producing water in its wake, while resident bacteria eventually
reduce it to tatters and by-products including painful amounts of gas.
(Note that this reaction, though unpleasant, is not an actual allergy. True
milk allergy, potentially life-threatening but luckily rare, is an immune
response in which the body reacts to milk proteins as foreign substances
to be fought off with antibodies and a surge of histamines.)
As any glance at the world’s dairying regions and cuisines shows,
lactose intolerance doesn’t stop adults from consuming milk. It usually
deters them from drinking the fresh unsoured milk that suddenly
acquired vast prominence in Western diets during the nineteenth
century. The milk drinkers of the Northwestern Cow Belt didn’t know
that they were mutants able to do something very unusual. And until the
vogue for fresh—that is, full-lactose—milk appeared in early modern
times, even northwestern Europe treated it as only one possible form of
milk among many others with little or no lactose.
PURITY AND PRESTIGE
A shift in priorities occurred in eighteenth-and nineteenth-century
England. The new focus on milk for drinking reflects a “perfect storm”
convergence of circumstances. First of all, cash-crop farming began to
attract ambitious specialists who saw opportunities in feeding cities. City
provisioning had become more complex and troubled as the rural poor,
progressively dispossessed by new patterns of land ownership, migrated
to urban centers. Townsfolk became both more isolated from once
widespread skills like dairying and more dependent on retail sellers who
came to the ever-expanding city markets or trolled the streets for
customers. A smaller but notable factor was the advent of hot tea and
coffee with fresh milk added. All this coincided with an emerging
popular-science vogue that claimed to incorporate the discoveries of the
first real modern chemists and public-sanitation pioneers.

CHILDREN OF THE AFFLUENT BEING FED MILK IN ST. JAMES’S PARK, LONDON.
The new idea that many substances were acids, bases, or neutralized
products of reactions between the two seems to have captured many
imaginations by the end of the eighteenth century. So did the concept of
“putrefaction” as a process of chemical decomposition. Putting two and
two together and coming up with five because as yet nobody knew
anything about bacteria, some influential would-be experts decided that
acids were damaging substances and alkalis benign, while acid
fermentation of foods was often a sort of dangerous putrefaction likely to
lead to dyspepsia if not pestilence.

CHILDREN OF THE POOR BEING FED “SWILL” MILK IN NEW YORK, 1878.
Meanwhile, more and more consumers were city people who had
never acquired the home skills of fermenting bread doughs or milk, or
any familiarity with the resulting sour flavors. It was not difficult for
many leaders of medical and culinary opinion to convince a sizable
audience that bread and milk were best when “sweet” and “pure”—the
bread chemically leavened instead of leavened by yeast or sourdough
fermentation; the milk free of any sour “taint.” Of course the mysteries
of the lactose in sweet milk had not yet been plumbed.
By 1851 the London–street life chronicler Henry Mayhew was
describing supposedly healthful “new milk” straight from the cow being
sold in St. James’s Park to children and “others, of a delicate
constitution,” who in the surly opinion of one seller would benefit more
“if they was set to some good hard work.” A crucial breakthrough was at
hand: the ability to sell fresh (i.e., full-lactose) milk for drinking at a
higher profit than in any other form.

SWILL DAIRYMEN MILKING A COW TOO FEEBLE TO STAND, 1858.
Yankee enterprise now showed the way to milk that would be cheap
and convenient for buyers, lucrative for producers. By 1830 the demand
for fresh milk had increased exponentially in the major northeastern
cities of the United States. So had the supply—but much of it came from
dozens or hundreds of cows herded into crowded, filthy milking sheds
next to breweries or distilleries, where dairyists thriftily bought up the
wastes for fodder. This opportunistic dovetailing of interests sickened or
killed huge numbers of cows and provoked horrified outcries from
public-health advocates who saw the watery, bluish, ill-tasting “swill
milk” doing the same to people.
Farmers and middlemen shortly began working to get much better
country milk to the cities. Their great ally was rail or steamboat
transport of milk in sealed cans, which started in the 1840s and had
decisively driven out swill milk in a few decades. Dozens of local railway
lines were built to connect rural regions with cities, enabling dairy
farming to become the livelihood of sundry bailiwicks such as Orange
County, New York. Small though they look today, the East Coast
operations begun during this era were on a scale that allowed tens of
thousands of city dwellers to take up milk drinking as a relatively safe
and affordable daily habit—perceived, however, as necessity, not habit.
Medical opinion now unanimously held that drinkable unsoured milk
was indispensable for children and healthful for everyone else. Doctors

did notice that milk seemed to disagree with more people than any other
food of equal importance. But there was no way that they could have
identified lactose as a culprit. In fact, more and more evidence seemed to
mount that fresh milk was a godsend if not a miracle food. There were
“milk cures” that had patients in sanatoria gulping six quarts a day for
six weeks before returning to society in (according to adherents) a state
of restoration. Less bizarrely, after about 1910 calcium and phosphorus
were conclusively proved to promote healthy skeletal growth. Dairy
products clearly were the richest known source of both. From World War
I on, public nutrition-education programs would urgently implore
mothers to feed milk to children by the quart.
Two major worries continued to dog “Nature’s Perfect Food” as a
continuous country-to-city pipeline materialized. The lesser was
adulteration, which was very widespread but seldom involved anything
more dangerous than a little adroitly administered water and whiting or
plaster of Paris testifying to the premiums that fresh or theoretically
fresh milk commanded. Milk-borne epidemics remained a more serious
concern.
Public understanding of contagions had improved greatly with the
work of the microbiologists Louis Pasteur and Robert Koch. During the
last third of the nineteenth century the milk industry used such
discoveries to advance factory-scale production of relatively—though far
from completely—safe milk. Sterile bottling techniques on plant
production lines became feasible at the same time as tuberculin testing
on dairy cows (now known to be a vector for tuberculosis) and bacterial
counts of milk samples under a microscope. These factors would have
been tremendously important in any era. But modern technology was
about to usher in others—refrigeration and pasteurization—destined to
make milk in the industrialized West even more firmly identified with
the sweet, full-lactose milk that non-Westerners had trouble digesting.
The earlier successes in getting milk from country to city had not
solved the problem of temperature. Many bacteria, including the lactic-
acid kinds that make milk go sour, can be kept in check if the milk is
thoroughly chilled. Railway cars refrigerated with blocks of ice helped
push back the geographical limits of milk collection and distribution
after the Civil War, and by the early twentieth century mechanically
refrigerated tank cars were starting to take over. Milk was already being

chilled at bottling plants, and the consumers who bought it often kept it
in home iceboxes until use.
The weak link here was the farm, where the milk emerged from cows
(normal body temperature about 100°F) into the ambient temperature of
the barn. When dairying was more of a home enterprise, many
households had had springhouses for keeping things cold, but now
farmers had little choice but to put the results of morning and evening
milking into cans and head for the milk train. Depending on the season
and the length of the journey from farm to plant, any resident bacteria
might or might not have had opportunity to multiply. Thus despite many
gains in understanding, milk-borne diseases were still enough of a reality
at the end of the nineteenth century to spur a long, ultimately successful
milk-pasteurization campaign whose most famous exponent was the New
York department-store magnate Nathan Straus.
The pasteurization process that became most common after about
1900 involved running the milk into a vat, heating it beyond the
tolerance of nearly any microorganism, and maintaining a certain
temperature for some period of time to kill bacteria as uniformly as
possible. There were competing ideas about the ideal conditions, but
eventually most dairy plants opted for a temperature of about 145°F and
a heating period of thirty minutes, followed by prompt chilling. Between
1900 and 1920 pasteurization, usually by this formula, became
mandatory in most parts of the country.
But that wasn’t the end of the pasteurization story. In the 1930s many
plants began switching to another method involving not separate batches
but a continuous pipe feed of milk—“high-temperature/short-time,” or
HTST, pasteurization. This requires a pasteurizing temperature of 161°F
maintained for fifteen seconds (not minutes) and nearly instantaneous
cooling to 40°F. Since about 1970, the even more drastic continuous-feed
“ultrahigh-temperature” pasteurization—UHT or “ultrapasteurization”
for short—at or above 280°F for about two seconds has been gaining
ground.
Early pasteurization initiatives went along with calls for much stricter
governmental supervision of sanitary conditions at dairy farms.
Whatever the public-health benefits, these pushes toward modernization
drove small and marginal farmers out of business if they could not afford
the necessary capital investments. Meanwhile, a certain medical faction

continued to oppose pasteurization as an unwarranted interference with
the natural qualities of milk. For several decades the “certified milk”
adherents not only kept commercial raw milk before the public (at
premium prices) but energetically publicized the quite valid view that
superstrict hygienic supervision and testing at critical points could
reliably 
prevent 
milk-borne 
infections 
without 
recourse 
to
pasteurization. Certified milk production was, if anything, a harder
option for farmers, since the certifying “medical milk commissions” held
them to stricter standards (especially regarding bacterial counts) than
the local authorities enforcing requirements for pasteurized milk.
The one factor that both sides insisted on was a low-enough
temperature to keep the milk fresh—i.e., unsoured, with the original
lactose intact. By the turn of the twentieth century, the scientific means
existed 
to 
distinguish 
“putrefaction” 
from 
benign 
bacterial
fermentations, but advanced Western food preferences now had little
room for plain sour milk. In the early days of 145°F pasteurization,
Southerners, many Ashkenazic Jews, and ex-rural types nostalgic for the
sour milk of their youth still could still “clabber” pasteurized milk at
home by leaving it out at room temperature. More up-to-date people
clapped it straight into the icebox or refrigerator. This latter practice
tipped the population of invading bacteria toward the kinds called
psychrophilic, or psychrotrophic, meaning “cold-preferring.” Such
organisms feed not on lactose but on milkfat and milk proteins. When
they go to work the result is inedibly bitter, truly putrid milk. The HTST
and UHT pasteurization methods that eventually carried the day posed
further bars to natural souring, because the very rapid, thorough heating
and cooling of the milk virtually eliminated lactic-acid bacteria along
with other microbes.
Though the pasteurization and certification campaigns were a
tremendous public-health success in many ways, they played a distorting
role in others. In their single-minded focus on one goal, they helped to
relegate naturally fermented fresh dairy products to some lesser realm
and wipe out home cooks’ already fading knowledge of how to work
with milk for multiple purposes. They capped and legitimized both the
equation of pure, first-class milk with nonsoured milk for drinking and
the idea that such milk is not just one food among many but a
fundamental necessity for human survival. By the time Western medical

opinion belatedly noticed the phenomenon of lactose intolerance in the
late 1960s, American consumers and most of their nutritional advisors
were too automatically conditioned to a milk-in-every-fridge mentality
to grasp two clear implications: first, that anyone can happily live
without using milk in any form; and second, that drinking large amounts
of unsoured milk is foreign to the habits of most dairying peoples
throughout the world.
Neither of these thoughts seems to have seriously affected public-
health education. By and large, unsoured milk for drinking continues to
be treated as a core food or defining element of the American diet in a
way that soured milk is not—and this despite the fact that it has been
losing any resemblance to real fresh milk for the better part of a century.
The ins and outs of the story are tortuous, but the basic reason for the
debasement of quality couldn’t be simpler. From early milk-train days
on, milk for drinking commanded higher prices than milk meant to be
changed into other forms, an irresistible stimulus toward expansion at
whatever cost to quality.
As the volume of milk produced by the nation’s farms grew in the
twentieth century, the entire system became riddled with struggles for
competitive advantage. Investment in advanced devices that reduce
labor costs per unit of milk has become ever more essential to farmers’
survival. Obvious instances are electric milking machines and
refrigerated bulk tanks, widely adopted after the rural electrification
initiatives of the 1930s and mandatory almost everywhere by about
1950. Another expensive machine that people are likely to know less
about is the cow herself, as reinvented for our time.
COW AND SUPERCOW
There came up on the drive immediately before the front door, under the custody of a boy, a cow.
It was an Alderney cow, and any man or woman at all understanding cows would at once have
perceived that this cow was perfect in her kind. Her eyes were mild, and soft, and bright. Her legs
were like the legs of a deer; and in her whole gait and demeanour she almost gave the lie to her
own name, asserting herself to have sprung from some more noble origin among the woods, than
may be supposed to be the origin of the ordinary domestic cow,—a useful animal, but heavy in its
appearance, and seen with more pleasure at some little distance than at close quarters. But this

cow was graceful in its movements, and almost tempted one to regard her as the far-off descendant
of the elk or the antelope.
ANTHONY TROLLOPE   
The Belton Estate (1866)
ALDERNEY COW, 1834
Bessy, Will Belton’s gift to Clara Amedroz early in the star-crossed
courtship at the heart of Trollope’s novel, is the nonpareil of what used
to be meant by a “dairy cow.” Few of her counterparts today evoke
thoughts of deer and antelopes. For many dairy farmers, the ideal
modern cow is more like a ruminant SUV. You could call her an
expanded and consolidated version of a cow, just as today’s dairy farms
are expanded and consolidated versions of farms. A case in point: While
the number of dairy cows in this country shrank from about 18 million
to 9 million between 1960 and 2005, the total amount of milk they
produce increased from 120 billion to 177 billion pounds during the
same period.
In 1856 the English writer George Dodd’s magnificent survey The Food
of London reported that one especially fine cow had given 28 quarts (7
gallons, or about 56 pounds) of milk a day for six weeks. In 1975 an
Indiana cow named Beecher Arlinda Ellen set the dairy world on fire by
pumping out a record-eclipsing average of 152.5 pounds (more than 76
quarts, or 19 gallons) a day during a year’s lactation, for a total yield of
55,661 pounds, compared to a national 1975 dairy-cow average of about
10,000 pounds. Ellen’s feat has since been surpassed several times, and

the current 365-day lactation record is the 67,914 pounds yielded by a
Wisconsin contender, Muranda Oscar Lucinda-ET, in 1997. By 2005 the
national average was almost 20,000 pounds a year per cow.
The road to such “improvements”—if that’s the right word—has
paralleled the growth of the fluid-milk industry since about the early
nineteenth century. Scientific breeders then began distinguishing the
best milkers by body type and working with local breeds to accentuate
their advantages.
Trollope’s Bessy represents one extreme of the “dairy type.” From his
description it’s plain that she was of what we would now call Jersey
stock. Doe-eyed and curiously reminiscent of shy, tawny woodland
creatures, Jersey cows are the smallest and most enchantingly pretty of
the major modern dairy breeds. At the time of Will Belton’s wooing, they
and the slightly bigger, less deerlike Guernseys were usually lumped
together as “Alderneys.” Bessy probably weighed only between six
hundred and seven hundred pounds; in this country the Jersey was
gradually developed into a somewhat larger and coarser animal, so that
a latter-day American relative might be between nine hundred and one
thousand pounds.
Beecher Arlinda Ellen, a black and white behemoth who at maturity
weighed 1,750 pounds, cannot ever have reminded anyone of an
antelope. She and Bessy were poles apart on any scale of dairy-cow
values. But both exemplify a talent that breeders have been exploiting
and amplifying for the last two centuries: the gift of converting more of
what they eat and drink into milk than other cows. At one glance cows
of advanced dairy type, whether tiny or enormous, are easy to tell from
beefy counterparts who put more food energy into gaining weight than
lactating. They are not exactly gaunt, but their pelvic bones jut starkly
from hollow, angular flanks and their ribs are either plainly or almost
visible under a very thin layer of flesh. Their entire system is
concentrated on making milk, not infrequently to the point of
endangering life and limb.
But what are we calling milk? The Bessies of the dairy world direct a
phenomenal 
amount 
of 
caloric 
energy 
from 
their 
food 
into
manufacturing a rich, concentrated source of nutrients, chiefly milk
proteins and milkfat but also important amounts of lactose and minerals.
The Ellens also channel just about everything they ingest into milk—

extraordinary volumes of milk so diluted that it can almost be said to
have been watered inside the cow. (The average milkfat percentage from
Ellen’s famous 1975 lactation—2.9—was far below the mingy federal
minimum standard of 3.25 percent for whole milk.) Genetic propensities
to give richer milk and more milk tend not to go together. It’s possible to
manage both, but not easy. The first is economically advantageous if the
milk is intended for purposes like butter-or cheesemaking. The second
became the be-all and end-all for many or most dairy farmers when
golden opportunities opened up in the fluid-milk market.
A “COW OF THE FIRST CLASS,” CIRCA 1860
Early nineteenth-century English breeders tackling the quantity-
quality equation produced the progenitors of four major breeds that later
were adopted and revamped by American dairymen: the Channel Islands
cattle (Jerseys and Guernseys), the somewhat larger, lyre-horned red and
white Ayrshires, and a branch of the beefy Durham, or Shorthorn, race
specially engineered for milk. Later in the century American breeders
began experimenting with a strapping, strong-framed Alpine cow that
would become the American Brown Swiss. They also became interested
in a large black and white (sometimes red and white) kind from the
northern Netherlands that was first called “Dutch” or “Friesian.” In most
countries its descendants still have the name “Friesian,” but American
breeders unaccountably preferred “Holstein-Friesian” or just “Holstein.”

Literally dozens of other breeds have their adherents on the American
dairy scene, but the ones we hear about most in popular reporting are
Jerseys and Holstein-Friesians. Cows like Ellen—you probably don’t need
to be told that she was a Holstein-Friesian—are what food writers
generally associate with the latter. It’s a wrong stereotype, for there are
many Holstein-Friesian dairy herds managed at least as much for quality
as quantity of milk. To farmers who grew up understanding flavor,
quality means rich percentages of both milkfat and “SNF,” or “solids
nonfat,” which includes everything else except water. Nonetheless, the
real reason that Holstein-Friesians now make up more than 90 percent of
today’s U.S. dairy-cow population has to be volume, both in its own
right and in relation to milk-production costs per cow. The average yield
per year of Jersey cows is now about 16,000 pounds of milk, compared
to 21,500 pounds for Holstein-Friesians.
The picture really isn’t all that simple. Because many breeds can have
particular virtues, dairy herds with “grade” stock (purebred or close to
it, but not officially registered), mixed stock, or deliberate crosses of
several breeds are more common than ones made up of single-breed
registered stock. Many a “grade” Holstein-Friesian herd owes its fine
milkfat and SNF records to a strategic admixture of Jersey genes. But
higher and higher volume per cow certainly is a universal (though not
exclusive) goal.
Merely breeding dairy cows generation after generation for skinny
contours and brimming milk pails would not have brought daily record
yields from the neighborhood of 56 pounds (28 quarts) to 152.5 pounds
(76 quarts, for Ellen) or roughly 186 pounds (93 quarts, for Lucinda)
between the mid-nineteenth and late twentieth century. The early
“scientific” breeders worked before it was possible to apply Mendelian
genetics to the cows or chemical analysis to the milk. Not until these
tools were mastered and coupled with artificial insemination (starting in
1938) and advanced record-keeping techniques did breeding for actual
genotype heat up. There seemed almost no limit to yields once farmers
could identify heritable milking qualities in the daughters of a particular
sire who could then impregnate hundreds or thousands of other cows.
But breeding by itself was only half the story behind today’s super-high-
producing cows. The other half was feeding, which has been
revolutionized as drastically as applied cattle genetics by modern

information technology.
BREED, FEED, AND EXCEED
The unimproved cows of yesteryear suckled their calves while eating
what cows were made to digest: grass. Like human mothers, some
produced more milk and some less. The higher producers might eat more
to compensate for the greater amounts of energy and nutrients being
channeled into their milk, but the energy-balance system was largely
stable and self-regulating. Genetic selection for abnormally high yields
complicated the picture. It meant that the “best” cows were always in a
sort of metabolic race to outrun “negative energy balance,” with
capacity for intake being pitted against capacity for output.
Calves left to their own devices start experimentally nibbling grass
within days of birth and are at least partly weaned in a few months.
Suckling a calf places lesser demands on the mother’s body than being
completely milked out in a milking parlor twice (or even three times) a
day for a year or more at a time. A little arithmetic shows that the
1,750-pound Ellen was directing close to 8.75 percent of her own weight
a day into that 152.5-pound milk output. Few cows can eat and drink
fast enough to keep up with such losses.
Now, a ruminant’s stomach does not resemble a human stomach. It is
a series of chambers that postpone the business of digesting food by
gastric juices in the fourth stomach, or abomasum, until the cellulose of
grasses has first been partly broken down by trillions of microbes in the
gigantic fermenting-tank system formed by the rumen and reticulum (the
first two stomachs) and ground fine by the many-leaved walls of the
omasum (third stomach). Even the role of the mouth is different, for
what the animal eats gets two chewings, one perfunctory, the other a
more thorough “rumination” of a bolus of cud regurgitated from the
rumen. Ruminants live in delicate symbiosis with their bacterial and
protozoal guests, a multispecies population swimming in a reticulo-
ruminal soup replenished by gallons of saliva per hour. As well as
breaking down fiber, the microbes begin the work of elaborating the
particular proteins and fatty acids that the host animal needs.
For millennia after cattle were domesticated, different sorts of grass
(or hay) continued to be virtually their whole diet. The resident ruminal

bacteria need it to maintain a stable balance of different microbial
organisms. Altering the diet kills off some species while encouraging
others, until the entire chemistry of the rumen may be thrown out of
whack. This does the cow no good but, depending on what you’re
feeding her, may make her give more milk. For generations it has been
known that you can stimulate dairy cows to higher yields by keeping
them on low-fiber, “high-energy” rations with large amounts of
“concentrate” (mostly meaning grains, especially corn). Concentrate
translates into more net caloric energy per pound than fiber, which
siphons off more energy into the work of digestion. But at high levels it
also changes the only slightly acid environment of a normal rumen to a
lower pH. The unhappy animal often loses her appetite. She is constantly
thirsty and tries to right matters by drinking more water, which means
more (if thinner) milk and explains why one can speak of milk watered
inside the cow. She may develop full-blown ruminal acidosis.
Here we arrive at one of several déjà-vu-all-over-again moments in
recent dairying history: Cows may no longer be munching distillery
wastes in hideous city sheds, but it still is in at least some people’s
interest to feed them substances injurious to their health. In acute and
even subacute acidosis, the walls of the rumen become ulcerated,
releasing infectious bacteria that often travel to the liver, where they
cause abscesses, or generating by-products that migrate to the interior of
the hooves, where they cause a painful foot inflammation called
laminitis. (This condition probably was the reason that the “downer
cows” surreptitiously filmed by the Humane Society at a California
slaughtering plant early in 2008 had to be goaded onto their feet by
electric shock.) In addition, lowered ruminal pH is ideal for encouraging
the growth of Escherichia coli bacteria that can survive through the entire
digestive tract (ending up in manure and fertilizer made from it) and
often include the virulent 0157:H7 strain.
The elite, high-producing stars of dairy herds are the cows who suffer
most drastically on large amounts of concentrate. Already pushed by
genetic makeup to the threshold of negative energy balance, they are
easily nudged over the edge by any loss of appetite. But the breeding-
and-feeding stresses on high-producing cows don’t end there. Since the
mid-1990s farmers have made them even higher-producing through
injections of the hormone bovine somatotropin (BST), also called

“bovine growth hormone” (BGH). Or more precisely, the Monsanto
Corporation’s laboratory-engineered “recombinant” version of the cow
original, known as rBST or rBGH. Much controversy rages around rBST
—and we now reach another plus-ça-change moment. Adulteration
scandals, it seems, didn’t end with the practice of dyeing the milk. An
angry faction has denounced rBST as a harmful foreign substance.
Monsanto reasonably enough points out that it is indistinguishable from
the BST made by cows and naturally found in milk. Its detractors, also
reasonably, want to know whether consuming it can increase human
blood levels of a potential carcinogen that occurs at higher
concentrations in treated cows’ milk, “insulin-like growth factor-1” (IGF-
1).
No clear medical consensus has emerged on these issues. On the other
hand, it’s obvious that whatever increases milk production in already
high-yielding cows also increases the physical stress on organisms that
are stressed to begin with. Not only is rBST a serious additional risk
factor for mastitis (infection of the udder), to which today’s stressed-out
cows are highly prone, but it tends to shorten the animals’ life
expectancy—which in any case has been on a downward slope over the
last half century. In 1950, farmers might have kept many or most cows
milking for a dozen years after their first lactation at (usually) about age
two. In 2007 a production span of three years before “culling” to be sold
for cheap beef wasn’t uncommon. Forget the fact that in the Dark Ages
of dairying a well-treated cow might often have lived out something
close to the twenty-year potential of the species; enlightened modern
management ensures that during their short term on this planet many of
today’s cows will have to be repeatedly dosed with antibiotics to pull
them through their latest bout of mastitis or laminitis. Antibiotics are
banned from milk sold for any food purpose whatever, and the milk
from cows under antibiotic treatment is supposed to be dumped.
Nonetheless, contamination is regularly caught in inspections of farm-to-
plant milk shipments, and whether it is sometimes not caught is
anybody’s guess.
The pressures on cows mirror those on farmers—a word I use for want
of a better one, though their job is really more like applied industrial
engineering under the most unforgiving conditions. Farming to supply
the fluid-milk market is an incredibly competitive business with

painfully slender profit margins that make shaving a few cents from
production costs for a thousand pounds of milk a matter of survival or
collapse for large operations. And all operations are inexorably
becoming larger. In the late 1940s sixty-cow farms looked as modestly
middle-sized as three-hundred-cow farms do today. Only at the level of
two thousand cows do dairyists start to talk about big. There are
operations with eight or nine times more. The San Joaquin Valley in
California has dairy farms so huge that the methane gas given off by
ruminal bacteria and belched by the animals as they chew the cud is
now regarded by air-quality experts as a major local pollutant.
Many small dairy farms stand, or stood before they disappeared, in the
path of real-estate juggernauts in the ever-expanding orbit of cities.
Those that survive often do so by leaving the fluid-milk market for
arrangements with local makers of other dairy products; ripened or aged
cheeses are an increasingly lucrative destination for milk with good fat
and protein content.
Meanwhile more and more of the fluid-milk supply comes from huge
farm operations completely dependent on high-producing cows bred,
fed, and injected to be still higher-producing. On many farms, the
animals never see a blade of grass—not because farmers are unnatural
villains but because pasture management for hundreds of ground-
trampling 
twelve-hundred- 
to 
eighteen-hundred-pound 
Holstein-
Friesians is a time-consuming luxury. Besides, grazing in an actual
pasture distractingly complicates the job of evaluating any one cow’s
performance in a several-thousand-cow herd.
The crucial task of tracking performance is now done by computer on
most dairy farms. A cow may have a name, but she also has a number
recorded on an ear tag, possibly one with a computer chip. She enters
the herd along with crucial milking statistics from her dam’s and sire’s
lineages. Everything she eats and drinks is measured against her milk-
output data (weight as well as fat, SNF, and water content), which go
into the computer from the milking machine. Her food ration is a
customized recipe based on readouts of her milking record. It typically
includes chopped hay, cornstalk or other silage, corn or cornmeal,
ground soybeans or cottonseed, and beet pulp or molasses, not to
mention chemical buffers like sodium bicarbonate, dicalcium phosphate,
or powdered lime to lessen the risk of acidosis. The milking data dictate

adjustments in the exact proportions of different nutrients.
This isn’t at all a matter of robotic programming replacing thoughtful
human care, because every dairy farmer has his or her own priorities.
Computer-monitored rations can be a tool for wringing the last drop of
watery milk out of creatures on the edge of metabolic collapse, or a way
of balancing quantity and quality while maintaining the animals in good
health. But it’s fair to say that any cow who performs poorly enough to
bring down the herd average for desired characteristics will rapidly be
culled.
If a cow proves really remarkable in an outstanding herd, she may
well be chosen for supermotherhood via ET, meaning “embryo transfer”
or “transplant” (hence the initials at the end of Muranda Oscar Lucinda’s
name). She must first be induced to “superovulate”—release multiple
ova instead of the normal single ovum—through a series of hormone
injections, then inseminated with semen from a bull of proven excellence
as a dairy sire. After some days her uterus is washed out with a saline
solution that is microscopically scanned for fertilized eggs (too small to
see with the naked eye). Meanwhile, several destined surrogate mothers
have been brought synchronously into heat through rBST injections and
are ready to be impregnated with the new embryos. The donor cow can
thus become the mother of perhaps six or more calves almost
simultaneously—all daughters, if the bull’s semen has been sexed to
choose only sperm with X chromosomes. And the process can be
repeated at intervals.
The steam that drives current breeding-and-feeding technology along
with the rest of the production engine is, of course, the bizarre exaltation
of milk drinking over other forms of milk consumption since the
nineteenth century. It can’t be too often repeated that pushing fluid milk
into this extraordinary role has not made it more worth drinking (by
those who can digest it) for the sake of flavor.
Dairy farmers are not to blame for the punishing realities of modern
commercial milk production. Not only do they supply a food that
everybody else takes for granted without understanding the first thing
about it, but they were hit hard in the late twentieth century as the
Nature’s Perfect Food myth began to be challenged by authorities on
coronary artery disease and heart attacks. When the diet-and-health
battle heated up, the nation’s milk processors had some useful strings to

their bow. Unfortunately these would provide no magic answers for
farmers.
BRAVE NEW MILK
The cholesterol wars arrived several generations after three strategic
developments that didn’t do much for the cause of good plain milk but
would enable the industry to reinvent itself under fire. In the end, these
bits of technical progress would give dairy processors the tools for taking
Nature’s Perfect Food apart and—the really decisive factor—putting it
back together with selling points that nature hadn’t thought of.
The first breakthrough, in the 1880s, was the mechanical separation of
cream by centrifuge, far more thorough than any hand skimming. The
next came in 1890, when a University of Wisconsin dairy chemist
invented the eponymous Babcock test for measuring the precise fat
content of milk—at the time, the chief indicator of quality. These two
advances led to intense growth in the butter industry, which became the
most lucrative destination for milk. Old-style farmstead buttermaking
declined, while dairying regions became dotted with small factories
called creameries that bought up shipments of high-Babcock-score milk
and produced butter from cream so efficiently centrifuged that, like the
cream my parents remembered buying in tiny Creamery, Pennsylvania,
it had to be spooned rather than poured.
The third crucial achievement was homogenization, or the technique
of crushing milkfat globules into droplets too small to rise to the surface
in a cream layer. Homogenization had to overcome several obstacles
before it could be coupled with the first two advances. It disrupted the
chemical structure of the milkfat so drastically as to release a torrent of
enzymes that promptly turned raw milk rancid. Even when dairy
chemists learned to sidestep rancidity by combining the steps of
pasteurizing (which inactivated the enzymes) and homogenizing, there
remained the age-old consumer habit of judging milk by its richness—
i.e., the thickness of the cream layer on top. When packaging in glass
bottles came in toward the start of the twentieth century, one of its
advantages from a buyer’s point of view was the plainly visible
“creamline.” The fact that homogenized milk in glass tended to acquire
an unpleasant oxidized flavor on exposure to light more rapidly than

creamline milk was another strike against it.
As a result, until shortly after World War II few people saw any reason
to want homogenized milk. Milk for drinking was almost without
exception available in only two degrees of richness: with or without all
the original fat. Skim milk, or what was left when the cream was
separated for other purposes, was the ugly sister. Health experts warned
mothers that it was paltry stuff, deficient in crucial nutrients. (Most
states required that it be fortified with vitamin A to replace the fat-
soluble beta-carotene that disappeared along with the cream; this step is
still mandatory for fat-free and most reduced-fat milk.) At the nation’s
creameries skim milk was an unvalued by-product, often dumped for
lack of any profitable use.
As early as the late 1930s a few dairy processors had been trying to
win people over to homogenized milk. The turning point came with a
postwar shift to opaque paper or cardboard containers in place of
returnable milk bottles. This in turn accompanied another shift away
from home delivery and toward supermarket purchases of milk.
Consumers and supermarket managers adored the convenience of
throwaway packaging, Milk processors and distributors loved the fact
that cardboard couldn’t be seen through, which incidentally solved the
oxidation problem. It was the perfect moment for abolishing creamline
milk and substituting a product whose appearance had previously
weighed against it.
From an industry perspective, homogenization meant not simply
homogenizing milk as it came from Bessy, Ellen, or Lucinda but being
able to play with it. A commercial dairy could now calculate the amount
of fat in incoming milk, completely remove it, and homogenize it back
into the milk in any desired proportion, while putting any surplus to other
purposes such as butter or ice cream. In effect, “whole milk” could now
be whatever the industry said it was.
Publicity 
campaigns 
successfully 
persuaded 
housewives 
that
homogenized milk was both handier and—a particularly Orwellian
stroke—creamier-tasting than messy old-fashioned milk with the cream
on top. The fact that few milk drinkers now had ever met a cow was a
great help. Very soon even the few diehards who preferred milk in glass
had forgotten about creamlines, and today curiosity seekers tasting
unhomogenized milk for the first time often find the appearance and

“mouthfeel” vaguely unnatural. The dairy-processing industry was free
to set the standard milkfat content for supposedly “whole” milk at 3.25
percent by weight—the minimum specified by the Food and Drug
Administration in the Code of Federal Regulations, though some states
mandate a slightly higher percentage.
In 1929 a survey of the composition of milk produced by major dairy-
cow breeds showed milkfat ranges from 2.9 to 8.4 percent; though a
similar listing today would show some ironing-out of extremes, a real
average for American dairy herds probably would be around 4 percent,
with the best herds easily achieving 5 or 5.5 percent. Yet after more than
half a century of almost universal homogenization, it would be fiscal
insanity for most processors to sell anything mirroring the composition
of real whole milk. Indeed, consumers have trouble grasping that the
usual homogenized product is not whole, in the sense of being entire or
intact.
FROM MILK GLUTS TO NICHE MARKETING
This tale of pseudo-progress must be seen against a backdrop of
permanent crises in milk allocation. As dairy farming became more
capital-intensive and productivity per cow increased, chronic supply-
and-demand mismatches arose that led to price regulation during the
New Deal era. I will not attempt to describe the labyrinthine USDA milk
price–support system, which baffles my comprehension and probably
hasn’t been understood by the last five secretaries of agriculture. Suffice
it to say that for about seventy years the prices paid to dairy farmers
have been calculated by formulas based on both geographical location
and intended use, meant to ensure a steady supply of drinkable fresh
milk from rural dairying regions to population centers. “Class I” fluid
milk for drinking occupies a privileged rank and ordinarily commands
the highest prices, while most of the milk destined for other uses (for
instance, in butter, cheese, powdered milk, and various manufactured
foods) is placed in a confusing array of generally less lucrative
pigeonholes. It probably will surprise no one to learn that, regulatory
machinery or no, the country is periodically flooded with regional or
nationwide surpluses of fresh fluid milk, while many (perhaps most)
dairy farmers barely break even.

Special-interest gimmickry promised an out. Dairy processors had
investigated it to an extent after World War I, the success story of
chocolate milk being one 1920s example. But their efforts were mere
dabbling until the miracle of “standardization” by homogenizing came
along. And even that might not have had the spectacular results it did if
not for a swift reversal of nutritional orthodoxy about the benefits of
whole versus skim milk during the late-twentieth-century cardiac
donnybrooks summarized further on (this page). Suddenly milkfat was
not proof of quality, but one of nature’s blunders in designing an
otherwise virtuous food. From the ’60s or ’70s on, hasty public-health re-
education campaigns sought to convert consumers to “the less, the
better” attitudes regarding fat percentages in milk, with zero being the
new ideal.
Zero was easily attainable through centrifuging, but centrifuged skim
milk lacked the flavor-saving smidgin of cream that remained in the milk
after hand skimming. Some people uncomplainingly adopted zero-fat
milk; many more balked. The milk-processing industry eventually
arrived at a spectrum of products starting with 0 percent milkfat milk
and progressing through various homogenized gradations of fat content:
0.5 percent (officially “low-fat”), 1 percent, 1.5 percent, and 2 percent
(these last three “reduced-fat”). Not all are equally available everywhere,
but in most states you will find at least three or four of them. All quickly
acquired fan clubs that are now an entrenched part of American culture.
For a long time the hardest sell remained skim milk, and for good
reason: The usual commercial versions are a singularly thin, vapid
travesty of decent hand-skimmed milk. But eventually processors hit on
the stratagem of using dried skim milk solids to add body and selling the
result under names like “Skim Milk Plus.” (Despite any promotional
malarkey on the label, the real difference between this and plain skim
milk is not extra “creaminess” or “richness” but more lactose and
casein.)
Other possibilities opened up with news of the lactose-tolerance issue,
which began reaching consumers in the 1970s and seriously sank in
about a decade later. Instead of acknowledging that people do not in the
least need to drink fresh milk, dairy chemists eagerly began working to
produce something that would approximate fresh milk without the usual
lactose content. In all fairness, this head-in-the-sand approach must be

attributed less to industry guile than to cultural biases so deep that even
intelligent public-health advocates don’t recognize them as biases.
Making lactose-free milk turned out to be far more difficult than
making fat-free milk. Lactic-acid bacteria do it all the time—but no one
wanted the souring and thickening that are part of their wizardry.
Instead, the human wizards had to directly expose milk to the lactase
enzyme. Unfortunately for flavor, the result was a release of very sweet
free glucose into the milk when the original lactose—one of the least
sweet sugars in nature—was enzymatically chopped into galactose and
glucose. More recently, advanced techniques have been developed to
physically extract the lactose from the milk instead of splitting it into
component sugars. No technique so far makes lactose-free or lactose-
reduced milk taste particularly like plain unmodified milk. Taste,
however, doesn’t seem to be the point.
Regardless of the new products’ deficiencies, they have brought us still
more 
value-added 
categories 
of 
fluid 
milk. 
Along 
with 
the
aforementioned kinds of fat-free or reduced-fat milk, supermarket dairy
cases now display lactose-free or reduced-lactose “whole” (i.e.,
homogenized 3.25 percent), skim, 1 percent, and 2 percent milk. If your
head isn’t already spinning from this surfeit of choices, some retail
sources also tout calcium-fortified milk—either “whole” or reduced-fat,
full-lactose or reduced-lactose. Why add calcium to a food that already
happens to be a rich source of calcium? Well, call it the Nothing
Succeeds like Excess theory of nutrition. Despite the fact that neither
osteoporosis nor childhood skeletal maldevelopment is more prevalent
among well-nourished people in societies where no one consumes milk
than in the United States, it would take a lot to displace the “no milk, no
strong bones” syllogism from popular nutrition education. You can even
buy milk fortified with fiber, undoubtedly in response to some
perception of a market.
Among the final absurdities in this sequence of nutritional bad jokes is
the rehabilitation of “filled” and imitation milks, once synonymous with
cheap impostures. In the era when creameries were awash in unwanted
skim milk, various quick-buck artists conceived the idea of buying it up
for a song and emulsifying (“filling”) it with some kind of vegetable oil,
perhaps partially hydrogenated to mimic the “mouthfeel” of the milkfat
in whole milk. Dairymen’s associations and health experts—who in those

days usually furthered each other’s agendas—denounced the budget-
price results as unwholesome shams. They were still louder in
condemning 
the 
nutritional 
deficiencies 
of 
“imitation 
milks”
compounded from vegetable oil, sugar, corn-syrup solids, some protein
source, and emulsifiers.
Who could have foreseen that one day we would see these old ringers
peddled in new guises as more healthful than what now passes for plain
milk? The American Heart Association serenely certifies a product called
SunMilk, made by emulsifing skim milk with sunflower oil. Soy-based
imitation milks are rapidly encroaching on real fluid-milk sales. Quite
unrelated to the plain fresh soy milk sold in small Chinatown groceries,
they are created from improbable farragoes of ingredients with heavy
doses of sugar and added flavorings to counteract an underlying “beany”
pong. Today’s dairy aisles are crammed with filled milk and soy milk in
such flavors as strawberry, chocolate, green tea, and mango, proudly
billed as “lactose-free,” “casein-free,” “cholesterol-free,” and “heart-
healthy.” Dairy farmers may regard the trend with dismay—but not the
world’s largest conglomerate of milk processors, Dean Foods, which has
hedged its bets by acquiring the Silk and Sun Soy brands of soy milk.
Can this spectacle get any crazier? It can and will. Dairying experts
everywhere are trying to see whether adding substances like fish oil to
dairy cows’ rations will result in milk with more unsaturated fatty acids.
It has been difficult to administer feed supplements that won’t either
impart off flavors to the milk or end up being turned into saturated fatty
acids after all by the ruminal bacteria. But at least one success story is
now on retail shelves in Ontario: Dairy Oh!, developed by members of
the University of Guelph’s renowned dairy science department. Similar
products will eventually jostle for U.S. shoppers’ attention with the
already dizzying roster of value-added twists on milk that we now take
for granted.
THE FAT FACTOR AND THE FEAR FACTOR
We all know the reason behind the bastardized products flooding the
market: the reputation as a killer that milk acquired during successive
debates on heart disease in the last half of the twentieth century. Today
a great deal of the diet-and-cardiac-mortality gospel as originally

promulgated has had to be profoundly revised or, in some cases, thrown
out. But for some reason the milk parts of the creed have never come in
for serious re-examination.
Many facts of the case are undisputed. In the first place milkfat as
found in all full-fat dairy products is very rich in saturated fatty acids.
(For the nuts and bolts of the saturation concept, see the description of
butter, this page.) Beginning as unsaturated precursors in the fresh
grasses or hay eaten by the cow, these acquire their saturated form in
the great chemist’s workshop of the rumen with its population of
fermenting bacteria. The same is true of other ruminants like goats,
sheep, and water buffaloes. All produce milkfat with more saturated
fatty acids than any vegetable-derived fats except coconut oil, palm oil,
and palm-kernel oil.
The picture is clear from a few simple comparisons. A 100-gram
portion of most commercially available vegetable oils contains about 10
to 18 grams of saturated fatty acids and 82 to 90 grams total unsaturated
fatty acids, with widely varying proportions of monounsaturated to
polyunsaturated fatty acids. The figures for olive oil are about 14 grams
saturated fatty acids, 77 grams monounsaturated fatty acids, and 9
grams polyunsaturated fatty acids. But 100 grams of cows’-milk butter
that has had the water mechanically removed would—allowing for large
variations in composition among different animals—probably average
out 
at 
roughly 
62 
grams 
saturated 
fatty 
acids, 
29 
grams
monounsaturated fatty acids, and 4 grams polyunsaturated fatty acids
together with a few grams of other milk-derived substances.
Undisputed though all these figures are, the interpretations different
people have placed on them are anything but. We can start with the
campaign to point out saturated fatty acids—and foods like milk that
contain a great deal of them—as artery-clogging menaces. This
movement was led during the ’50s and ’60s by the energetic, influential
Ancel Keys, whose country-by-country comparative studies of diet data
and mortality statistics provided the initial evidence for a sustained
public-health war on saturated fats and cholesterol.
Several aspects of this battle, however, remained strangely
underreported for many decades. One is that Keys’s attempts to link
national dietary habits and coronary heart disease ignored many
populations in which high consumption of saturated fats wasn’t

accompanied by high rates of atherosclerosis. (The most obvious
examples are parts of Asia, Africa, and the Near East with heavily milk-
dependent diets, and various tropical regions where palm or coconut oil
historically was the cooking fat of choice.) Another is that his
contentions about the genesis of arterial plaque have proved surprisingly
hard to verify in detail as he first proposed them. And from the start,
many equally qualified frontline researchers came to conclusions
different from those of Keys.
As time went on, both interpretive disagreements and official course
corrections began to strain the public patience, until a certain popular
backlash erupted late in the 1990s. The first hints of trouble to come
appeared when Ancel Keys and his allies in the public-health sector
realized that they had oversimplified the saturated/unsaturated–fat
dichotomy by telling people that “more unsaturated” automatically
equaled “more life-saving.” To their surprise, monounsaturates turned
out to afford more cardiac benefits than the polyunsaturates in which
they had initially placed their trust. Links between dietary cholesterol
and the levels that show up in the bloodstream as builders of arterial
plaque also failed to meet early expectations. Some years later
researchers realized that blood-serum cholesterol was not one uniform
substance but an amalgamation of different fractions with different
effects; moreover, its path from dinner table to artery wall didn’t match
the beautiful simplicity of the first formulations. A yet more jarring
discovery was that the labels “saturated,” “monounsaturated,” and
“polyunsaturated” were inadequate to indicate different fatty acids’ roles
in triggering or protecting against atherosclerosis. Certain saturated fatty
acids in milk and meat didn’t seem to raise blood cholesterol levels.
Certain monounsaturates appeared to be desirable, others quite the
opposite. As for polyunsaturates, they turned out to come in several
molecular configurations that now are thought to play dramatically
different roles in cell chemistry and plaque formation.
Epidemiologists surveying twentieth-century mortality figures further
weakened the Keysian argument by failing to agree on whether there
had ever been an “epidemic” of fatal heart disease, as opposed to
statistical shifts during a period of increasing longevity and decreasing
likelihood of dying from diseases of childhood or youth before cardiac
conditions had had time to manifest themselves. Another embarrassment

surfaced in the early 1990s, when the authorities had to do a highly
public about-face on blanket recommendations of shortenings and
margarines. Far from being beneficial, it developed, the partially
hydrogenated vegetable oils responsible for these test-tube wonders
contained possibly atherogenic trans fatty acids in hugely greater
amounts than plain butter. The turn of the twenty-first century saw a far
worse setback: The general lean-and-trim diet blueprint to which the
antisaturated fat agenda belonged was thrown into disarray when a
vocal wing of dietary specialists denounced low-calorie, low-fat
alternatives to such traditional full-fat foods as milk, butter, and cream
as factors in a rising national tide of obesity and diabetes.
By the mid-1990s some rebellious types were heretically celebrating a
return to steak. A few years later red meat and eggs—early victims of
nutritional McCarthyism—were getting a small, grudging rehabilitation
from the self-constituted food police. Not so butter and full-fat milk,
though they happen to have a striking piece of negative evidence on
their side. As shown by USDA and census statistics, consumption of both
whole milk and butter was steadily declining during the 1950s and ’60s
while the number of fatal heart attacks rose—along with decreasing use
of animal fats overall and increasing use of vegetable oils. Yet to this day
the American Heart Assciation—which readily accepts money from
manufacturers in return for putting AHA approval stickers on products
like Cocoa Puffs breakfast cereal and Smart Balance De Luxe Microwave
Popcorn—still inveighs against milk with the milkfat that is simply part
of the nature of milk. And the shakiest tenets of the Keysian party line
continue 
to 
inspire 
tinhorn 
politicos 
like 
the 
school-district
administrators who have succeeded in getting whole milk banned from
public schools in both Los Angeles and New York City. Probably most
people who think of themselves as nutrition-savvy would be astonished
to learn that evidence of whole milk’s being a ticket to an early grave is
conspicuous by its absence.
How did a good and useful food come to be buried in such
misunderstanding? For one answer we can look to well-meaning
authorities on nutrition and disease who have spent fifty-plus years
repeatedly issuing blanket dietary recommendations for the whole
population without waiting to think through many ifs, ands, or buts that
have had to be inserted piecemeal at erratic intervals. Their

pronouncements, as rehashed by a corps of food and health journalists,
have reached most of us as a series of disjointed bulletins compared to
which the blind men’s reports on the elephant were marvels of
coherence.
Add an endless chorus of commercial persuasions to buy more and
more (for obvious reasons, never less) of this or that value-added niche
product targeted to real, imaginary, or highly misrepresented needs and
deficiencies, and you have what I can only call a schizoid mentality.
Consider the millions of people taught to fear and distrust a common
food to the point of banishing it from their diet. Do they look elsewhere
for ideas about eating that don’t involve its use? On the contrary, they
rush forth to spend extra bucks on crude artificial mimicries of the
dreaded offender.
NOT ALL THINGS TO ALL PEOPLE
This sad ending might have looked like the only ending a decade or two
back, but I see increasing evidence that it doesn’t have to be.
Seventeen years ago I went to a “milk tasting” organized by the New
York branch of a national gastronomic organization, meant to illuminate
some of the factors affecting milk flavor, like what animals it comes
from and what sort of processing it undergoes. The next week a New
Yorker “Talk of the Town” reporter—unable to taste any particular
difference among the six samples on display “except for the chocolate
milk, which tasted like chocolate”—had a quiet snicker at the general
foofaraw (especially the lunatic aspirations of any anti-pasturizers trying
to turn a public health hazard into “chic milk,” in scornful italics). Moral
of story, as of 1991: Modern dairying had been working to treat an
innately variable, highly perishable biological secretion like a bulk
commodity long enough for wags to chortle over even a modest attempt
to call this absurdity into question.
I doubt that an exercise designed to stimulate curiosity about milk
from various animals, handled in different ways, would draw the same
sort of putdown today. The idea that milk doesn’t have to be a
gastronomic neuter wished on the public under misguided dietary
assumptions, but actually is capable of tasting like something, is not quite
as foreign to people who eat and think about what they eat. What now

seems to be happening, for at least some of us, is a more liberating
perception of food in general as a source of both sustenance and
pleasure.
Notwithstanding the Babel of sales pitches and ideologies charging us
to view everything we put in our mouths as either a miracle cure or a
death warrant, a gathering conflux of the independent-minded is
recognizing the really great thing about today’s food scene: It gives us
the stuff of several different kinds of enjoyable and nutritious diets based on
time-honored foodways of peoples everywhere in the world. It feeds and
nourishes a mentality that seeks varied, flexible answers to the question
of what to eat rather than competing Doctrines of the Faith about what
not to eat. There are, for instance, different ways to be a vegetarian,
inspired by eating patterns from parts of the Far East, Near East,
Mediterranean basin, and India—routes paved with choices of pleasure,
not deprivation, and blessedly free of products arm-wrestled into
simulations of what they are not.
If this dietary liberation theology has any prime doctrine of its own,
it’s that starting with a “what to eat” firmly centered on a very wide
spectrum of minimally processed fresh fruits, vegetables, and vegetable
protein sources ought to free us from agonized struggles to ration out
other foods—for example, milk—by miserly formulas from this or that
ministry of fear. No food has to pretend to be all things to all people.
Nothing has to suffer exaggerated reactions against false labels like
“Nature’s Perfect Food.”
Or to put it another way: If we can shed the notion that chugging
down so much milk a day is a duty, perhaps we will be free to discover
different forms of it as a joy. People whose ancestors never consumed
milk products may be able to make up their own minds about it without
well-meant ethnocentric mistakes distorting the picture. Those with the
right genes may taste the really, truly fresh milk and cream just starting
to reach certain retail sources and for the first time realize what
exquisite works of nature these are. And those whose understanding of
milk products and milk-based cooking has revolved around a few narrow
Western models may rejoice in the glorious culinary plenty and diversity
now opening up to all of us.
In short: Everyone who honestly loves fresh dairy foods should tune
out the noise of hucksterism and fearmongering, and recognize what

milk can contribute to the pleasure of not all but very many sound and
satisfying diets.

P
RAW VS. PASTEURIZED, ORGANIC VS.
CONVENTIONAL
A Minority Opinion
eople who learn that I’m writing a book about dairy products often
ask whether I think raw or pasteurized milk is better for children and
adults, or how organic milk stacks up against conventionally produced
versions. Unfortunately, I don’t have any clear-cut answers.
Certainly the questions spring from sincere concerns about the
potential of a basic foodstuff to nourish us or bring down disasters on
our heads. But I find the usual course of public debate troubling. It is
waged with great eagerness to discuss issues of food and health by
slinging around as many claims and counterclaims as possible in the
service of preformed agendas, and all too often without elementary
caution, fair-mindedness, or patience to entertain any answer that falls
between two stools. And in the case of milk, the loudest opinions often
come from people who know very little. I can only offer my own
opinions in the hope that they’ll be of help to someone.
RAWNESS AND RATIONALITY
To be blunt: Every time I hear or read any discussion of raw milk in any
public forum, I know I can look forward to endless repetitions of a few
misleading, simpleminded claims on both sides, with either no attention
to or no technical understanding of taste factors (which are my
preformed agenda).
Most of those who want consumers to have unfettered access to raw
milk insist that pasteurization destroys nutritional value. Sometimes they
also assert that raw milk tastes better, period. Neither claim is
unconditionally true. On the other side, adherents of pasteurization are
bent on warning the public that without it we can expect the unhindered
spread of milk-borne pathogens that used to kill people en masse but are

eliminated in the pasteurizing process. This, too, is only partly true.
To start with flavor, though it’s the last thing many of the polemicists
think of: Certainly a glass of raw milk sampled at the farm is going to
taste different from the supermarket milk in somebody’s refrigerator. But
pasteurization is only one of the industrial processing steps responsible
for the difference. As explained earlier (see this page), virtually all the
pasteurized milk that reaches us has been centrifugally separated,
recombined to standardized milkfat percentages, and homogenized.
These steps do more to denature milk than anything else that happens to
it in manufacturing. The creamier “mouthfeel” and fresher flavor of
whole raw milk at a well-run Jersey cow dairy farm (and, by the way,
plenty of Holstein-Friesian farms) reflect not just actual freshness but the
fact that the basic milk structure is intact. You can get nearly all of the
same effect from unhomogenized pasteurized milk—at least, if it comes
to you very fresh and was pasteurized by the right method.
This brings us to the second great factor usually left out of the debate:
There is pasteurization and pasteurization. As we’ve seen, at one time it
was routinely done at a comparatively low temperature for a long time
by pumping batches into and out of a vat. This method eliminated
harmful bacteria with minimal impairment of flavor. The more cost-
effective approaches that are almost universal today involve higher
temperatures with near-instantaneous heating and cooling by continuous
flow. They tend to impart a slightly more cooked flavor while denaturing
some of the water-soluble milk proteins—but it’s hard to attribute
particular flavor effects to these techniques alone, because they are
almost always carried out together with homogenization.
Then there is the intrinsic quality of the milk itself. Rawness and
pasteurization have nothing to do with the plain fact that milk produced
by farmers with sane breeding-and-feeding priorities tastes better than
milk cranked out with an eye only to volume. Some of the best milk I’ve
tasted has been raw, and so has some of the worst. I have awful
memories of one watery, dismal brand that I naively tried several
decades ago when New York State permitted retail sales of raw milk in
health-food stores.
When we come to the question of health and safety, people on both
sides usually seem to have their minds closed before they open their
mouths. The most frequent argument I hear about the health-giving

properties of raw milk is that the heat of pasteurization destroys the
vitamin C and most enzymes present in raw milk. Quite true—but not of
great importance to anyone’s health. Compared with other plentiful
sources of vitamin C (most fruits, some vegetables), milk contains very
little in the first place; the loss through pasteurization isn’t going to
drastically affect our access to an adequate natural supply of this
nutrient.
As for the large array of enzymes that disappear in heating, they are a
highly species-specific aid to the digestive systems of newborn calves
and don’t need to greatly concern nonbovines—except cheesemakers,
who are sorely handicapped when intricate sequences of enzymatic
changes are interfered with through pasteurization. With due respect to
people who swear that raw milk cleared up their children’s ear infections
or other problems, I have yet to see convincing proof that it
automatically improves our general nutritional welfare.
But I am only marginally more sympathetic to the claims of the other
side. The health authorities who have brought about blanket
prohibitions on the sale of raw milk in most states seem to me to
represent muddled governmental thinking at its officious worst. They are
perfectly correct in pointing out that raw milk is a known vector for
spreading such deadly diseases as tuberculosis and brucellosis. They are
just as wrong in trying to impose the presumption that all raw milk is
guilty of such evils until proven innocent. In fact, the means have existed
for more than a century to ensure that it is innocent: very frequent, very
scrupulous inspection of cows, milking facilities, and milk.
What spreads disease is not raw milk but raw milk contaminated by
harmful bacteria—or in some cases, pasteurized milk contaminated by
bacteria. Pasteurization is a great blessing that does indeed keep most
fresh dairy products from spreading lethal infections. As practiced today,
it also saves a lot of money for all parties. But it is a crude and imperfect
solution to a problem that ought to admit of more than one solution.
Treat milk by continuous-feed pasteurization methods at high
temperatures, and you will not (usually) cause mass outbreaks of disease
by pooling the output of many thousands of cows on many dozens of
farms at colossal processing facilities hundreds of miles from the point of
production, then shipping it over equal or greater distances to many
hundreds of retail stores where it may reach consumers close to a week

after milking. Clearly, there are precautions that have to have the force
of law if that’s the only way anyone is to get milk—but why should it be?
What’s wrong with devising other precautions for milk to be sold
without pasteurization?
The real answer is cost-effectiveness. Anyone can see that producing
and distributing raw milk in the same way as HTST (high-
temperature/short-time) or ultrapasteurized milk (see this page) would
be an invitation to disaster. Economies of scale are impossible here. The
milk must be handled and stored in much smaller volumes, transported
(if at all) over much shorter distances, and sold within a much shorter
time than milk for mass distribution. And any given unit of HTST or
ultrapasteurized milk is not only cheaper to produce for retail sale than
the same amount of raw milk, but cheaper to regulate. It would be insane
to allow the sale of raw milk without frequent official inspections of
herds and facilities, ultravigilant testing of all cows, and a strict schedule
of bacterial counts done on the milk—all of which adds up to longer
man-hours and higher personnel budgets than the far laxer supervision
of HTST and ultrapasteurized milk. No wonder that most state regulatory
agencies faced with any suggestion about licensing raw-milk operations
automatically switch to the “How Not to Do It” mode of Dickens’s
Circumlocution Office. If they had concrete motives for figuring out how
to do the job, clean raw milk could be gotten (at a price) to the small
number of consumers who want it.
Even under the strictest supervision, raw milk can’t be guaranteed to
be uniformly and absolutely free from pathogens. But neither can
pasteurized milk. Any fair-minded person will recognize that
pasteurization is a generally effective public-health measure that hugely
reduces bacterial populations in milk. But occasional cases of
recontamination after pasteurizing not only occur but seem to be on the
increase, especially in certain kinds of cheeses made (for Latin American
clienteles) by direct acidification instead of lactic-acid fermentation. The
pathogen Listeria monocytogenes crops up oftener than any of the other
usual suspects. The question of whether it can actually survive the
pasteurization process has not yet been conclusively settled. Most
authorities now think that it can’t, and that episodes such as the 1983
outbreak of listeriosis in Massachusetts—traced to pasteurized milk from
several different dairy herds, after forty-nine people had been sickened—

represent recontamination that escaped monitoring.
I don’t mean to soft-pedal the danger of pathogens in “natural” or
“alternative” foods beloved of some counterculturalists—indeed, I’d
seriously caution anyone against galloping off to the nearest dairy farm
and trying to buy raw milk with no questions asked. But it’s only just to
point out that every year more and more cases also come to light of
pathogens spread through mass-distribution channels—let’s say, in
hamburger—and undetected at the time by the usual public-health
regulatory machinery. The difference is that nobody as far as I know is
proposing to bring raw milk to the public through mass-distribution
channels.
As a food writer, I believe it is irresponsible to recommend certain raw
animal products—oysters or clams on the half-shell, fish in sashimi or
Andean tiraditos, beef in steak tartare or carpaccio, unpasteurized milk—
without pointing out that they are better disease vectors than most other
fresh raw foods. You don’t have to regard all raw milk as a deadly
poison in order to think that people looking to buy, sell, or regulate it
should pay superfanatical attention to the cleanliness of cows, milking
equipment, and storage conditions. But if produced and handled under
eagle-eyed supervision it should be no riskier than other raw foods that
command happy followings among food lovers—indeed, probably less
risky than raw clams and oysters, which sicken dozens or hundreds of
people every year.
The monkey wrench in the analogy is that these other foods never
inherited the bizarre nutritional mythology of fresh fluid milk.
Consumers feel free to enjoy any one of them or not, without imagining
that they must shovel it into their children or themselves as a scientific
duty. If the “Milk Is Indispensable” notion were not so entrenched, the
subject wouldn’t rouse such passions. In fact, if we all had access to
sources of good, fresh, locally produced unhomogenized milk batch-
pasteurized by slow methods, less nonsense might be spouted about
rawness and pasteurization. Meanwhile, it certainly isn’t irrational to
point out that the risk of spreading disease through raw milk lies not in
its rawness but in the absence of carefully designed, well-enforced
regulations requiring that it be handled under very much stricter
supervision than the HTST or ultrapasteurized milk in ordinary retail
stores.

“ORGANIC”: IMAGE AND REALITY
The second major controversy that has pitted mainstream interests
against people looking for better alternatives concerns organic versus
conventional farming practices. Here again, I usually wish the debate
could be conducted with more reason and less yelling. But there are two
other thorny factors: a hazy public understanding of what is meant by
the word “organic” and a rapidly shrinking distance between
mainstream and organic agriculture.
“Organic” is a term tricky enough to pin down when applied to plant
crops, and becomes ridiculously arbitrary where livestock are concerned.
The organic criteria submitted by the National Organic Standards Board
in 2002 exclude any crop raised with pesticides and synthetic fertilizers,
though there is a certain amount of hair-splitting about just what falls
under those categories. Organic milk is supposed to come from animals
that have been fed nothing prohibited under organic-crop guidelines.
Treatment with recombinant bovine somatotropin (see this page) is also
forbidden. But what consumers think they’re getting when they see the
words “organic” and “milk” together on a package label goes
considerably beyond these yardsticks.
This is not the place to review the entire meaning of organic
agriculture or evaluate its promise for better soil management and better
food. But pious-sounding rhetoric and pictures of contented cows on
milk cartons are no guarantee of either humanely tended animals or
more “natural” milk. For better or worse, organic agriculture is big
business. The bigger it gets, the more eager many producers are to
interpret organic requirements in ways that serve the bottom line instead
of reforming conventional agriculture’s faults—for example, haggling
over how long an interval should pass before cows originally raised by
nonorganic regimens can be deemed free enough of banned substances
to be milked as part of an organic herd. And they bank on the
assumption that consumers don’t know enough about milk to look
beyond the “organic” label and compare concrete markers of production
values. Here are some jarring facts to take into account before ascribing
any ethical or other advantages to organic milk:
• The organic dairying business is tremendously concentrated, with the

great preponderance of milk coming from three or four very large
producers owned by vast agribusiness conglomerates. The biggest
facilities are in the Rocky Mountain and West Coast states, and milk
regularly travels thousands of miles from there to reach retail shelves
throughout the country. As with conventional milk, gigantic farm
operations with several thousand cows now dominate the business.
• The largest farms depend on the same breeding-and-feeding methods
as their conventional counterparts, including high-energy rations to
increase volume (see this page); thrice-daily milking; and as much
confinement with as much restriction of access to grazing as the
managers can get away with. (The NOSB regulations mention “access
to pasture” and to the outdoors generally, without spelling out how
much or little.)
• Milk entering the pool at large organic dairies is separated and
homogenized by the same arbitrary numbers games as conventional
milk.
• The milk is also usually ultrapasteurized, the better to transport it
across vast distances and permit weeks rather than days between time
of milking and time of use.
So far, the major organic-dairy producers have managed to cash in on
the widespread popular view of pure, simple, pastoral, animal-friendly
organic food without acknowledging how little their wares justify the
image. In fact, milk is one of the fastest-growing segments of the organic
market. Sales of organic dairy products reached about $2 billion in 2005
and are increasing by about 20 to 25 percent annually; Horizon brand is
now familiar in mainstream supermarkets from coast to coast. But this is
one gift horse that really should be looked in the mouth. Why should we
support new-style versions of factory farming clad in airs of moral
superiority to factory farming?
Other people may come to other conclusions. But I ignore every
organic brand of dairy products on the shelves unless it has some solider
selling point than simply being “organic”—for example, also being
unhomogenized, or coming from small dairy operations in my own part
of the Northeast. I try to support these whether or not they have organic
certification. I urge other consumers to exercise some judgment about

the “organic” label, and to seek alternatives to mass-produced
conventional milk in places such as farmers’ markets or a few specialty
retail sources that encourage locally based agriculture.

I
WHITE MAGIC 101
’m sure that no institute of higher learning offers a course called “Milk
Science for Dummies,” but in my opinion it would be a blessing for
cooks and consumers. To learn even a few basics about the biology and
chemistry of this supposedly familiar substance is to see a bottle or
carton of it with new eyes. And without new eyes few Americans can
look past the externals to see milk’s connection to living animals (the
biology part) or fathom the reasons it tastes and behaves as it does (the
chemistry part).
MILK AND MOTHERHOOD, OR LACTATION IN A
NUTSHELL
Every carton of milk in every supermarket started out inside an animal,
in most cases a cow, who was giving milk because she had given birth.
This will make perfect sense to any human mother who has done the
same.
Cows and women both have nine-month gestations, compared with
about five months for goats and sheep. Milk wouldn’t exist if mothers’
bodies didn’t undergo intricate hormonal changes during the process.
These cause the specifically female apparatus that lends its name to the
class Mammalia (mamma is Latin for “breast”) to crank up from neutral
into high gear. Between conception and delivery a semi-undeveloped
system of ducts and lobes that has been biding its time in the mother’s
breast, udder, or mammary gland by any other name expands
tremendously, putting forth subdivided lobules and the minute capillary-
embroidered sacs called alveoli that do most of the milk synthesis. (A
nursing cow’s or goat’s udder, by the way, is not a hollow space that gets
filled with liquid like a water balloon, any more than is a nursing
woman’s breast. It has a lot of room for internal expansion depending on
how much milk has been secreted, but most of what’s inside is living

tissue in a somewhat spongelike, elastic arrangement.)
Until the actual onset of labor, pregnancy-sustaining hormones inhibit
this future life-support system from producing true milk. In the last few
days or hours, however, a kind of pre-milk equipped with various
immunological weapons begins to be secreted. The start of labor triggers
a cascade of drastic hormonal readjustments that produce more of this
substance—a thick, serous yellowish fluid with a slightly laxative effect,
known as colostrum. It is exactly what the newborn needs to get through
the transition from placental to oral nourishment.
Colostrum functions solely as an interim support, and doesn’t look or
taste at all like any animal’s normal milk. Within a week or two in most
species, the real milk supply appears in response to a sequence of
hormonal commands. Mother and infant establish an intricate but
(usually) efficient feedback in which a mouth clamping around a nipple
causes the “letting down” of the milk that has collected in the alveoli
and ducts since the last nursing.
No animal except man has ever thought of decanting milk into
receptacles other than baby animals, or of consuming the milk of any
species other than its own. In fact, most interspecies substitutions would
be disastrous for newborns because of the crucial matches between milk
composition and the physiological needs of different animals. The milk
of two kinds is no more interchangeable than the placental blood that
supports life within the womb before milk takes over the job.
Cast your mind over the many destined environments that infant
mammals must confront during the period of adjustment made possible
by nursing. Arctic waters, for instance, or grassy savannas. If your first
duty in life is to grow an insulating layer of blubber, you would die on
milk meant for creatures whose immediate task is to build the muscle
power to run with the herd. The situation is less critical for humans past
the age of weaning who choose to consume another creature’s milk,
since it will ordinarily share attention with a number of other foods
instead of being anyone’s only sustenance.
If you know anything about the dairy industry, you know that the
milk in one supermarket carton really started out inside not one cow but
hundreds, whose milk has been pooled and sent to gigantic processing
facilities where it is brought as close as possible to uniformity.
Commercial milk is expected not to show any detectable variation

throughout the 365 days of a year. A lactating mother’s milk, however,
is anything but uniform, and isn’t meant to be produced over a whole
calendar year. A natural breeding cycle would dictate that at a certain
point the baby starts sampling other food. As it gradually loses interest
in nursing and graduates to an adult diet, the mother’s milk supply
synchronously changes composition and dries up, and the mammary
system reverts to pre-pregnancy mode.
In the smaller herd animals such as goats and sheep, mothers are
ready to conceive again just when the young are fully functioning on
their own. In fact, the spring lambs and kids will themselves be able to
breed in autumn. The breeding interval is a year longer with cows, but a
calf left to its own devices will be grazing and independent of the
mother by eight or nine months. In all three cases nature has
programmed the mothers to stop lactating before the time of poor grass
or no grass and again come into milk when spring vegetation is at hand.
If you could see and taste the milk of one cow’s, doe’s, ewe’s, or
woman’s milking cycle, from the time she stops producing colostrum to
the time when the young animal says farewell to nursing, it would be
shot through with huge variations. Milk shifts in makeup not only
throughout one lactation but from the beginning to the end of one day.
Indeed, the first and last mouthfuls that an infant swallows at a single
nursing ordinarily differ in composition (the final dribs and drabs being
the highest in fat). And this is to ignore the question of how one
individual cow’s, doe’s, ewe’s, or woman’s milk differs from that of
others in her species, herd, or bridge club.
We can imagine how visible such differences must have been to
cottagers who milked only one animal. Composition could be averaged
out to an extent when the milk of a whole herd was pooled. Still, the
limits of interference with the biology of milk production were stringent
in early times. The first way that prehistoric dairyists discovered to
prolong lactation far beyond the needs of infants was to get lambs, kids,
or calves weaned to some transitional ration as soon as possible and milk
the dam twice (or more) a day as aggressively as the hungriest offspring.
Usually she accepted this more willingly if the little one was kept close
enough in sight to trigger the let-down reflex.
A well-known illustrated encyclopedia of the world’s cheeses has an
extraordinary photograph illuminating the point better than a thousand

words. It was taken among the semi-nomadic Qashqa’i people of
southern Iran, who still herd sheep and goats as people might have five
or six thousand years ago. On an expanse of stony hardscrabble, a
woman wearing the richly patterned Qashqa’i skirt and tunic sits
hunkered down at the hindquarters of a shaggy, longhorned black goat
that she is milking into a large pail. The animal looks trustingly up at the
second member of this classic pre-industrial milking team: another
woman who bends down to grasp the goat gently under the chin with
one hand while using the other to restrain a tiny black kid, half hidden
in the folds of her skirt.
After some days or weeks the mother may be coaxed to let down her
milk without the baby in sight. And if someone keeps milking her with
might and main long after her real offspring would have gone on to
other food, her body can be fooled into thinking that a young one still
needs the peak milk supply that she was pumping out a month or two
after giving birth.
Of the Big Four milch animals, cows are the easiest to manipulate into
prolonged lactation. And because they accept alterations of their natural
breeding schedule more readily than the other three, they are the easiest
to maintain on a year-round lactation (or as long as two or three years)
if you can solve the formerly intractable problem of how to feed them
through the winter with no pasturage. Today’s dairy-cow rations can be
—and often are—bought and administered with no relation to local
climate or vegetation, meaning that for many of the animals, twelve-or
eighteen-month lactations are routine. Modern dairyists often actually
inseminate cows a few months into lactation, allowing a drying-off
period of only about six weeks before they “freshen,” or give birth and
again come into milk. (Probably this strenuous regimen has much to do
with the short life spans of modern cows. Ganmaa Davaasambuu, a
researcher on hormones in food, has also discovered that routinely
milking pregnant cows channels possibly harmful amounts of pregnancy-
triggered estrogens into the American milk supply.) By staggering the
breeding schedules of different cows in a herd, a farmer can achieve
something like a uniform general output throughout every season.
(Goats, sheep, and buffaloes obstinately prefer a more seasonal
reproductive schedule.)
The impersonally standardized form in which most of us now

encounter milk tends to blind us to the realities of nursing for each and
every mammal. At the onset of lactation any animal mother’s body starts
channeling everything she eats into what is not just “nature’s perfect
food” but nature’s only food for a newborn navigating the complex early
stages of growth and development. Of course, nature never meant this
precious substance to enter the outside world. It’s worth re-emphasizing
that milk as it emerges from the nipple is as much a living fluid as blood,
designed to go straight from the mother’s mammary system into the
infant’s digestive system with no detours. Once it is sidelined into a pail
or tank, its major components begin undergoing multiple interactions
with the forces of irreversible chemical change. What we call cooking is
one way of capturing and using these forces.
A LITTLE HANDS-ON DAIRY CHEMISTRY
In the age of “molecular gastronomy,” few food lovers will need to be
told that every tastable quality in food rests squarely on chemistry. But
in the case of milk, even the crudest chemical analysis is too long to fit
between the covers of a cookbook. Rather than try to list the many
thousands of substances present in any single arbitrarily chosen form of
milk (for example, the homogenized and pasteurized cows’ milk usually,
if incorrectly, labeled “whole”), I would like to send you into the kitchen
to conduct some simple experiments that show milk’s major components
at work.
You will get more out of these exercises if you first understand that, to
food chemists, all animals’ milk is a structured system with three
principal “phases.” Each phase, by the way, contains complexities that
the utmost powers of science today can barely describe, much less
duplicate. Put the three together, and you have something still more
mind-boggling.
All milk starts out with water, and the simplest of the three phases to
visualize is an aqueous (water-based) solution with molecules of different
substances dissolved in it. But milk is also a suspension, meaning that it
contains minuscule undissolved solid particles floating in the aqueous
medium. In the third place, it is an emulsion shot through with small
dispersed globules of something that can’t be either dissolved or
suspended: fat.

The dissolved substances include minerals such as calcium and
potassium, several proteins known as lactalbumins and lactoglobulins,
and the special sugar of milk, lactose. The suspended particles, which
are larger than even the large globulin and albumin molecules, are
called micelles and are intricately cobbled together out of more calcium
as well as casein, a unique form of protein that furnishes the main
protein reservoir for the newborn. The still larger emulsified fat globules
are made up of countless different lipids (fat-related substances) linked
up in still more innumerable configurations, each globule being
surrounded by a delicate but sturdy membrane that keeps the contents
from spilling into the milk.
The three fundamental phases can be clearly seen in any sample of
milk under a microscope. But people actually knew of them long before
microscopes. The kitchen-lab experiments that I suggest re-enact some
major pre-industrial discoveries of dairying peoples. (A note to people
who 
have 
trouble 
digesting 
lactose: 
Unless 
you 
suffer 
from
extraordinarily severe lactose intolerance, you should be able to taste
small samples of full-lactose milk without ill effect. In this sequence of
exercises, the two things most likely to cause symptoms are the unsoured
milk and whey. Little of the original lactose will remain in the soured
versions, and the cream in several experiments has much less lactose
than milk. Skim milk has proportionally more than whole milk.)
EXERCISE 1 Begin by getting enough pasteurized, unhomogenized whole
cows’ milk to work with, preferably a gallon but at least half a gallon.
(I’m all in favor of rescuing raw milk from the public-health doghouse,
but will leave that battle to others.)
What if you hunt frantically through a dozen stores and can’t find
unhomogenized milk? Or are appalled at how much it costs compared
with “regular” homogenized milk? Well, look on the bright side—you’ve
already learned something! Without spending a cent on anything except
gas and shoe leather, you have just discovered one of the true idiocies of
the American milk industry. Illogical as it may seem, milk that retains its
three basic phases in unmonkeyed-with form is—when you can find it—
usually at least three times as expensive as milk that has been put
through a complicated, energy-intensive alteration of the original

structure. Go figure. But if you completely strike out, buy a gallon or
half a gallon of skim milk (preferably without added milk solids, another
distorting bit of interference) and half a pint of heavy cream (preferably
unhomogenized—simply 
look 
for 
a 
label 
that 
doesn’t 
say
“homogenized”—and non-ultrapasteurized). If you have to use these
expedients, skip the first two exercises and go on to the third (this page).
Pour the cold milk into a glass or stainless-steel bowl that is deep
enough not to spread out the contents in a big lake but wide enough to
admit a scooping/skimming tool such as a shallow ladle or large spoon.
You may find the mouth of the bottle or carton partly stopped up with
what used to be called a “cream plug,” a thickened blob testifying to the
fact that your milk probably took several days to get to the store. (When
unhomogenized milk was more common, it moved much faster and was
likelier to reach the family doorstep with a liquid cream layer than a
definite plug on top.) Break it up, if necessary, by gently whisking until
it is smoothly recombined with the milk.
PITCHER TO MEASURE THE DEPTH OF CREAM, WHICH USED TO BE THE MEASURE OF QUALITY IN
UNHOMOGENIZED MILK
Before going any further, taste the milk. Concentrate your attention on
what’s in your mouth: something ethereally subtle but concretely there.
This milk has a kind of roundness or depth that the homogenized
equivalent doesn’t. The reason is that the contrast between its leaner and
richer components hasn’t been ironed out but remains just delicately

palpable. Its flavor is not so much flavor as a sensation of freshness on
the palate that scarcely translates into words. “Sweetness” is as close as
anything, but it’s an elusive note on the thin edge of perception rather
than sugar-in-your-coffee sweetness.
What you have just sampled is, for humans past the age of weaning,
one of the world’s oldest beverages after water. It was never drunk
everywhere in the fresh liquid form you are encountering; the reasons,
as we have seen, vary, from human digestive quirks to the ubiquity of
milk-souring bacteria. You should also recall that goats’ and sheep’s
milk, with their more distinctive flavors, are still older in human
experience, and that your sample has undergone a few significant
changes through pasteurization. Even so, you are getting close to
something primeval.
EXERCISE 2 Let the milk sit in the refrigerator, covered, until a well-
defined layer collects at the top. Layering will start within hours, but it
may take from twelve hours to two days before the “top milk,” as people
used to call it, is really well separated.
Why such wide variation? Take this as the first concrete illustration of
what you just read about the non-uniformity of milk in a state of nature
—something you should get used to if you plan to work much with milk
in your own kitchen. If your sample came from Jersey cows, it will
separate faster and more distinctly than Holstein-Friesian milk. Goats’
milk would take several days for a somewhat incomplete separation,
while water buffaloes’ milk would separate quite clearly in much less
time than cows’ milk.
Use your skimmer to remove the top layer to a smaller nonreactive
container such as a small glass bowl or measuring cup. You won’t be
able to get all of it without a little remixing of top and bottom. Another
lesson: The two layers can’t be fully separated by hand (it takes a
mechanical centrifuge). But you have now performed your first feat of
applied dairy chemistry. You have used gravity to isolate (though
incompletely) the emulsified phase from the other two milk phases.
Of course you know that the thicker liquid in the smaller container is
cream. It rose, or “creamed,” because it is lighter than the rest of the
milk. (“Heavy cream” is a misnomer as regards specific gravity.) It

contains nearly all the milkfat, still emulsified in a small amount of the
original water-based solution; traces of the suspended micelles also
remain. The reason for differences in creaming time is variation in the
size of milkfat globules; larger ones, like those in buffaloes’ milk, rise
faster than the much smaller ones in goats’ milk. With cows’ milk there
are well-known differences among breeds.
When cream separates more promptly there’s also more of it. A gallon
of good rich Jersey milk may give you as much as two or three cups of
cream. But don’t be surprised if your sample yields less than half that
amount—again pointing to the unpredictability of mothers in
comparison with machines. Taste it. Maybe if it were shocking pink or
moss-green, one wouldn’t have the same reaction, but its ivory sheen
and caressing smoothness suggest some stunning union of virginal and
carnal. Put it back in the refrigerator for the nonce.
EXERCISE 3 Your original container of milk is now a container of “skim
milk,” which means the solution and suspension parts of the three-phase
system that you started out with. Stir any vestiges of cream back into the
whole, pour out a small amount, and taste it. It will be very slightly
sweeter than the milk you sampled before. (The cream will be sweet,
too, but the two kinds of sweetness are indefinably different.) Notice
how much richer and finer this feels on the palate than any commercial
skim milk, even or especially the kind enriched with intrusive-tasting
milk solids. In hand-skimmed milk the residual trace of cream creates an
effect you wouldn’t guess from its minuscule volume.
If you weren’t able to obtain unhomogenized milk, proceed with a
gallon or half a gallon of skim milk. In any case, pour half of the milk
into a saucepan, half into a nonreactive bowl or wide-mouthed jar. Stir a
little cultured “buttermilk” into the second half—we’ll come later to the
reason for the quotation marks. Plain yogurt is not as suitable because
yogurt cultures really require special cosseting. But it will work as a
second choice. Whichever you use, the label should unmistakably say
that it contains active cultures.
Relative amounts aren’t terribly important, since different samples will
vary with the strength of the culture. Half a cup of “buttermilk” or plain
yogurt should be more than enough for two quarts of skim milk. What

you are doing is “inoculating” the milk with microorganisms that will
convert some of the lactose into lactic acid. Cover the container and let
it sit undisturbed at room temperature until it is slightly soured. This
happens faster in a warm room, but timing will be unpredictable no
matter what—eight hours, twelve, sixteen. You will get a thriving colony
sooner or later and shouldn’t worry if it’s later. (The only reason for
complete failure would be antibiotic contamination of the milk—illegal
and rare, but not absolutely unheard of.)
Keep tasting the milk at intervals until it has a perceptible sourness
and a bit of body. Now pour yourself a little and drink it. You are tasting
something that most of the world’s milk users are far more familiar with
than fresh sweet milk. Plain soured milk brings history to life, or more
accurately, prehistory. It harks back to the earliest chapters of human
culinary discovery—the knowledge of how to change one flavor into
another.
EXERCISE 4 While the inoculated batch is souring, turn your attention to
the remaining skim milk. For each quart of milk you will need about 2
tablespoons of freshly squeezed lemon juice or 1 to 1½ tablespoons of
distilled white vinegar (please, no fancy vinegars here!).
Quickly bring the milk to a boil. Turn off the heat, stir in the lemon
juice or vinegar, and take the pan off the stove. The milk will quickly
separate into a soft fluffy-looking (the technical term is “flocculent”)
substance and a thin greenish-white liquid. If the separation is not fairly
distinct, add more lemon juice or vinegar (about 1 tablespoon per quart
of milk).
Dampen a piece of tight-woven cheesecloth (not the gauzy stuff) or a
large cotton handkerchief, wring it out, and use it to line a colander set
over a deep bowl. Pour and scrape the contents of the pan into the
colander, then gather up the corners of the cloth and tie them together
securely to make a bag. After a few minutes’ draining, lift up the bag and
put it somewhere to drain more completely. I usually suspend it on a
long wooden spoon placed across the top of a pail or deep stockpot.
Leave it until the liquid stops dripping, which may be anywhere from
four to more than eight hours.
Meanwhile, taste some of the greenish liquid that drained into the

bowl. You probably know that this is “whey” and the solider white stuff
is “curd,” or “curds.” The flavor of whey depends on the method used for
separating it from the curd. This batch may be almost imperceptibly sour
from the lemon juice or vinegar, but there will still be something
definitely milky about it—though without the body of whole or skim
milk. Set it aside, at room temperature or in the refrigerator. When the
curd is drained, transfer it to any convenient container and taste a
spoonful. It will be quite bland and delicate, a little like a closer-grained
ricotta cheese (which is based on a similar idea).
You have now removed the suspended phase of the milk from the
aqueous solution that it was suspended in. The solution is no longer
white and opaque because it has lost the components—milkfat globules
and still more importantly casein—that make milk milky-looking by
refracting light off their surfaces. Line up the whey, curd, and previously
separated cream, and you will see the three phases of milk side by side,
as well isolated from one another as they can be by low-tech home
methods developed thousands of years ago.
There are really several possible means of separating curd and whey.
The one given here happens to be the simplest for American home cooks.
It is a classic method in northern India, where Western-style cheese is
unknown. Like all other ways of producing curd, it persuades the tiny
casein micelles to come together in large enough clusters to literally fall
—chemists say “precipitate”—out of the whey by the force of gravity.
What you did was to combine the action of heat and an acidulant, which
join forces to precipitate curd faster than any other method.
You can eat the curd as is, or perhaps turn it into a spread with a dash
of salt and some minced scallion and/or green chile. It is the chhenna
described more fully on this page and used in several of my Indian
recipes (see Vegetarian Malai Kofta, and Saag Panir).
EXERCISE 5 You can easily see that your efforts have produced more whey
than anything else. In earlier and thriftier dairying eras, all the whey
drained from curd got used. Today millions of pounds are literally
thrown 
down 
the 
drain—except 
where 
prohibited 
by 
local
environmental regulations—because the amount that can be put to any
halfway profitable purpose is only a fraction of the volumes produced in

commercial cheesemaking. But if you seriously love making the dairy
foods that yield whey as a by-product, you will eventually want to try
finding a good use for it.
Whey comes in two basic forms. You have just tasted one of them,
“sweet” (i.e., unfermented) whey. This is very bland, because the
acidulant that you used to curdle the milk was too mild to impart much
of an acid taste. The alternative is “sour” whey. To make it, inoculate the
bowl of whey with live-culture “buttermilk” or plain yogurt by stirring
in anything from ¼ to ½ cup per quart just as you did with the first
batch of skim milk; leave it to culture in exactly the same way, tasting it
occasionally to follow the souring process.
You may already be familiar with another excellent version of sour
whey, the liquid that separates from drained yogurt. For more about
forms of whey and their uses, see “Fresh Cheeses.” But for a first
experiment I suggest either mixing sweet whey with enough sugar and
lemon juice to jazz it up a bit or seasoning sour whey with a vigorous
pinch each of salt and dried mint. Both versions are extremely refreshing
poured over ice cubes.
EXERCISE 6 The cream obtained in Exercise 2 has one more trick to play, if
you haven’t already put it on strawberries. For those who couldn’t get
unhomogenized milk and are working with “boughten” cream, the
general idea is the same. In both cases you are going to get two results—
very small in quantity, but thought-provoking for any real cook—from
one batch of cream.
I suggest doing or at least trying to do this by hand. It’s laborious, but
enables you to track critical stages of change more closely than any
other method. People who have had to settle for ultrapasteurized cream
may need to use a handheld immersion blender, but I recommend first
seeing how far you can get without it.
Have the previously skimmed cream or half a pint of commercial
heavy cream in a small glass bowl or measuring cup. Both cream and
container should be very cold when you begin, because the amount is
small enough to easily become overwarmed through simple friction.
Start rapidly agitating it with a small wire whisk. Large bubbles will
appear, then stop appearing. The whole consistency will gradually

become heavier. (This will take longer with ultrapasteurized cream.)
Keep plying the whisk until you recognize the beginnings of whipped
cream.
In technical terms, you have incorporated air into the mass while
partly knocking apart the remarkably constructed membrane that
surrounds each milkfat globule. Some dislodged components of the
membrane now form walls around the air bubbles. Whipped cream is not
your present goal, so go on beating the cream stiffer and stiffer until the
whisk will scarcely move through it. Keep watching the pace of change.
After a longer or shorter interval (once more depending on variables
beyond your control) you will see a bit of liquid seeping from the stiff,
heavy foam. Keep on whisking, and the whipped cream will resolve itself
into a grainy yellow-white substance and a thin, cloudy whitish liquid.
Scrape the wires of the whisk as clean as you can, and beat the half-
separated components with a small wooden spoon to separate them
further. Drain the liquid into a small cup; work the yellow stuff with the
spoon to force out any more residue, and drain that off, too.
You have now produced butter and true buttermilk by wrestling your
way through a phenomenon known as phase inversion. The cream at the
start of the proceedings still consisted of milkfat globules emulsified in
the underlying solution, which held the fat globules as a fabric may hold
tiny beads or sequins. The solution—not too far removed from the whey
you saw in the curd experiment—at that time formed what is known as a
continuous phase, with the milkfat globules sprinkled throughout as a
dispersed phase. (The suspended casein micelles that later came together
as curd were a whole different dispersed phase; you may now be starting
to see why food chemists never tire of pointing out that milk is an
incredibly complex substance.) Agitating the system forcefully enough
eventually causes the separate globules of fat to unite in a coherent
mass, squeezing out most of the original wheylike solution. Most of this
liquid will drain from the mass as you work it, but not quite all.
In a switch of roles, the previously dispersed milkfat has become the
continuous 
phase: 
butter. 
The 
tiny 
amount 
of 
the 
original
solution/suspension that hasn’t drained off now remains scattered
through the mass in minuscule droplets of true buttermilk as the
dispersed phase of a suddenly inverted emulsion.
Examine the buttermilk. Its main difference from the whey that you

obtained before is that it retains whatever casein was in the original
cream. (This is why it looks whiter.) Taste it. In spite of starting with a
gallon of milk, you unfortunately don’t have enough to do anything
more with, but at least you can recognize it as a pleasant cousin of both
sweet whey and milk. If you had cultured the cream before churning it,
the buttermilk—the liquid residue of the phase-inversion process—
would be more like soured milk. (What is sold in today’s America as
“buttermilk” is really a kind of soured milk similar to the version you
tasted in Exercise 3.) In dairying parlance, the culturing of cream for
butter often is called “ripening.”
If you ever make ripened butter by the directions in “Butter and True
Buttermilk” and sample the resulting buttermilk, probably you will
scratch your head in puzzlement at the complete unavailability of real
ripened buttermilk in any part of this country.
The small amount of cream used here yields only a little butter—but
oh, what celestial stuff! Put it in the refrigerator to chill briefly. (Butter
most emphatically is not among the foods that reveal their ultimate
perfections when left to bask in the warmth of an American kitchen.) Dig
out a bit on a spoon and eat it, trying to concentrate on every
microsecond of its delicate passage from solid to melted. Spread some on
a plain cracker or piece of sturdy bread and eat it. If there is enough left,
scrape it out onto a helping of piping hot cooked vegetables or noodles.
It is like the Platonic essence of the cream you tasted earlier, containing
tiny, elusive vestiges of the original fresh skim milk together with the
suave, luscious, ineffable newly churned butter. It is not as wonderful in
consistency as butter made by very good professionals who know the
ideal temperature for different batches of cream. But the flavor ought to
make any butter lover wonder how manufacturers have the nerve to call
some of their wares “butter.”
WHAT HAVE WE BEEN MISSING?
Now, what exactly have you proved by all these exertions? After all,
anyone can buy the results of the foregoing experiments (or nearly all of
them) as separate products. Most of them won’t taste as good, but
doesn’t the convenience of being able to get ready-made butter, skim
milk, and so forth compensate for some small loss of quality?

Well, yes and no. If you’ve eaten good fresh dairy products, you’ll
know that the loss of quality is not small. But there’s something else at
issue here. You started out with one single batch of milk that was as close
as practicable to the state in which it emerged from the cow. (True, it
was pasteurized, but that didn’t greatly impair its fitness for our
purposes.) The amount was not huge. But through an alchemy not
hopelessly beyond everyday American kitchens, it supplied you with not
only delicious whole milk but wonderful fresh cream, skim milk fit to
drink with pleasure rather than resignation, refreshing soured skim milk,
nutrient-rich curd and whey (whose versatility I’ve barely hinted at), a
bit of truly lovely butter, and a tantalizing soupçon of real buttermilk. It
could have yielded still other transformations—for instance, yogurt,
yogurt “cheese,” junket, pot cheese and several other fresh cheeses, or
clotted cream. Some of these can also be made from the so-called whole
milk that we’re all familiar with—it bears repeating that by no stretch of
the imagination is commercial U.S. whole milk really whole—or from
other standard offerings in the supermarket dairy case. But they are
better when they are, so to speak, mined from the original ore that is
true whole milk.
Why should all the white magic be left to the big dairy processors and
not the home cook? It’s as if the only way people could buy wheat were
as cake flour, prepackaged cake mix, biscuit mix, white sauce mix,
frozen bread dough, flavored instant bulgur, and so forth. How could
any cook ever learn to understand what wheat itself is all about? How
could any consumer ever fathom the sheer wastefulness of a corporate
machinery geared up to make one of the world’s most ancient foods
available only in the form of superspecialized products meant to fill
arbitrary little retail-sales slots, while excluding the incredibly versatile
basic material that could furnish better homemade versions of them all?
Since none of us lives in some ideal realm of pristine ingredients, most
of my recipes are based on easily obtainable versions of cows’ milk,
butter, and so forth. But I would like users of this book to keep thinking
of the tangible, tastable culinary magic that is ancient applied dairy
chemistry. Not so long ago, millions of ordinary people could readily
perform this magic in their own homes. We still should be able to
recapture it. If more cooks understand that they, too, can manipulate the
miraculous complexities of milk to splendid culinary purpose, their

voices may move the American dairy industry to bring us the basic
substance in less technologically manhandled and denatured form.


FRESH MILK AND CREAM
Introduction
Label Babel: Buying Milk and Cream
Cream, Whipped and Unwhipped: Some Thoughts
Clotted Cream
Mascarpone
New Englandish Clam Chowder
Cream of Tomato Soup
Apple-Onion Cream Soup
Vichyssoise
Milk Toast
“White Sauce” or Sauce Béchamel Maigre
Ají de Leche (Venezuelan Milk-Chile Infusion)
Spicy-Milky Peanut Sauce
Pan Gravy with Cream
Chhenna and Panir
Vegetarian Malai Kofta
Saag Panir or Palak Panir
“Corn Kees” (Gujarati Stovetop Corn Pudding)
Irish Champ (Mashed Potatoes with Milk and Greens)

Scalloped Potatoes
Creamed Spinach, Madame Saint-Ange (Épinards à la Crème)
Chinese “Fried Milk”
Rice Pudding
Chocolate Pudding
Panna Cotta and Relatives
Cremets d’Angers
Lemon Sponge Pudding
About Vanilla Ice Cream
Vanilla Ice Cream I: Custard-Based
Vanilla Ice Cream II: Philadelphia-Style
Crème Anglaise (Stirred Custard)
Cajeta Mexicana (Mexican Dulce de Leche)
Dulce de Leche with Canned Condensed Milk
Batidos (Latin American Milkshakes)
Thai-Style Iced Coffee
Hot Chocolate
Chocolate Malted
Hoppelpoppel: Eggnog with a Difference
Milk Punch

T o most American cooks, the idea of ordinary milk or cream as a
vehicle of vivid or concentrated flavors comes as a surprise. We’re more
used to encountering them in gentle contexts where no one expects them
to be anything but bland, and where that quality can be seen as a virtue.
Indeed, sometimes it is a virtue. But there’s a lot more to milk-based
cookery than mild-mannered innocuousness.
A simple first step for starting to think outside the box: Take about
two cups of milk—any kind from skim to whole will do—and a few
ounces of strong-flavored smoked fish like chub, whitefish, Finnan
haddie, or kippered herring. If none of these is easy to find, substitute a
chopped raw onion. Put the fish or onion in a small dish, pour the milk
over it, and let sit for four to twelve hours, well covered, in the
refrigerator or at room temperature.
Strain the milk through a fine mesh sieve and taste it. It will have
picked up either a distinct fishy-smoky edge or an equally definite
pungency from the onion. Even plain water will leach out salt from
foods, but water doesn’t have the property of becoming subtly and
complexly infused with other essences. One of milk’s signature qualities
is the tenacity with which its more volatile or reactive components latch
on to reactive counterparts in more strongly flavored foods. This really
should be considered a useful talent. Your fishy or oniony milk would
make a wonderful cooking liquid—say, as part of a roux-based milk
sauce or the foundation of a chowder.
As this mini-exercise suggests, American cooks usually have very
limited experience in exploiting some fascinating aptitudes of plain milk
and cream. Models of suavity and creaminess we have aplenty, and I’m
certainly not turning up my nose at those qualities or planning to forgo
demurely luscious incarnations of milk such as whipped cream. But it
must be said that the familiar English-or French-derived uses of
unsoured milk or cream seldom are notable for piquancy, intensity, or
multidimensional verve. Probably our most notable milk-based dishes
are sweetened puddings, which can be excellent but represent only a
tiny fraction of what we could be doing.
Opportunities for enlarged horizons have become more obvious as
America has become progressively enriched by the cooking traditions of

new immigrants, and will be still more so in years to come. Recent
arrivals from northern India have introduced millions of us to the firm
cheeselike delicacy—not a true cheese—that is called panir or chhenna
and eaten in marvelously spiced sauces. Clotted cream, which depends
on very slow heating to thicken the top cream layer of unhomogenized
milk into a dense, nutty-tasting crust, has long been known to people
who travel in the West Country of England, and is now taking up
permanent residence in this country thanks to Turkish immigrants
devoted to their own riper-flavored counterpart, kaymak. People from
the Asian and Latin American tropics are bringing preferences of their
own that usually include a love of sweetened, concentrated dairy
products such as canned condensed milk or the still intenser dulce de
leche—also condensed, but by heating in an open kettle rather than
under a vacuum. Latin Americans are also crazy about their own
versions of milkshakes (batidos) based on many different kinds of
tropical fruits.
In short, today’s uses of fresh milk and cream in starring roles add up
to more of an expanding galaxy than anyone could have predicted a few
years ago. There also seems to be more hope of persuading a few
independent-minded farmers and dairyists to improve the quality of
what we have to work with.
LABEL BABEL: BUYING MILK AND CREAM
The usual commercial choices in this department unfortunately have
more to do with arbitrary niche marketing than simple, unvarnished
milk or cream. Nonetheless, some of the questions I’m most frequently
asked are about the meanings of different designations on labels of fresh
milk and cream. Clearly there is a hunger for more information. Here, in
ascending order of richness, are the kinds usually available in retail
markets. A preliminary caveat: Very few fresh dairy products have been
assigned any formal FDA “standard of identity” in the Code of Federal
Regulations; it may be frustrating to learn that things bearing the same
name often vary in composition from one state (or indeed one
manufacturer) to another, but such is unfortunately the case.
• Fat-free or nonfat milk: Still informally called “skim milk” by some,

though the term has disappeared from most labels. It contains the
whey and casein of milk with none of the butterfat, and is fortified
with vitamins A and D. Proportionally it contains more lactose than
any other form of fresh milk. (The proportion of lactose decreases with
every increase in milkfat content, so that heavy cream contains only
minute amounts.) It also curdles more easily with the heat of cooking.
When it comes from well-managed herds of cows producing a lot of
protein in the milk, it can be quite satisfying. The fat-free milk from
large commercial dairies, however, is at best indifferent-tasting. There
are versions with added nonfat dry milk solids, which in my opinion
just plaster an extraneous cheesiness over dull-tasting milk. Note that
they have more lactose than plain skim milk.
All other gradations manufactured by large commercial processors
are based on fat-free milk homogenized with certain standardized
percentages of milkfat.
• Low-fat milk: Made by homogenizing fat-free milk and cream to 0.5
percent milkfat content. Fortified with vitamins A and D.
• Reduced-fat milk: Usually made by homogenizing fat-free milk and
cream to 1 percent, 1.5 percent, or 2 percent milkfat content. Fortified
with vitamins A and D.
• Whole milk: The designation “whole,” though legally sanctioned, is
misleading inasmuch as the milk has been separated by centrifuge and
recombined to an arbitrary standard. In most states, it means a
mixture of nonfat milk and cream homogenized to 3.25 percent
milkfat content. Fortified with vitamin D.
Cream, as processed for mass distribution, is also usually
homogenized, but not as universally as milk. The unhomogenized kind,
in all gradations, is much creamier-tasting. On standing for a while, it
will develop a layer of skim milk at the bottom, clearly visible when the
cream is sold in glass. This is not a defect but a sign that the cream
retains milkfat globules large enough to separate from the thinner milk,
not having been crushed to a fraction of their original size through
homogenization.
For more about cream, see the essay on whipped cream. Today’s usual
retail-store choices—nearly always ultrapasteurized—are:

• Half-and-half: A term with no uniform meaning. Long ago it hazily
designated a mixture of half milk, half cream by volume. Modern
manufacturing percentages (by weight) range from 10.5 to 18 percent
milkfat in different states, or even in the same state as processed by
different manufacturers. Note that percentages are only sometimes
stated on labels. Nearly all half-and-half is homogenized. I hope it isn’t
necessary to say that the product brazenly labeled “nonfat half-and-
half” in supermarkets is utterly unrelated to the real stuff and should
not be used in any of my recipes.
• Light cream: The least precise of all designations; ranges from 18 to 30
percent milkfat. Thus the terms “half-and-half” and “light cream” can
overlap in meaning. If milkfat percentages don’t appear on labels, trial
and error is the only way to tell how rich or light local brands of half-
and-half or light cream are. Often homogenized.
• Heavy cream: Must contain at least 36 percent milkfat; anything richer
is very rare. Often homogenized.
In most places today it is uncommon to find the intermediate
gradation “light whipping cream” for cream with a milkfat percentage
between 30 and 36. Where it exists, it is often homogenized.
As explained on this page, milk in many gradations is also sold with
value-added features such as lactose reduction. In consequence, dairy-
section shelves are filled with a huge number of products that, if you
believe the marketing moguls, represent a wonderful diversity of choice
inviting cooks to exploit innumerable subtle differences in the kitchen.
In my opinion, they add up to the kind of niche-marketing-gone-hogwild
spectacle that you see in the toothpaste aisle. I don’t suggest buying any
kinds from supermarkets except whole milk and heavy cream
(sometimes light cream or half-and-half). When unhomogenized, truly
whole milk, good skim milk, and nonultrapasteurized cream are
available to cooks everywhere without search missions to expensive
specialty food shops, then we can start congratulating ourselves on
choice. Meanwhile, cooking with milk and cream is best done with the
plainest, least-fiddled-with versions you can find.
There is one notable category of exceptions to this rule: canned milk, a
food intended for emergency situations that in some parts of the world
ended by taking on gastronomic dimensions of its own. Gail Borden,

who introduced a vacuum-evaporation method of condensing and
canning heavily sweetened milk shortly before the Civil War, reaped a
considerable wartime reward by supplying it on a large scale to the
Union Army. A different process perfected in the late 1880s yielded
unsweetened evaporated milk. The two new products had a lively
success over the next century throughout the industrialized West, where
they still command a following. But it was in the Latin American and
Asian tropics—regions with brief dairying histories or none—that they
would make their biggest mark.
Canned milk accompanied the colonial powers to much of southern
Asia, where no society except India had any taste for milk as it came
from cows or other milch animals. That it didn’t taste like other forms of
milk was all to its advantage. The condensed kind, which Borden had
intended to be diluted with up to five or, in a pinch, seven times its
volume in water before being drunk like usual milk, had (when
undiluted) a densely syrupy quality that people greatly enjoyed.
Evaporated milk was less sweet and heavy, but also had a sufficiently
strong caramelized note to drown out the disliked flavor of unprocessed
milk.
AN EARLY CANNED MILK ADVERTISEMENT
In Central and South America, European-style dairy farming has been
extensive enough to make fresh milk known wherever milch animals can
be raised. But the love of canned milk seems to run deeper. Both there
and in Asia, condensed and evaporated milk are primarily used not as
major elements of the diet but as enrichers of sweetened beverages—for

instance, Thai-style iced coffee and tea, or the Latin American
equivalents of eggnog. In Latin America, they are also preferred for flans
and used in desserts such as the celebrated “three milks,” or tres leches, a
cake made with condensed milk, evaporated milk, and cream. It is
important to realize that in these cases canned milk is not a poor relation
of “real” milk but an ingredient prized for its own qualities.
Finally, there are two other forms in which unsoured milk reaches a
large clientele: the long-keeping fluid version and the powdered kind.
LONG-KEEPING MILK IN ASEPTIC PACKAGING has been advertised as a great
convenience because it needs no refrigeration until opened, though
afterward it is as perishable as any other kind. One brand, Parmalat,
now seems to have become a permanent fixture in U.S. supermarkets.
When I’ve tried it, the flavor has seemed at least as fresh as that of
conventionally packaged milk at the end of the usual journeys to
supermarket and home refrigerator. I don’t buy it myself, but this is one
case where aseptic technology seems to produce something no worse
than the prevailing conventional technology—though that isn’t saying
much. Every dish in this chapter (except for those using canned milk)
will taste better if made with very fresh unhomogenized milk or cream.
But many of them can be reasonably managed with mass-produced
whole milk, including the long-keeping versions. (I don’t recommend
any of the reduced-fat gradations.)
DRIED OR POWDERED MILK has been around longer than the aseptic-packaged
fluid version, and strikes me as the least desirable way you can buy
unsoured milk. But it is important enough to many people to deserve
some attention. Its history is bound up with the chronic surpluses
confronting milk producers. Surpluses of something notoriously
perishable are harder to deal with than surpluses of, let’s say, salt.
From the late nineteenth century on, manufacturers were looking into
the possibility of converting unsoured milk into a form still more durable
than canned milk, and cheaper to handle and package in large volumes.
Early versions had a sweetish, cooked flavor, slightly mitigated as the
technology improved. The Great Depression and World War II brought

about large-scale diversion of milk surpluses, in dried form, to domestic
food-assistance programs and international relief agencies. These still are
financial mainstays of the industry. Huge amounts also find their way
into commercial confectionery, baked goods, canned soups, frozen foods,
and many more uses. As pointed out earlier, nowadays dried milk solids
are often used to “enrich” commercial skim milk, though I find no real
richness in the result. But for decades, a stubborn drawback discouraged
retail sales of dried milk: the difficulty of dissolving the powder quickly
and smoothly in cold water. The problem was solved in the mid-1950s
by a new technique of getting the powdered grains to aggregate in
minute crystals. Millions of consumers took to instant dried milk as a
thrifty alternative to fresh milk. For a while it was the darling of
nutrition-minded recipe developers, who encouraged home cooks to put
supposedly vitalizing doses of dried milk into sauces, puddings, and
breads.
Another technical problem was more intractable: the tendency of
milkfat to develop spoiled or harsh flavors in the drying process. Dairy
processors did find solutions, but they were expensive enough to make
mass-produced whole dried milk economically infeasible. This is why
virtually all commercial brands are nonfat, though there is some
distribution of whole dried milk in health-food stores.
As the shelf life of fluid milk in cartons has been extended, dried milk
reconstituted at home has lost some of its appeal for consumers. Its great
selling points are cheapness, durability, and—for people in remote
locales with little access to other dairy products—convenience. In my
view dried milk is the least appetizing form of either skim or whole milk.
I don’t cook with it myself, and would not recommend using it in any of
my recipes. The only form of dried milk I ever use is malted-milk
powder, which isn’t meant to produce an imitation of fresh milk, and
whose caramelized flavors are part of its appeal. (See Chocolate Malted.)


I
CREAM, WHIPPED AND UNWHIPPED: SOME
THOUGHTS
t isn’t exactly news that most people today cannot find plain
pasteurized (much less raw) cream. In fact, some users of this
book probably have never encountered any that wasn’t
ultrapasteurized. To them, anything else may not taste quite
normal. But if you can possibly get hold of some basic pasteurized
heavy cream (preferably unhomogenized) to compare with the
more usual kind, you’ll be better able to understand why it’s the
ultrapasteurized version that’s really not normal.
The main difference is that the heat of ultrapasteurization
(carried out in a rapid, high-pressure continuous feed at 280°F)
affects particular kinds of whey proteins called agglutinins that
otherwise would bond with the membranes of milkfat globules in
well-chilled milk or cream and encourage separate droplets of fat
to cluster closely together. Through this clustering action the
milkfat “creams,” or rises to the top as a visible cream layer.
When skimmed or removed by centrifuge, this risen, or
agglutinated, cream has a satisfyingly slow-flowing quality that
we think of as “heavy,” though as regards specific gravity it’s
really less heavy than the rest of the milk. Heat tends to damage
the agglutinins; the effect is negligible with old-fashioned, low-
temperature batch-pasteurization methods but quite destructive at
the higher temperature required for ultrapasteurization. As a
result, ultrapasteurized cream is thinner than cream pasteurized
by slower methods.
If you’ve been able to line up a pasteurized and an
ultrapasteurized sample of heavy cream and taste both, you may
think I’ve got it dead wrong, because the ultrapasteurized cream

will seem quite viscous and heavy. You will find the reason in the
ingredients list printed on both cartons. Plain pasteurized cream
will list nothing but “cream” (or perhaps “milk”). The
ultrapasteurized label is more romantic reading, with enticements
like “carrageenan” or “guar gum,” “polysorbate 80,” and “mono-
and diglycerides.” It is purely because of such fixes to the thinness
problem that the contents seem heavier than nonultrapasteurized
cream. If you put both on berries or other acid fruit, the
ultrapasteurized sample will react by turning quite a bit thicker—
also thanks to the same extraneous agents. And the finish of the
plain pasteurized cream will be cleaner and fresher, without the
cooked or overcooked note of the other.
The proof of the pudding is in the whipping. Since
ultrapasteurized cream has been in existence, old-school cooks
have been loudly complaining about how difficult that process
has become. You will see why if you put two equal-sized samples
(anything from ½ to 1 cup) of both kinds into separate bowls,
chill them well in the refrigerator, and read on a bit.
Raw or plain pasteurized cream not only creams faster than its
ultrapasteurized lookalike but also moves more easily to another
useful step, a kind of bubble formation that depends on intact
agglutinins helping clusters of milkfat globules come together. For
best results the cream (preferably unhomogenized, for reasons to
be explained) should contain at least 35 percent milkfat. If it is
agitated through whipping with a set of wires or blades, air is
introduced into the cream mass. (You have already seen the
principle at work if you tried the brief “White Magic” Exercise 6.)
The friction and commotion of whipping causes the complex,
delicate milkfat-globule membranes to shed slippery bits of their
own inner and outer walls. The agglutinins that they previously
took up from the whey now help dislodged membrane-wall
remnants to cooperatively join and to create new, differently
constituted walls of film around the air pockets. At the same time,
part of the fat starts to be released from some formerly
unbreached globules.
With more agitation, eventually the still-chilled cream enters a

delicate intermediate state: lightened and expanded to about
twice its original volume from the incorporation of air in a film-
supported network of bubbles, with the remaining milkfat starting
to be jammed closer between bubbles but not yet cohering in a
buttery mass. This is what we call “whipped cream.”
Check 
the 
time 
on 
the 
clock. 
Take 
the 
bowl 
of
nonultrapasteurized cream and start whipping with any preferred
beating tool. An immersion blender, wire whisk, rotary eggbeater,
or hand mixer will do. So will a food processor, but it will be
harder to follow the different stages by eye. Cream, container, and
beating device should be very cold for the quickest and most
thorough results—meaning the most efficient action of agglutinins
on milkfat-globule membranes. The agglutinins bond most easily
with membrane surfaces, thus encouraging the clustering of
globules, 
at 
temperatures 
around 
40°F. 
Their 
work 
is
progressively impeded as the cream warms to anything like usual
room temperatures.
As you beat and the cream moves from the globule-clustering
stage to the partial rupture of globule membranes, you will see it
looking loose and gloppy, a little heavier, noticeably expanded
and thicker, and finally transformed into a light blossomy cloud.
Do not let it turn to butter. People have preferences for more softly
or stiffly whipped cream; I like it about as stiff as it can get but
usually find myself in the minority on that question.
When it’s whipped to your satisfaction, look at the clock to see
how long the whole process took. This will be highly variable,
depending on several factors beyond your control. Put the lovely
stuff back into the refrigerator and try to reproduce the
experiment as exactly as possible with the ultrapasteurized heavy
cream.
The cream will go through the same stages on the road to
becoming whipped cream, but somewhat more slowly and (if
you’re using a whisk or rotary eggbeater) more effortfully. The
reason is that you have less in the way of membrane walls and
agglutinins to start the clustering process and the buildup of film.
The difference in time will be most marked if your

nonultrapasteurized sample was also unhomogenized; shattering
milkfat globules to smithereens by forcing them through the
minute nozzle openings of a homogenizer leaves crushed
remnants too small to cluster easily and cream that takes longer
to whip.
The more easily cream whips, the better-tasting the result. (The
best comes from Jersey cows, whose milkfat occurs in large
globules that give the cream a leg up on the clustering process.)
Still, even ultrapasteurized and homogenized cream make
infinitely better whipped cream than any of the pressurized
prewhipped commercial substitutes. Even when they contain real
cream, they have a vapid wishy-washy consistency quite unlike
the full-bodied quality of freshly whipped cream. It is true that
home-whipped cream on standing displays a tendency to start
leaking a bit of liquid, but this is not a serious drawback and can
be partly offset if you beat in a small amount of sugar (a teaspoon
to a cup of cream) partway through whipping and plan to very
lightly rewhip it just before serving.
One cup of heavy cream will yield about 2 cups of whipped
cream. There is no more agreeable dessert topping or pastry
filling, whether the cream is plain or flavored with more sugar (2
to 3 tablespoons to each starting cup of cream), a jolt of any
preferred spirit or liqueur, or a dash of vanilla or almond extract.
HISTORICAL UPS AND DOWNS
Given everything that I’ve said about the inferiority of
ultrapasteurized cream, how did it come to crowd out old-
fashioned pasteurized cream so decisively in the last thirty or
forty years? The short answer is lack of public demand for cream,
period. Cream has had its heydays and lean times in the history of
Western cooking, and we seem to be well into one of the latter.
There are plenty of reasons that fresh cream hasn’t always been
a prominent feature of every dairying region. It can exist, in
theory, in any location with milch animals whose milk has large-
enough fat globules to form a cream layer on standing. The best

are cows and water buffaloes. But in hot climates the creaming
phenomenon is somewhat diminished and the cream sours
quickly. Thus the northerly milking regions of Europe were about
the only areas where unsoured cream could have figured in
cooking. Northeastern peoples, however, firmly gravitated toward
sour cream. This was never a preference of the far northwestern
reaches—but neither was fresh cream, for a long time. We have
no evidence that most English or northern French cooks held any
form of cream in high regard until close to the dawn of
specialized modern dairying. It was after the late seventeenth
century that cream-based dishes became common in English and
French cookbooks, and that particular districts became known for
the excellence of their cream as well as butter.
The culinary prestige of cream increased swiftly with advances
in cooling milk. Creaming, or the formation of a well-defined
cream layer, was found to take place faster and more thoroughly
in a dairy with a running cold spring than in a warm room. With
the developing nineteenth-century ice trade, followed late in the
century by mechanical refrigeration, people discovered that very
deeply chilled milk creamed still better. Not long after this,
centrifugal separators took over the job, and cream so rich that it
had to be thinned with milk before whipping in order not to turn
to butter reached urban consumers’ iceboxes as a matter of
course.
This development coincided with the advent of improved
beating devices. Before the nineteenth century nothing better than
bundles of straw or twigs existed for beating cream or egg whites.
You had to whip cream a little at a time, skimming off the
whipped froth from the top and placing it in a sieve to drain off
any still-retained liquid while you went on with the rest of the
batch. Whisks of thin wooden or metal rods seem to have been
available by midcentury, but were not much more efficient. Over
the next fifty years these were superseded by sturdy balloon
whisks and rotary eggbeaters, just as ice cooling, centrifuging,
and the rise of dairy-cattle breeds such as Jerseys and Guernseys
(noted for the quality of their cream) put other pieces of the

puzzle in place. By the turn of the twentieth century any cook
could produce beautifully and completely whipped cream in a
matter of minutes, whereas Isabella Beeton in her renowned 1861
manual had estimated that a pint of cream ought to take an hour.
A golden age of cream-enriched cooking was now at hand in
countries with modern dairy technology. In the United States,
whipped cream became the embellishment or filling of choice for
any really dazzling dessert. In France and all places touched by
French culinary influence, rich fresh cream (whipped or
unwhipped) became the magic ingredient in mousses, quenelles,
custards, Bavarian creams, and sauces that would symbolize
grand cuisine for many from the belle époque to the 1970s.
Influential cooks and writers of the period leading up to the so-
called gourmet revolution habitually placed cream in a starring
role. As an aspiring young cook, I thought it was impossible for
anything to be too creamy. And I was far from alone in that
opinion, which now looks as quaint as yesteryear’s fashionable
kitchen color schemes.
One reason for cream’s fall from grace was, of course, the
general move away from full-fat dairy products that began several
generations ago. Recently, the rationale of this trend has been
called into question. But cream has been one of its economic
casualties. For dairy processors, most of the cream obtained when
milk is centrifuged at the plant has become a chronic
embarrassment. Some profit can be salvaged from the bulky,
inconveniently perishable substance by putting it to such
manufacturing purposes as butter and ice cream—or giving it a
longer shelf life through ultrapasteurization. For the industry as a
whole, ultrapasteurized cream is the only form that makes
economic sense.
It’s a sad development, because when real creaminess is what
you want, there is nothing like fresh cream. Still, even cream-
loving cooks nowadays understand that creaminess can all too
easily become a kind of blanket spread over individual textures,
softening other flavors to the point of mawkishness. (Especially
ultrapasteurized cream, with its faint sludginess and lack of clean

finish.) There are occasions when too much cream is just enough,
but also many when less is more.
Enough of a market for decent-tasting cream remains to keep a
few small dairies supplying specialty stores here and there,
especially in large cities. I’d hazard a guess that demand will
increase rather than decrease, given the resurgence in small-scale
farm dairies and the many doubts now being cast on the superior
healthfulness of low-fat dairy products.

M
RECIPES
CLOTTED CREAM
any people fall in love with the Devonshire or Cornish
versions of this celestial substance without realizing that a similar
idea has occurred to people elsewhere, from Serbia (kajmak) and
Turkey (kaymak) to India (malai). The necessary raw material is a
kind of milk that on standing acquires a thick, well-defined top
layer of cream. Water buffaloes’ and cows’ milk are the best for
this. Goats’ milk, with its very small fat globules, will not develop
the requisite degree of separation. Sheep’s milk also has fairly
small fat globules, but is sufficiently more concentrated than
goats’ milk to make good clotted cream anyhow. In parts of the
Diverse Sources Belt, milk from two or more species is sometimes
combined.
What’s crucial in all cases is an unhomogenized distribution,
with cream on top and the thinner milk on the bottom. For
English clotted cream the unhomogenized milk is put in a wide,
shallow pan and subjected to a very slow, gentle heating that
causes the cream to form a thick, semisolid blanket. Heating
cream by itself without a bottom layer of milk doesn’t work the
same way. Though most of the milk will eventually be removed at
the skimming stage, it somehow communicates better flavor to
the cream. Besides, the thinner milk on the bottom acts as a heat
insulator and modulator, letting the top gradually reach

temperatures that will half-coagulate it without directly exposing
it to the stronger heat coming from the floor of the pan.
Heat alone won’t produce the desired result. There also has to
be some evaporation of water from the surface, promoted by the
width of the pan and the further step of letting the milk stand at
least overnight before starting to warm it. The incomparable
flavor doesn’t depend on bacterial action, though probably a
small amount of ripening takes place during the initial standing
phase. (Ignore recipes that tell you to put sour cream in with the
milk.) The main factor is cooking without boiling, which transforms
the taste of simple fresh cream into something wonderfully warm
and nutty.
English-style clotted cream is quite simple to make at home if
you can get hold of unhomogenized milk and cream. It is not true
(though often asserted) that the real thing depends on
unpasteurized milk. Unhomogenized milk is the key, since its
comparatively large milkfat globules easily come together in a
good substantial body. The few people who can get milk from
Jersey or Guernsey cows are the luckiest, because the milkfat
globules are larger than in the milk of other breeds and the cream
almost begs to form a rich clot. (Devotees of the stuff can be
spotted by the fact that they find the word “clot” poetic.)
In the English West Country, milk alone was traditionally used
to make clotted cream, but you must remember that it was milk
from very backward cows that knew no better than to give small
amounts of very rich milk. The best plan today (for those lacking
their own Jersey cow) is a combination of unhomogenized milk
and cream, in the ratio of 1 cup cream to 1 quart milk. You can
make a stab at clotted cream with homogenized whole milk and
heavy cream, but the separation will be less complete and the
yield more meager.
I don’t recommend making clotted cream with less than about 1
to 1½ quarts of milk (that is, milk-cream mixture), because under
the best of circumstances you won’t get much more than a cup of
clotted cream per quart. (I find a two-quart batch best.) You will
need a wide, shallow nonreactive skillet or sauté pan that will
hold the milk without spilling when moved from one spot to

another. If you have two suitable pans you can distribute the milk
between them. But note that you’ll have to clear space in the
refrigerator for the postcooking phase, which may complicate the
planning with two pans. An instant-reading thermometer is a
help.
YIELD: About 1 cup clotted cream, 4 cups leftover milk for each
starting quart of milk and cup of cream (Results will vary
depending on the quality of the milk and how long it heats.)
1 or 2 quarts unhomogenized milk
1 or 2 cups nonultrapasteurized heavy cream, preferably
unhomogenized
Combine the milk and cream in a shallow nonreactive pan (see above),
preferably one with a heavy bottom. Let it stand at least 12 hours,
loosely covered, in a cool room. Lacking a fairly cool room, you can use
the refrigerator, but the milk won’t clot as firmly; increase the standing
time to 16 to 24 hours or until the cream layer is well defined.
Set a Flame Tamer or other heat-diffusing device on a stove burner,
and very carefully set the pan of milk on it over the lowest possible heat.
(If put directly on a burner the milk may boil, which ruins the gradual
coagulation process.)
Watch the pan closely through the various heating stages. The slower
the process the better. First you will see tiny beads of fat appearing
around the rim of the pan. Then small blistery stipplings will form just
under the surface, which will begin to look filmy. Eventually the surface
will acquire a yellow cast and begin to wrinkle, then coalesce into a
more deeply and completely wrinkled crust. The milk will take on a
faintly cheesy smell. The temperature, meanwhile, must reach something
between 140° and 180°F, and has to remain in that range long enough to
encourage the maximum amount of clotting. If you snatch the pan from
the stove as soon as you see wrinkles, you will end up with less cream.
Try to keep it within the right zone for about 4 hours. (I’m skeptical of
people who say they can make clotted cream in half an hour.)
Very, very carefully remove the pan from the heat, and let cool to
room temperature before sliding it into the refrigerator and leaving it for

at least 8 hours, preferably overnight; the clot will not firm up until it is
deeply chilled. With a slotted spoon, spatula, or anything else that will
work, gently lift the thick yellow crust into a small bowl, letting the
residual milk drain back into the pan.
Part of the clotted cream will be firm, part slightly fluid. You can
gently stir it together to even out the contrast, but I like it as is. It will
keep in the refrigerator, tightly covered, for 5 to 7 days. Proudly serve it
on biscuits, scones, toast, bread, or anything else that takes your fancy.
It is a glorious partner to fresh fruit, and perhaps even better with
compotes or stewed dried fruit.
Going through a two-or three-day process for far less cream than milk
may sound like a spendthrift idea, but the leftover milk is actually lovely
for such purposes as scalloped potatoes and chowders. It also makes
absolutely wonderful rice pudding.

M
MASCARPONE
ascarpone originated close to the Lombard city of Lodi.
Technically it is one of the noncheese cheeses, like Indian panir,
made by simple acidification instead of lactic-acid fermentation or
enzymatic action. The cheap and handy original acidulant was
tartaric acid from the tartar that crystallizes out of wine onto
barrel walls during the aging process. Cream of tartar, a
potassium salt of tartaric acid that is available today in most
supermarkets, ought to be just as good, but I have never had
success using it. I get good results with the other common
acidulant for mascarpone—citric acid, the “sour salt” that once
flavored some versions of borshch. Look for it in health-food
stores or markets catering to a Jewish clientele, and also in some
Indian and Turkish groceries. Its advantage over such agents as
vinegar or lemon juice is that a very small amount will both
curdle the cream and add a suggestion of pleasant, neutral
tartness free of other distracting notes. The flavor you want is
lightly cooked (not boiled) cream with a delicate hint of acid.
This beautiful quasi-cheese would be a cinch to make if one
could find the right sort of cream—which isn’t a cinch. Plain
heavy cream when chilled yields a result I don’t care for, clayey
rather than silky. Most half-and-half won’t set up. The best choice
would be cream with about 20 to 25 percent milkfat,
nonultrapasteurized and if possible unhomogenized. Some old-
fashioned “light cream” fits the bill. Otherwise, use a combination
of heavy cream and half-and-half matching the consistency of
light cream. I use 2 cups each of half-and-half and heavy cream.
(But note that the name “half-and-half” covers products of varied
milkfat percentages in different areas; depending on where you
live, you may have to experiment with other proportions.)
The uses of mascarpone, beyond the familiar tiramisù, are
legion. I love it with dried or fresh fruit, but even more in savory
contexts. Try eating it on bread with salt. Or put a dab each of
mascarpone and Gorgonzola on bread or crackers for an

improvement on the commercial version called torta. In The World
of Cheese, the late Evan Jones described mascarpone in the Trieste
region being given something like the Liptauer cheese treatment.
This sounds like a wonderful avenue to explore.
YIELD: About 2½ to 3 cups mascarpone, 1 to ½ cups whey
(Proportions will vary with the milkfat content of the cream.)
1 quart nonultrapasteurized cream, either all light cream or equal
amounts of half-and-half and heavy cream
½ teaspoon citric acid (see above)
You will need a double boiler or an equivalent arrangement such as a
stainless-steel bowl fitted over a saucepan of water. Start the water
warming over medium-low heat. Pour the cream into the top part or
bowl and let it slowly heat to about 185°F, checking the temperature at
intervals on an instant-read thermometer.
When the temperature reaches 185°F, turn off the heat. Stir in the
citric acid and let stand until you see the cream turning decidedly
thicker. If this doesn’t happen, very gently stir in another pinch of citric
acid.
Have ready a colander lined with tight-woven cheesecloth or a large
cotton handkerchief, set over a large bowl. Carefully pour the contents
of the top vessel into the colander, and let drain until the whey is barely
dripping. Refrigerate the colander arrangement for 8 to 12 hours—
having, I hope, first removed anything smelly from the refrigerator.
Turn the mascarpone out into a mixing bowl and beat it smooth with a
wooden spoon before packing it into a clean container. It will keep,
tightly covered, for 4 to 5 days in the refrigerator.


A
NEW ENGLANDISH CLAM CHOWDER
ny claim to present an “authentic” New England clam
chowder is a sure way to start a fight about a dish that has had
some serious career changes over the years. Today we all
associate it with a soul-satisfying hot milk–based soup enriched
with salt pork and full of clams and potatoes. But American
chowder in general—the word “chowder” probably comes from a
Norman-Breton fish soup called chaudrée and the idea seems to go
back to eighteenth-century English, French, and North American
coast dwellers—seems not to have started off as either a milk-
based soup or a soup at all.
Early versions suggest a one-pot meal made by arranging layers
of sliced salt pork, cut-up fish, and ship’s biscuits (for thickening)
in a pot with some seasoning like onion, adding enough water to
cover the ingredients, and simmering the whole thing for an hour
until the elements melded into a hearty dish. In the course of the
nineteenth century two innovations appeared: the addition of
potatoes to the layered ingredients and, starting around the
middle of the century, the use of milk to replace all or part of the
water—eventually, enough milk to convert the dish into a soup.
I would guess that milk came into the picture in this dish—as it
did in much of our cooking—along with the nineteenth-century
rise of a specialized dairy industry in the northeastern United
States. In any event, the layering idea gradually disappeared
along with the ship’s biscuit; New Englanders came to understand
“chowder” as a soup made of milk; and the hand-cranked meat
grinders that appeared in many households after about 1880 were
called into play to grind up the salt pork, onions, and clams
before they went into the pot. Awful things happened a few
generations after that, eventually leading to the sort of restaurant
incarnation that may be almost any hot soup with a clam or two,
enough milk to make it white, and enough flour and potatoes to
make it nearly solid enough to walk on.
My favorite clam chowder is simply the kind that was

considered old-fashioned in my youth. It should have a certain
rockbound plainness; I like it more milky than creamy, and
innocent of any seasonings fancier than maybe a bay leaf or some
thyme. I thicken it with nothing but the potatoes. If you feel
strongly about having it thicker, make up 2 to 3 teaspoons of
beurre manié (see this page), whisk it into the hot milk, and cook
for a couple of minutes until it thickens.
YIELD: About 6 servings
30 large hardshell clams (quahogs or chowder clams)
2 ounces salt pork, cut into matchstick-sized pieces
1 large onion, cut into medium-sized dice
2 large potatoes (I prefer a mealy type), peeled and cut into medium-
large dice
1 cup whole milk
1 cup cream, either all half-and-half or part half-and-half and part
heavy cream
Freshly ground pepper to taste
Minced parsley for garnish
Shuck the clams or have them shucked by the fishmonger; save the
liquor. Rinse away any grit, coarsely chop the clams, and strain the
liquor through a cheesecloth-lined strainer.
Put the salt pork in a small soup kettle or large, deep saucepan over
medium heat to render out the fat. Cook for 8 to 10 minutes, stirring
occasionally, until browned and crisp but not burnt. Scoop the fried bits
out of the hot fat and drain on paper towels.
Add the onion to the fat and sauté it over medium heat, stirring
occasionally, until translucent. Add the diced potatoes and the strained
liquor from the clams. Bring to a boil and cook over medium heat until
the potatoes are almost soft enough to disintegrate, about 15 minutes.
Mash the potatoes slightly with a wooden spoon (most should still be
intact; some will half-dissolve into the cooking liquid).
Heat the milk and cream to a boil and simmer a couple of minutes
over very low heat. Add the chopped clams, let the milk return to a boil,
and pour it over the potatoes in the soup pot. Taste the chowder for

seasoning and add a few grindings of pepper (it probably won’t need
salt). Serve at once, garnished with minced parsley and the reserved salt-
pork bits.

R
CREAM OF TOMATO SOUP
eal cream of tomato soup isn’t worth making with anything
but dead-ripe, sweet, juicy local tomatoes in season. Even good
canned tomatoes will lack the right summery sprightliness. If a
batch of tomatoes is a little wan-flavored, I sometimes resort to a
small dollop or two of homemade tomato paste or a combination
of regular and sun-dried tomato paste.
Cream may curdle, though not as badly as milk, when heated
with an acid solution such as tomato broth unless the mixture is
stabilized with some kind of starch. A small amount of beurre
manié does the trick here.
YIELD: About 7 cups
3 tablespoons unsalted butter
6 to 7 shallots, coarsely chopped
7 to 8 very ripe, juicy medium-sized tomatoes (about 3⅔ pounds),
well rinsed
1 cup heavy cream
1 cup (or to taste) well-flavored chicken, beef, veal, or vegetable
stock
2 to 3 teaspoons beurre manié (this page)
1 teaspoon salt, or to taste
1 to 1½ tablespoons tomato paste (optional, see above)
A pinch of sugar (optional)
Minced scallions, chives, or parsley for garnish
Melt the butter in a medium-sized saucepan over medium heat; when it
foams and sizzles, add the shallots and sauté until translucent and
tender. Cut the tomatoes into wedges, add to the pan, and simmer,
covered, until they are swimming in their own juice, 20 to 25 minutes.
While the tomatoes are cooking, bring the cream to a boil in a small
saucepan and let it reduce over low heat to about ½ cup. Heat the stock
in another saucepan.
Pour the cooked tomatoes, with their juice, into a heatproof bowl,

then work them through a food mill into the pot they cooked in. Discard
the skins and seeds. Heat the purée just to a boil and add the hot stock.
Whisk the beurre manié into the reduced cream, then whisk into the
soup along with the salt; cook just until slightly thickened. Taste for
seasoning. If you think it needs a little enrichment or some softening of
the acid, add a dollop of tomato paste or, as a last resort, a pinch of
sugar. Serve hot, garnishing each serving with a little minced scallion,
chives, or parsley.

C
APPLE-ONION CREAM SOUP
ream soups are best when they have something more than
creaminess going for them. A good cold-weather example is this
robust sweet-tart combination of apples—use a good local fall
variety in season—and onions with some crisp bacon for
counterpoint. It’s best when made with a strong, full-flavored beef
broth.
YIELD: 8 to 9 cups
4 to 6 thick slices of bacon, coarsely diced
3 to 4 tart, juicy apples, pared, quartered, cored, and coarsely diced
4 tablespoons butter
4 large onions, coarsely diced
3 cups good beef broth, or as needed
6 to 8 whole allspice berries, lightly bruised
1 cup heavy cream
1 teaspoon salt, or to taste
Freshly ground black pepper
A dash of lemon juice (optional)
1 teaspoon caraway seeds, lightly bruised (optional)
Cook the bacon slowly in a heavy skillet to render out all the fat. When
it is crisp, scoop it out of the fat and drain on paper towels. Sauté the
diced apples over medium heat in the same skillet, stirring occasionally,
until cooked through. Scoop out a few spoonfuls of the apples for
garnish and set aside.
Melt the butter in a large heavy saucepan. When it foams and sizzles,
add the chopped onions and sauté very patiently over low heat, stirring
frequently, for 15 to 20 minutes, until the onions are well softened and
starting to brown. Scoop out a few spoonfuls for garnish and set aside
with the reserved apples. Add the rest of the apples to the onions, pour
in the broth, add the allspice, and simmer until everything is nearly
dissolved, 10 to 15 minutes.
Fish out and discard the allspice. Purée the soup in batches in a

blender or food processor, making sure to leave the texture slightly
coarse. Return the soup to the pot, heat to a boil, and stir in the cream.
Let it come to a boil again, add the salt and a grinding of pepper, and
taste for seasoning; if it seems too bland, squeeze in a little lemon juice.
If it is too thick for your taste, thin it with some hot water. Serve
garnished with the reserved bacon, apple, and onion. I like a scattering
of caraway seed as well.

C
VICHYSSOISE
hilled cream soups do not go back very far in the annals of
either French or American gastronomy. Before modern
refrigeration, the whole business of chilling food at any season
but winter was expensive, difficult, and almost wholly reserved
for fancy aspics and ice creams. Crème vichyssoise glacée, the best-
known chilled cream soup of the twentieth century, saw the light
of day in or around 1917 as a summer cooler, the international
hybrid offspring of a simple French leek-and-potato soup and a
developing American enthusiasm for new dishes based on
refrigeration technology. The soup’s inventor was Louis Diat, chef
at the Ritz-Carlton Hotel in New York, who designed his
brainchild for the summer menu of the hotel’s rooftop-garden
restaurant and named it for the city of Vichy, close to his
Bourbonnais home.
The idea struck a chord with American cooks and diners.
Recipes for Diat-inspired vichyssoise had been published even
before he officially set down his version in the 1941 Cooking à la
Ritz. The new soup became the prototype of innumerable chilled
puréed concoctions that people kept “discovering” over at least
the next thirty years; Gourmet magazine’s mailbox was regularly
filled with readers’ offers to share family improvisations on the
theme (puréed cooked something, mixed with a lot of cream and
served ice cold) using any vegetable from asparagus to zucchini.
Electric blenders made it possible to invent more elaborate
mixtures—there is no telling how many people independently
stumbled on “Fishyssoise”—at the push of a button.
But strange to say, or perhaps not so strange, the taste for these
voluptuous imaginings never spread far beyond the United States.
Vichyssoise and the rest remained far outside mainstream French
preferences. The cautious embrace of vichyssoise in Elizabeth
David’s French Provincial Cooking seems to depend on toning down
the general milk-and-cream content of the original—and no one
could possibly question David’s credentials as a cream lover. It

strikes me as significant that chilled soups freighted with heavy
cream became synonymous with American gourmet cooking at
just the time that honest-tasting unhomogenized whole milk with
its intrinsically creamy quality was disappearing from the
American table. Part of what filled the vacuum was cream, with
sometimes good but often regrettable results.
By my lights, the fall from grace that cold cream soups
underwent a few decades back was not wholly unmerited. But
vichyssoise as made by Diat was certainly the best of them, a
genuinely pleasant soup that doesn’t deserve the “updates” or
“makeovers” or “tweakings” commonly visited on it in recent
years. A few points have to be kept in mind if it is to taste like
anything:
1. Being thick and heavy by nature, it doesn’t need to be drowned in
superrich cream. Diat calls for much more stock or water, milk
(meaning unhomogenized whole milk), and “medium cream” (I
use light cream or rich half-and-half) than heavy cream.
2. The potatoes should have plenty of mealiness and flavor.
3. Because it is served very cold, it needs a lot of salt.
I don’t see how Diat’s straightforward cold soup can be
improved on, unless by a dash of acid such as lemon juice or good
wine vinegar. My puréeing device of choice is a hand-turned food
mill, though the original uses just a strainer. This amount, which
according to Diat ought to serve eight, seems more suitable for
ten or twelve, since it makes about 3 quarts. The recipe can easily
be halved.
4 leeks, white part only, sliced thin
1 medium onion, sliced thin
2 ounces unsalted butter
5 medium potatoes, peeled and sliced thin
1 quart water or chicken broth
1 tablespoon salt
2 cups milk
2 cups light cream or half-and-half

1 cup heavy cream
Melt the butter in a medium saucepan, add the leeks and onion, and
sauté gently until scarcely browned. Add the potatoes, water or stock,
and salt, and cook over medium-low heat until the potatoes are tender,
about 35 to 40 minutes. Put the mixture through a food mill set over a
bowl. Return to the pan and stir in the milk and light cream. Season to
taste and bring to a boil before letting cool to room temperature. Stir in
the heavy cream and chill thoroughly. Serve very cold, garnished if you
like with minced chives.

T
MILK TOAST
his dish is one of our last remaining links with “soup” in its
oldest sense. The word originally meant bread, often toasted stale
pieces or the hard crust of a loaf, put to frugal use by being
soaked (“sopped”) in something wet—water, broth, ale, wine, or
milk. The last of these was certainly the most nutritious
alternative in many parts of Europe where during bad times some
people were lucky to see meat a few times a year. Somehow the
“soup” idea was first transferred to the soaking liquid and then
reattached to a whole class of liquid dishes minus the sopped
bread. Today there are only a few soups that we routinely
associate with bread crusts or croutons. And few people would be
likely to think of the spoonable breakfast or supper dish called
“milk toast”—once routinely fed to nursery-age children and
invalids—as having the slightest connection with soup.
Even divorced from its old associations with thrifty medieval
foodways, milk toast has its charms. It can be a lesson in the
happy affinity of bread and milk; read the milk-toast entry (in
which two people revel in a no-pains-spared version at a
supremely elegant restaurant) in M. F. K. Fisher’s An Alphabet for
Gourmets. Of course, it can also be dreary beyond belief. The
difference is all in the caliber of the two star players. The bread
must be firm and nicely toasted, the milk fresh and creamy.
Detail-minded cooks used to specify “rich milk.” I can’t see
making it without unhomogenized whole milk from a good small
dairy; if that’s out of the question, mix homogenized whole milk
with a dash of cream or a few dashes of half-and-half. (You can
indeed splurge by using nothing but cream, for what used to be
called “cream toast.”)
Here is the general idea: You will first need some fresh hot
toast, from slightly stale bread. (Give coarse, hearty bread a day
or two to acquire the right texture; let fine-textured, dainty bread
stand overnight.) Allow about as much toast per serving as one
greedy person might eat for breakfast. I prefer it sliced rather

thick and toasted to a good rich brown on both sides. Butter the
hot toast on both sides—this keeps it from getting too soggy too
fast—and put it in individual serving bowls, preferably rather
deep ones. Some people tear or cut the toast into bite-sized pieces.
Meanwhile, have some “rich milk” slowly warming in a small
saucepan, preferably with a large pinch of salt and a grinding of
pepper to each cup. There is a slurpy-is-better school that uses a
generous cupful to two substantial slices of toast, and another
wing that likes about half that amount, or just enough to be
almost absorbed by the toast. When the milk is too hot to stick a
finger into, pour it over the toast in the bowls. Serve at once,
while the toast has a little bite to it.
VARIATION: Serious milk-toast lovers should investigate a splendidly bold-
tasting Balkan counterpart usually called popara, enriched with feta
cheese. My version is slightly modified from the directions in Maria
Kaneva-Johnson’s The Melting Pot: Balkan Food and Cookery. Crumble an
ounce or two of feta cheese into a bowl, cover it with creamy whole
milk, and let soak for 30 minutes to an hour. Drain off the milk into a
saucepan. Meanwhile, take some robust, slightly stale country-style
bread, broken into bite-sized pieces, and divide it among four ovenproof
serving bowls. Dot the surface with bits of butter and heat the bread in a
preheated moderate (300°F) oven for about 20 minutes. Briefly scald the
milk, with or without a little sugar. (The proportions, by the way, should
be such that the milk will be almost completely absorbed by the bread.)
Scatter the drained cheese over the bread in each bowl and pour the hot
milk over it. If desired, sprinkle a dash of Hungarian or Turkish paprika
over each serving.

M
“WHITE SAUCE” OR SAUCE BÉCHAMEL MAIGRE
ilk sauces thickened with flour did not become common in
European cooking until the eighteenth century. After that,
however, they took a sharp upturn paralleling the rise of modern
dairying and modern flour milling. By the turn of the twentieth
century, milk sauces overshadowed other kinds in most middle-
class American and English kitchens. When up-to-date cooks of
Fannie Farmer’s era thought of “sauce,” milk-based white sauce
was what they most often had in mind.
Standard white sauces of a century ago usually involved either
a briefly cooked mix of flour and butter with milk added, or a
slurry of flour (or starch) and cold milk that thickened in cooking.
With small variations like the addition of tomato or egg yolk, they
could be rechristened by many other names. Similar mixtures
were the base of cream soups. When made very thick, they were
the starting point for croquettes.
After the 1970s, white sauces as a class were largely relegated
to the culinary Hall of Shame, an understandable fate in view of
what most of them had come to taste like by midcentury. But we
should not forget that butter was generally more buttery and milk
creamier during the first heyday of white sauces in American
kitchens. In other words, they weren’t necessarily as insipid as
they would become. And the founding white sauce that gave birth
to them wasn’t insipid at all. It was the French béchamel, a sauce
that demanded scrupulous, thoughtful attention and judgment. A
true béchamel must be cooked a long time with extreme delicacy
so that it stays white instead of browning; at the same time, it
develops real flavor of its own.
The béchamel version that became classic, after being
championed by Carême in the early nineteenth century, used a
rich mixture of cream and an elaborate, painstakingly reduced
meat stock as the liquid. A little later, milk came in as a substitute
in the version called sauce béchamel maigre. Maigre, meaning
“lean,” designates dishes that are meatless or otherwise suitable

for Fridays, fast days, and Lent, when nothing on the table is
supposed to be grasse—non-“lean,” or meat-based. (The word
means literally “fat,” or “fatty.”) The family of modern American
white sauces originated as shortcut versions of béchamel maigre.
Béchamel grasse has nearly vanished today, even in France, but I
would recommend the following version of béchamel maigre to
anyone willing to put a little more time and effort than usual into
white sauce. Admirers of Madame E. Saint-Ange’s noble
twentieth-century cooking manual will recognize that my version
is adapted from hers.
(A parenthetical note: To reconstruct a decent if not super-
ambitious béchamel grasse, replace the milk with any preferred
combination of stock and cream—nonultrapasteurized, it should
go without saying. To get closest to the spirit of the original, use a
rich veal stock.)
YIELD: About 2 cups
The few simple enrichments and aromatics given here make all
the difference between a subtly flavored sauce and what critics
not unjustly call “library paste.”
1 small onion or half onion
1 small carrot or half carrot
A bit of celery stalk
A few parsley stems
A few mushroom trimmings
¼ cup unsalted butter
A few scraps of dry-cured country ham or prosciutto (optional)
3 generous cups whole milk (preferably unhomogenized)
¼ cup flour
1 bay leaf
1 to 2 sprigs of fresh thyme, or a large pinch of dried thyme
Salt and freshly ground white or black pepper to taste
Freshly grated nutmeg
Chop the onion, carrot, and celery into medium-fine dice. Coarsely cut

up the parsley stems and mushroom trimmings.
Melt half the butter in a small heavy saucepan over low heat. Add the
onion, carrot, celery, parsley, and mushroom and optional ham scraps.
Cook, stirring, for 8 to 10 minutes, being careful not to let the vegetables
brown. Scrape out the sautéed aromatics into a bowl and melt the rest of
the butter in the same pan over very gentle heat. Meanwhile, heat the
milk just to boiling in another small, heavy saucepan.
Add the flour to the butter and cook over low heat, stirring gently,
until the mixture is smooth. It must not brown. Whisk in the hot milk.
Return the sautéed aromatics to the pan and add the bay leaf, thyme,
salt, pepper, and a discreet grating of nutmeg. Bring the sauce to a boil.
Simmer, uncovered, over low heat for 30 to 40 minutes, stirring
occasionally. The sauce should become somewhat thicker than heavy
cream, without sticking or browning on the bottom.
Pour the sauce through a mesh sieve into another pot or heatproof
container, gently pressing with a spoon to extract as much liquid as
possible from the cooked vegetables without getting any of the pulp. It is
now ready for use. If it has to stand for a while, melt a little more butter
over the surface to keep it from forming a skin; reheat very gently,
stirring, over a heat-deflector such as a Flame Tamer. (Alternatively, put
it in the top of a double boiler and reheat over hot water.)

A
AJÍ DE LECHE
(VENEZUELAN MILK-CHILE INFUSION)
jí is Caribbean and South American Spanish for “chile
peppers,” as well as the name for various sauces or infusions
based on them—for instance, this Venezuelan table sauce made
with milk, to which I was introduced by the endlessly
knowledgeable Maricel Presilla. Maricel loves it with fish. I could
eat it with nearly anything. Like the little experiment with
smoked fish or onion on this page, it is an object lesson in how
milk absorbs and transforms strong, penetrating flavors. (Do not
expect the consistency to resemble a chunky salsa; it will be as
thin as milk.)
By all means save the puréed chile-herb mixture after straining
off the infused milk. It will keep for a few days in the refrigerator,
tightly covered, and makes a wonderful addition to anything from
cream cheese to cornbread batter. See Spicy-Milky Peanut Sauce
for another excellent use.
YIELD: About 3 cups
4 small green or red hot chiles (habaneros, Scotch bonnets, jalapeños,
or any preferred combination of different kinds)
2 to 3 scallions, cleaned and trimmed
2 garlic cloves
About ¼ cup cilantro leaves stripped from stems
3 cups whole milk
1 to 2 teaspoons salt
Stem and seed the chiles; coarsely chop them with the scallions and
garlic. Put them in a blender or food processor with the cilantro and
about half a cup of the milk; process to a purée, turn off the motor, and
add the salt with the rest of the milk. Pour the mixture through a
medium-mesh strainer into a bowl, pressing hard to extract every last bit
of milk from the puréed aromatics. Store the infused milk in the
refrigerator, tightly covered, for up to 4 to 5 days, and serve as a table

sauce with any kind of simply cooked meats, fish, or vegetables.

H
SPICY-MILKY PEANUT SAUCE
ere is a bit of lagniappe for anyone with a batch of the above
Ají de Leche and the leftover seasonings used to make the heady
milk infusion. You can use it as anything from a dip to a noodle
sauce. It also makes a great dressing for cold chicken or potatoes,
and can profitably be substituted for tahini in pita sandwiches.
The exact proportions don’t matter. It can be thickish or
thinnish, tame or blazing hot. You will find that peanuts vary in
their ability to absorb water and oil.
YIELD: About 2½ cups
8 ounces peanuts, dry-roasted or oil-roasted
¼ to ½ cup Ají de Leche (See preceding recipe.)
¼ to ½ cup any preferred vegetable oil
½ to 1 teaspoon salt
1 to 3 tablespoons puréed seasoning mixture from Ají de Leche
Put the peanuts in a food processor and grind briefly, stopping before
they start to form peanut butter. Add ¼ cup each of Ají de Leche and oil.
Process the mixture to a coarse paste; if it’s too heavy for the blades, add
more milk sauce and oil a little at a time until the texture is slightly
thinner than peanut butter. Add ½ teaspoon salt and 1 tablespoon of the
puréed aromatic mixture; taste for seasoning and work in as much more
of each as you like.
The sauce will keep in the refrigerator, tightly covered, for about a
week.

T
PAN GRAVY WITH CREAM
his is the sauce of sauces for any meat browned in a skillet or
roasting pan. It’s like a tiny flavor blossom in the mouth and is
meant to be dished out by the spoonful, not the cupful.
Cream-enriched pan gravy is another of those pleasures that
almost defy recipes. But here is the simplest possible outline of
the process as applied to any basic pan-broiled meat. You might
choose loin lamb chops for an example—or steaks or hamburgers
or “lamburgers.”
I will assume that you already know how to pan-cook the meat in a
heavy skillet—NOT nonstick—so as to brown it well on all sides without
extreme charring. Remove the finished meat to a warmed platter. If a lot
of fat has rendered out of the meat, simply pour it off. Immediately
splash a little water into the hot pan. Forget exact measurements. Every
case is different. Anything close to half a cup for a medium-sized skillet
or a little more for a large one will do. You can use wine (any kind you
like) or stock (ditto) instead of water, but the principle is the same. Turn
up the heat to medium-high. With a wooden spoon or spatula, start
“deglazing”—that is, scraping up all the browned bits from the pan so
that they can melt back into the liquid. Try to be thorough, but fast.
Turn down the heat a little if it’s bubbling away too fast to keep up with,
but not so much as to discourage the liquid from reducing by more than
half and forming a rich brown glaze.
Now add about as much heavy cream as the amount of water you
started with. Stirring rapidly, let it reduce in the same way, but stop
while it is still pourable. Pour the sauce over the meat and serve at once.
What you have just done is to superimpose a reduction on a reduction
—slightly concentrated cream amalgamated with a concentrated solution
made from everything that initially caramelized and sizzled as the meat
juices met the heat of the pan. The same technique, on a larger scale,
can be applied to the pan glazes or drippings of any meat or poultry—
even a Thanksgiving turkey, if you share my opinion that a smidgin of
this precious substance is better than a bucketful of anything else.

A
CHHENNA AND PANIR
s I’ve explained, milk coagulated through the addition of acid
at a high temperature isn’t really cheese. But it is the only
cheeselike food that took root on the Indian subcontinent, or at
least parts of it. (The taboo against “breaking” milk into curd and
whey—see this page—prevented its acceptance everywhere.) And
it has been greeted with great enthusiasm in the United States. I
have even found frozen supermarket versions in New Jersey.
If you tried your hand at “White Magic” Exercise 4, you’ve
already seen acid coagulation at work. Larger batches involve just
the same principle: Bring milk to a boil and while it is still hot,
add some acid ingredient that makes it at once break into a mass
of fluffy curds floating in whey. Once the major part of the whey
is drained, you hang up the curd in a cloth to drain or press it
under a weight. Chhenna is what you get if you stop at a fairly
soft, moist stage and leave the curd in a mass. Taken to a firmer,
more thoroughly drained stage it is panir, which is most often
added to sauces in sliced or cubed form after a light browning in
ghee or oil.
In India, the curd for chhenna and panir is usually coagulated
with citrus juice or commercial citric-acid crystals. There are
various other possibilities, including whey saved from a previous
batch, sour whey drained from yogurt, or yogurt itself. (Vinegar
would also do the job, but it is scarcely used in any Indian region
but Goa.) Since judging necessary amounts of whey or yogurt
takes some experience, I have given directions using only lemon
or lime juice. You can easily double the recipes, using the ratio of
2 tablespoons juice per quart of milk. Whole milk (homogenized
or unhomogenized) gives the best results.
CHHENNA
YIELD: About 8 ounces (1 cup) chhenna, 7 cups whey
2 quarts milk

¼ cup freshly squeezed lemon or lime juice
Pour the milk into a heavy-bottomed 4-quart saucepan. Bring to a boil
over high heat, stirring to keep the bottom from scorching. When it
starts boiling up in earnest, remove from the heat and promptly strain
the lemon or lime juice into the milk, stirring it in gently. The milk
should rapidly separate into clouds of white curd in a sea of greenish-
yellow whey. (If this doesn’t happen, add another spritz of juice.) Let
stand for 8 to 10 minutes.
Line a strainer or colander with tight-woven cheesecloth or other
clean cotton cloth, set it over a deep bowl, and use a skimmer or shallow
ladle to carefully lift out the larger clumps of curd into the cloth. Very
gently pour in the whey with the remaining curd.
Let drain for a few minutes. Tie the corners of the cloth into a bag.
Holding the bag by the tied corners, briefly rinse the curd under cold
running water to remove a little of the lemon taste. Gently squeeze the
bag in your hands to press out some of the water. Now you can either
hang it up to drain further until it is a little softer than cream cheese
(usually about 1½ to 2 hours; suspend it on the kitchen faucet or a
wooden spoon set over a deep bowl) or speed the process as follows:
Flatten the bag of curd into a rough disc or rectangle, put it on a plate,
and cover it with another plate. Place a weight (a heavy can, a couple of
large beach pebbles) on the top plate and let stand for about 30 minutes,
periodically draining off any overflow. It can then be used as is, but will
be easier to work with if you cream it with a large wooden spoon in a
bowl or with the heel of your hand on a flat work surface. Imagining
that you are creaming butter for a cake or putting a pâte brisée through
the stage called fraisage, work the cheese very, very smooth a little at a
time. If you are not using it at once, pack it into a container and
refrigerate, tightly covered. It is extremely perishable and should be used
within 3 to 4 days.
PANIR
YIELD: About 8 ounces panir, 7 cups whey
2 quarts milk

¼ cup freshly squeezed lemon or lime juice
2 tablespoons ghee (this page) or vegetable oil
Follow the directions for chhenna to the stage of draining or pressing.
The cheese should now be drained for 4 to 5 hours or pressed for 1 to 2
hours, until firm enough to be cut with a knife. Shape it into a block
roughly 4 by 4 inches and cut into approximately 1-inch cubes with a
heavy sharp knife. It will be both firmer and more flavorful with a quick
browning: Heat the ghee in a heavy medium skillet, either nonstick or
very well seasoned (panir sticks tenaciously to most pan surfaces). Add
the cubes of panir and cook, stirring and turning constantly, until they
are golden brown on all sides. Scoop out of the hot fat to drain on paper
towels until cooled to room temperature. Store as for chhenna and plan
to use within 3 to 4 days.

T
VEGETARIAN MALAI KOFTA
his is a name that I have never really figured out. “Kofta”
refers to meatballs or meatball-shaped things like dumplings and
croquettes. “Malai” ought to indicate that thick cream is involved,
but many dishes labeled “malai kofta” haven’t a smidgin of
cream. Be that as it may, Indian restaurants in this country
regularly attach the name to a vegetarian dish of meatless
croquettes in a creamy sauce with Mughlai touches—that is, real
or fancied borrowings from the Moghul conquerors of India,
usually including nuts and sweet dried fruits. The versions I like
best are based on chhenna, the slightly moister cousin of panir.
Usually the cheese is bound with potatoes or chickpea flour and
shaped around a dab of fruit and nut filling before being dipped
in a simple batter of chickpea flour and water and deep-fried in
oil or ghee.
The sauce is made separately and can take many different
forms. I’m partial to one with onions, cream, yogurt, and a
mixture of finely ground nuts—this last closely copied from the
“Fragrant Masala with Nuts” in Neelam Batra’s inexhaustibly rich
1,000 Indian Recipes. It is complex enough to be best made in
stages.
YIELD: About 4 large servings as a vegetarian main dish
FOR THE SAUCE:
12 to 15 green cardamom pods
4 to 5 black cardamom pods
½ teaspoon ground cinnamon
½ teaspoon black peppercorns
2 to 3 whole cloves
1 tablespoon raw cashews
1 tablespoon pistachios
1 tablespoon almonds
4 to 6 quarter-sized slices of peeled fresh ginger, coarsely chopped

1 to 2 long green chiles, stemmed, seeded, and coarsely chopped
3 to 4 garlic cloves, coarsely chopped
3 to 5 tablespoons ghee (this page) or vegetable oil
½ teaspoon cumin seeds
½ teaspoon Indian brown mustard seeds
8 to 10 fresh curry leaves
3 medium onions, chopped
2 to 3 ripe plum tomatoes or 1 large globe tomato, peeled, seeded,
and finely chopped
1½ teaspoons salt, or to taste
Any chopped fruits and nuts left over from stuffing the croquettes
(see below)
FOR THE CROQUETTES:
12 ounces chhenna (this page; use 3 quarts milk)
About 1 tablespoon each raw cashews, pistachios, and/or almonds
1 scant tablespoon golden raisins
1 or 2 Turkish sweet dried apricots (optional)
1 to 2 teaspoons salt
1 medium-large potato, all-purpose or waxy
¾ cup Indian chickpea flour (usually labeled “besan” or “gram
flour”)
A large pinch each of ground cumin and ground coriander (optional)
Vegetable oil for frying
Cilantro for garnish
To make the sauce, remove the seeds from the cardamom pods. Put the
cardamom seeds, cinnamon, peppercorns, and cloves in a small heavy
skillet and roast over medium-low heat, stirring, until the spices are
fragrant but not scorched. Remove from the heat and let cool slightly
before grinding everything to a fine powder in an electric coffee or spice
grinder.
Put the nuts in the same skillet and roast over medium-low heat,
stirring frequently, until they are fragrant and lightly browned. Remove
from the heat and let cool to room temperature before grinding to a
powder in a mini–food processor. Combine the ground spices and nuts in
a small bowl and set aside. (This nut masala mix can be prepared a week

or several days ahead; store in the refrigerator, tightly covered.)
Mince the ginger, chiles, and garlic together almost to a paste. Heat 3
tablespoons of the ghee or oil until fragrant and rippling in a deep heavy
skillet. Add the cumin, mustard seeds, and curry leaves and cook,
stirring, for a few seconds. Add the minced ginger mixture, and let it
sizzle briefly before you add the onions. Cook, stirring frequently, over
medium-high heat until the onions are softened, about 15 minutes.
Let everything cool slightly and process to a coarse paste in a blender
or food processor. Add the tomatoes and nut masala, and process briefly.
Rinse out and dry the skillet. Add the remaining 1 to 2 tablespoons
ghee or oil, and heat over medium-high heat until fragrant and rippling.
Add the sauce, which should sizzle vigorously. Cook, stirring frequently,
until you see the fat beginning to separate from the sauce, 20 to 25
minutes.
Remove from the heat and let cool. The sauce can be prepared to this
point several hours ahead and reheated while the croquettes are being
fried. If you have any leftover fruit and nut filling, add it to the sauce in
reheating.
For the croquettes: Make the chhenna and work it smooth; see this
page.
Coarsely chop together the nuts, raisins, and optional dried apricots.
Boil the potato until tender in plenty of salted water; peel while still
warm, and grate the flesh on the coarse side of a box grater. Add the
potato and ½ to 1 teaspoon salt to the chhenna and work it with your
hands into a soft dough.
Lightly oil your hands and a couple of plates. Divide the chhenna-
potato dough into 8 equal-sized portions. Roll each into a ball between
your palms, then pat it into a disc about 2½ inches across and set it on a
plate. Place about a teaspoon of the nut-fruit mixture in the center of
each disc. Gently fold up the edges, and reshape it into a ball enclosing
the filling; roll smooth between your palms. Set the filled croquettes on a
plate.
Sift the chickpea flour into a bowl with the remaining ½ to 1 teaspoon
salt and optional cumin and coriander. Add a large dash of vegetable oil
and ⅔ cup water, and whisk to make a smooth batter.
Reheat the sauce if it has cooled, dumping in any unused fruit-nut
mixture.

Pour oil into a wok, Indian kadhai, or deep skillet to a depth of about
1½ to 2 inches, and heat to about 350°F. Immerse half the croquettes in
the batter; lift out with a skimmer and quickly add them to the hot oil.
Fry, turning several times, until they are golden brown on all sides, and
lift out to drain on a plate lined with paper towels. Repeat with the
remaining croquettes. Slide the croquettes into the hot sauce and let
warm through for a minute. Arrange the croquettes and sauce in a
serving dish, garnish with a little cilantro, and serve at once. Steamed
basmati rice is an ideal accompaniment.

W
SAAG PANIR OR PALAK PANIR
hen Indian restaurants began multiplying in the United
States during the 1970s, one of the quickest hits with diners
everywhere was a northern-style dish called saag panir or palak
panir that has now become as all-American as spring rolls or shish
kebab. It consists of panir cubes—eclectically minded cooks are
known to substitute firm tofu or drained pressed ricotta—in a
sauce of chopped or puréed leafy greens. “Palak” is Hindi for
“spinach”; “saag” can be any kind of leafy greens. The faintly
nutty blandness of the panir marvelously contrasts with and
complements the slight bitterness of spinach or the more assertive
character of Swiss chard, collard greens, or any other greens you
care to experiment with.
There are no rules about the composition of the sauce.
Anything goes—greens or spinach creamed or simply tossed in a
little hot oil or ghee with a few quasi-Indian seasonings, or
sumptuous presentations of puréed greens simmered in a “wet”
(saucelike) masala and flavored with a dry masala (spice
mixture). My version is neither more nor less “authentic” than a
hundred others.
YIELD: About 5 to 6 servings as a vegetarian main dish
12 ounces chhenna, made with 3 quarts of milk and ⅓ cup of lemon
or lime juice
6 tablepoons ghee or vegetable oil
2 pounds fresh spinach or other preferred leafy greens, or two 10-
ounce packages frozen leaf (not chopped) spinach or greens,
thawed
4 to 5 quarter-sized slices of fresh peeled ginger, coarsely chopped
1 long green chile or 2 small hot green chiles, stemmed, seeded, and
coarsely chopped
2 garlic cloves, coarsely chopped
A large pinch each of cumin seeds and Indian brown mustard seeds
(optional)

1 medium onion, chopped
1 ripe medium tomato, peeled, seeded, and chopped (optional)
1 teaspoon salt, or to taste
⅛ to 1 teaspoon (or to taste) garam masala (any preferred homemade
or commercial blend)
½ to ¾ cup well-drained creamy plain yogurt
½ to ¾ cup heavy cream
Make the chhenna as directed. Press it firm, cut into cubes, and brown in
3 tablespoons of ghee or oil, following the directions for panir.
Rinse fresh spinach or greens very zealously to remove the last trace of
grit or sand. Shake off a little of the water, put it in a large heavy-lidded
saucepan, and cook, tightly covered, over high heat just long enough to
wilt the leaves, 3 to 4 minutes. Frozen spinach or greens can be used as
soon as thawed. In either case, drain off excess liquid and squeeze as dry
as possible between your hands. Pick over the spinach to remove the
coarser stems. Chop it very fine with a heavy sharp knife. (You can
roughly purée it in a food processor, but first chop through the stems in
several places to keep them from wrapping around the spindle.)
Mince together the ginger, chile, and garlic until they are almost a
paste. Heat the remaining 3 tablespoons of ghee or oil until rippling in a
large deep skillet or medium saucepan. Add the optional cumin and
mustard seeds. When the seeds start to pop, add the minced ginger
paste, let it sizzle for 10 to 20 seconds, and add the onion. Cook
uncovered over medium heat, stirring frequently, until the onion is well
cooked, about 15 to 20 minutes. Add the optional tomato, and cook for
another few minutes before stirring in the spinach and salt. Add the
garam masala in any amount you prefer, from a large pinch to more
than a teaspoon. Cook uncovered, stirring frequently, about 20 to 25
minutes, or until the spinach and onion have formed a dense, fragrant
sauce and the fat is beginning to separate.
Add the panir to the sauce and let heat through. Gently but
thoroughly stir in ½ cup each of thick drained yogurt and heavy cream.
Check the consistency and add a little more of one or both if desired.
Serve with plain steamed basmati (or other) rice.

T
“CORN KEES”
(GUJARATI STOVETOP CORN PUDDING)
his pretty dish originally came from a small Indian
paperback, 100 Easy-to-Make Gujarati Dishes by Veena Shroff and
Vanmala Desai. Our corn and watery milk undoubtedly produce a
thinner, sweeter result than the starchy, filling corn and richer
milk of India, so I replace some of the milk with cream and add a
little starch in the form of wheat flour. To me, corn here seems
plenty sweet without the added sugar, but this is a matter of
individual taste.
Asafetida, once available only in Indian grocery stores, now
turns up in more venues (my local Whole Foods supermarket, for
one). It deepens all the other flavors just as the turmeric deepens
the color.
Dishes like this are regularly made with either cows’ (or
buffaloes’) milk or coconut milk; in both cases the milk brings out
the “corny” quality of the corn. In a pinch you can substitute
three 10-ounce packages of frozen corn kernels, first giving the
corn a very short spin in a blender or food processor to bring out
the juice while leaving the texture coarse.
YIELD: 4 to 6 servings as main dish, 7 to 8 as side dish
6 large ears of corn, shucked and cleaned
6 small hot green chiles (any preferred kind)
A 1-inch chunk of fresh ginger, peeled
3 tablespoons ghee or vegetable oil
¼ teaspoon Indian brown mustard seeds
1 tablespoon flour (optional)
1½ cups milk and cream, combined in any preferred ratio (I use 1¼
cups milk and ¼ cup heavy cream)
1 to 2 teaspoons salt, or to taste
2 teaspoons sugar
A pinch of ground asafetida
½ teaspoon ground turmeric

Juice of 1 lemon
Minced cilantro for garnish
Cut and scrape the corn kernels from the ears with a sharp knife.
Chop the chiles (deseeded if you prefer) and ginger together until they
are almost a paste.
Heat the ghee or oil in a deep wide skillet or sauté pan and add the
mustard seeds. When they start to splutter and pop, add the corn and stir
over pretty brisk heat for a few minutes. Add the optional flour, stirring
well to eliminate lumps. Add the chile-ginger paste, milk-cream mixture,
salt, sugar, asafetida, and turmeric. Cook uncovered over medium heat,
stirring frequently, for about 15 minutes. The texture will thicken
somewhat if you have used flour and remain a little runny otherwise.
Remove from the heat, stir in the lemon juice, and serve garnished with
a sprinkling of minced cilantro.
VARIATION: To convert this into Spiced Corn Chowder, omit the flour and
use 5 cups of the milk-cream mixture, 8 to 10 chiles, and a 2-inch chunk
of ginger. Proceed as directed above, doubling the amount of all other
seasonings and making any further adjustments when you taste the soup
after it has come to a boil.

I
IRISH CHAMP
(MASHED POTATOES WITH MILK AND GREENS)
n some parts of the Old World milk or buttermilk was very
nearly the only everyday source of protein for poor people until
modern times. Ireland, where millions would have starved if the
family cow had starved, remained a case in point far later than
most parts of England or Europe.
When “Irish potatoes” arrived from the Americas, marriages of
milk with the new vegetable proved to be a nutritional blessing to
the nation. Supplementing these two ingredients with some green
vegetable (usually spring onions or leeks, though young green
nettles were also a favorite) put more vitamins into the mix and
added a bit of fresh verve. This combination was called “champ,”
and was a main dish—more accurately, an only dish, a meal in
itself—on thousands of Irish tables for generations. Like many
peasant standbys, it was usually served in one communal bowl
that everyone dug into with his own spoon. I think it still makes a
fine main dish for a simple meal, though of course no one today
commands the services of a small Irish cow giving the excellent
milk for which Ireland was once renowned. Anybody who can get
good unhomogenized milk should use it here.
The important principle in dishes like champ is that cooking
anything oniony in milk creates an entirely different effect from
sautéing it in butter. For champ, what you want is not a sautéed
flavor but the one that results when the milk is directly infused
with an oniony character (the same principle applies if you use
some other kind of greens). In this way, the butter that’s added at
the end will be a fresh touch of luxury not foreshadowed by
anything else in the dish.
Use either leeks or scallions, or (if you can get them) the fresh
white bulb onions with green stalks still attached that are often
sold as “spring onions” or “jumbo scallions.” Other possibilities: a
large handful of chives, new peas, parsley, or—if you’re a field
forager—young nettles.

YIELD: About 6 servings (4 as a main dish)
5 to 6 large russet or other mealy (baking-type) potatoes (about 1¾
to 2 pounds), peeled and cut into large chunks
2 to 3 small leeks or medium spring onions or 6 large scallions,
cleaned and trimmed; include an inch or two of the green part
(more for scallions)
2 cups whole milk, preferably unhomogenized
Salt and freshly ground pepper to taste
4 to 8 tablespoons butter, cut into chunks
Boil the potatoes in salted water until tender. While they are cooking,
cut the chosen onion relatives into thin slices. Put them in a small
saucepan, pour in the milk, and bring to a simmer. Cook, uncovered,
until tender, about 10 to 15 minutes (a little less for scallions). Strain off
the milk, return it to the pan, and keep it warm, reserving the onions
separately.
Drain the cooked potatoes and briefly return them to the pan over low
heat to let them dry out a little, shaking the pan to prevent scorching.
Put them in a large, deep bowl, and start mashing with a wooden spoon
or potato masher. Mash in the drained onions while adding as much of
the hot seasoned milk as the potatoes will absorb without getting soupy
(the amount will vary according to the starchiness of the potatoes).
Some lumps are all to the good. Season with salt and pepper to taste and
serve at once, as hot as possible. Each person makes a well in his or her
portion and puts in a lump of butter.

S
SCALLOPED POTATOES
calloped” is a culinary term for which no reasonable
definition exists. As far as I understand, it murkily emerged late in
the nineteenth century from a welter of antecedent words,
including “collop” (a thin, cutletlike slice of meat), “escalope”
(the French equivalent), and “scallop” (the mollusk). Many cooks
came to apply it to things that were “escaloped” in the sense of
being cut into slices, presented in a nice layered or overlapped
serving arrangement. By the turn of the twentieth century,
“scalloped potatoes” usually meant a sturdy standby made by
building up layer on layer of sliced raw potatoes in a dish and
baking them, covered with milk, until very tender.
The dish takes well to a little jazzing up with onion and a salty
accent like diced ham (a Swedish cousin, “Jansson’s Temptation,”
is liberally seasoned with anchovies). But it really is only as good
as the potatoes and the milk; you must remember that it
originated in an age when many people dug their own potatoes
and attached real meaning to such terms as “rich milk” and “new
milk.” If you’re stuck with supermarket homogenized milk, you
might want to replace a little of it with half-and-half or light
cream. As for the potatoes, they should be mealy to the nth
power. Use a heavy hand with the salt.
A slight soupiness and curdled appearance are perfectly normal
for this dish.
YIELD: 6 to 8 servings
4 large mealy-type potatoes (russets—no substitutes)
1 medium or 2 small onions
3 tablespoons flour
4 ounces smoked ham, coarsely diced (optional)
1 tablespoon salt, or to taste
Freshly ground black or white pepper
Minced parsley (optional)
3 to 4 tablespoons butter

1½ cups (or as needed) milk, preferably unhomogenized (you can
replace about ¼ cup of the milk with half-and-half or light cream)
Preheat the oven to 350°F.
Peel the potatoes and onion and cut into very thin slices. Butter a 2-
quart baking dish, preferably wider than deep, and arrange a layer of
potato slices over the bottom. Dust with a little of the flour. Scatter a
little of the onion and optional ham over the potatoes; season plentifully
with salt, pepper, and the optional parsley and dot with bits of butter.
Add another layer of potatoes and continue in the same way, finishing
with a layer of potatoes and any remaining butter. Pour enough milk
over the potatoes to nearly but not quite cover them; the amount needed
will vary with the shape of the baking dish.
Bake, tightly covered with a lid or several layers of aluminum foil, for
40 to 45 minutes. Remove the cover and bake another 35 to 40 minutes,
until the milk is nearly absorbed. Let stand for 5 to 10 minutes before
serving.

F
CREAMED SPINACH, MADAME SAINT-ANGE
(ÉPINARDS À LA CRÈME)
ans of creamed spinach are legion, but they all seem to
understand something different by the term, from a little spinach
in a lot of white sauce to a lot of spinach with a little reduced
cream. Neither of these exactly takes my fancy. I think that for
many spinach lovers the following recipe by the great twentieth-
century French cookbook-writer E. Saint-Ange will come as a
revelation. The main thing that sets it apart from other versions
good, bad, or indifferent is adding plenty of butter to the hot
spinach at the last minute so that it has no time to lose its just-
melted suavity.
This is my general take on the sturdy classic with measurements
given in standard American units. Experienced cooks will
understand that before cooking, the spinach should be rinsed and
lightly shaken to remove excess moisture, and that today’s
equivalent of pushing a pan to the corner of an old-fashioned
range is putting it on a burner over very low heat. The ever-
methodical Madame Saint-Ange notes, “The cream used here can
be replaced by the same amount of milk, reduced by half,” and
gives estimated total preparation time as “one and a quarter
hours, including all prior preparations.”
(For anyone interested in further pursuing the acquaintance of
La Bonne Cuisine de Madame Saint-Ange I recommend Paul
Aratow’s complete translation.)
YIELD: 7 to 8 servings
3 to 3½ pounds spinach (gross weight, before trimming)
3 ounces (6 tablespoons) butter
scant 2 tablespoons flour
⅞ cup cream (or 1¾ cups milk, reduced to ⅞ cup)
Salt
Pepper
Nutmeg

Large pinch of granulated sugar
Put about 1 tablespoon of the butter in a medium-size “sauteuse” pan;
add the spinach and wilt on high heat, stirring it, for 4 or 5 minutes.
Remove from the heat. Season with: a good pinch of salt; the pinch of
granulated sugar; a small pinch of pepper and grated nutmeg. Dust with
the flour, mix well, and stir again on the heat for just 2 minutes.
Now add the cream, little by little, and off the heat. Next let it come to
the boil, stirring continually. Then remove the pan to the corner of the
stove. Cover and let it gently simmer for 20 to 30 minutes. This part of
the cooking can also be done in the oven: in that case, place a round of
buttered [parchment] paper over the spinach under the lid. Just a few
seconds before serving, add to the spinach what you have left of the
butter, by small bits. From that moment do not let boil. If the spinach
has to wait a little while, it would be best to put off adding the butter,
and not to do this until the very [last] moment: otherwise it loses its
creamy effect.
[Once the spinach is arranged in a serving dish, Madame Saint-Ange
suggests garnishing it with small triangular butter-fried croutons or
sprinkling it with 5 to 6 tablespoons of hot cream, seasoned with a small
pinch of fine salt.]

T
CHINESE “FRIED MILK”
he popular idea that the Chinese have always shunned milk
products is quite inaccurate. So is the notion that lactose
intolerance accounts for the very widespread modern Chinese
dislike of milk, butter, and any dairy product that doesn’t come
out of a can. The French historian Françoise Sabban exposed these
mistakes more than twenty years ago. As she shows, descriptions
of milking practices, dairy products, and the use of milk in
cooking are routinely found in many sources, including
agricultural and culinary treatises from the sixth to the eighteenth
century.
Why the dominant Han Chinese ethnic population eventually
developed an aversion to the mere idea of tasting milk or butter,
and why the use of these foods became almost entirely limited to
a few ethnic minorities in the Mongol or Uighur outposts of the
empire, are among the great puzzles of history. Certainly the use
of cows’ milk today is a piece of Westernization that has
penetrated very unevenly into Chinese society. But in recent times
an intriguing dish called “fried milk” has achieved currency in
some of the areas most deeply affected by European contact,
chiefly in Kwangtung (Canton) province and Hong Kong. It should
not be confused with another local dish of the same name, a
dessert made out of a superthick, starchy milk-based custard cut
into squares or diamonds and then deep-fried in a batter coating
in the same way as its probable inspiration, the Portuguese leite
frito.
The second or savory kind of “fried milk” slightly resembles fu
yung, at least the very delicate versions that use only egg whites.
It, too, could be described as a custard, but a lightly set savory
one made with a combination of milk, egg whites, and a little
cornstarch, all stir-fried to the texture of scrambled eggs. When
I’ve had it in Chinatown restaurants, it usually contains crab or
shrimp and sometimes is served on a bed of fried cellophane
noodles or rice sticks. Browned pine nuts are the usual garnish.

This version of fried milk is great as part of a simple Chinese
dinner menu. I’ve also found that people who won’t touch egg
yolks with a ten-foot pole like it as a breakfast or brunch dish—
especially with the vegetarian substitutions suggested below. It’s a
useful recipe to know about when you’re wondering what to do
with a bunch of egg whites after making something like lemon
curd or Hollandaise sauce.
I first came across the dish in Ken Hom’s fascinating book
Fragrant Harbor Taste, a tribute to the food of Hong Kong, and
have followed his recipe for many years with only minor
deviations. Hom suggests a combination of fresh and canned
evaporated milk. I’ve also had good results with all fresh milk.
Experiment with the recipe to your liking; it seems to work
equally well with larger or smaller proportions of milk, egg white,
starch, and seafood or meat.
YIELD: 5 to 6 servings
2 tablespoons cornstarch
1 teaspoon salt
1½ to 1¾ cups whole milk (all fresh, or about two parts fresh to one
part evaporated)
8 egg whites
4 ounces lump crabmeat or peeled shrimp (whole if small, otherwise
diced)
2 to 3 ounces unsmoked Smithfield-style ham, coarsely chopped
A handful of pine nuts
2 to 3 tablespoons peanut oil
Cilantro for garnish
Mix the cornstarch and salt to a smooth paste with a few tablespoons of
the milk. Add the remaining milk and egg whites and use a whisk to stir
—not whip—the mixture until well combined but not quite perfectly
blended. Stir in the crabmeat (or shrimp) and ham.
Toast the pine nuts in a small dry skillet, stirring occasionally, until
lightly browned. Scoop them out into a bowl before they can scorch.
Heat the oil in a wok over medium-high heat. When it is not quite

smoking, pour in the milk–egg white mixture and begin to stir-fry,
scooping and scrambling with a spatula (preferably a wok spatula). At
first it will be thin and soupy; after a couple of minutes you will notice
some thickening on the bottom. Reduce the heat to low and continue to
stir-fry for a few minutes longer, until the milk custard has the
consistency of scrambled eggs. (Total cooking time is usually about 5 to
6 minutes.) Toward the end it will take on a cheesy consistency and
“break,” giving up a lot of liquid. Now pour the contents of the wok into
a mesh strainer set over a bowl to let the watery part drain off before
turning the “fried milk” out into a serving dish. Serve at once, garnished
with the toasted pine nuts and a handful of cilantro leaves.
VARIATIONS: You can replace the shellfish and ham with a few ounces of
cooked chicken breast, diced or shredded. For a vegetarian version,
eliminate the shellfish and ham and substitute a dozen or so dried
shiitake mushrooms (soaked in hot water, drained, and coarsely
chopped) along with a large handful of scallions or Chinese chives
(trimmed and coarsely chopped), slender asparagus tips (blanched or
briefly stir-fried), or seeded chopped tomatoes.

R
RICE PUDDING
ice puddings exist around the globe in boiled, baked,
steamed, and other forms that range from nursery to banquet fare
(say, from German Milchreis to French riz à l’impératrice). We in
the West are most familiar with puddings based on whole rice,
such as Spanish or Latin American arroz con leche, Norwegian
riskrem, and the eggy kind at American delicatessen counters. But
where rice puddings reach even greater glory, from Turkey to
India, they are often made with rice flour. This is entirely
understandable, since the essence of rice pudding is the alchemy
that takes place between the sweetened milk and the starchy or
floury part of the rice grain. (The same is true in parts of
Southeast Asia where the “milk” in question is coconut milk.)
Of the European-and American-style rice puddings, I always
unhesitatingly opt for members of the stovetop branch made
without eggs. (Or for that matter, without raisins—I like to put
raisins plumped in hot water and a little Scotch on the finished
pudding, not in it.) Nothing is wrong with baked egg-enriched rice
puddings, but to me they lack the clean elegance of the ones
simmered in a saucepan.
The long-grain rice of American supermarkets can be used in a
pinch but really is not starchy enough to suit the purpose. The
kinds I recommend are called “short-grain” by some people,
“medium-grain” by others, and—just to complete the confusion
—“round-grain” by many British pudding lovers. They are
starchy, but not as starchy as the varieties used for risotto
(arborio, vialone nano, etc.). My favorite is baldo rice, which is
grown in Italy largely for the Turkish market and shows up in
Turkish and Greek groceries. I’ve also had good results with a
kind widely sold in Hispanic markets under names like “Valencia”
(which it is not) or “Valencia-type.”
The reason for fussing over the choice of rice is that you want it
to gradually release a certain amount of starch in cooking—just
enough to bind the mass of softened grains in a velvety matrix

that conveys a sense of creaminess even when you use skim milk.
The other important thing to realize is that as regards the amount
of rice you’re using in proportion to liquid, less is more. It’s
astonishing how little rice you need for the most beautiful effect.
When you use too much, somehow the lovely puddingy
consistency never develops to the full and the milk can’t really
blossom in your mouth. Some old-fashioned recipes used to
specify a few tablespoons of rice to a quart of milk. Other
versions, like mine, use both water (for precooking the rice) and
milk (for completing the cooking).
The best rice pudding I ever made was a happy accident using
the leftover milk from a batch of clotted cream.
YIELD: About 5 to 6 servings
⅔ cup (generous) baldo or other medium-grain rice
1½ cups water
4 cups milk (whole, skim, or any desired percentage)
½ cup sugar
1 teaspoon salt
A 4-to 5-inch piece of vanilla bean
Zest of half a lemon, peeled in long strips
Either a 3-inch piece of cinnamon stick or a generous grating of
nutmeg
Put the rice and water in a heavy-bottomed 1½-or 2-quart saucepan,
bring to a boil, and cook tightly covered over very low heat for 15
minutes. Don’t worry if not all the water is absorbed in that time.
Add the milk and remaining ingredients, stirring to dissolve the sugar.
Bring it to a boil, and simmer over medium heat for 45 to 50 minutes,
stirring frequently. After about 15 minutes fish out the vanilla bean, slit
it lengthwise with a small sharp knife, and scrape out the contents.
Return the vanilla bean and seeds to the milk, which will still be very
thin. It should begin to thicken slightly in another 15 to 20 minutes.
Keep stirring vigilantly as more of the starch dissolves out. The pudding
is done when it has a creamy, full-bodied texture.
Remove the vanilla bean, lemon peel, and cinnamon stick (if using).

Rice pudding can be served warm, but I prefer to let it cool to room
temperature before transferring it to a bowl and chilling thoroughly.
Some people dislike having any skin form on top and try to prevent this
by pressing plastic wrap directly over the surface. I simply stir it back in
a few times and don’t worry if a little more re-forms.

T
CHOCOLATE PUDDING
his recipe is taken with little alteration from the first
chocolate pudding recipe I ever used, in my mother’s copy of
Fannie Farmer. It’s a good representative of the cornstarch-based
milk pudding tribe, which for a time nearly disappeared from up-
to-date cookbooks. Some of us, however, remember that such
puddings used to be one of the most popular uses for milk in
American cuisine.
Don’t judge this kind of pudding by chocolate mousse
standards. The texture, though less airy and creamy than that of a
mousse made with beaten egg white and whipped cream, is
smooth and satisfying in another way. What happens in cooking is
that as the starch molecules link with the water molecules of the
hot milk, new compounds form from the softened, reconfigured
(“gelatinized”) starch and the no-longer-free water. The butterfat
of the milk keeps the mixture from turning into a pasty stodge as
it cools to near-solid consistency—at least, as long as the
proportion of starch to liquid isn’t high.
Being very lowbrow in my approach to chocolate, I use any
brand of plain unsweetened chocolate. If the new high-cacao-
solids premium chocolate brands now reaching this country are
your passion, by all means experiment with them (reducing the
amount of sugar slightly if the chocolate is already sweetened).
YIELD: 4 servings
2 cups whole milk, or part milk, part half-and-half
2 ounces unsweetened chocolate, broken into pieces
3 tablespoons cornstarch
⅓ cup sugar
½ teaspoon salt
1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract
Whipped cream for garnish
Reserve ¼ cup of the milk. Pour the rest into a small heavy saucepan

with the chocolate and heat over medium-low heat, stirring occasionally
with a wooden spoon or heatproof rubber spatula, until the chocolate is
melted. (You may prefer to use a double boiler, which will give some
insurance against scorching when the pudding starts to thicken.)
While the milk heats, put all the dry ingredients in a small bowl and
mix in the reserved ¼ cup milk to make a smooth paste. Stir this into the
milk-chocolate mixture, increase the heat slightly, and cook, stirring
frequently, until it starts to thicken, 5 to 8 minutes. Stir in the vanilla,
reduce the heat slightly, and cook for another 5 minutes, stirring slowly
but regularly. (Overly vigorous stirring may break down the starch
links.) Remove from the heat, and continue to stir (very gently) as the
pudding cools almost to room temperature. Gently pour into 4 small
serving dishes, such as glass custard cups; press a piece of plastic wrap
over the surface of each to keep a skin from forming. Refrigerate for at
least 2 hours, until thoroughly chilled, and serve with a bowl of
unsweetened whipped cream.

W
PANNA COTTA AND RELATIVES
hen panna cotta rode into town in the 1990s, people of a
certain age did a double take. This maiden-white concoction of
gelatin-set sweetened cream (with or without milk) took some of
us back to the early ’60s, when the women’s magazines and
newspaper food columns periodically urged everybody to try
something that went by the name of “Russian” or sometimes
“Swedish” cream. These attributions of nationality now sound to
me like food editors’ games of pin-the-tail-on-the-donkey. But the
idea behind “Russian” cream was gorgeously simple. It consisted
of heavy cream and sour cream in any preferred proportion, with
sugar and enough gelatin to make a sort of cream-on-cream aspic.
I adored it. The sour cream just redeemed it from insipidity
without detracting from the stunning super-hyper-creaminess of
the thing. I’ve never cared equally for the blander panna cotta,
except when given a little kick with citrus zest or something else
by way of contrast.
Where did the whole idea originate? I suspect that panna cotta
(“cooked cream”) doesn’t have particularly old Italian roots.
Probably it and its cousins elsewhere started as latter-day
simplifications of the medieval blancmange, which originally was
made like the chicken-breast pudding (tavuk göğsü kazandibi) that
is still a beloved dessert in Turkey. After the Middle Ages,
blancmange was successively transformed into an almond-milk
custard and a starch-bound milk pudding. When commercial
isinglass—predecessor to today’s gelatin—appeared in the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, it gave rise to still other
changes on the milk-pudding theme. There was an English version
called “stone cream,” which involved a layer of fruit preserves
covered with a layer of isinglass-set sweetened cream. (In her
1961 The Continental Flavor, Nika Standen Hazelton passed along
an old recipe with the comment “Said to be one of Queen
Victoria’s favorites.”) Early in the gelatin era something similar
turns up in American cookbooks as “Velvet Cream.” My guess is

that modern gelatin manufacturers helped revive the general idea
from time to time in the twentieth century.
The proportion of cream to milk is entirely up to the individual
cook. In Marcella Cucina, Marcella Hazan points out that when a
panna cotta mixture made with American gum-stabilized
ultrapasteurized cream is allowed to boil, it leaves a strange
residue on the pan bottom. Take the pan off the stove just before
the cream boils (or look for nonultrapasteurized cream).
YIELD: 6 servings
1 envelope (2¼ teaspoons) unflavored granulated gelatin
1 cup milk
2 cups heavy cream (or half heavy, half light cream), preferably
nonultrapasteurized
½ cup sugar (¾ cup if you like it sweet)
A pinch of salt
About ½ teaspoon finely grated lemon zest (optional)
1 to 2 teaspoons freshly squeezed lemon juice (optional)
Put the gelatin in a small saucepan with the milk and cream. Add the
sugar, salt, and optional lemon zest and juice; heat gently, stirring to
dissolve the gelatin and sugar thoroughly. If using ultrapasteurized
cream, do not quite let it boil. Otherwise, bring just to a boil and remove
from the heat. (Make sure the gelatin is dissolved; if necessary, reheat
briefly.) If you wish, pour through a fine-mesh strainer to remove the
shreds of lemon zest. Let the mixture cool just slightly.
Have ready six lightly oiled 6-ounce or 4-ounce heatproof glass
custard cups. Pour in the mixture and refrigerate until set, 3 to 4 hours.
(If keeping longer, cover with plastic wrap; it’s best eaten within a day.)
Unmold by briefly dipping the bottom of each cup in hot water, then
inverting onto a serving plate. Serve with lightly sweetened fresh fruit or
a pureed fruit sauce like raspberry coulis.
VARIATION: For “Russian Cream”—I have grave qualms about the
authenticity of the name—omit the milk. Using 1 envelope gelatin, 2
cups heavy cream, and ¾ to 1 cup sugar, heat to (or just under) a boil in

the same way. Remove from the heat, and add 2 cups sour cream,
stirring it in very thoroughly. Pour or spoon into 8 custard cups or a 5-
cup serving bowl and chill for 4 hours. Don’t try to unmold this; it’s too
creamy. The perfect foil is an instant sauce made by gently melting
about a cup of thin-cut Seville orange marmalade in a small saucepan
and adding a shot of Scotch.

T
CREMETS D’ANGERS
his specialty of the Loire Valley is cream lovers’ heaven, pure
and simple: whipped cream napped with plain heavy cream. The
whipped cream is brought to an ethereal airiness by being
lightened with stiffly beaten egg whites and drained in a mold or
wicker basket (often heart-shaped) lined with muslin. You then
serve it with summer berries and sugar, “sauced” with unwhipped
cream.
There are Angevin versions of cremets based on a very soft,
fresh fromage blanc beaten smooth with cream and/or egg whites.
Something like this, with a cream-cheese mixture replacing the
fromage blanc, is the usual model for the coeur à la crème recipes
in American cookbooks, which I find stolid by comparison with
the whipped-cream kind described by Curnonsky (in Recettes des
Provinces de France) and Elizabeth David (in no less than three of
her books—she must have been crazy about it).
This is a dish best reserved for your local summer fruit season,
no matter how brief. Since there is no last-minute preparation, it’s
an ideal dinner-party dessert. (But the recipe can easily be halved
for a smaller number of people.)
Because there is nothing to disguise the essence of cream, I’d
try to hunt down glorious heavy cream from a small dairy
(preferably one that does batch-pasteurizing without
homogenizing) before undertaking this exercise in unvarnished
simplicity.
Ultrapasteurized cream just won’t yield the same effect. But if
you can find good crème fraîche, a few spoonfuls will add a little
pizzazz to ultrapasteurized cream.
Please note the use of uncooked egg whites. The risk of
salmonella infections from raw eggs has been greatly reduced in
the last twenty years (and is smaller with eggs from free-range
hens than birds raised in factory-farm conditions), but it has not
been eliminated.
YIELD: About 10 servings

About 3½ cups heavy cream, preferably nonultrapasteurized and
unhomogenized
4 egg whites
Superfine sugar
Fresh seasonal fruit (raspberries, very sweet and ripe strawberries, or
sliced peaches or apricots)
Using a chilled bowl and chilled beaters, whip 2¼ cups of the cream
very stiff (almost to butter stage).
Beat the egg whites to stiff peaks in a separate bowl. Thoroughly fold
the egg whites into the cream.
Line a perforated mold (a coeur à la crème mold, if you have one) or
colander with tight-woven cheesecloth or a large cotton handkerchief,
letting the edges hang over the rim. Spoon the whipped mixture into the
mold and loosely cover with the overhang. Set it over a bowl to drain
and place the whole arrangement overnight in the refrigerator (which
should be free of anything smelly). At serving time, turn out the cremets
into a dish. Pass around the cremets, sugar, fruit, and remaining
unwhipped cream for everyone to help himself. Or you can pour the
cream directly over the serving bowl of cremets.
VARIATION: Recently I was introduced to a very similar dish called
“Fontainebleau,” or “Fromage de Fontainebleau,” in a surprising but
delicious Americanized version using both sugar and yogurt. Begin by
stirring together 2 cups plain yogurt (preferably a rich, creamy kind) and
1 cup superfine sugar until the sugar is well dissolved. Whip 2 cups
heavy cream; separately beat 3 egg whites. Fold together cream, egg
whites, and sweetened yogurt; drain as described above and serve with
fresh fruit and (if desired) fresh cream.

I
LEMON SPONGE PUDDING
t’s a cake, it’s a custard, it’s what lemon curd would be if it
took a fancy to hobnob with milk and flour in a baking dish.
Some nineteenth-century versions of this two-layered milk
pudding were made in a pastry crust at a time when the terms
“pie” and “pudding” were somewhat interchangeable in American
kitchens.
The Joy of Cooking “Lemon Sponge Custard” was one of the first
dishes I ever attempted from that contribution to human
happiness, and I still make it by more or less the same formula.
The amounts given below will fill an 8-inch square Pyrex baking
dish. Note that you will also need a larger pan for a water bath.
YIELD: About 8 to 10 servings
1½ cups sugar
4 tablespoons butter
A pinch of salt
Grated lemon zest to taste (anything from ½ to 2 teaspoons)
6 eggs, separated
⅓ cup flour
⅓ to ½ cup freshly squeezed lemon juice
2 cups milk
Preheat the oven to 350°F. Cream together the sugar, butter, salt, and
grated zest. Work in the egg yolks one at a time. Combine the lemon
juice and milk. Add the flour and the milk mixture alternately in three or
four increments each, being sure each one is thoroughly incorporated
before adding the next. Beat the egg whites to stiff peaks, and stir into
the batter, which will have an odd half-curdled look (don’t worry).
Butter a shallow 2-quart baking dish and gently pour in the mixture.
Have ready a kettle of boiling water. Set the baking dish in a slightly
larger pan, slide the whole thing almost all the way into the oven, then
carefully pour enough hot water into the larger pan to come about an
inch up the sides of the dish. Bake for 1 hour; the top will be something

like a sponge cake and the bottom will be a creamy custard. It can be
served hot, but I prefer it well chilled. The Rombauers’ recommended
accompaniments of “thick cream or raspberry sauce” cannot be
improved on.
ABOUT VANILLA ICE CREAM
The effect I love most in ice cream is delicacy, not over-the-top
richness or flavors revved up to something like bombing-raid
intensity. Give me “plain vanilla,” which to my mind is anything
but plain when made with that rarest of treasures, very fresh
unhomogenized cream.
There are two general American approaches to ice cream making.
Custard-based ice cream (sometimes called “French”) uses a cooked
mixture similar to crème anglaise, and acquires a voluptuous finish
and rounded flavor from eggs or egg yolks. “Philadelphia” ice cream
is chancier but, I think, more beautiful in its simplicity. Its basic
texture rests on nothing but a combination of cream and sugar, its
flavor (in the vanilla version) only on sweetened cream and vanilla.
There is nothing to disguise the quality of the cream and vanilla; if
they’re indifferent, the ice cream will be nothing special. And
freshness is everything in Philadelphia ice cream. Serve a
particularly good batch within hours of freezing, and you will taste
ice cream as the great nineteenth-century Philadelphia cookbook
author Eliza Leslie meant it to taste.

T
VANILLA ICE CREAM I: CUSTARD-BASED
his is what Eliza Leslie, in the 1851 Miss Leslie’s Directions for
Cookery, labeled “Frozen Custard”—as opposed to “ice-cream, for
which it frequently passes.” Today, however, it is probably the
most familiar American style of ice cream. The main reason is
that first-class cream from small local dairies no longer exists as
an option for most manufacturers; custard-based or French ice
cream doesn’t expose the indifferent quality of the basic
ingredient as glaringly as the Philadelphia counterpart.
Because of the richness lent by the eggs, I prefer to use a
combination of heavy and light cream with milk. See this page for
more on the crucial gradations of cream.
YIELD: About 6 cups (exact volume may vary markedly with
different ice cream–maker models)
1 large vanilla bean, preferably Mexican
1 cup whole milk, preferably nonultrapasteurized and
unhomogenized
2 cups light cream or rich half-and-half, preferably
nonultrapasteurized and unhomogenized
1 cup heavy cream, preferably nonultrapasteurized and
unhomogenized
2 large eggs, or 4 egg yolks
⅔ to ¾ cup sugar (I prefer the smaller amount)
A pinch of salt
½ to ¾ teaspoon pure vanilla extract, preferably Mexican (optional)
If necessary, put the bowl of your ice cream maker in the freezer to chill
in advance.
Slit the vanilla bean lengthwise with a small, sharp knife and scrape
the seeds into a small, heavy-bottomed saucepan. Pour in the milk and
cream, add the halved bean, and slowly heat to just under a boil.
Whisk together the eggs or egg yolks, sugar, and salt. Slowly pour the
hot cream and vanilla bean into the whisked eggs, stirring with a

wooden spoon. Pour the mixture back into the saucepan and cook over
medium-low heat, stirring gently. As the mixture starts to thicken, stir
more rapidly, being sure to scrape the custard from the entire pan
bottom. When the pan bottom starts being exposed and the custard coats
the spoon, quickly remove the pan from the heat before the eggs can
curdle. Pour the custard through a medium-or fine-mesh strainer into a
heatproof bowl and let cool completely, stirring several times. Taste for
seasoning and if desired, stir in a little vanilla extract to reinforce the
flavor. (All flavors will be muted in freezing.) Let the custard chill
thoroughly 
in 
the 
refrigerator 
before 
freezing 
according 
to
manufacturer’s directions.
OLD-FASHIONED GEAR-DRIVEN ICE CREAM FREEZER

T
VANILLA ICE CREAM II: PHILADELPHIA-STYLE
he quality of the cream you use is all-
important here. Ultrapasteurized cream will
often impart a faint sludginess to the texture,
the result of the gums and thickeners used to
offset a loss of viscosity that occurs in the
manufacturing process. If you can find
unhomogenized cream, the larger size of the
fat globules will make the ice cream feel heavier and creamier on
the palate—not, however, that you want the absolutely heaviest
and creamiest effect possible. It will be more delicate made with a
combination of heavy and light cream than with all heavy cream.
For the crucial gradations, see this page.
YIELD: About 6 cups (exact volume may vary markedly with
different makers’ models)
1 large vanilla bean, preferably Mexican
2 cups nonultrapasteurized light cream or rich half-and-half,
preferably unhomogenized
2 cups nonultrapasteurized heavy cream, preferably unhomogenized
¾ to ⅞ cup sugar (I prefer the smaller amount)
A pinch of salt
¼ to ½ teaspoon pure vanilla extract, preferably Mexican (optional)
Slit the vanilla bean lengthwise with a small, sharp knife and scrape out
the seeds into a small saucepan. Add 1 cup of the light cream and the
halved bean. Heat slowly to just under a boil. Let the cream cool to room
temperature before proceeding.
Combine the remaining light and heavy cream with the sugar and salt.
Stir until the sugar is thoroughly dissolved. Discard the vanilla bean and
add the infused cream to the rest. Taste for seasoning and if desired, stir
in a little vanilla extract to reinforce the flavor. (All flavors will be
muted in freezing.) Let the ice cream base chill thoroughly in the
refrigerator before freezing according to manufacturer’s directions.

C
CRÈME ANGLAISE
(STIRRED CUSTARD)
rème anglaise, so baptized by the eighteenth-century French
writer François Massialot, is about as English as Scotch tape is
Scotch. Never mind. This simple stovetop custard is one of the
most delicious dessert sauces ever invented—a beautiful
accompaniment to fruit and an indispensable element in cake-
based assemblages such as trifles.
Among egg-based custards, crème anglaise (also called “stirred
custard”) is neither so fragile as hollandaise sauce nor so sturdy as
baked custards. The addition of a little sugar and a lot of milk or
cream enables the eggs to cook—with constant stirring—to
around 180°F without curdling, though 175°F is more prudent.
The consistency can be manipulated to your preference by three
factors, starting with the creaminess of the liquid used. This is not
an occasion for using skim milk, but either whole milk, various
milk-cream combinations, or all cream will make a fine custard.
The larger the proportion of cream, the faster the custard will
thicken and the less likely it is to curdle. In my opinion the best
results come from light cream, half-and-half, or equal parts of
milk and any preferred grade of cream (nonultrapasteurized,
please).
Then there is the ratio of eggs to milk. Not surprisingly, a
higher proportion of eggs means a heavier, thicker sauce. But the
third variable—whole eggs versus egg yolks—doesn’t work
exactly as you might expect. Using both yolks and whites makes
the custard set up firmer, but paradoxically with less roundness
and body. Yolks alone produce not only a softer, more pourable
consistency but also a more velvety richness.
In its simplicity, the sauce is like a blank slate waiting to be
written on. Vanilla (preferably a whole bean, not the cruder-
tasting extract) is the favorite flavoring, but various spices, herb
infusions, and accents like citrus zest have their adherents.
Probably the liveliest variations involve small amounts of brandy,

whiskey, eau-de-vie (any preferred kind), or liqueur beaten into
the partly cooled custard. I like the juice from finely grated ginger
(squeeze a few drops through a garlic press).
Because crème anglaise stands up to a little more heat than
other custard cousins like lemon curd or hollandaise sauce, I
usually make it over direct heat. Some people prefer a double
boiler for extra insurance against curdling.
YIELD: About 2 cups
1 vanilla bean
2 cups whole milk, nonultrapasteurized half-and-half, or equal parts
milk and nonultrapasteurized cream
5 egg yolks, or 2 whole eggs and 1 yolk
⅓ cup sugar
A pinch of salt
Have ready a large bowl of ice, a heatproof storage bowl, and a fine-
mesh strainer.
Slit the vanilla bean lengthwise and scrape out the seeds. Put the
seeds, empty bean, and milk in a heavy-bottomed saucepan and heat to
just under a boil.
Gently whisk together the egg yolks, sugar, and salt. If using whole
eggs, beat more vigorously, but try to froth them as little as possible.
Slowly pour the hot milk into the whisked yolks or eggs, stirring with a
wooden spoon. Pour the mixture back into the pan and cook over
medium-low heat, stirring gently. As it starts to thicken, stir more
rapidly, being sure to scrape the custard from the entire pan bottom.
When it coats the spoon and every stroke exposes a clean trail on the
pan bottom, remove the pan from the heat.
At once pour the sauce through the strainer into the storage bowl, set
it on ice, and whisk to partly cool it down. You can use it now if it is to
be served warm. Otherwise, whisk again every few minutes until it is
quite cold and refrigerate, uncovered, for an hour before covering
tightly. It will set up more as it chills, but will remain loose rather than
firm. Plan to use it within a day or two.

NOTE: A custard that threatens to turn grainy and “break” during cooking
can usually be salvaged in acceptable condition if you instantly snatch it
off the stove, pour it through a strainer as directed above, and whisk
strenuously until it cools.

I
CAJETA MEXICANA
(MEXICAN DULCE DE LECHE)
f you take milk and sugar, cook them down thicker than heavy
cream in an industrial vacuum pan, and put the result in a can,
you get commercial condensed milk with an ivory-tan color and
the double sweetness of two caramelized sugars (lactose and
sucrose). Do the condensing yourself by boiling down a milk-
sugar mixture a few steps further to a nearly taffylike consistency,
and you have the world’s best caramel sauce-cum-candy, known
as dulce de leche throughout Latin America and cajeta (literally,
“little box”) in Mexico. Nearly all Latin countries have their own
commercial brands, some of which are sold here. I’m not crazy
about any of them except for the Coronado brand cajeta from San
Luis Potosí in Mexico. The rest are generally thickened with
starch, which is cheaper than using more milk and boiling it down
longer, but introduces something faintly stodgy into the texture.
You have to be careful about saying “cajeta.” In Mexico it
historically referred to various kinds of sweet preserves cooked
down to dense pastes and formerly sold in small wooden boxes.
Unfortunately, the same word in some parts of Latin America is
vulgar slang for the vagina, so it is a poor idea to ask for dulce de
leche as cajeta in the local pan-Latin grocery. Just as
unfortunately, commercial Mexican milk cajeta—also sometimes
called leche quemada, or “burnt milk”—is much less widely
available in the United States than brands of dulce de leche from
other countries.
Mexican cajeta is often (not always) made from goats’ milk or a
combination of cows’ and goats’ milk. I find that using part goats’
milk adds a lot of flavor and character to the homemade version;
cows’ milk alone gives an almost cloyingly sweet blandness. In
this case it doesn’t matter if the only goat’s milk you can find is
ultrapasteurized. Cajeta or dulce de leche is much used for fillings
and icings in Latin America, but I have to say that I never do
anything with it other than either scarfing it up by the spoonful or

warming it enough to pour over vanilla ice cream for the best
butterscotch sundae I remember since Schrafft’s.
To make cajeta at home, prepare to stand attentively over the
pot for about an hour. (It helps to have another person to switch
off with.) If like me you adore all things butterscotchy, it’s worth
it. But for a streamlined version, see Dulce de Leche with Canned
Condensed Milk.
YIELD: About 2½ cups
1 quart whole cows’ milk
1 quart goats’ milk
2 cups sugar
¼ teaspoon baking soda
Choose a large (at least 6-quart) deep saucepan, thick enough not to
start scorching on the bottom before the milk is half cooked. An
enameled cast-iron pan is good; any other pan should be nonreactive and
heavy-gauge. Pour the milk into the pan; dip out about ½ cup and
reserve.
Add the sugar to the pan of milk, stirring to dissolve it with a wooden
spoon. Bring just to a low boil. Remove the pan from the heat while you
stir the baking soda into the reserved milk, then add that to the hot milk,
which will froth up at once. Set it over medium heat and continue to
cook, stirring frequently, for about 30 minutes. The mixture will start to
look more like a syrup as the water evaporates and the temperature
rises. Now you must stir constantly, gradually reducing the heat as the
syrup darkens and thickens, for about another 30 minutes (less if it
seems about to burn). When a stroke of the mixing spoon exposes the
bottom of the pan and the syrup is slow to close in again over the track,
remove the pan from the heat and let sit until the molten stuff is partly
cooled but still liquid enough to pour into small containers. Let cool to
room temperature before covering. It will keep for weeks at room
temperature, for months in the refrigerator. It may, however, crystallize
like long-stored honey. If this happens, set the container in hot water
until the crystals melt.


E
DULCE DE LECHE WITH CANNED CONDENSED MILK
veryone in Latin America is familiar with the convenient
version of cajeta, or dulce de leche, made by immersing an
unopened 14-ounce can of condensed milk in enough boiling
water to cover it thoroughly, simmering it for several hours, and
opening it when the contents have slowly cooled. (Not just in
Latin America, either; the prison-camp inmates in Solzhenitsyn’s
The First Circle knew the same trick.) The method works fairly
well, and some people even prefer the result to dulce de leche
from scratch. But it has been known to end in serious injury when
a sealed can exploded, either because it was defective to begin
with or because the forgetful cook let the water boil away so that
the contents of the can became superheated. Some commercial
manufacturers now provide directions for cooking the milk out of
the can, which is safer. This version is based on a method
suggested by the Borden Company.
YIELD: About 1½ cups
A 14-ounce can of condensed milk
Preheat the oven to 425°F. Scrape the milk into a shallow heatproof
glass baking dish such as a 9-inch pie plate. Cover it snugly with several
layers of aluminum foil. Place the dish in a slightly larger ovenproof
vessel, put the arrangement in the oven, and carefully pour enough
boiling water into the larger container to come partway up the sides of
the glass dish. Bake for 1 hour, lift out, and let cool as for Cajeta
Mexicana.


T
BATIDOS
(LATIN AMERICAN MILKSHAKES)
he mom-and-pop restaurants in mixed Hispanic
neighborhoods seldom do much in the line of wine and beer. The
choice of beverages usually boils down to good coffee, a few
freshly squeezed juices, some bottled or canned fruit and cola
drinks, and a multitude of blender specialties. In my town—which
is in effect a New Jersey outpost of Miami—the blender drinks
come in milk-based and milkless varieties. Cubans call the
milkshake kind batidos. (I have given up trying to remember all
the names used by people from different parts of the Latin tropics;
licuados, refrescos, and vitaminas barely scratch the surface.)
The Miamion-the-Hudson batidos can be made from some
pretty unexpected materials, the most unexpected perhaps being
puffed wheat. But most use fruit, anything from strawberries or
peaches to remote Amazonian exotica. The tropical-fruit batidos
are almost universally based on frozen fruit. Our local stores carry
a huge array of imported fruit pulps or chunks in 14-ounce
packages. These are not mediocre “convenience” ingredients; they
usually have much fresher flavor than the whole fresh fruits
would after being shipped from Central or South America, and
they are the first thing people reach for when they want to make
most batidos. Passion fruit, tamarillo, pineapple, cashew fruit,
mango, guava, guanábana (soursop), cherimoya, tamarind,
papaya … the list of possibilities seems to expand every year.
It is impossible to give one fixed formula, since every kind of
fruit will vary in sweetness (always start with a small amount of
sugar and cautiously add more to taste) and intensity. A very
rough rule of thumb is about 3 or 4 cups of milk to a 14-ounce
package of frozen pulp; you may want to halve this for a maiden
attempt. Here is a model recipe of sorts using my favorite among
the frozen tropical fruits that reach these parts, mamey sapote,
which everyone except botanists calls simply “mamey.” Now and
then fresh mamey sapotes in good condition briefly show up in

our stores from Florida, especially at the end of summer. Seize the
moment if you see this wonderful fruit. An exterior like a furry
tan football conceals salmon-colored flesh with a custardy
avocadolike consistency and a perfumed sweetness, so good for
simply eating with a spoon that you may never get around to
making a batido.
YIELD: About 3 cups
Half a 14-ounce package of frozen mamey pulp, partly thawed (or
the flesh of one large fresh mamey, peeled, pitted, and roughly
cubed)
2 cups whole milk, very cold
¼ cup sugar, or to taste
½ cup shaved or finely crushed ice
Combine the mamey pulp and milk in a blender with half of the sugar.
Process for a few seconds and taste for sweetness. Add the ice and more
sugar to taste; process to combine thoroughly. Add a little more mamey
pulp to thicken it slightly, more milk to thin it. It tastes best served at
once, straight up or over ice cubes.
VARIATION: Batidos are often enriched with ice cream. Omit the crushed
ice and add half a scoop (or more to taste) of slightly softened vanilla ice
cream to the fruit pulp and milk, reducing the amount of sugar to
compensate. Process just until combined.

S
THAI-STYLE ICED COFFEE
outheast Asia is among those parts of the world where “milk”
as generally understood means only the canned kind, either
evaporated or condensed. Introduced by French and Dutch
colonists who also hoped to strike it rich with coffee plantations,
canned milk became a favorite addition to coffee as drunk hot or
iced in Thailand, Vietnam, Indonesia, and other ex-colonies of the
region. Eventually American restaurant-goers fell in love with the
iced version.
There is no single standard recipe. In most places, you simply
brew the coffee ultrastrong, cool or chill it, and drink it with the
canned milk—though cream has some recent adherents—and ice.
With condensed milk, further sweetening is optional (though it’s
supposed to be ferociously sweet); with evaporated milk, you
sweeten the coffee with sugar or sugar syrup before putting in the
milk. Some people combine the sugar and coffee from the start, in
the brewing.
A somewhat different approach arose in Thailand, where coffee
drinkers invented a unique preground combination of roasted
coffee beans with other ingredients, usually roasted corn kernels,
sesame seeds, and soybeans. This mixture, called oliang, or oleng,
is commonly brewed in a “coffee sock,” a sock-shaped cotton filter
on a metal rim that also happens to be much used in parts of
Central America and can often be found in pan-Latin stores.
There is no substitute for oliang. But if you can’t find it, lavishly
sweetened strong coffee brewed by any preferred method,
combined with canned milk, and served over ice makes a
refreshing drink in the right spirit.
YIELD: About 6 servings
½ cup oliang (Thai ground coffee mixture)
Sugar to taste
4 cups boiling water
Plenty of ice

Canned evaporated or condensed milk (or heavy cream—inauthentic
but good) to taste
Measure the oliang into a coffee sock set over a carafe or heatproof
pitcher. If you are using evaporated milk, add about 2 tablespoons sugar
for a slightly sweet or 4 tablespoons for a very sweet brew. Pour the
boiling water over the oliang and sugar and leave it to steep in the
carafe for 8 to 10 minutes before removing the sock. If you don’t have a
coffee sock, simply put the oliang and sugar in a small saucepan, pour
the boiling water over them, let sit 8 to 10 minutes, and strain through a
coffee filter into a carafe or pitcher. If you are using condensed milk,
either omit the sugar or add only about 1 tablespoon.
Let the brewed coffee cool to room temperature. In hot weather, you
may want to chill it. Taste for sweetness. If using evaporated milk, fill
tall serving glasses up to the brim with ice cubes or crushed ice and pour
in the coffee, leaving a good inch or two at the top. Add evaporated milk
to taste, gently pouring it over a spoon so that it will gradually eddy
down into the coffee in pretty swirls.
Condensed milk needs a lot of mixing, which is best done by adding
about ⅓ to ½ cup of the thick, heavy stuff to the carafe of cooled coffee
and stirring vigorously. Taste for sweetness, fill serving glasses with ice
cubes or crushed ice, and top up with the coffee-milk mixture.

I
HOT CHOCOLATE
t’s high time for the food-minded to discover that despite much
confusion in labeling, hot chocolate is not the same as hot cocoa.
The latter is made from a mixture using ground cacao partly
denatured by removal of the cacao butter that is an intrinsic part
of real chocolate. I can see the point of cocoa in a few uses—but
not in chocolate for drinking, which has been one of the finest
fruits of Old World–New World cross-fertilization since Spanish
conquerors returning from Mexico with cacao beans and reports
of native chocolate-drinking traditions inspired the nations of
Europe to develop their own counterparts. To have the right body
it has to be made with full-fat chocolate. Unfortunately, there is
no formal labeling requirement.
Cows’ milk, which was unknown in pre-Columbian Mexico,
probably didn’t enter the picture during the first few generations
of European chocolate drinking. (Until the late nineteenth
century, chocolate was scarcely used for any purpose but
drinking.) To this day there are fine versions of hot chocolate
made without a drop of milk. But where the tradition of milk-
based hot chocolate took hold, what people loved about it was the
effect of marrying two remarkably similar forms of fat. Cacao
butter happens to be a closer match for the saturated/unsaturated
lipid “profile” of milkfat (see this page) than any other culinary
fat, which is why the “mouthfeel” of chocolate somewhat
resembles that of butter. Put them together as a hot drink, and
you have something utterly luscious.
This kind of hot chocolate is better approached as an idea than
a recipe: Melt some chocolate and mix it with some previously
heated rich, creamy milk. (Since rich, creamy milk has all but
ceased to exist, I recommend the best whole milk you can find
combined with a little light or heavy cream.) The chocolate can
be as recherché or ordinary as you like. When I first started
making hot chocolate, the usual base was Baker’s brand
unsweetened chocolate, to which you added a little sugar.

Nowadays most fans probably would opt for some version of
semisweet or bittersweet eating chocolate. Follow your general
taste in chocolate, whether it’s for one of the superdense and
superexpensive kinds (Scharffen Berger, El Rey, Valrhona) or one
of the humbler European or American brands. Most people prefer
dark chocolate, but there’s no reason not to use milk chocolate.
Here is a general scenario:
For one large serving, allow 1 ounce of semisweet, bittersweet, or
unsweetened chocolate per cup of whole milk or milk-cream
combination (say, 1 tablespoon heavy cream or 2 tablespoons light
cream to a cup of milk). Real chocoholics probably will want to use
more chocolate for greater intensity, but I recommend first trying the 1
ounce per cup ratio so that you’ll have a standard of comparison for next
time. If the chocolate is unsweetened or on the very bitter side of
bittersweet, allow 1 to 2 tablespoons sugar per ounce of chocolate (less
or more to taste). Otherwise, omit sugar.
Break the chocolate into small pieces, and put it in a small saucepan
with a few tablespoons of water and the sugar (if using). Put the milk in
another small saucepan. Start warming both over low heat, keeping an
eye on the milk to prevent it from scalding. Whisk together the slowly
melting chocolate and water; when the chocolate and optional sugar are
smoothly dissolved, start gradually whisking in the warmed milk. Heat
to just under a boil, whisking constantly, and pour into chocolate cups or
small mugs.
People vary the basic formula in many different ways—for example,
letting some whole spice like cinnamon, cardamom, allspice, or vanilla
bean briefly steep in the hot milk before straining it over the chocolate,
or lacing each cup with booze (whiskey, rum, or any preferred liqueur or
eau-de-vie). Whipped cream (plain, sweetened, or flavored) is a favorite
topping.

I
CHOCOLATE MALTED
belong to the era of drugstore soda fountains, a species
unknown to about the last two generations of Americans. In those
days, moderately priced everyday ice cream was generally
creamier, since plebeian and superpremium brands were not as
firmly segregated into marketing niches as they are today.
It seems to me that soda-fountain fare then was far more
satisfying and less contrived than the ice-cream extravaganzas
now served up in multistar restaurants. I can’t imagine anything
ever tasting better than a simple butterscotch sundae—or this
unpretentious combination of milk, vanilla ice cream, chocolate-
flavored syrup, and malted-milk powder.
Since my youth both the syrup and the malt powder have
deteriorated somewhat. It takes some doing to find chocolate-
flavored syrup containing more cane sugar than corn syrup.
Malted-milk powder lends crucial depth to the whole, but this
also can take some searching for, and the few surviving brands
tend to be additive-laden. (Plain old ground malted barley and
powdered milk used to be nearly the only ingredients.) On the
other hand, the advent of handheld immersion blenders has made
it easier for home cooks to produce the right consistency.
In my day malteds were in high nutritional repute and thought
to be made even better for growing children by the addition of a
raw egg. I like the extra body that this gives, but raw eggs have to
be viewed with some caution nowadays.
YIELD: One large (about 2 cups’ worth) milkshake or 2 small ones
3 generous scoops vanilla ice cream, preferably a premium brand
made with vanilla bean
⅔ cup very cold milk, or as needed
3 tablespoons plain (not chocolate) malted-milk powder
Chocolate-flavored syrup, preferably made with cane sugar
1 raw egg (optional)
1 heaping cup finely crushed or shaved ice

Put all the ingredients into a 1-quart glass measuring pitcher or other
sturdy pitcher and begin blending with a handheld immersion blender.
(If you don’t have one, combine everything in the jar of a regular
blender; it’s a little harder to gauge progress, and you may need to pulse
on and off to get a uniform texture.) As it starts coming together and
becoming drinkable, try to judge the consistency and thin it with a little
more milk if you like. Pour the shake into a deep, well-chilled glass and
slurp it up with a straw.
VARIATION: Chocolate fans may want to substitute chocolate ice cream for
part or all of the vanilla ice cream. Note, however, that superchocolatey
kinds may drown out the malt flavor.

D
HOPPELPOPPEL: EGGNOG WITH A DIFFERENCE
istilled liquor figures in a tribe of heavily sweetened drinks
enriched with eggs and cream or milk. Often they are associated
with the Christmas or Easter holidays. In the Hispanic Americas
these rich concoctions go by such names as rompope (Mexico) or
crème de vie (Cuba), and are usually based on eggs and canned
condensed milk, with or without evaporated milk, coconut milk,
and fresh milk and/or cream. In most English-speaking countries
the equivalents are made with fresh cream or milk-cream
combinations, and are generically called “eggnogs.” The “nog”
part has been rather shakily traced to an old dialect word for
strong ale or beer; an early cousin called an “egg flip” was made
by “flipping” a mulled beer-egg-sugar mixture from one container
to another to raise a good head of froth.
In America, eggnog seems to have had some popularity at least
since the early nineteenth century. Lettice Bryan’s 1839 The
Kentucky Housewife has a family-sized recipe that would look
quite familiar now if it didn’t call for “rich sweet milk.” But the
big nineteenth-century cooking manuals usually give only single-
serving formulas as “restorative” or “fortifying” drinks for
invalids. Not until the repeal of Prohibition did the major kitchen
bibles regularly print recipes meant for a crowd.
By the time of my introduction to eggnog, creamy milk was a
thing of the past and recipes usually called for cream or a cream-
milk mixture. Most versions that I’ve encountered are cold, and
involve separately beaten egg yolks and whites as well as
whipped cream. You beat the yolks with sugar and booze (usually
bourbon, Scotch, brandy, or rum) before adding the whipped egg
whites and cream, which create a thick frothy topping. Some lily
gilders also add more sweetening via a block (or individual dabs
per serving) of vanilla ice cream, which gradually melts into the
rest of the drink.
I confess that I have lost the taste for cold, very sweet, frothy
eggnog. I like it warm or hot, straightforwardly creamy, and offset

by something astringent. To those who share my opinion I offer
this version of the north German Hoppelpoppel, closely taken from
Horst Scharfenberg’s lovely book Die deutsche Küche. (To the
bewilderment of non-Germans, “Hoppelpoppel” can also refer to a
dish of fried eggs and potatoes.) Its starting point is strong brewed
tea sweetened with Kandiszucker, or lump sugar. Use the French A
la Perruche lump sugar if you can get it.
YIELD: 4 to 5 cups
2 cups hot tea, brewed rather strong (use a plain unscented kind)
About 3 ounces French white lump sugar (see above; about ½ cup) or
5 to 6 tablespoons granulated sugar
4 egg yolks
2 cups cream (half each heavy and light, or any preferred
combination)
½–1 cup dark rum or any preferred spirit
Mix the tea and sugar until the sugar is completely dissolved. Whisk the
egg yolks smooth (not frothy), then whisk in the cream and the
sweetened tea. Strain into the top of a double boiler set over hot water
on low heat. Whisking constantly, warm the mixture until it is hot and
slightly thickened. Carefully stir in the rum and serve at once in
heatproof punch cups or demitasse cups.
VARIATION: Some people make Hoppelpoppel with black coffee instead of
tea.

T
MILK PUNCH
he star chemistry between milk and liquor used to be
common knowledge, and deserves to be so again. Not just milk
reinforced with eggs and cream to make eggnog; not just the
industrially concentrated canned milk that goes into many Latin
American holiday drinks. Given a little sugar and spice, plain old
milk is a delightful partner for brandy, rum, whiskey, sherry, and
nearly anything that goes into other sorts of punch.
There is just one hitch, and by now you probably can repeat it
by heart: Plain old milk isn’t what it used to be. Without fresh,
creamy unhomogenized milk, much of the reason for making milk
punch disappears. Recipes used to call for “rich milk,” “top milk,”
and other tokens of yesteryear. Perhaps with the reappearance of
fresher and better milk from small dairies, such terms will regain
their former meaning. Milk punch made with mass-produced
homogenized milk will win few converts, because it won’t have
the dewy delicacy of fresh milk with the cream still present as a
distinct element. If you can get hold of this necessary ingredient, I
suggest the following general proportions per two servings:
1 cup very fresh, creamy unhomogenized whole milk
1 tablespoon very fresh unhomogenized light or heavy cream
(optional; use if the milk seems on the lean side)
2 tablespoons sugar syrup
1½ jiggers bourbon, rye, or brandy
Freshly grated nutmeg
Briefly beat or whisk the cold milk in a small bar pitcher and add the
optional cream. Stir in the syrup and liquor and pour into punch cups or
small tumblers. Grate the nutmeg over the top and serve at once.

YOGURT
Introduction
Homemade Yogurt: Some Thoughts
Homemade Yogurt: Basic Recipe with Cows’ Milk
Yogurt “Cheese” and “Cheese” Balls
Tarator (Cold Yogurt Soup with Cucumbers and Walnuts)
Yogurt-Garlic Sauce
Cacık and Relatives
Cucumber Raita
Banana Raita
Walnut-Yogurt Chutney
Lamb Köfte in Yogurt Sauce
Çılbır (Turkish Poached Eggs in Yogurt Sauce)
“Curd Rice”
Chicken Salad à la Tandoor
Zucchini-Yogurt Salad with Fresh Dill
Shrikhand (Saffron-Scented Yogurt Dessert)
Revani (Yogurt-Semolina Cake with Lemon Syrup)
About Yogurt-Based Drinks
Ayran or Doogh (Turkish-or Persian-Style Yogurt Drink)

About Lassi and Other Indian Soured-Milk Drinks
Salt Lassi
Punjabi-Style Sweet Lassi
Mango Lassi
Tarhana, Trahana, and Relatives
Homemade Greek-Style Sour Trahana
Turkish Tarhana Soup I and II

Y ogurt is as amazing a piece of human intervention in
the destinies of foodstuffs as wine or bread. Probably it is
as old as those other two miraculous discoveries, if not
older. Like them, it first came into being somewhere
around the eastern Mediterranean, or perhaps not far from
the Fertile Crescent. (All eulogies of the “Mediterranean
diet” that ignore the role of yogurt in the first-settled parts
of the Mediterranean basin are leaving out something crucial.) The
somewhat later prehistoric spread of dairying from its first core areas to
realms as remote as Kenya, southern India, and the western ranges of the
Chinese empire went hand in hand with the spread of yogurt.
To understand yogurt in its glory, you must set aside
some of the images attached to today’s commercial Western
versions. Yogurt as made for millennia throughout huge
chunks of the Old World usually isn’t called by that name;
it goes by dozens (or more) of local names of which the
Turkish “yogurt,” pronounced something like “yaawwhhrt”
with a prolonged vowel, happens to be the one that got
picked up in English during the early twentieth century. In its old
strongholds it does not come in a choice of flavors. It has its own
intrinsic flavor, combining the taste of a particular animal’s milk (sheep,
goat, camel, cow, buffalo, or others) with some degree of lactic-acid
sourness. Nobody expects to buy it already sweetened. Sweetness is only
one possible flavor effect, achieved by adding honey or fruit preserves—
or in India, unrefined palm or cane sugar—when you eat it. It may or
may not have a consistency resembling anything you’ve bought in the
supermarket yogurt section. Undoctored yogurt can be nearly as
pourable as cream or as firm as a thickened pudding, again depending
on the animal that gave the milk. It is beautifully creamy, because
people born to yogurtmaking are also born to the use of unhomogenized
whole milk. It is one of the joys of life.
Yogurt was also one of the staffs of life, from prehistoric times on, in
the regions I have called the Diverse Sources Belt and the Bovine and
Buffalo Belt. Nobody knows how ancient it is. Though archaeological
sites can be troves of evidence for such things as animal bones and plant

seeds, less durable foods like milk products generally
disintegrate and disappear fast. But yogurt must be
almost as old an article of diet as unfermented milk in
the first Near Eastern centers of animal husbandry—and
certainly became more important as regards settled
culinary practice. Under the once inescapable reality of
being produced during very hot weather with no
refrigeration, milk is a fickle cooking ingredient; it turns into yogurt or
something yogurtlike within a matter of hours. In that state it is not only
more stable than unfermented milk, but digestible by more people
because of its reduced lactose content.
Here it probably is a good idea to define yogurt, or to explain that it’s
not strictly definable. The simplest description is: a mildly sour
fermentation of milk colonized by lactic-acid bacteria of the general kind
called thermophilic, or “heat-loving.” These not only tolerate but prefer
temperatures that would knock some kindred microorganisms out of
commission—110° to 120°F, a level not at all hard to achieve on a
summer’s day in Yogurtistan or India.
Of course, the ambient air anywhere in the world is a soup of many
miscellaneous bacteria, and the first wild fermentations of raw milk must
have been a microbiological free-for-all with all kinds of edible, inedible,
or positively dangerous results. Perhaps a series of lucky experiences
encouraged populations of the right bugs to cluster around places where
milk was being collected. Then at some unknown point, people learned
to modify wild fermentation and give the desired bacteria a leg up on
the competition by saving some of the last batch and using it to
inoculate a new batch of milk.
It is tempting to think of yogurt-culture lineages stretching back into
antiquity like royal dynasties. But as the professionals who grow
bacterial cultures for industrial use know, keeping any strain pure and
unchanging is impossible without the tools of modern science. From
time to time natural yogurt “starters” will become easy prey for
microbial enemies, or either lose their potency or develop somewhat
different flavor effects through mutation. Nonetheless, it’s a reasonable
guess that most yogurt through the ages has involved the combined
action of two particular lactic-acid bacteria, or their ancestors. As they
exist today, they are usually known as Lactobacillus bulgaricus and

Streptococcus thermophilus. (In the last twenty years, specialists have
rebaptized both with new names, but the older ones are still the most
common.) As I use the term in this chapter, “yogurt” is the product of
these two principal actors’ colonizing any sort of milk.
The starter method of putting certain chosen bacteria to work was a
major if not completely foolproof advance in reliably turning milk into
yogurt. A second leap forward—also of unknown date—came when
people learned that yogurt became thicker and more flavorful if you
boiled the milk and let it cool to just the right temperature range before
inoculating it with the starter. (This also helped the starter bacteria more
reliably get there first and multiply until they created a slightly acid
environment hostile to many harmful microorganisms.) Heating the milk
to a boil, or even letting it cook down quite a bit before inoculating it,
became a nearly universal practice among the world’s yogurtmaking
peoples. This is why anyone who knows yogurt will raise an eyebrow at
the words “raw-milk yogurt”; I either avoid buying anything so labeled
or try to question the seller about the term. If the milk really was raw,
the yogurt will lack something in flavor and texture.
Certainly the first yogurtmakers didn’t scientifically classify the
organisms that worked their wonders on milk. There are many
thermophilic lactic-acid bacteria in addition to the two I’ve mentioned.
In different regions, yogurt and yogurtlike foods probably involved
combinations of organisms whose multiple alliances and shifts—and,
incidentally, flavor effects—we may never be able to fully document.
Sometimes the two basic yogurt bacteria got mixed in with others that
preferred temperatures between about 90° and 100°F—the so-called
mesophilic organisms, which could start multiplying after the milk
cooled below optimum yogurt-setting temperatures and might introduce
other flavor notes of their own. In parts of the Caucasus and Central
Asia, people also learned to introduce yeasts that triggered carbon-
dioxide fermentation and produced some alcohol.
(For more on the resulting kefir and kumys, as well as the fresh
fermented products that were developed in the cool climates of northern
Europe, see “Cultured Milk and Cream.”)
EAST IS EAST, AND WEST IS WEST—SOMETIMES THE

TWAIN SHALL MEET
The vigorous state of yogurt sales in Europe and the United States belies
the fact that many people in the Western world still don’t really get the
taste of yogurt as found east of the Adriatic. It was a very late import to
the modern West—that is, a few immigrants here and there probably
had managed to bring cultures from places like Greece or Syria before
the twentieth century, but no one else had heard about it until 1907.
At that point grandiose reports from the Paris-based émigré Russian
biologist Élie Metchnikoff began to put yogurt on the Western map.
Metchnikoff had concluded that yogurt as consumed by generations of
hardy Bulgarian peasants was the secret of a greatly extended life span.
The culturing organisms in yogurt, he thought, were in effect microbial
policemen that could be deployed to keep the human colon free of crime
—i.e., toxins produced by “putrefying” bacteria. These colonic pollutants
were the essential cause of aging, but luckily the bacteria that
manufactured them could be knocked out by yogurt cultures. Without
exposure to the “autointoxicating” products of the wrong germs,
presumably everyone could live to the astonishing ages said to be
commonplace in rural Bulgaria.
Today most of this scenario looks either oversimplified or positively
crackbrained. But Metchnikoff’s claims meant the start of a new Western
career for yogurt, far from its places of origin. France was the first center
of yogurt boosterism (and still is an important one). But pro-yogurt
publicity circulated around the rest of western Europe from
Metchnikoff’s lifetime (he died in 1916 at the respectable but scarcely
breathtaking age of seventy-one) throughout the 1920s and ’30s.
Bulgarian cultures were exported and propagated in various countries. A
dogged if not delighted clientele embraced yogurt in the spirit that
Evelyn Waugh ascribes to John Beaver’s mother in the opening scene of
A Handful of Dust (1934): “She held the carton close to her chin and
gobbled with a spoon. ‘Heavens, how nasty this stuff is. I wish you’d take
to it, John.’ ”
There is an irony here: Metchnikoff had achieved an accurate enough
knowledge of the operative culturing organisms to make possible the
scientific commercial manufacture of finished yogurt—something that

hadn’t existed in the countries where an incubating batch of yogurt was
a daily kitchen miracle, not a standardized retail product to be sold in
packages. Its new Western aficionados understood nothing about it but
that it was supposed to be good for you, “nasty” or not.
On yogurt’s home territory, people had always eaten it not for health
reasons but because it was a beloved food made and handled by well-
known methods that controlled the final flavor. Without thinking, people
knew how to make yogurt that was sourer, “sweeter” (i.e., less sour),
creamier, milkier, thicker, thinner, or variously aligned along other
scales of quality. To the early twentieth-century European sophisticates
who bought yogurt as an exotic panacea, such niceties were
meaningless. They disliked the lactic-acid sourness but assumed that it
was a given, not an effect to be heightened or toned down by simple
means like adding the starter under slightly altered circumstances (e.g.,
minute temperature variations) or draining whey at some optimal stage.
Gradually some European—and later, American—devotees began to
like the taste of the early commercial yogurts. For those who didn’t, help
eventually arrived in the form of sugar.
The Greek-born Spanish entrepreneur Isaac Carasso founded one of
the first yogurtmaking businesses in Barcelona a few years after
Metchnikoff’s death, naming it “Danone” for his son Daniel. During
World War II, Daniel Carasso brought a new branch of the family
business—which had already expanded into France and elsewhere—to
the United States, changing the name to “Dannon.” By this time some
European producers were experimentally adding sweetened fruit
preserves to yogurt. The American Dannon company, originally a tiny
Bronx-based supplier to ethnic communities, adopted this tack in 1947.
By the late 1950s sweetened yogurt was making giant strides on both
continents.
Different approaches, for instance, “sundae-style” with sweetened fruit
on the bottom or “Swiss-style” with the sweetening mixed in, gathered
enthusiastic followings. Many—probably most—manufacturers soon
took to using skimmed or partly skimmed instead of whole milk,
offsetting the lack of body by adding powdered skim milk. The change
reduced sweetened Western yogurt’s already tenuous connection with
any sort of natural milk flavor but enabled promoters to call it “low-fat”
or “fat-free.” Some manufacturers also lengthened the product’s shelf life

by pasteurizing it after incubation. Of course, this killed the live cultures
that have always been part of yogurt. But since live cultures weren’t
(and currently aren’t) mentioned in the FDA’s standards of identity, it
didn’t stop anyone from calling the result “yogurt.” At about 1970 a new
sales arena opened with the development of frozen yogurt, the most
highly sugared avatar yet, which was inaccurately but very successfully
promoted as a “lighter,” more healthful alternative to ice cream.
The bigger the business grew, the less it had to do with the yogurt of
Bulgaria, Turkey, or anywhere else in the eastern birthplaces of this
remarkable food. In effect, yogurt had been turned into a kind of
premixed sweet-and-sour pudding or pseudo–ice cream, and whatever
conflicted with that image came to be viewed as a defect by makers and
consumers alike.
Most real yogurt, for example, “breaks,” or releases whey, if it’s
allowed to stand after a spoon is dipped in it. There is a simple reason
for this. To dairy chemists, yogurt is technically a fragile semisolid “gel”
formed during the culturing process when the lactic-acid content gets
high enough to lower the pH of the milk and cause some changes in the
shape of the casein micelles. Their surface becomes bumpy and irregular
enough to let them link up in a spongy lattice of casein strands holding
whey in the interstices of the sponge. The casein and whey remain in
this delicate arrangement—somewhere between the original milk
structure and the kind of decisive curd precipitation that happens with
cheesemaking—as long as the yogurt is left alone. Dip into it with a
spoon, and you disturb the unstable gel enough to let whey leak out of
the sponge. This harmless change does not affect flavor, and can be
simply though temporarily reversed by stirring the whey back in. But
because the separating phenomenon (chemists call it “syneresis”)
bothered many consumers, manufacturers routinely started adding such
fixes of the imaginary flaw as starches, gums, and/or pectin to keep the
body of the yogurt intact.
Through all these vicissitudes, plain unflavored yogurt with nothing
added retained a scattered following among Western consumers, mostly
though not entirely in ethnic enclaves. Then a small but sturdy
renaissance began to dawn for real yogurt.
Some of the impetus came from the counterculture of the 1960s,
which adopted homemade yogurt as a sort of “lifestyle statement.”

Unlike some fashions of the time, this one has continued to gather
converts ever since. Today nearly any cookbook claiming to be an all-
purpose American kitchen bible will have directions for making yogurt.
This certainly doesn’t mean that the general cooking population has a
solid acquaintance with the age-old marvels of well and truly made
yogurt, but at the very least we can say that no one now sees home
yogurtmaking as a hippie affectation.
At the same time, several other developments contributed to a serious
upturn in the American fortunes of yogurt. One was a lively outpouring
of cookbooks by such writers as Paula Wolfert, Claudia Roden, and
Madhur Jaffrey, celebrating cuisines to which real, fresh, rich, flavorful
yogurt was crucial. This encouragement was eventually followed by a
modest return of local artisanal dairying and a growing curiosity about a
range of fermented foods, as well as tremendous waves of immigration
from India and many parts of the old Yogurtistan.
In other words, Americans who really want to explore yogurt now
have unprecedented freedom to do so. Without wanting to diminish the
importance of other fermented dairy foods, I have to say that for sheer
culinary richness and diversity, the basic yogurt traditions of the eastern
Mediterranean, the Near East, Central Asia, and India stand apart from
anything else.
It should be pointed out that these are not the world’s only yogurt
traditions. Yogurt or something close to it flourishes today among the
pastoral peoples of East Africa and some sizable ethnic minorities of
China. But I don’t know of any work that’s been done to document its
uses in either area in terms intelligible to American consumers. On the
other hand, people in this country can learn a great deal about the
genius that people in India and the old Yogurtistan homelands have
brought to cooking with yogurt. The recipes in this section barely
scratch the surface.
YOGURT AND HEALTH: A CAUTIONARY VIEW
Health claims on behalf of yogurt have persisted, and undoubtedly
helped keep it before the public eye during the transition from a strange
new import to a permanent part of the American diet. But I think it’s not
easy to disentangle reality from myth. The only claims I’d subscribe to

are that plain yogurt can be both a delicious and a nutritious food, that
sufferers from moderate lactose intolerance can digest it more readily
than unfermented milk, and that it may help people get over gastric
upsets.
There does seem to be evidence that when certain bacteria are
introduced into the colon they may help keep undesirable counterparts
in check. But the basic yogurt-producing organisms (S. thermophilus and
L. bulgaricus) aren’t among them, because they cannot survive on their
own in the human gut. Just which lactic-acid bacteria can and can’t form
viable populations in the colon, and what that implies about choices in
fermented dairy products, are questions on which the jury is mostly out.
The most plausible claims are for a lactose-digesting organism called
Lactobacillus acidophilus, which appears able to live on its own in the
colon. On the strength of this capacity, it is often added to yogurt
cultures though it is not one of the heat-loving, or thermophilic, bacteria
responsible for basic yogurt fermentation. In my opinion, the merits of
acidophilus should be debated by people qualified to talk about lactose-
digesting problems, not good food.
On the lactose-intolerance question, I’d simply point out that people’s
digestive capacities can vary across a wide spectrum and that the
amount of lactose in yogurt also can vary a good deal. The fermentation
is never carried to the point of changing a hundred percent of the
original lactose to lactic acid. But as discussed later on in the basic
yogurt recipe, the world’s habitual yogurt eaters have almost invariably
finished the culturing process by draining much or most of the whey.
This eliminates nearly all the lactic acid and remaining lactose together.
Unfortunately, sufferers from very severe lactose intolerance may be
affected by even the small amounts found in drained or undrained
yogurt; trial and error is the only way to find out. Generally speaking,
lactose content is highest in yogurt made from nonfat milk, especially
with added nonfat milk solids.
BUYING AND USING PLAIN YOGURT
I have been happy to see the plain-yogurt fan club grow in the last few
years as good new versions come on the market. (The preflavored kinds,
though hugely popular here, appeal to a different cluster of preferences

and aren’t appropriate for any of my recipes.) Savvier shopping has been
one result. It starts with careful label reading.
The first thing to look for is the presence of live cultures. Don’t buy
anything that doesn’t mention them. The label may say simply, “live
active cultures” or list them by name, in which case the ones to look for
are Streptococcus thermophilus and Lactobacillus bulgaricus. There are
brands that list numerous others, but adding more kinds of bacteria
doesn’t confer any intrinsic flavor advantage, at least to my taste. If you
find that you like yogurt prepared with a large number of different
organisms, by all means follow your own preference.
The fewer other ingredients, the better. “Milk,” or “milk and cream,”
is all that’s necessary. I avoid everything containing either thickeners
(starch, gum, tapioca, pectin) or additives accompanied by health claims
(inulin, fructo-oligosaccharides). The additive hardest to avoid is nonfat
milk solids, meant to give wan, insubstantial yogurt more body. I’d
prefer to see the goal pursued by other means like using better milk in
the first place, but sometimes can’t find anything made without this
would-be improvement.
Please be aware that real yogurt is not a low-fat or low-calorie food.
(On its home territory people not only made it from whole,
unhomogenized milk but often reduced the milk by long cooking to
enrich the yogurt.) If you have tasted good full-fat yogurt, you will
realize how inferior the reduced-fat versions are. As for commercial
nonfat yogurt, it is inexcusably awful. Calorie counters and fat-watchers
had best treat yogurt as a rich food to be used with discretion, not shorn
of its true character. Everyone else should know that the higher the
listed fat content, the creamier the yogurt. When possible, look for
yogurt from unhomogenized milk, though unfortunately this information
isn’t always on the label.
Yogurt is best bought as fresh as possible. It becomes sourer with long
sitting. Check expiration dates and try to find younger rather than
elderly specimens. Once bought, it will stay fresher longer if you drain
the whey as suggested on this page. Some (usually imported) brands will
say “strained,” indicating that they already have been partly drained.
These are usually creamier and fresher-tasting than ones with all the
whey still present.
The range of available brands varies greatly in different parts of the

United States. The best are almost invariably more expensive than most
of the popular national brands. Small producers often sell their yogurt in
local farmers’ markets, and I urge you to explore these before any others.
Otherwise, my hands-down favorite is Old Chatham Sheepherding
Company yogurt, an advertisement incarnate for the flavor of sheep’s
milk. Just about as good (and expensive) is the sheep’s-and goats’-milk
yogurt imported from Greece under the brand name Fage Total.
Total also produces a good whole cows’ milk yogurt. But I usually
prefer the full-fat cows’-milk yogurts often sold by the quart in Turkish
neighborhood groceries, with labels stating that they are made from
“whole milk” containing at least 3.5 percent milkfat—a small but quite
perceptible improvement over the usual 3.25 percent kind.
I also like the thick, dense buffaloes’-milk yogurt made by the
Woodstock Water Buffalo Company of Vermont, though I wish it were
unhomogenized and put up in larger containers. My favorite goats’-milk
yogurt is the refreshing drinkable Yo-Goat from Coach Farm in New
York State. As explained later (this page), goats’-milk yogurt is naturally
thinner than that from other animals, a quality that the Yo-Goat people
happily embrace instead of trying to disguise it with thickeners as do
most other makers.
A final note to cooks: Yogurt curdles on exposure to heat. This doesn’t
hurt the flavor, but looks rather unappetizing. Depending on the dish,
you may be able to sidestep the problem by warming a sauce through
without letting it boil after adding yogurt. Or for a popular Middle
Eastern method, mix yogurt with a small amount of flour, cornstarch, or
egg white and heat briefly before using it in hot dishes. (In India, people
often use chickpea flour.) The usual proportions are about a tablespoon
of flour or starch, or 1 egg white, to 4 cups of yogurt. Begin by mixing
the flour or starch smooth with a little cold water or lightly beating the
egg white. Put the yogurt in a saucepan and whisk or stir until it thins.
Add the chosen stabilizer and bring the yogurt barely to a boil, stirring.
Let it simmer for a few minutes before adding to the rest of the dish.

WALLACHIAN SHEEP WITH SPIRAL HORNS

I
RECIPES
HOMEMADE YOGURT: SOME THOUGHTS
f you never have made yogurt before, it’s only fair to tell you in
advance that what you end up with may not in the least resemble
the kinds you’re used to buying—and there’s no reason it should.
Perhaps the most important thing to understand is that real
yogurt varies widely in natural consistency, depending on factors
like the source of the milk.
In the regions I think of as Yogurtistan, the comparatively thin
body of unmodified cows’-milk yogurt (as compared to sheep’s or
water buffaloes’ milk) isn’t seen as a defect to be got around by
adding any of the thickeners frequently put into commercial
American yogurt. If people want to thicken yogurt, they do it by
subtraction, not addition. Once it is set, they put it in some kind
of strainer and leave it until it has lost from a third to half its
volume in whey—at least, that’s a usual treatment of cows’-milk
yogurt. Pure sheep’s-milk yogurt sets up much thicker because it’s
more concentrated to start with, and the pure goats’-milk kind
isn’t expected to set up at all; you drink rather than eat it.
The advantages of draining are several. Thin, undrained yogurt
gets sour faster than drained yogurt because the retained whey
continues to ferment after the yogurt sets, making it sourer
without making it any firmer. Yogurt connoisseurs from places
like Turkey, Greece, and Armenia always say that good yogurt is
“sweet”—meaning not sugary but beautifully milky, fresh, and
clean-tasting. The texture will be suave and silky without
heaviness. Yogurt thickened by draining also produces better
results in cooking. And the whey has its own uses as a refreshing
cold drink, light soup base, or cooking liquid for pilafs.

The best analogy to explain the effect of draining is with
simmering a broth or stock to reduce it. You are not merely
removing liquid but deepening and focusing the original character
of the yogurt in a way that can’t be reversed. Sour yogurt is all
very well, but compared with very fresh “sweet” yogurt it is
unremarkable. Make the attempt, and I think you will be
convinced.
I am often asked where to find professional-quality yogurt
cultures for starting a first batch. But the fact is that after various
experiments I see no great advantage in them for home
yogurtmakers. My advice is to use a few spoonfuls of any plain,
unflavored commercial yogurt that you find particularly good.
It’s also unnecessary to buy yogurt “kits” with little individual-
sized cups, or any kind of special yogurtmaking equipment. I do
find an accurate thermometer to be a help, but it’s not essential.
You can make do with a few ordinary kitchen items once you
grasp the basic stages of the process that you will be putting the
milk through. They are:
• Heating and partly cooling
• Inoculating with a starter
• Incubating in a warm environment protected from jostling
• Draining
None of these is difficult as long as you look through the recipe
in advance and make mental notes about the equipment you’ll
need. The only thing that may require any special advance
planning is the incubation period, when the milk has to stay
warm for at least 4 to 6 hours. Some people pour the milk into a
crockery bowl, cover it with a plate or plastic wrap, and leave it
in a warm, draft-free place (for instance, a turned-off gas oven
with a pilot light—alas, the newer gas stoves usually don’t have
oven pilot lights). My usual solution, which maintains a good
even temperature for a long time, is one or more wide-mouthed
plastic containers of the kind you can keep liquids hot or cold in,
like the inexpensive half-liter Stanley Heatkeeper Food Jars from

Aladdin Industries. The good news is that even if the incubating
yogurt cools off below the optimum temperature of about 110°F,
all is not lost—it will just take longer to set and may be a little
thinner. Making yogurt really is pretty foolproof as long as the
starter contains active cultures and the milk doesn’t get jounced
during incubation.

I
HOMEMADE YOGURT: BASIC RECIPE WITH COWS’ MILK
usually double the recipe, but suggest starting with these
amounts for a maiden effort. Have all equipment as clean as
possible before starting.
YIELD: About 2 to 2½ cups finished yogurt, 1½ to 2 cups whey
(Exact amounts will vary from batch to batch.)
1 quart whole milk, as fresh as possible and preferably
unhomogenized
2 tablespoons plain unflavored yogurt containing live cultures
Heating and cooling: Pour the milk into a heavy saucepan and gradually
heat it to or just below boiling. Let it partly cool until not quite hot to
the touch, about 110° to 115°F. (You can speed the process by immersing
the pan in a sinkful of cold water.)
Inoculating: Put the yogurt into a small bowl; it’s your “starter.” When
the milk reaches the right temperature, stir about 1 cup of it into the
yogurt, then stir the mixture back into the pot of milk.
Incubating: Gently pour the milk into your chosen container (see this
page). To repeat the crucial mantra: It must not be disturbed by any jiggling
or shaking, so set it far from any bumptious goings-on in the household.
Let it stand until set to the consistency of a delicate custard, not a heavy
pudding. Timings vary widely, but usually yogurt will be well set after 4
to 6 hours if the temperature can be steadily maintained at about 110°F.
(Nothing can stop it from taking its own time, so be patient.)
Draining: As explained above, draining the whey once the delicate gel
is set makes all the difference between unremarkable and really
beautiful yogurt. Line a colander or mesh strainer with tight-woven
cheesecloth, butter muslin, or a large cotton handkerchief. Set it over a
pot or bowl deep enough to hold up to two cups of whey per original
quart of milk. Pour or scrape the yogurt into the colander and drain until
it has lost close to half its volume in whey, usually about 3 to 4 hours.
Turn out the drained yogurt into a large bowl, and stir or beat it as
smooth as possible with a stout wooden spoon. It is now ready to eat,

and will never taste better.
The yogurt will keep its incomparable freshness for a day or so if
refrigerated in a sealed container. After that it will start to take on the
still good but less magical flavor of sour yogurt.
If you want to keep a batch going more or less permanently, save a
few tablespoons from the last batch and use it as starter for the next. It
will most reliably keep up its activity if you use it within a week
(preferably less) of making.
VARIATION: Goats’-milk yogurt can be made by exactly the same method
using a quart of goats’ milk (nonultrapasteurized) to two tablespoons of
starter. But the casein in goats’ milk has a different composition from
that in cows’ milk. (Four major forms of casein play a part in the uses of
milk, and each has a different configuration in the milk of different
species.) As a result, yogurt from goats’ milk will remain liquid. Some
books suggest correctives ranging from rennet to kosher gelatin. In fact,
it needs no corrective. It is just as good for drinking as other yogurt is
for eating.
SERVING SUGGESTIONS: Whether you prefer sweetened or unsweetened
yogurt, starting with the best plain kind you can make (or for that
matter, buy) will open up a whole world of flavor possibilities. For
instance, any preferred sort of honey put on creamy plain yogurt creates
an exquisite contrast of tastes not to be matched by any presweetened
commercial version. The same is true of fruit preserves, or flavorful
unrefined sugars such as Indian gur, or jaggery. Real “sweet” yogurt on
fresh berries or fruit is also a revelation. Or pass a bowl of it (perhaps
seasoned with fresh mint, dill, or cilantro) to accompany just about any
meal based on east-of-the Adriatic traditions—Serbian, Greek, Middle
Eastern, or Indian. And don’t forget its uses with garlic. There is no more
marvelously adaptable culinary chameleon.
YOGURT “CHEESE” AND “CHEESE” BALLS
hat is usually called yogurt cheese is no more cheese than

W
cultured buttermilk is buttermilk. True, there are commercial
cheeses (leaning toward the mild, rubbery, and forgettable)
based at least partly on yogurt. But most often the term
“yogurt cheese” refers to yogurt taken a stage or two beyond the
draining suggested in the main yogurt recipe. Usually it has had
enough of the whey drained from it to produce something about
as firm as a medium-soft cocktail spread. This is what’s often
called labneh, or lebne, by Arabic-speakers. Sometimes you can
buy it under that name in Middle Eastern groceries (but don’t
confuse it with laban, which is yogurt generally).
It’s hard to give precise directions for turning yogurt into yogurt cheese,
since different batches will take a longer or shorter time to drain to a
given consistency. But for drained yogurt thick enough to use as a spread
or fairly full-bodied dip, I would put either homemade or store-bought
yogurt in a cheesecloth-lined colander (nonreactive, please) or the clever
mesh-lined draining device called a “yogurt cheese funnel,” set it over a
deep bowl, and let it drain until dripping has completely or almost
stopped. If it is still rather messy, gather and tie the cheesecloth corners
into a bag that can be hung from a stick (I use a long-handled wooden
spoon set over a pail), or put a small plastic-wrapped weight (e.g., a can
of beans) on the funnel, and leave until you see no further dripping and
the yogurt is the consistency of a dip or spread. The whole process may
take anywhere from 6 to 24 hours—sorry, but that’s the nature of the
beast. It will happen faster at room temperature than in the refrigerator.
For yogurt cheese balls, you must get the mass to give up still more
moisture. In the hot, dry climates where yogurt originated, this is not
difficult. In many American kitchens, it will be easier said than done. I
suggest that you follow the procedure for yogurt cheese, but first mix the
yogurt with a little salt (about ½ teaspoon per starting pint of yogurt), to
facilitate drainage. Let it sit still longer, until it resembles a very thick
spread. Scrape it into a wide, shallow container (or more than one) like
a Pyrex pie plate or baking dish, spreading it out no more than about ⅓
inch thick. If you are blessed with hot, dry summers and blazing
sunshine, set it in a sunny place (loosely protected with thin
cheesecloth) for 6 to 10 hours, or until it is as thick as cream cheese and
the surface is dry. Otherwise, put it in a warm, dry room and wait for

the same result, which may take two or three days. Be patient; it will be
most satisfyingly cheesy if you wait until the yogurt is no longer tacky to
the touch and you see a few dried-out cracks on the surface.
Now lightly rub your palms and a plate with olive oil. Scoop up the
yogurt a small handful at a time and roll it into balls about 1 to 1¼
inches in diameter. Set them on the oiled plate as they are done; re-oil
your hands as necessary. You should get about 5 to 6 cheese balls per
original starting pint of yogurt.
If everything is terribly sticky when you are done, briefly refrigerate
the plate before carefully transferring the cheese balls to a screw-top
glass jar and pouring in enough olive oil to cover them. They will keep
in the refrigerator for two to three weeks. The oil will congeal around
them, so be sure to let the jar sit at room temperature long enough to
liquefy the oil before scooping out as many cheese balls as you need.
Mixed with a little of the oil, they make a lovely spread for crackers or
good pita bread with a dusting of black pepper, oregano, or thyme; the
sumac-thyme-sesame mixture called za’atar; or Turkish hot red pepper
flakes (Aleppo, Maraş, or Urfa pepper).

T
TARATOR
(COLD YOGURT SOUP WITH CUCUMBERS AND WALNUTS)
his splendid Bulgarian soup is closely related to a Turkish nut
sauce of the same name. It is perfectly designed to exploit yogurt’s
affinities with garlic, walnuts, and cucumbers. My recipe is
loosely based on one in Maria Kaneva-Johnson’s invaluable The
Melting Pot: Balkan Food and Cookery, an extraordinary survey of
the many interwoven strands that make up the Balkan cuisines.
In the Balkans, cold soups like this are often served with a little
ice floating in the bowl. Dill is the usual herb for tarator, but some
cooks use fresh mint instead. The yogurt should be fresh and
sweet, not sharply acidic. Look for a nutty-flavored walnut oil;
some health-food brands are so tasteless that olive oil is
preferable. I like the French-made J. Leblanc.
For all yogurt-cucumber combinations I suggest using the small,
thin-skinned cucumbers often sold here as “Persian-type,” which
are increasingly available even in supermarkets. When chopped or
grated they release less water than the large, usually waxed
American ones, and add better cucumber flavor. If you’re stuck
with the big, coarse kind, you can slightly improve results by first
peeling and seeding them, then grating them, sprinkling lightly
with salt, and letting some of the liquid drain off before mixing
them with the other ingredients. Follow this procedure in any
recipe using grated or chopped cucumbers.
YIELD: 4 to 5 servings (about 4 cups)
2 to 3 large garlic cloves
1 teaspoon salt, or to taste
1 cup (4 ounces) walnut meats
2 to 3 thick slices of sturdy-textured bread, soaked in water and
squeezed dry
¼ to ⅓ cup well-flavored walnut oil or strong young extra-virgin
olive oil
2 cups rich, creamy plain yogurt

3 to 4 small thin-skinned Persian-type cucumbers or 1 English
hothouse cucumber
1 tablespoon freshly squeezed lemon juice
½ cup ice water
A large handful of fresh dill, snipped
Lemon wedges for garnish
Pound the garlic and salt to a paste with a mortar and pestle. Set aside a
handful of walnut meats; pound the rest smooth with the garlic. Add the
bread and pound the mixture to a paste. Work in 2 to 3 tablespoons of
the oil.
Whisk the yogurt in a mixing bowl with the walnut-bread paste. Whisk
to combine. Coarsely grate the cucumbers or dice them very fine and
add to the yogurt. (If using a hothouse cucumber, peel and seed it first.)
Stir in the lemon juice.
Let the soup chill for at least an hour in the refrigerator. It will thin
slightly as the cucumbers release their juice. Meanwhile, chop the
remaining walnuts fine. At serving time, stir in enough ice water to
make it the consistency of a thick soup. Taste for salt and add a bit more
if you like. Put an ice cube or a little cracked ice in each bowl. Serve
garnished with plenty of fresh dill; pass the lemon wedges, chopped
walnuts, and the remaining 2 to 3 tablespoons of walnut oil for everyone
to add to taste.

T
YOGURT-GARLIC SAUCE
he best sauce may be hunger, but some combination of garlic
and yogurt runs a close second from Serbia to the western
Himalayas. It appears on local tables as universally as simple
tomato salsas in Mexico and is put on all kinds of meats and
vegetables—though in many regions, not on fish or seafood; there
are widespread taboos against combining fish and dairy products.
YIELD: 1 cup
2 small garlic cloves, coarsely chopped
½ teaspoon salt, or to taste
1 cup plain whole-milk yogurt, preferably thick and creamy
(otherwise lightly drain before measuring)
Pound the garlic and salt to a paste using a mortar and pestle; stir in the
yogurt. Serve at once for the mildest flavor, or let it sit in the refrigerator
for several hours to bring out the garlic.
VARIATION: The recipe for “Mast-o Mooseer” in Margaret Shaida’s The
Legendary Cuisine of Persia is an interesting spin on the yogurt-garlic idea
calling for 8 peeled and chopped shallots (reduce or halve this if the
shallots are large) to 1 cup yogurt. Soak the shallots in cold water for
several hours (overnight if they’re strong) and let dry thoroughly before
seasoning with salt and pepper and mixing into the yogurt.

A
CACIK AND RELATIVES
ll cuisines of the Diverse Sources Belt—or original
Yogurtistan—have their versions of yogurt combined with fresh
vegetables and herbs. In English such preparations are variously
and lamely described as salads, soups, relishes, dips, spreads, cold
side dishes, or sauces, though none of these exactly fits the bill.
Perhaps the best-known of them is the cucumber-yogurt mixture
called cacık (pronounced “jajik”) in Turkish and tzatziki in Greek;
other names include khyar bi laban (Arabic) and mast-o khiar
(Farsi). Any ten different people probably will give you fifteen
ideas on how to concoct it—say, with thick sweet yogurt to make
it mild and dense, ice water to make it soupy, lemon juice to
make it sour, oil to make it satiny, chopped cucumbers presalted
to draw off moisture, or grated cucumbers allowed to contribute
all the moisture they want. There is invariably some kind of herb,
but whether it is parsley, dill, scallion, cilantro, fennel, dried
mint, fresh mint, several combined, or none of the above depends
on whom you’re talking to. Cucumbers, yogurt, salt, and garlic
are about the only constants (and even the last can be omitted).
The following is the version I like best, but don’t hesitate to try
any of the embellishments I have mentioned. There is no right or
wrong way to make it. I will say, however, that the quality of the
cucumbers and the yogurt you start with will come through very
distinctly. If you have just made a particularly excellent batch of
your own yogurt, there is no finer purpose you could devote it to.
If you have to use the thick-skinned American-type cucumbers,
see the suggestion on this page.
YIELD: About 3 cups
3 small Persian-type cucumbers or 1 English hothouse cucumber
About 1 teaspoon salt
2 small garlic cloves
2 cups drained plain yogurt (a thick, creamy kind)
2 teaspoons Turkish dried mint, crushed

Freshly ground black pepper
2 tablespoons olive oil
Peel and seed the cucumbers; cut into very fine dice and put them in a
small bowl with ½ teaspoon of the salt. Let stand for about 20 minutes,
or until they have given up some of their juice. Drain them and squeeze
as dry as you can in a few thicknesses of paper towels.
Crush the garlic and remaining salt to a paste with a mortar and
pestle. Thoroughly mix the cucumbers with the garlic paste, yogurt,
dried mint, and pepper. Taste for salt (probably it will have plenty). Beat
in the olive oil, and let sit for at least an hour to meld the flavors; serve
at room temperature as a dip, relish, or just generally useful dish.
VARIATION: This becomes a light, pleasant vegetarian cold soup for two or
three people with the addition of 1 cup ice water and perhaps an extra
pinch of salt. Some people put an ice cube in each soup bowl.

T
CUCUMBER RAITA
he yogurt-based Indian preparations called raitas—there is no
good English word, since they might equally well be called salads
or relishes—are of innumerable different kinds. There is scarcely a
vegetable or fruit that can’t be turned into a raita. This cucumber-
based version happens to be the best known to diners in Indian-
American restaurants. At a glance, it somewhat resembles the
preceding Turkish cacık or Greek tzatziki. The main differences
are that cucumber raitas are made without garlic and usually are
laced with a dash of spices (cumin, black pepper, red pepper,
sometimes others). Chopped tomato figures in some versions. Like
many dishes of the subcontinent, raitas receive a different
treatment in southern India as well as a different name, pachadi.
If you have to use the thick-skinned American-type cucumbers,
see the suggestion on this page.
YIELD: About 3 cups
3 small Persian-type cucumbers or 1 English hothouse cucumber
1 small ripe tomato (optional)
2 cups drained plain yogurt (a thick, creamy kind)
½ to 1 teaspoon cumin seeds, briefly toasted and ground with mortar
and pestle
¼ to ½ teaspoon freshly ground black pepper
½ to ¾ teaspoon salt
1 small green chile pepper, seeded and minced (optional)
A handful of fresh mint or cilantro leaves, coarsely chopped (leave a
few whole for garnish)
A dash of cayenne pepper or hot paprika
Either cut the cucumbers into very fine dice or shred them on the coarse
side of a box grater. Squeeze out any excess moisture. Peel and seed the
optional tomato and chop very fine.
Put the yogurt in a small bowl and whisk smooth. Mix in the
cucumber, tomato, cumin, black pepper, salt, optional minced chile

pepper, and chopped mint or cilantro. Serve garnished with a dusting of
cayenne or paprika and a few whole mint or cilantro leaves.
Some people make this hours ahead and let it sit to marry the flavors.
I like to serve it freshly mixed.
VARIATION: For Cucumber Pachadi, follow the directions for raita but use
cilantro leaves and 1 or 2 small green chiles. Heat a little ghee or
vegetable oil (1 tablespoon or less) in a small skillet and toss in ⅛
teaspoon Indian brown mustard seeds and a few curry leaves. (You can
also add a pinch of ground asafetida; 1 teaspoon each whole urad dal,
also called “black gram”; and channa dal, Indian split chickpeas; and/or
a small dried red chile.) When the mustard seeds begin to pop, pour the
contents of the skillet over the yogurt-cucumber mixture and stir to
combine.
OTHER SUGGESTIONS: Raitas and pachadis can be made with any vegetable
that takes your fancy, crisp and raw (let’s say, sliced or grated radishes)
or cooked (sautéed diced eggplant, chopped spinach). There are onion
raitas, mint raitas, sweet-potato raitas, mixed raw vegetable raitas.…

A
BANANA RAITA
favorite among the many Indian fruit raitas. It is served in
the same way as the preceding cucumber version, but in my
opinion goes best with Indian rice-based dishes. Banana raitas can
be sweet and mild, or—like this one—distinctly punchy. Tone
down the chile if you like, but please do not use any sort of low-
fat or nonfat yogurt.
YIELD: About 4 cups
3 medium-sized ripe bananas
Juice of half a lemon
2 cups well-drained plain yogurt, preferably a very creamy kind
1 teaspoon salt, or to taste
2 long green chiles, seeded and chopped (not too fine)
A large handful of cilantro, minced
½ teaspoon ground cumin, or to taste
Cut the peeled bananas lengthwise into quarters and crosswise into thin
slices. Put them in a bowl, season with lemon juice, and toss to coat
well.
Beat the yogurt and salt very smooth with a wooden spoon. Add the
bananas and all other ingredients, reserving a little of the cilantro for
garnish. Give it all a good stir and let stand for at least half an hour at
room temperature to marry the flavors; serve garnished with the extra
cilantro. It does not keep, so plan to serve it within an hour or two at
most.

W
WALNUT-YOGURT CHUTNEY
hy walnuts should frequently be combined with yogurt in
some of the oldest Eurasian cuisines is no mystery. Dairy animals
and yogurtmaking historically flourished in many of the Old
World regions where walnut trees grew—Greece, the Caucasus,
the Vale of Kashmir. (For another example, see Tarator.) There
are many variations on the theme—coarse-textured and
minimalist, bound with bread or pot cheese, enriched with stock,
a little vinegary, a little sweet. This versatile Kashmiri condiment
is only one possibility among many. It is traditionally made with
the local medium-hot chile peppers, which can be used green but
more often are dried when ripe and pulverized to make a
seasoning somewhat like ground dried New Mexico chiles. Hot
Hungarian paprika (or a mixture of sweet and hot) will do.
Experiment with any kind of hot, mild, fresh, or dried chile you
like. The proportions can be elastic; for a looser-textured sauce,
increase the yogurt to 1 cup.
It is worth looking for young, sweet walnuts; the skins don’t
have the harsh tannic bite of older ones. Stores catering to
immigrants from Turkey or the Caucasus often have excellent
walnuts.
YIELD: About 1 cup
1 cup walnut meats
1 tablespoon (or to taste) ground dried New Mexico chile, or 1 ½
teaspoons each Hungarian sweet and hot paprika
1 teaspoon salt, or to taste
A large pinch of garam masala, or a pinch each of ground cumin and
cinnamon
½ cup thick, creamy plain yogurt
Grind the walnuts in a food processor, stopping just when the pulverized
bits start coming together in a paste. Scrape out into a small bowl; add
the ground chile, salt, garam masala, and yogurt and stir to combine

thoroughly. Serve at room temperature as a condiment for meats and
vegetables, or a dip with crudités and any Indian bread.

A
LAMB KÖFTE IN YOGURT SAUCE
mong the many ways of cooking lamb meatballs in the
Diverse Sources Belt, baking them in a custardlike yogurt sauce is
one of the most delicious. For this Turkish version, be sure to use
a good rich yogurt. I like the meatballs quite tart (from lemon
juice and sumac) and a bit hot (from Turkish red pepper and
paprika), with a strong jolt of cumin. Any of these can be cut back
to gentler proportions.
YIELD: 8 meatballs
2 cups creamy whole-milk plain yogurt
3 to 4 thick slices of a small day-old roll or baguette, crusts trimmed
1 medium onion
2 garlic cloves
4 eggs
1 pound ground lamb
½ to 1 teaspoon Aleppo pepper or other Turkish ground red pepper
¼ teaspoon Turkish paprika
¾ teaspoon ground sumac
2 to 3 teaspoons ground cumin
1 to 3 teaspoons lemon juice
¼ cup minced parsley
1 teaspoon salt
Plenty of freshly ground black pepper
⅓ to ½ cup olive oil
Set the yogurt to drain briefly in a cheesecloth-lined colander; soak the
bread in a little warm water until well softened. Preheat the oven to
350°F.
Grate the onion on the coarse side of a box grater, and mince the
garlic very fine. Thoroughly beat one of the eggs. Wring the water out of
the bread. Place the onion, garlic, egg, and bread in a large mixing bowl
with the ground meat. Add the Aleppo pepper, paprika, sumac, cumin,
lemon juice, parsley, salt, and pepper. Mix everything very thoroughly

with your hands and shape into 8 oval meatballs.
Heat the oil to rippling in a heavy medium skillet. Working in two
batches, brown the meatballs well on both sides. As they are done,
remove them to a shallow 2-quart baking dish like an 8-inch Pyrex pan.
Beat the remaining 3 eggs and stir in the partially drained yogurt.
Pour this mixture over the meatballs and bake for 40 to 45 minutes.
Serve at once.

A
ÇILBIR
(TURKISH POACHED EGGS IN YOGURT SAUCE)
ll the yogurt homelands possess some simple dish based on
the unbeatable combination of yogurt and eggs. Any egg-loving
cook should be able to come up with marvelous ways of pairing
the two. This Turkish example, which is always glorified with
paprika-reddened butter, may start your imagination going.
YIELD: 4 servings
A double recipe of Yogurt-Garlic Sauce
1 tablespoon distilled or cider vinegar
8 eggs, the freshest possible
Salt and freshly ground black pepper to taste
¼ cup butter, preferably unsalted
1 tablespoon (or to taste) mild or hot Turkish paprika, Maraş pepper,
or Aleppo pepper
Preheat the oven to the lowest setting. Divide the yogurt sauce among
four ramekins of about 1½-to 2-cup capacity, and set in the oven to
barely warm.
Fill a shallow saucepan about 1½ to 2 inches deep with water, add the
vinegar, and bring to a boil. Reduce the heat to a bare simmer. Poach
the eggs, two or three at a time, by breaking them into a saucer and
slipping them into the simmering water; let cook about 3 minutes or just
until set. Carefully lift out the eggs with a slotted spoon, letting them
drain briefly, and put them into the warmed ramekins (two eggs to
each). Season with salt and pepper.
Gently melt the butter in a small saucepan and add the paprika or
crushed red pepper. Tilt the pan to let the solids settle to the bottom,
drizzle a little of the clear red-orange butter over each portion, and serve
at once.
VARIATIONS: Instead of making the garlic sauce, mix creamy plain yogurt
with a little finely crumbled feta cheese and dried Turkish mint. The

dish is also very good with eggs fried sunny-side up rather than poached.

T
“CURD RICE”
o English-speakers in India, “curd” is the local equivalent of
yogurt. The popular southern dish “curd rice” is a sort of rice
salad using plain cooked rice, some diced cucumber with or
without other fresh seasonings, and a tarka (special enrichment)
of dried spices briefly sizzled in hot ghee or oil, the whole thing
being bound with a yogurt-milk dressing. Now that so many of us
have access to Indian dals and spices, it deserves to be discovered
by nonIndian cooks. I find curd rice endlessly useful as a lively
room-temperature side dish that can be made hours ahead. And it
wouldn’t take much (some more diced or slivered vegetables,
cooked chickpeas, leftover chicken or meat) to turn it into a main
dish, vegetarian or otherwise.
This is one time that you aren’t aiming for fluffy, dry rice with
every grain beautifully distinct. Nor should you spring for basmati
rice; any plain, nonconverted long-grain rice will do. You don’t
want it wet when cooked, but it should be just very slightly soggy.
There is nothing tricky about curd rice, but remember to let the
yogurt drain well in advance. The two kinds of dal used in the
aromatic tarka are not absolutely necessary, but their crunchy
nuttiness is a big plus.
If you have to make do with thick-skinned American
cucumbers, see the suggestion on this page.
YIELD: About 6 servings (5 to 6 cups)
1 cup long-grain rice
2 cups drained plain yogurt, preferably a creamy whole-milk kind
About ⅓ to ½ cup whole milk
1 scant tablespoon whole (not split) urad dal (also called black gram)
1 scant tablespoon channa dal (Indian split chickpeas)
1 teaspoon Indian brown mustard seeds
1 small dried hot red pepper, seeded
6 to 8 fresh curry leaves
A pinch of asafetida

About 1 tablespoon ghee, mustard oil, or vegetable oil for frying the
spices
3 to 4 small Persian-type cucumbers or 1 English hothouse cucumber
2 small serrano chiles or other small hot green peppers
A 1-inch chunk of peeled fresh ginger
A large handful of cilantro leaves, plus more for garnish if desired
About 2 teaspoons salt, or to taste
Put the rice in a small bowl, and cover with cold water. Rinse it in
several changes of water until the water runs clear. Let soak half an
hour, and pour into a sieve to drain briefly.
Meanwhile, beat the yogurt as smooth as possible with a whisk or
wooden spoon. Beat in enough milk to give it the consistency of a thick
but not pasty dressing.
Prepare the ingredients for the tarka: Rinse the urad dal and channa
dal under cold running water to remove any grit or dust, blot dry with
paper towels, and put them in a small bowl. Put the mustard seeds, dried
red pepper, curry leaves, and asafetida in another bowl and have the
ghee or oil ready for frying.
Cook the drained rice by any preferred method. (I spread it in a wide,
shallow lidded saucepan, cover with about 1½ cups boiling water, add 1
teaspoon salt, bring to a boil, and cook tightly covered over very low
heat for about 16 to 18 minutes, or until the water is barely absorbed
and the rice is tender but still a little moist.)
While the rice cooks, dice the cucumber very fine. Seed the green
chiles and mince them together with the ginger and cilantro.
Turn out the hot rice into a large mixing bowl and mash it for a few
seconds with a potato masher, leaving the grains mostly whole.
Heat the ghee or oil very hot in a small heavy skillet. Add the urad dal
and channa dal and fry, stirring, for about 15 to 20 seconds (don’t let
them scorch, but they should get slightly crisp). Add the mustard seeds,
dried pepper, curry leaves, and asafetida, stirring briskly. When the
mustard seeds start to pop, empty the entire contents of the pan over the
hot rice. Add the cucumbers, minced chiles, ginger, and cilantro, and 1
teaspoon salt; toss to mix thoroughly. Lastly, add the yogurt-milk
mixture and toss well. Taste for seasoning and serve warm or at room
temperature, garnished with extra cilantro if you like.

À
CHICKEN SALAD À LA TANDOOR
la tandoor” may be a misnomer for something that never gets
anywhere near an Indian tandoor oven or any American
substitute, but fans of the real thing will get the idea: cold chicken
in a dressing based on yogurt and the usual elements of a tandoori
chicken marinade. In lieu of the red dye that is usual in tandoori
dishes, I use some Hungarian sweet paprika. Naturally this doesn’t
have the same intensity as the tandoor-seared original. But it’s a
good dish in its own way and, unlike genuine tandoori chicken,
can be made ahead as the centerpiece of a cold lunch or dinner.
The proportions of spices given here are only a suggestion;
improvise as you like. Use only a creamy, fresh-tasting yogurt. It’s
worth lavishing a newly made batch of your own on the dish,
which will taste very dreary if made with thin, sour supermarket
yogurt.
YIELD: About 4 servings
A 4-pound chicken, skin removed, cut into 6 to 8 pieces
2 large garlic cloves
A 2-inch chunk of peeled fresh ginger
3 tablespoons any bland vegetable oil
½ teaspoon ground cumin
½ teaspoon ground coriander
¼ teaspoon ground turmeric
A large pinch of ground cinnamon
1 teaspoon ground cayenne pepper
1 tablespoon freshly squeezed lime or lemon juice
1 to 1¼ cups very fresh, creamy plain yogurt, briefly drained before
measuring
½ to ¾ teaspoon salt, or to taste
1 medium onion
2 to 3 teaspoons Hungarian sweet paprika
Cilantro leaves for garnish (optional)

Poach the chicken until tender (about 20 to 25 minutes for breast meat,
35 for legs, thighs, and wings) in about 4 cups water. While it is cooking,
mince the garlic and ginger together until they are almost a paste. Heat
the oil until almost smoking in a small heavy skillet, add the garlic-
ginger mixture, and let it sizzle (but not scorch) for 30 to 60 seconds.
Stir in the cumin, coriander, turmeric, cinnamon, and cayenne; let cook
until the fragrance of the spices is a little deepened.
When the chicken is done, remove the pieces to a platter. (Save the
cooking stock for another purpose.) As soon as it is cool enough to
handle, pull the meat from the bones and cut it into neat (or not too
messy) pieces. Place the meat in a bowl and toss with the lime juice.
Quickly add the garlic-ginger-spice mixture, then the yogurt. Toss to
combine well and add salt to taste, a little at a time. (Remember that
some seasonings will be muted as it chills.) Slice the onion into paper-
thin half-moons and add along with most of the paprika. Toss again,
arrange in a serving dish, and sprinkle with the remaining paprika.
Garnish with a little fresh cilantro if desired, and chill thoroughly before
serving.

Y
ZUCCHINI-YOGURT SALAD WITH FRESH DILL
ogurt lends agreeable depth and verve to a vegetable that can
be pretty one-dimensional. I usually prefer this without the garlic,
but both versions are good. A combination of green and golden
zucchini makes an especially attractive dish.
YIELD: About 6 servings
4 medium-small zucchini or similar tender summer squash (about 1
½ pounds)
2 teaspoons salt
10 to 12 scallions, cleaned and trimmed
¼ cup olive oil
1 cup well-drained mild, creamy plain yogurt or Yogurt-Garlic Sauce
Freshly ground black or white pepper
Plenty of fresh dill, snipped
Trim the ends of the zucchini and grate them on the coarse side of a box
grater. Put the grated squash in a colander set over a bowl; add the salt
and mix well with your hands. Let stand for 20 minutes to drain off
some of the moisture.
Meanwhile, cut off the scallion tops where the green begins. Slice the
white part into rounds and set aside; chop the tenderer part of the greens
and reserve separately.
Firmly wring out as much liquid as you can from the salted zucchini.
Heat the oil to rippling in a large lidded skillet over pretty brisk heat,
add the scallion whites, and sauté for a few minutes until translucent.
Add the drained zucchini and cook, stirring and tossing to coat them
well with the oil, for 3 to 5 minutes. Adjust the heat to medium-low.
Add the reserved scallion greens, cover the pan, and cook for about 5
minutes or until the squash is slightly wilted. (Check occasionally for
scorching.)
Remove the pan from the heat and let cool slightly, uncovered. (Too
much heat will curdle the yogurt, though it won’t harm the flavor.) Add
the yogurt, pepper, and most of the dill. Toss to combine everything well

and serve warm or at room temperature, garnished with the remaining
dill.

G
SHRIKHAND
(SAFFRON-SCENTED YOGURT DESSERT)
ujarati shrikhand is one of the world’s simplest and most
exquisite desserts. There is nothing to it but well-drained yogurt—
the creamier the better—sweetened to your preference and gilded
with a little saffron. It can be lightly spiced and garnished, but the
satiny and voluptuous character comes only from yogurt and
sugar (I use confectioners’ sugar). It’s worth making a batch of
fresh yogurt just for this purpose; otherwise, look for the
creamiest possible whole-milk yogurt.
The following recipe is no more than a rough guide. Omit the
cardamom or other flavorings if you want; the pistachios are a
great touch, but it will be delicious without them.
YIELD: about 3 ½ to 4 cups (6 to 8 servings)
6 cups plain whole-milk yogurt, preferably an unhomogenized
Turkish-style brand with 3.5 percent milkfat
1 to 2 tablespoons milk
A large pinch of saffron
½ to ¾ cup confectioners’ sugar (or to taste), sifted
A pinch of salt (optional)
A large pinch of freshly ground cardamom (seeds from 2 to 3 green
cardamom pods), nutmeg, or cinnamon (optional)
A dash of rosewater (optional)
A handful of chopped pistachios for garnish (optional)
Scoop the yogurt into a cheesecloth-lined colander or a couple of plastic
yogurt cheese funnels (this page), set over a bowl or bowls. Let drain at
room temperature for 4 hours. It will lose about 1½ to 1¾ cups of whey,
depending on the individual batch of yogurt. Save the whey for another
purpose.
When the yogurt has pretty much stopped dripping, turn it out into a
mixing bowl. Heat the milk in a small pan, crumble the saffron into it,
and remove from the heat.

Begin beating the confectioners’ sugar into the yogurt with a wooden
spoon, a few tablespoons at a time. When it is sweetened to your taste,
beat in the optional pinch of salt; strain the saffron-infused milk and
gently work it into the mixture. If the shrikhand seems lumpy, force it
through a coarse-mesh sieve into a bowl. Now beat in any preferred
seasoning (or none). Refrigerate for 2 to 3 hours and serve very cold,
garnished if desired with pistachios. (Charoli nuts would be as usual as
pistachios in Gujarat, but these small and faintly celery-accented nuts
can’t always be found here, even in Indian groceries.)
Shrikhand is supposed to be served in elegantly small portions, but
don’t count on your guests’ feeling the same way.
VARIATION: Shrikhand De Luxe: One day I happened to have both some
very good Turkish-style yogurt and some labneh on hand. It occurred to
me that together they ought to produce something like shrikhand
concentrated to the ultimate power, and I was right. Later that day I
took some to a family gathering. “I don’t eat yogurt,” muttered a
supremely unimpressed teenager, and stuck a spoon in it, then devoured
two large helpings.
The ingredients are the same as for the previous version, except that for
the 6 cups of yogurt you substitute 4 cups (1 quart) of very creamy
unhomogenized plain yogurt (3.5 percent milkfat, if possible) and 2 cups
(1 pint) of labneh (this page). Beat them together in a mixing bowl, force
the mixture through a mesh strainer, and drain for 4 hours as directed
above. Sweeten, season, and garnish as for regular shrikhand. Sometimes
I add a dash of almond extract (anomalous but good). Sweet Turkish
dried apricots are a fine accompaniment. Or for a completely
unorthodox variation, omit the seasonings and spoon the mixture over
fresh berries or sliced peaches.

I
REVANI
(YOGURT-SEMOLINA CAKE WITH LEMON SYRUP)
n Greece and Turkey, revani is the general name for a family of
cakes made (usually) with durum-wheat semolina or a semolina-
flour mixture, which are soaked after baking in some kind of
syrup. When taken from the oven they are heavy, coarse-textured,
and a little gritty from the hard, stubborn semolina. But the syrup
bath moistens and flavors the cake without making it disintegrate
as a fine-textured European cake would. Yogurt is a frequent
ingredient, with or without some other source of fat like butter or
olive oil. The acid will slightly tenderize the crumb.
This simple lemon-flavored version comes with little change
from Özcan Ozan’s splendid book The Sultan’s Kitchen, a must for
any fan of Turkish food. It uses only drained yogurt (this page)
with no other fat except the egg yolks, so it’s crucial to start with
the richest, creamiest yogurt you can make or buy. Be sure to buy
semolina fine enough for cakes, not the coarser kind for puddings.
Allow at least 4 hours after baking for the cake to soak up the
syrup. It is traditionally served with kaymak, the Turkish version
of clotted cream, often sold in Turkish groceries. English clotted
cream and plain whipped cream are reasonable substitutes. Any
of them will be an excellent foil to the intense sweetness of the
lemon syrup. A tiny serving goes a long way.
YIELD: One 8-inch square cake (16 small servings)
SYRUP:
1 cup water
1 ½ cups sugar
4 scant teaspoons freshly squeezed lemon juice
CAKE:
Butter for greasing baking dish
Flour for dusting baking dish

4 eggs, separated
¼ cup sugar
Zest of half a lemon (more, if preferred)
½ cup fine semolina
⅓ cup plus 1 tablespoon all-purpose flour, sifted
1 teaspoon baking powder
A pinch of salt
1 cup well-drained yogurt (an extra-creamy kind, either homemade
or Turkish-style with 3.5 percent milkfat)
Chopped pistachios for garnish (optional)
Kaymak (see above), clotted cream, or whipped cream for topping
Make the syrup by heating the water and sugar in a small saucepan.
When it reaches a vigorous boil, turn the heat to low and simmer for 15
to 20 minutes. Add the lemon juice and set aside to cool completely.
Have all cake ingredients at room temperature. Butter and flour an 8
× 8-inch Pyrex baking dish. Preheat the oven to 350°F.
Beat the egg yolks, sugar, and lemon zest until light and frothy.
Combine the semolina, flour, and baking powder and stir them in. Add
the yogurt; fold and stir to incorporate as smoothly as possible.
Beat the egg whites to stiff peaks with a pinch of salt and fold them
into the yogurt batter in two or three increments. Spread the batter in
the pan. It will make a flat layer just about covering the bottom. Bake
for 35 to 40 minutes, or until lightly browned.
Remove the cake from the oven and instantly cut it into 16 squares—
or if you are good at geometry, diamonds. Pour the cooled syrup over
the hot cake, which will be swimming in syrup. Let sit at room
temperature for 4 to 6 hours; the syrup will be gradually absorbed.
Garnish with the optional chopped pistachios and serve with the kaymak
or cream.
ABOUT YOGURT-BASED DRINKS
All peoples who make yogurt—indeed, soured milk generally—also
drink it in some form or other. The oldest traditions belong to the many
lands making up my imaginary “Yogurtistan” (the ex-Yugoslavia to
Central Asia). The richest traditions, however, developed on the Indian

subcontinent. In most places where yogurt is a drink, it is a savory one
flavored with nothing but salt and perhaps some dried mint. But in India
and neighboring parts, people took to mixing drinkable forms of yogurt
with a fragrant spectrum of other ingredients, both “salty” (meaning
savory) and sweet. Though I find cold unsweetened yogurt drinks more
refreshing than the ones with sugar or fruit, I would like to see all the
traditional kinds, in their delightful diversity, earn a larger place in
American diets.
Americans, who are by and large little acquainted with any of the real
yogurt-drinking traditions, tend to be confused by the many different
names and approaches. It is easiest to begin not with the remarkable
world of Indian yogurt drinks but with the simpler and more ancient
kind known throughout Yogurtistan: plain yogurt thinned with a little
water and flavored with a dash of salt and (often) a little mint. The
name most familiar in this country is the Turkish ayran, or airan. Some
parts of the Arab-speaking world also call it ayran, but more often it has
no name of its own other than “yogurt” (laban). In Iran and Afghanistan,
where it is commonly made with carbonated water, the usual name is
doogh, or abdoogh. By whatever name, it is a lovely restorative.

N
AYRAN OR DOOGH
(TURKISH-OR PERSIAN-STYLE YOGURT DRINK)
ewcomers to yogurt traditions may be puzzled by the
instruction to thicken yogurt by draining the whey and then thin
it by adding water. But to harp again on a crucial point, the
draining step really changes the character of the yogurt,
especially delicate, newly made yogurt. It is fresher-tasting this
way, and the salt and mint register more brightly.
From ancient times, yogurt for drinking has been made with the
milk of any and all local dairy animals. If you can find sheep’s-or
goats’-milk yogurt, give them a try (for using goats’-milk yogurt,
see Variation below). Greek yogurt from a combination of sheep’s
and goats’ milk is excellent.
YIELD: 1 serving
1 cup very fresh plain whole-milk yogurt, lightly drained, preferably
a creamy kind from cows’ or sheep’s milk
Salt (anything from a large pinch to ⅛ teaspoon)
½ teaspoon Turkish dried mint, crumbled, or 1 sprig of fresh mint,
lightly bruised (optional)
½ cup very cold water or (for doogh) plain chilled seltzer or soda
water
Ice cubes or crushed ice
Mix the yogurt, salt, and optional dried mint in a prechilled bowl and
gradually whisk in the water. Serve in chilled glasses, poured over ice
cubes or crushed ice. Alternatively, whip until frothy in a blender with
crushed ice and serve garnished with a mint sprig.
VARIATION: For goats’-milk ayran, be sure to use goats’-milk yogurt (about
1¼ cups per serving) made without any of the thickeners added to most
commercial brands. As explained on this page, unadulterated goats’-milk
yogurt (I use Yo-Goat) will be thin enough to drink as is. Skip the added
water, stir or blend in the seasonings, and pour it over the ice.


I
ABOUT LASSI AND OTHER INDIAN SOURED-MILK DRINKS
Where culinary terms are concerned, the United States and English-
speaking India certainly are two nations divided by a common language.
Take “buttermilk,” sometimes given as a translation of the Hindi word
lassi as well as counterparts in several other Indian languages that you
may find on the menus of regional Indian restaurants in this country.
The thing meant here is not at all identical to American commercial
cultured buttermilk. For reasons explained in the discussion of cultured
buttermilk and the organisms used to make it (this page), diluted plain
yogurt comes closer to the taste and texture of Indian buttermilk than
our cultured version. Of course, there’s no reason that people who prefer
American buttermilk shouldn’t use it.
Lassi is most often associated with the Punjab, where people regard it
with the sort of patriotic local pride that Buffalonians bestow on chicken
wings. It and its variously named Indian cousins generally are made with
more emphatic and varied seasonings than ayran and company. Even the
simplest “salty” and sweet versions of lassi are usually stamped with
such flavor accents as cumin in the savory or rosewater in the sweetened
kind. Fruit purées, most often mango or banana, often figure in
sweetened lassi. So do mustard seeds, cardamom or coriander seeds,
peppercorns, fresh ginger, curry leaves, cilantro, and/or chile peppers in
“buttermilk” drinks of southern India. You can and should experiment
with any flavors that take your fancy. There is no “wrong” way to make
lassi as long as the yogurt is good.
Lovers of special cooking tools may want to try mixing lassi with the
traditional churning stick (kavvam or madhani, sometimes sold in Indian
grocery/housewares stores) instead of a blender or processor.
SALT LASSI
ndians swear by the combination of “curd [yogurt],” salt, and
cumin as an antidote to torrid summer heat, and believe that hot
spices help you cool off by making you sweat. I couldn’t agree

more. Nothing is more blissfully restorative at summer’s worst
than salt lassi in any version.
I like to drain the yogurt before adding water, but it is not
necessary. Just don’t try to play calorie games by substituting
nonfat yogurt, which gives no idea of the right consistency. (In
India the yogurt or buttermilk used for this purpose most often
comes from water buffaloes’ milk, which is much richer than
cows’ milk. Indians living here sometimes even spike the yogurt
with a tiny bit of cream for more body.) Cumin, either the regular
kind or Indian black cumin, will add more flavor if you briefly
toast it in a small heavy skillet and grind it yourself. If you can
find Indian “black salt” (a unique kind of rock salt, really pink
when ground), its distinctive sulfur flavor is wonderful in lassi.
Use slightly less black salt than plain salt.
The following is a very simple salt lassi. Start with the smaller
amount of yogurt, and add more to taste if it seems to need it.
YIELD: 1 serving
½ to 1 cup very fresh plain whole-milk yogurt, preferably a creamy
unhomogenized kind
Ground cumin or Indian black cumin to taste (anything from a large
pinch to ⅛ teaspoon)
Sea salt or Indian black salt to taste (anything from a large pinch to
⅛ teaspoon), ground fine if coarse
Very cold water in any preferred proportion
Crushed ice from 2 to 3 ice cubes (or more to taste)
Whisk ½ cup yogurt smooth in a small pitcher and start adding
seasonings and water a little at a time—more yogurt as well, if you like
—until the taste and consistency are close to what you like but on the
concentrated side (the ice will dilute it slightly). Most people prefer lassi
somewhere between the thickness of heavy and light cream. Pour the
mixture into a blender or food processor, add the ice, and process until
smooth and frothy. Serve at once in a tall chilled glass.
VARIATIONS: The fun begins when you elaborate on this minimalist

formula by adding other seasonings, which are usually de rigueur in the
regional kinds known as chhaach, neer (meaning “water-thinned”) moru,
and majjiga. You can start by experimenting with some coarsely ground
black pepper or toasted and ground coriander seeds, and go on to a
pinch of ground asafetida; small fresh chile peppers (slivered); fresh
ginger (grated or slivered); or a tarka of South Indian seasonings made
by heating a little ghee or oil in a small skillet and adding a large pinch
each of Indian brown mustard seeds and cumin seeds, a few lightly
bruised curry leaves, and, if desired, a couple of tiny dried red chile
peppers and sizzling them in the ghee until the mustard seeds pop; you
then whisk the whole thing into the yogurt. Or if you have a favorite
version (commercial or homemade) of garam masala or the tarter chaat
masala, try adding a pinch.
Fresh cilantro or mint leaves, pulled from the stems and lightly
bruised or chopped, are a delightful final addition to all forms of salt
lassi.

P
PUNJABI-STYLE SWEET LASSI
unjabis, who love lassi with proprietary zeal as the fruit of
native Punjabi genius, often use milk rather than water to thin the
yogurt. (You can try this in salt lassi as well.)
YIELD: 1 serving
½ to 1 cup very fresh plain whole-milk yogurt, preferably a creamy
unhomogenized kind
1 ½ to 2 ½ tablespoons superfine sugar, or to taste
Rosewater (a dash to 2 teaspoons; different kinds vary greatly in
intensity)
Very cold water or whole milk in any preferred proportion
Crushed ice from 2 to 3 ice cubes (or more to taste)
Mint leaves or dried edible rose petals for garnish (optional)
Proceed as for Salt Lassi, but begin by whisking the yogurt as smooth as
possible with part of the sugar, then adding the rosewater and more
sugar to taste a little at a time. Serve at once in a tall chilled glass,
garnished with the optional mint or rose petals.
VARIATIONS: Other essences and extracts are also popular in sweet lassi. If
you can find kewra (screwpine) or sandalwood essence at an Indian
grocery, try adding it a drop at a time. Or make an infusion of a few
saffron strands in a tiny bit of hot milk and strain the fragrant saffron
milk into the sweetened yogurt. Orange-blossom water and genuine
vanilla extract are, as far as I know, quite inauthentic, but delicious.

T
MANGO LASSI
he favorite version in Indian-American restaurants. In all
honesty, frozen mango pulp is better than many of the fresh
mangos sold here.
YIELD: About 3 cups
1 medium-small, very ripe mango or ¾ cup frozen mango pulp
2 cups very fresh plain whole-milk yogurt, preferably a creamy
unhomogenized kind
A dash of freshly squeezed lime or lemon juice, or to taste
A dash of salt, or to taste
Crushed ice from 8 to 9 ice cubes
Superfine sugar (optional)
Mint sprigs for garnish (optional)
If you are using a fresh mango, detach the flesh from skin and pit as
follows: Hold the mango upright on a work surface, narrow edge facing
you and the flat and rounded sides to your right and left. With a small
sharp knife, slice vertically down through both flat and rounded sides so
as to just miss the flat pit. Skin side down, score each of the cut halves
into ¾-inch dice. Push from the skin side to open up the scored side;
slide the knife blade under the flesh to detach from the skin. Slice away
as much of the remaining flesh as you can from around the pit and cut
into small dice. If using frozen mango pulp, simply thaw to refrigerator
temperature.
Place the yogurt, mango flesh or thawed pulp, lime juice, salt, and ice
in a blender or food processor; process until the ice is slushy and the
mixture is frothy and well combined. Taste for flavor and sweetness. It
should need no sugar unless you have a rather insipid mango; if
necessary add a teaspoon or two of superfine sugar and process to blend.
If it seems a little bland, add another jolt of fresh citrus juice and/or salt.
If it is too thick for your taste, dilute with a little ice water. Serve at once
in tall glasses, garnished with the optional mint.


I
TARHANA, TRAHANA, AND RELATIVES
f I had the power to dictate the next all-the-rage ingredient, my
first nominee might well be tarhana or one of its many cousins—
trahana, kishk, kashk, and more. By whatever name, they belong
to a large, amorphous family of staple foods that has no good
general label. In Mediterranean Grains and Greens, Paula Wolfert—
who along with Diane Kochilas has done much to publicize these
treasures—suggested “rustic pasta.” I lean toward “proto-pasta,”
because tarhana and the rest of the clan undoubtedly existed
before any other sort of pasta in the regions that were the cradle
of both cereal-growing and dairying. All consist of wheat (or
occasionally barley) in some form—crushed, cracked, ground, or
as cooked whole berries—combined with a liquid element like
milk, then dried enough to be reduced to pellets, granules, or
morsels. Once dried and kept dry, they last forever without
refrigeration.
If you were to catalogue every variety that exists on earth, the
list would stretch from egg barley and Pennsylvania Dutch rivvels
to Sardinian fregola and the many forms of couscous. But probably
the oldest members (and for me, the shining lights) of the family
are kinds found from the Balkans far into the Middle East that are
made with soured milk, buttermilk, or yogurt, particularly from
goats’ or sheep’s milk. The interplay between tart milk and grain
flavor has to be tasted to be understood.
The most varied and complex of the soured proto-pastas were
developed in Turkey, where their collective name is “tarhana,”
and Greece, where they are called “trahana” or xinohondros (“sour
cracked wheat,” a Cretan specialty). The simplest kinds consist of
nothing but flour and yogurt or soured milk, partly dried and
crushed or crumbled to the texture of coarse flour or fine meal.
The most elaborate ones are slowly fermented, sometimes with

the aid of yeast, and use a battery of other ingredients that may
include sweet and hot peppers, tomatoes, and chickpeas, with or
without herbs and spices. Some kinds are made into coarse,
rough-textured crumbs, some into bite-sized pieces. There are
versions with sour fruit like pomegranate or quince. Every village,
indeed every family, used to have its own variation. A version
even came to Hungary as tarhonya, though today the name
usually applies to a form of egg barley made without yogurt.
The long drying period produces a vividly fused concentration
of all the original flavors together. Unfortunately, the drying step
will be the chief logistical problem for many people seeking to
duplicate this marvelous specialty in the United States. In
Anatolia and Greece, the year’s supply was traditionally made
from combined sheep’s and goats’ milk in late summer, when
lactation was starting to wind down (resulting in scantier but
richer milk) and fiercely hot, dry sunlight prevailed everywhere.
Those of us in areas of high humidity can expect the drying
process to take a day or several days longer than can people in
Arizona. Depending on how stubborn it’s being, you may want to
finish it off in a home dehydrator. Some cooks suggest an oven at
lowest setting, but I don’t recommend this unless you can reliably
keep the temperature below 150°F.
The chief use of tarhana/trahana (which is “kishk” or “kashk”
in most of the non-Turkish Middle East) is as a kind of porridge,
or a soup base or thickener. It also goes into some wonderful
fillings for savory pies or stuffed vegetables. Making it from
scratch is undeniably the sort of extended project that people
either are or aren’t game for, like homemade pasta or sourdough
bread. Come to think of it, sour-milk tarhana is not unlike a
combination of the two, since sourdough is also a product of
lactic-acid fermentation.
I have successfully made Turkish-style tarhana at home from a
recipe in Özcan Ozan’s excellent The Sultan’s Kitchen. I
recommend his version to anyone who wants to master this
incredibly labor-intensive—but also incredibly good—staple of
Turkish cuisine; otherwise, there are several good commercial

brands. For most cooks, the recipe for Greek-style Sour Trahana
will be a more practical undertaking.
I suggest trying a commercial Greek brand before deciding
whether to embark on the adventure yourself. Look for the
pebbly-textured Vlaha or Krinos brands of trahana labeled “sour”
or “xinos,” meaning that it was made from milk in soured form.
(If it says “sweet” or “glykos,” it was made from unsoured milk—
perfectly okay, but not as interesting as the other.) The best,
though unfortunately scarcest, imported trahana I know—the
coarse-textured Pittas brand—comes from Cyprus and consists of
cracked wheat and sheep’s-milk yogurt formed into pieces about
the size and shape of Tootsie Rolls.
Tarhana imported from Turkey is often very sharp-flavored,
from the complex mixture of vegetables and seasonings worked
into the original ferment and left to ripen over a long period.
Baktat, Coskun, and Sera are the most common commercial
brands here. They are finer than most Greek trahana, a gritty
powder with a strong pink or orange-red tinge from red peppers
and tomatoes.
TO COOK TARHANA/TRAHANA: BASIC METHOD
In Turkey and Greece, people regularly eat tarhana/trahana as a
breakfast porridge. This is one of the most forgiving and foolproof
dishes in existence. Allowing roughly ¼ cup of dried cereal per
serving, you stir it into about four to six times its volume of
boiling water and cook it, stirring occasionally, over medium-low
heat until the water is absorbed and you have a thick, well-
softened mush or porridge. The time will usually be between 15
and 30 minutes. If the water starts boiling off before the grain is
tender, simply add more water and cook longer. If you’ve
inadvertently used too much water, turn up the heat to evaporate
it faster. Or if you decide you’d like to try it in a soupy condition,
that’s fine, too. Serve it with butter, creamy yogurt, crumbled feta
or grated Parmesan cheese, or any desired fresh herb. And note
that the Greek kinds—especially those using bulgur—make an

T
excellent lunch or dinner side dish for grain fanciers.
Tarhana/trahana is often briefly soaked in water before being
brought to a boil, to shorten the cooking time. Another variation
is to cook it pilaf-style, briefly sautéing the cereal in butter or
olive oil (sometimes along with chopped onions or garlic) before
adding liquid—stock instead of water, if you want a rich man’s
version of what is in its origins an exceedingly thrifty dish. By all
means experiment with tarhana/trahana to thicken and enrich
soups or stews; see the recipe for Turkish Tarhana Soup.
The most exciting array of recipes using trahana that I have
seen—far surpassing my few suggestions—is presented by Diane
Kochilas in The Glorious Foods of Greece.
HOMEMADE GREEK-STYLE SOUR TRAHANA
his is a several days’ project, though it involves very little real
work. It makes a coarse-textured trahana that will be a hit with
bulgur fans. My version is modeled on a recipe in Aglaia
Kremezi’s The Foods of Greece—or was; over time it’s wandered
some distance from the original. As noted above, the drying
process may stretch out quite a while.
YIELD: About 2 ½ pounds (7 cups)
2 cups milk, preferably goats’ milk
2 cups rich, creamy plain yogurt, preferably Greek goats’- and
sheep’s-milk yogurt
About 4 cups coarse bulgur
About ⅔ cup fine semolina
1 heaping tablespoon salt
2 to 4 tablespoons olive oil (optional)
Flour or more oil for handling the dough

Bring the milk nearly to a boil, and cool to room temperature. Stir in the
yogurt, and let stand overnight in a warm room, loosely covered.
Pour the soured milk into a large saucepan with the bulgur and
semolina. Mix everything together and set the pan over low heat,
stirring, for several minutes. The goal is only to soften the bulgur enough
so that it will absorb the liquid. Different batches will vary quite a lot in
absorption capacity. You want a dough about the consistency of a dense
meatloaf mixture. If it is much thicker than that, thin it with a little
water; if it’s loose and runny, add some more bulgur or semolina. Work
in the salt and oil (oil isn’t absolutely necessary, but it helps the dough
cohere).
Let the sticky, pebbly-textured dough cool until you can handle it.
Scoop out handfuls the size of medium meatballs and flatten them into
patties, occasionally moistening your hands with oil or dusting them
with flour to keep from sticking. Set the patties on parchment paper
spread on a tabletop or cookie sheet. Let stand, turning several times a
day, for two to three days, or until bone-dry. In weather too damp for
complete drying, the final stages can be accomplished in a home
dehydrator on the lowest possible setting.
Break and crumble the patties to coarse crumbs until the largest lumps
are no bigger than a raisin. Store at room temperature in a glass jar or
jars.

T
TURKISH TARHANA SOUP I AND II
arhana in a soup acts as both flavor agent and thickener. The
thickening effect, of course, comes from flour—but flour
magically transformed by having been set to ferment as a dough
in the company of yogurt and vegetables. A tarhana-thickened
soup is not floury but somehow rustic, suave, and fortifying at the
same time.
Tarhana soup is so familiar to Turkish cooks that recipes are
scarcely necessary. “Dissolve some dried tarhana in some
simmering water” is the gist of it. “Water or broth” is one way of
enlarging the possibilities, but there are dozens more. Preferred
ratios of tarhana to liquid range from about 1:4 (very thick) to 1:8
(thin).
Tarhana soup makes a great breakfast or lunch, and is a
splendid main-dish soup for an otherwise light supper. The
following two recipes—one minimalist, one a little more fleshed
out—are only rough outlines of something that defies exact
formulas.
TARHANA SOUP I
YIELD: 4 to 6 servings
6 cups water or broth (lamb, chicken, beef, or veal)
¾ to 1 cup Turkish tarhana
1 to 2 teaspoons Turkish dried mint, crushed (optional)
Freshly squeezed lemon juice to taste (optional)
Aleppo, Maraş, or Urfa red pepper flakes to taste (optional)
Salt to taste
Freshly ground black pepper
Bring the water or broth to a boil in a saucepan. Reduce the heat to low
and add the tarhana in a trickle, whisking to eliminate lumps. Cook,
stirring frequently, for about 15 to 20 minutes, or until thickened to the
consistency of a light cream soup. In the last few minutes, stir in any of

the optional seasonings along with the salt and pepper. Serve at once,
piping hot.
TARHANA SOUP II
YIELD: 4 to 6 servings
3 to 4 tablespoons butter
1 medium onion, chopped
1 small Italian frying or cubanelle pepper, cored, seeded, and cut into
thin strips
6 to 8 ounces ground lamb or beef (optional)
1 large ripe tomato, peeled, seeded, and chopped
6 cups strong broth (lamb, chicken, beef, or veal) or water
¾ to 1 cup Turkish tarhana
1 to 2 teaspoons Turkish dried mint, crushed
Freshly squeezed lemon juice to taste (optional)
1 tablespoon tomato paste (optional)
Aleppo, Maraş, or Urfa red pepper flakes to taste (optional)
Salt to taste
Freshly ground black pepper to taste
About 1 to 1 ½ cups cubed or coarsely crumbed bread from any
preferred kind of sturdy-textured loaf, slightly stale
Melt 1 tablespoon of the butter in a saucepan, add the onion, and sauté
until translucent. Add the pepper strips and sauté briefly. Crumble the
optional ground meat into the pan and cook, stirring to break up lumps,
until it loses its red color. Stir in the tomato, let simmer for a minute,
and add the broth or water. Bring to a boil, reduce the heat to low, and
add the tarhana in a trickle, whisking to eliminate any lumps. Cook,
stirring frequently, for 15 to 20 minutes, or until lightly thickened. Add
the mint, any of the optional seasonings, and salt and pepper.
Heat the remaining butter in a small skillet until fragrant, sizzling, and
not quite browned. Add the bread cubes or crumbs and let brown lightly,
tossing to coat well with butter. Serve the soup at once, piping hot,
garnishing each portion with some of the croutons.


CULTURED MILK AND CREAM
Introduction
Some Cultured Milk and Cream Products: A Brief Survey
Homemade Cultured Buttermilk
Homemade Sour Cream
Herring with Sour Cream Sauce
Smoked Whitefish Salad
Buttermilk-Caraway Soup
Michael Field’s “Chlodnik” (Cold Savory Buttermilk Soup)
Chlodnik Litewski (Polish Cold Beet Soup)
Kadhi or Karhi (North Indian Thick Buttermilk Soup)
Moru Kozhambu (South Indian Buttermilk Soup)
Cold Blueberry Soup
Sour Cream/Crème Fraîche as Cold Sauce and Dip
Buttermilk Salad Dressing
Cucumber-Radish Sour Cream Sauce
Mennonite Buttermilk “Salad”
Beef Stroganoff
Chicken Paprikás, or Paprikahuhn
Mushrooms with Sour Cream Sauce

Mushroom Pirozhki with Sour Cream Pastry
Buttermilk Potatoes
Fried Bananas with Crema
Southern Buttermilk Pie
Hangop (Dutch Buttermilk Dessert)
Buttermilk as Drink

Y ogurt is so hugely important in so many of the world’s cuisines as to
cast most other kinds of cultured milk into comparative shade. But they
exist in diverse forms wherever milk exists, because milk naturally
attracts lactic-acid bacteria and sometimes other organisms, including
particular molds and yeasts. We know very little about their history.
Still, the reason for their diversity is obvious: As dairying spread out
from its first centers into most of the Old World, local climates favored
wild local microorganisms.
As explained earlier, over many centuries all dairying peoples learned
to culture milk by exposing it in a fairly controlled way to certain
organisms that prospered in their own haunts, usually in the form of a
starter taken from a previous batch. Or to put it another way, they
learned to domesticate bits of the local microflora. Probably no one will
ever be able to identify the multiple versions of cultured milk made
throughout the world. (Modern science is not close to identifying all the
microscopic species and subspecies used to produce them.) What they
have in common is that, like yogurt, they are allowed to ferment just
until there is enough casein precipitation to form a partly liquid gel, not
the firm curd of cheese. But unlike yogurt, most involve not the
thermophilic (heat-loving) bacteria endemic to Yogurtistan but
mesophilic species that need cooler conditions to thrive.
The most exotic kinds, from an American consumer’s viewpoint, were
native to Central Asia and the western fringes of China, where horse-
herding nomads used complexes of bacteria and yeasts to ferment the
very lactose-rich mares’ milk into a sour, slightly effervescent alcoholic
drink called “kumys” (or “kumis,” “koumiss”). Today it is rare and
perhaps headed for extinction, at least as made from mares’ milk. A
milder-flavored and less-alcoholic cousin, “kefir,” evolved in the
mountainous reaches between Georgia and southern Russia. (Unless
sugar was added, it never developed the same kick, because no milch
animals except horses and asses give milk with enough lactose to
support much alcoholic fermentation.)
Another family of regional cultured-milk specialties little known in
this country originated in Scandinavia or the Netherlands and is known
among dairy chemists by the collective name of “ropy milks”—“ropy” in

the sense that a spoon dipped into the milk will come out trailing long
viscous strings that non-Scandinavians find disconcerting. This unique
quality comes from special mutations of several common mesophilic
bacteria. Old-timers are said to consider ropy milk more flavorful and
sustaining than any other kind of soured milk. The culinary historians
Yvonne and William Lockwood report that diehards in the Finnish
communities of Michigan’s Upper Peninsula still keep alive the Finnish
version, “long viili,” while the younger generation offers unflattering
comparisons to mucus or slime and sticks to “short viili,” which is more
like our cultured buttermilk.
These are all too familiar stories of former knowledge going the way
of the two-bit subway fare. Such changes are usually more subtle than
the loss of mares’-milk kumys or ropy milk. The plainest examples in the
United States and most of western Europe are the replacement of home-
soured milk and true buttermilk by cultured buttermilk as a universal
standin, and the parallel case of home-soured cream and cultured sour
cream. Today the cultured versions are all that many people know of
fresh fermented milk.
It is easy to suppose that “buttermilk” as we know it connects us with
a homespun culinary past. But until about a hundred years ago, recipes
mentioning buttermilk—or sour cream—by name appeared less often in
cookbooks than today. If you made butter, you regularly had some
buttermilk on hand and knew how to use it without recipes. And if you
had more fresh milk or cream on hand than you had immediate use for,
you were bound to have sour milk or sour cream as soon as the lactic-
acid bacteria in your home started colonizing them.
The results were anything but uniform in quality. Any batch might
differ from preceding ones, though experienced cooks could partly
control things by keeping track of the ambient temperature (everything
soured faster in summer) and using the last of one batch to carefully
inoculate the next. Different households or regions as well as different
ethnic groups had their preferences about how sour or mild, thick or
thin sour milk and cream should be. Clearly, local complexes of lactic-
acid bacteria can’t have been identical from one region (or even
neighborhood) to another. The bottom line: Sour milk, buttermilk, and
sour cream were simply facts of kitchen life, capable of infinite
gradations that no one tried to capture in cookbooks.

Hints of change appeared around 1800, but it took more than a
century to erase the diversity of American cultured milk. One factor was
the introduction of alkaline leaveners for quick-raised breads and cakes,
the predecessors of today’s baking soda. Sour milk at once took on a
particular role in a new kitchen department that claimed to be more
modern and enlightened than yeast breads or cakes—chemically raised
batters for quick breads, biscuits, muffins, or pancakes. Batters using
potash, pearlash, or the first versions of “saleratus” depended on a
reaction that instantly generated carbon-dioxide bubbles in the mixture
before it went into the oven or onto the griddle. This chemical change
depended on the addition of something acid. Cream of tartar was the
recommendation of the scientifically minded, but sour milk was cheap
and universally available. It thus began acquiring a greater prominence
in written recipes.
But sour milk’s days in the kitchen were numbered. The triumph of
fresh, unsoured “sweet” milk was dawning. When pasteurized milk
began to drive out raw milk, cooks reaching for sour milk increasingly
found that they had none on hand. The usual improvised substitute was
sweet milk rapidly curdled with a little lemon juice or vinegar. It was at
this point, by about the late 1920s, that American dairy producers
started selling the product known as “cultured buttermilk”—a slightly
thickened soured milk based on commercial mixtures of mesophilic
bacteria. Of course it was not real buttermilk, which was the residue left
from churning butter and varied in flavor along with the character of the
butter itself (this page). But by the time of World War II, few consumers
knew enough to quibble over the difference. Recipes calling for
buttermilk became more numerous in cookbooks, and cooks came to
assume that they represented a taste of the colonial or early American
past.
The good news in this tale of shrinking horizons is that at least we still
have access to a useful and sometimes quite flavorful product: plain
cultured buttermilk. The less happy aspects are that neither consumers
nor producers really think of cultured buttermilk as a delicacy and a
privilege, and that no enterprising manufacturer has tried offering, say,
half a dozen subtly varied versions of bacterially soured milk (as
opposed to additive-laced travesties aimed at dieters) to knowledgeable
buyers. All that is needed are excellent fresh milk (perhaps

unhomogenized) and different combinations of bacteria to bring out
different flavor nuances. I will wager that if even a few more
differentiated kinds of honest sour milk were available, the public would
respond. The story is much the same with sour cream, though I think
sour milk or “buttermilk” either whole, low-fat, or nonfat has richer,
more varied possibilities.
Even now, the best cultured buttermilk is a great culinary resource. Its
uses are somewhat interchangeable with those of plain yogurt, but it
harmonizes more discreetly with some flavors because of the different
character imparted by the mesophilic bacteria. It’s still a useful leavener,
in tandem with baking soda, for many kinds of biscuits, muffins, griddle
cakes, and quick breads. As a marinade naturally helped out by lactic
acid, it’s even better than sweet milk at taming fishy-flavored fish, and
also is popular for tenderizing chicken. A very vocal Southern fried-
chicken school insists on soaking the pieces in buttermilk for several
hours or even overnight before cooking.
To me, cultured buttermilk is most irresistible as a cold drink—with or
without other flavorings; see this page for suggestions—or soup. As “sour
milk,” it was the foundation of various Kaltschalen, a tribe of slightly
sweetened North German cold soups that were much loved a few
generations ago. Farther to the east, sour milk was the chief
underpinning of distinctively sour-flavored cold soups as richly varied as
Spanish gazpachos. Today cultured buttermilk is our chief tool for
reproducing, or at least approximating, these disappearing legacies.
Cultured sour cream is nearly as versatile an ingredient. Its American
success, however, came a little later. Before pasteurization, cream left at
room temperature gradually acquired a lactic-acid tang, though it stayed
less sharp than sour milk because the colonizing bacteria didn’t have as
much lactose to work on. Before homogenization, it also set up quite
thick in a couple of days. Though cooks have always used sour cream, it
wasn’t especially visible in American cookbooks until fairly recently.
Ashkenazic Jews from the Pale of Settlement were the first group to use
it extensively as a delicacy in its own right.
Bottled versions of cultured sour cream were available from some
commercial dairies by about 1930. It started being called to wider
attention as a “gourmet” ingredient during the 1940s. By 1951 The Joy
of Cooking urged “the uninitiated” to suspend any prejudice roused by

the name and give it a try, or even make it at home with cultured
buttermilk if they couldn’t buy it.
Within a generation a broad spectrum of American cooks had learned
that cultured sour cream was a marvelous enricher of pastry doughs and
cakes, a good alternative to fresh cream in some kinds of mousses, and
(with a little draining) a lovely dessert topping. Its primary use,
however, was—and still is—in cold sauces, dips, and spreads (see this
page for suggestions).
As time went on, the commercial product increasingly diverged from
its 
homemade 
precursors. 
A 
“double 
homogenization” 
process
introduced in the 1960s enabled manufacturers to get a firm body that
really isn’t intrinsic to sour cream. Eventually they watered down the
milkfat content to about 18 percent (the borderline between half-and-
half and light cream) and started using rennet or vegetable enzymes to
set up the cream in a state between a gel and a soft curd, usually adding
gum thickeners for extra insurance.
Some of us now have a higher-priced but less technologically
convoluted alternative in various boutique brands of crème fraîche—to
my mind, clear proof that manufacturers of cultured dairy products have
everything to gain from thinking outside the box. Most American crème
fraîche versions suggest to me what sour cream could be like if someone
had the initiative to use richer cream, discard some of the usual
processing steps and additives, and experiment with slightly different
combinations of lactic-acid bacteria in order to play on different flavor
possibilities.
In fact, the time seems ripe for introducing an adventurous spectrum
of cultured dairy foods to a wider public. The recent American debut of
Icelandic skyr or a cousin (this page) is a promising omen. I have hopes
that in the next few years small artisanal American dairies will start to
explore the market for exotic kinds of cultured milk or cream—perhaps
even real kefir and Scandinavian “ropy milk.” Meanwhile, the best way
to stop taking cultured buttermilk and sour cream for granted, and gain
some perspective on the limitations of the commercial versions, is to try
making your own.

M
SOME CULTURED MILK AND CREAM PRODUCTS: A BRIEF
SURVEY
ilk fermented by lactic-acid bacteria is thousands of years
older than any system for classifying different kinds. Orderly-
minded searchers for correct definitions are always surprised to
see how haphazardly the names of different soured or sourish
milk-based products are thrown around—and not just in English.
(Trying to sort out anything like the meanings of “buttermilk” and
“sour milk” in other languages is an exercise in frustration.) You’d
think that modern science would have cleared up some of the
confusion. In fact, it has muddied things more by bringing
standardized strains of particular bacteria from industrial
laboratories in, say, Denmark to far-flung parts of the globe, there
to figure in packaged commercial versions of local fermented
dairy specialties that may coexist with more “primitive,” non-
uniform handmade originals. For shoppers, there is the additional
hurdle that American manufacturers are free to tag all kinds of
things with hit-or-miss names unless they happen to be covered
by a federal “standard of identity.” Even if you read the fine print
of labels, you may be completely mystified by the differences
between two items bearing the same name.
ACIDOPHILUS MILK Milk soured with a culture of Lactobacillus
acidophilus to produce something resembling a harsher version of
cultured buttermilk. Widely promoted on the unproven though
not disproven “probiotic” theory that L. acidophilus (which
survives in the colon) boosts the immune system and discourages
the action of undesirable bacteria. Some manufacturers add a
second organism, Brevibacterium bifidum. A “sweet acidophilus
milk” has been developed for those who dislike the flavor of lactic
acid; the bacteria remain dormant in it until the milk reaches the
digestive system.

“BULGARIAN BUTTERMILK” Really more of a yogurt; milk soured with a
culture of Lactobacillus bulgaricus alone instead of the double
action of L. bulgaricus and Streptococcus thermophilus. Unless it’s
been tinkered with to soften the effect, it is sourer than ordinary
yogurt and much sourer than American cultured buttermilk.
CREMA Literally, just the Spanish word for cream. In much of
Central America the word refers to local equivalents of sour
cream with a different mix of cultures and a characteristic slightly
salty tang. Like all kinds of sour cream, crema must have
originated as what hungry neighborhood bacteria did with fresh
cream, before it was turned into more standardized factory-made
products based on commercial laboratory cultures. Today’s crema
is a favorite condiment or table sauce for many Mexican antojitos
and botanas (“little dishes” and bar snacks).
Various brands are sold here in Latin American groceries under
the general name crema centroamericana or more particular names
such as crema mexicana, crema hondureña, and so forth. There
seem to be two main types: a very heavy one based on a cultured
cream-milk mixture with cream cheese added, and another kind
without the cheese. (I haven’t consistently been able to make out
special national nuances.) The flavor of all kinds is delightful,
though the texture usually relies heavily on carrageenan,
modified food starch, and/or rennet for thickening and
smoothness. If crema wins enough new fans on this side of the
border, some entrepreneur surely will be inspired to make a more
truly, if less apparently, rich artisanal version—the taste is too
good not to become part of the mainstream American kitchen.
Meanwhile, look for commercial brands with the fewest additives
listed on the label. Note that it does not contain live organisms, so
you can’t use it to culture your own.
CRÈME FRAÎCHE In French, just “fresh cream,” though it usually
refers to cream lightly cultured with particular mixtures of
mesophilic lactic-acid bacteria (i.e., ones that thrive at moderate
rather than very warm temperatures). The quality of the cream

from which it is made is all-important. Even today, Normandy is
considered the premier French source of cream and butter, and
Norman crème fraîche has long been the gold standard. It is still
occasionally made from unpasteurized Normandy cream (said to
have the truest flavor), but pasteurized versions are more
common. In the United States, a few small dairies make quite
good (pasteurized) crème fraîche. The best is made only from
cream and cultures, and has a more blossomy flavor and luxuriant
texture than commercial American sour cream. Because of its high
milkfat and low casein content, it can be heated to somewhat
higher temperatures than sour cream without curdling. Unless the
label states that it contains live cultures, it probably doesn’t and
can’t be used for culturing your own.
CULTURED BUTTERMILK Milk soured with a mixture of mesophilic
lactic-acid bacteria; for most of us, it is the nearest thing to the
naturally soured milk that used to be more familiar throughout
Europe and North America than unsoured milk. (If you come
across “sour milk” as an ingredient in an old recipe, this is your
best bet.) Cultured buttermilk began replacing true churned
buttermilk (see the butter and buttermilk recipes in “Butter and
True Buttermilk”) at least eighty years ago. Most brands are now
made from low-fat milk (either 1 or 1.5 percent milkfat; in my
mid-Atlantic neck of the woods, Friendship manufactures the best
commercial version). It can be a delicious cold drink when made
without gums and stabilizers, and is also the ideal culturing agent
for cooks interested in experimenting with homemade versions of
fresh cheese and several kinds of cultured milk or cream. Cultured
buttermilk curdles in cooking unless mixed with a little flour or
starch.
Note that today cultured buttermilk often is heated after
fermentation, which kills the cultures. Always look for the words
“active cultures” or “live cultures” on the label.
CULTURED SOUR CREAM Cream—today, more often a mixture of milk
and cream with added dry milk solids, standardized at 18 percent
milkfat—soured with a mixture of mesophilic lactic-acid bacteria.

Please do not be bamboozled by the misleadingly labeled
“nonfat sour cream,” with its dismal complement of gums and
extenders. Low-fat versions differ; ones made with only cultured
cream and milk are sometimes fairly pleasant. But the only skinny
version of sour cream I really like is made by draining plain,
additive-free cultured buttermilk and stirring it smooth. (Follow
directions for Hangop, but leave the buttermilk cream
unsweetened.)
Unless the label states that sour cream contains live cultures, it
probably doesn’t and can’t be used for culturing your own. Note:
There are not very good versions made by direct acidification
rather than culturing.
KEFIR Strictly speaking, milk cultured by the combined action of
several specific bacteria, molds, and yeasts, resulting in both
lactic-acid and alcoholic fermentation. Kefir, or something like it,
may be as ancient as yogurt, but never spread as universally
throughout the Diverse Sources Belt. By the twentieth century it
had come to Russian cities from the Caucasus (where it probably
had been made with cows’, goats’, or sheep’s milk, depending on
what was most convenient), having acquired a reputation for
healthfulness not unlike that of Bulgarian yogurt in 1920s Europe.
It has been a popular Russian drink ever since. Part of the
fascination is that, unlike yogurt bacteria, the starter itself is
visible to the naked eye. It consists of small whitish blobs
clustered into an irregular mass often described as cauliflowerlike.
The kefir “grains” contain all the operative microorganisms, ready
to flourish together symbiotically in the milk and turn it into a
pleasantly sour beverage of gentle fizziness and a slight alcoholic
kick. It is not difficult to make; devotees save the grains from one
batch—they shrink a little but remain intact—and use them to
inoculate the next.
Commercial drinks labeled “kefir” have started showing up in
places like the Whole Foods supermarket chain. These products
are not at all identical to the original kefir. In the first place, they
have been retooled to stop any alcoholic fermentation. They are

usually sold in gussied-up, highly sweetened strawberry or vanilla
versions surrounded by nutritional hype and augmented with
faddish “nutraceuticals” such as the complex sugar called inulin.
Even the plain unsweetened version tastes more like mediocre
yogurt than anything worth consuming on its own. If you want to
taste real kefir, you’re best advised to seek a source of kefir
grains, though you may feel as if you’d embarked on a “Joe sent
me” search for a speakeasy. The New England Cheesemaking
Supply Company (this page) can put you in touch with a source.
Note: “Kefir” is one of several words that can land you in
misunderstandings in Hispanic groceries. It is sometimes an all-
purpose name for any vaguely yogurtlike fermented dairy
product.
KUMYS, KUMIS, KOUMISS By whatever Anglicized spelling, this was
another Russian link with the ancient dairying past. Like kefir, it
was milk fermented by a mixture of different organisms, including
bacteria and yeasts, and produced alcohol as well as lactic acid in
the fermenting process. But apparently kumys had a stronger
connection with nomadic civilizations of the former Silk Road
that eventually fell under Russian domination. It was classically
made from mares’ milk, which has plenty of lactose for producing
alcohol. There was also camels’ milk kumys (probably less
alcoholic). In modern times there has been some Russian
production of kumys from cows’ milk, though it is weak if not
fortified with sugar to boost alcohol content. Memories of real
kumys were growing rare by the late 1960s, when Helen and
George Papashvily went to Kazakhstan while researching the
Russian volume in the Time-Life Foods of the World series and
were told by a nonagenarian recalling her youth, “One mouthful
of kumys and I could name the mare from which it came.” Today
mares’-milk kumys is reported to barely survive in a few parts of
the Central Asian republics and Mongolia. People who have tasted
it describe it as distinctly acid, pungent, and fizzy.
As with “kefir,” Latin Americans loosely apply the name
“kumys” to some yogurt cousins with no connection to the Silk

T
Road original.
SKYR An almost-cheese or not-quite yogurt from Iceland that
involves skim milk cultured by a combination of several lactic-
acid bacteria including the most important yogurt-making
organisms, along with several commonly used for cultured
buttermilk, before being lightly renneted and drained of whey.
Recently several American manufacturers have introduced
agreeable plain versions, as well as others given the sweetened-
yogurt treatment. Take a leaf from the Icelanders and eat plain
skyr with fresh berries, lightly sprinkled with sugar and doused
with cream.
SMETANA The Russian word for sour cream, adopted into French
culinary parlance as smitane. Emigration from the ex–Soviet Union
has brought Russian-style smetana to these shores, and it’s a huge
improvement over most commercial American sour cream. The
flavor is rounder and less sour. The cream doesn’t set up as firm,
but keeps a buttery softness that I find more pleasing. So far it
seems to be sold only in bulk, not prepackaged.
HOMEMADE CULTURED BUTTERMILK
hough by now it should be clear that cultured buttermilk is
“buttermilk” only by courtesy, it can be both flavorful and useful
in its own right. If only manufacturers and consumers had more
respect for it as an excellent food instead of some kind of dieter’s
ration to be tortured into a travesty of honest sour milk! Make up
a batch at home with some good unhomogenized whole milk, and
you will get an inkling of what it can taste like. Even
homogenized whole milk will give you buttermilk with more
body and flavor than the usual supermarket brands.
As long as supermarket buttermilk contains live cultures (and

says so on the label), it is your ticket to better things—meaning
home culturing of milk and cream for fresh cheeses as well as
good versions of cultured sour cream and buttermilk. As with
cheeses, I see no reason for sending away to a specialty supply
company for cultures when you have this perfectly respectable
source of mesophilic bacteria. Try to check expiration dates and
delivery schedules in order to buy the buttermilk as fresh as
possible.
YIELD: 1 quart
1 quart whole milk, preferably unhomogenized and very fresh
¼ cup commercial cultured buttermilk with active cultures, well
shaken before measuring
Culturing will take place a little faster if you begin by warming the milk
to between 85° and 90°F. But it will happen sooner or later as long as the
ambient temperature stays above about 70°F (preferably a little
warmer). In any case, mix the milk and buttermilk and let stand
undisturbed at room temperature, loosely covered, until the milk
thickens slightly and the taste is lightly but distinctly sour (usually
between 12 and 18 hours). Store in the refrigerator, tightly covered, for
up to about a week. As with yogurt, you can use the last of one batch as
starter for another, though—also like yogurt—it loses some bacterial
activity with long keeping.
VARIATIONS: You can make cultured buttermilk from either all skim milk,
whole milk mixed with skim in any desired proportion, or whole milk
mixed with half-and-half (nonultrapasteurized, please) in any desired
proportion.
I usually don’t add salt, but if you like, mix in anything from a pinch
to half a teaspoon per quart after culturing. If you have used
unhomogenized milk, stir the top cream into the rest of the buttermilk
before drinking or using.

C
HOMEMADE SOUR CREAM
all it “Homemade Crème Fraîche” if you like, though the
name is a stretch. A major difference between American
commercial sour cream and the better versions of crème fraîche
sold in this country is that the latter are made from richer cream
and don’t need the extraneous thickeners that manufacturers add
to offset the relative thinness of sour cream.
Make sour cream at home without such disguises, using light
cream that contains the usual commercial minimum of 18 percent
milkfat, and you will end up with something that tastes okay but
has little body. Make it with heavy cream as suggested here, and
you’ll see what you’ve been missing.
As for flavor—well, sour cream inoculated with cultured
buttermilk has great sour cream flavor. Will it taste just like your
favorite brand of crème fraîche? Probably not. Today’s American
makers often play around with different combinations of
mesophilic bacteria in order to bring out certain notes of
fragrance and flavor in the finished crème fraîche. This is one case
in which real perfectionists may want to try ordering a direct-set
culture from a cheese-supply company (this page). Remember,
however, that the mixture of bacteria you end up buying may or
may not resemble that used by a particular crème fraîche maker.
Meanwhile, you can rejoice in the ease of making really excellent
sour cream.
As always, check labels for the presence of live bacteria—which
is why you can’t just use commercial sour cream or crème fraîche
to inoculate cream for your own. Usually they have been
pasteurized or subjected to some heat treatment after packaging,
thereby inactivating any cultures. If you find a brand that works,
you’re luckier than I’ve been.
YIELD: 2 cups
2 cups nonultrapasteurized heavy cream, preferably unhomogenized
¼ cup commercial cultured buttermilk with active cultures, well

shaken before measuring
Mix the cream and buttermilk and let stand undisturbed at room
temperature (70° to 80°F, preferably above 75°F) until thickened and
lightly soured, just as for the preceding Homemade Cultured Buttermilk.
Refrigerate, tightly covered, for up to a week.

F
HERRING WITH SOUR CREAM SAUCE
or centuries both soured milk (or cream) and salt fish were
eaten by everyone in the Northeastern Cow Belt—peasants and
princes, shtetl dwellers and their oppressors. Together they
formed one of the region’s archetypal flavor marriages. The
pairing of cured herring and sour cream crossed the Atlantic
along with Ashkenazic Jews, Poles of all religious beliefs, and
assorted Scandinavians. It even made it to American soi-disant
“gourmet” circles as an appetizer for a generation or so after
herring with mild sweet-and-sour cures appeared for sale in jars
around 1940. Then cured and pickled herring vanished from favor
among the leaders of taste. Today there are all-purpose kitchen
bibles, up-to-date Jewish cookbooks, and even some would-be
encyclopedic fish cookbooks with no mention of herring, period,
let alone the once-popular combination with sour cream.
Please be persuaded to give this immensely satisfying appetizer
another lease on life. There is a problem: finding the fish. You
need to live within reach of an old-fashioned store selling cured
herring in barrels to a Polish, German, Russian, Dutch, Eastern
European Jewish, or other ex-Baltic and North Sea clientele. Some
Russian-American groceries sell decent pickled herring in large
jars or plastic pouches. (Ignore all recipes that tell you to simply
start with a jar of ordinary commercial pickled herring—one look
at typical lists of ingredients should send you fleeing from these
syrupy products.)
Try to buy fillets of plain salted herring. If you don’t see these
labeled, are not clear on what different labels like “schmaltz” and
“matjes” mean, or run into language barriers in the store, just get
whatever looks appealing. If only whole herring are on sale, ask
someone to fillet them for you. When you get home, taste what
you’ve bought to see whether it’s powerfully salty, mild, or sweet-
and-sour. You can get good results with any of these.
Fans of herring with sour cream are wholly non-unanimous on
such details as the preferred variety of onion or how sweet or sour

the sauce should be. I give the onion (the usual yellow kind) a
brief preliminary soaking in slightly sweetened ice water to crisp
it and take out a bit of the oniony sting, and I make the sour
cream sauce fairly but not overpoweringly sweet. Taste as you go
along and adjust the sugar and vinegar to your preference. The
grated apple is a Polish touch that splendidly complements the
fish and sour cream flavors.
YIELD: 4 to 6 servings as appetizer
8 large cured herring fillets, preferably from plain salted herring
(about 12 ounces in all)
Half of a medium onion
About 2 tablespoons sugar, or to taste, with a little more for soaking
the onion
2 tablespoons red or white wine vinegar, or to taste
2 cups sour cream, preferably Russian-type smetana, or 1 cup each
sour cream and very good crème fraîche (I use the Vermont Butter
and Cheese brand.)
Half of a large, crisp, juicy tart apple (Omit if good apples are
unavailable.)
½ to 1 teaspoon salt, or to taste
1 or more tablespoons of prepared (not creamed) horseradish or
Polish-style mustard (optional)
Fresh dill for garnish
First rinse the fish well under cold water and taste a tiny bit. If it is mild-
flavored enough to be eaten as is, simply blot it dry and proceed.
Otherwise, place it in a large bowl, cover well with cold water, and let
soak, refrigerated, for anything from 2 to 24 hours. Change the water at
frequent intervals, tasting the herring, until it is mild enough to suit your
preference. Drain, blot thoroughly dry with plenty of paper towels, and
cut into 1-inch pieces.
Slice the onion into paper-thin half moons and drop the slices into a
bowl of ice water with 1 to 2 teaspoons of sugar dissolved in it. Let soak
for about 5 minutes before draining and blotting thoroughly dry. Layer
the herring and onion in a small glass or crockery bowl or container.

Put 2 tablespoons each of sugar and vinegar in a small nonreactive
saucepan, and heat, stirring, just long enough to dissolve the sugar.
Whisk the sour cream smooth in a bowl and whisk in the sugar-vinegar
solution.
Peel and core the apple half, grate on the coarse side of a box grater,
and stir into the sauce. Taste for salt (the herring after enough soaking
will contribute next to no salt, so overkill is unlikely) and gradually mix
in enough to balance the other flavors along with a little more vinegar if
you like, or more sugar dissolved in a teaspoon or two of warm water. If
desired, add horseradish or mustard to taste. (These are an improvement
only if the fish needs perking up or no tasty apples are to be had.) Pour
the sauce over the herring and onion and refrigerate, tightly covered,
overnight or for at least 6 hours. Serve garnished with fresh dill. It is
wonderful with coarse-textured black or sour rye bread.

M
SMOKED WHITEFISH SALAD
ore properly, “smoked whitefish dip” or “spread”—but as a
staple of New York Jewish brunch tables it’s universally known as
“salad.” If you don’t already understand the harmony of smoked
fish with something creamy and slightly sour, this simple
combination is the perfect example. The only messy part is
removing the whitefish bones, which are many and stubborn.
YIELD: About 2½ cups
2 pounds smoked whitefish
½ to 1 cup sour cream
2 to 3 scallions or 1 small onion, minced
1 celery rib, minced
1 tablespoon prepared horseradish (optional)
Fresh dill for garnish
Remove and discard the skin and bones from the fish. Flake the meat
with your fingers; you should have about 2 cups. Put it in a bowl and
mix in enough sour cream for a spreadable consistency. Stir in the
scallions, celery, and optional horseradish. Scoop the mixture into a
serving bowl, sprinkle a little chopped dill over the top, and serve with
coarse dark rye or pumpernickel bread. It will keep in the refrigerator,
tightly covered, for two to three days.

I
BUTTERMILK-CARAWAY SOUP
t would be impossible to overstate the importance of utterly
plain, bare-bones milk dishes in peasant diets throughout much of
Europe well into the twentieth century. Bread or potatoes with
milk or sour milk once made up a very quick square meal in
millions of households from Ireland to Lithuania, Switzerland to
Siberia. This caraway-spiked Austrian and Bavarian soup gives
you an idea of just how minimalist a country breakfast or supper
could be—though with well-flavored buttermilk and sturdy black
bread I’d take it over American breakfast cereal and milk any day.
If you should go on a buttermaking kick and have some thick,
tasty ripened buttermilk to dedicate to this purpose, you will be
astonished at the goodness of the soup.
YIELD: 4 large servings
4 thick slices of sour pumpernickel or rye bread, or any coarse-
textured sour-flavored bread, broken or cut into chunks
2 cups water
2 teaspoons salt, or to taste
2 to 3 teaspoons caraway seeds, lightly bruised with mortar and
pestle
2 tablespoons flour
2 cups cultured buttermilk
Any preferred green herb (dill, chives, marjoram), minced or snipped
The bread must be hard and stale, so slice it and let it sit for a day or
two before starting the soup.
Bring the water to a boil with the salt and caraway. Mix the flour to a
smooth paste with a little of the buttermilk, then stir in the remaining
buttermilk. (This keeps the soup from curdling.) Whisk the buttermilk
into the water over medium heat and let come to a boil. Distribute the
bread in serving bowls, pour the soup over it, and serve scattered with
the herb of your choice.

VARIATION: By thrifty consensus this soup was generally made with equal
parts of buttermilk and water. You can, however, use all buttermilk. Stir
the flour with a little of the buttermilk, combine with the rest, and add
the salt and caraway. Heat just to a boil over low heat and serve as
directed.

D
MICHAEL FIELD’S “CHŁODNIK”
(COLD SAVORY BUTTERMILK SOUP)
ecades ago, this recipe in Michael Field’s Cooking School
(1965) provided my first glimpse of the magic that results when
you combine fresh, slightly sour forms of milk or cream with
strong, provocative flavors like garlic and pickling brine. It is still
my favorite cold soup, though I now know that Field’s description
“a poem of a Russian iced soup” needs some correcting. Russians
call this and a family of similar soups okroshka. Chłodnik
(pronounced roughly “huh-WOD-nik”) is the Polish counterpart
(see this page for a gorgeous version with beets).
Over the years I have replaced Field’s canned shrimp with fresh
shrimp and dropped the fennel that was in the original recipe. I
also usually leave out the hard-boiled egg garnish (though it’s a
classic part of such soups), and wilt the cucumbers in salt because
they then marry better with the other flavors. Use sauerkraut
juice from good delicatessen sauerkraut or a brand put up in glass
jars or plastic pouches, never cans.
YIELD: 8 to 10 servings
½ pound medium shrimp, briefly poached in the shell
4 small Persian-type or 2 American-type cucumbers
1 tablespoon salt
2 garlic cloves
2 cups sour cream, preferably Russian-type smetana
5 cups cultured buttermilk, at least 1.5 percent milkfat and made
without salt or gums
½ cup sauerkraut juice
4 scallions, whites and part of green stalks
Freshly ground white or black pepper
A large handful of fresh dill
2 hard-boiled eggs (optional)
Shell and if necessary devein the shrimp. Cut into coarse dice.

Peel and seed the cucumbers. Cut into medium dice (about ¾ inch),
toss in a bowl with the salt, and drain in a colander for 20 to 30
minutes.
Mince the garlic very fine and place in a large nonreactive bowl with
the sour cream, buttermilk, and sauerkraut juice. Whisk to combine
thoroughly. Rinse the salted cucumbers under cold running water,
squeeze as dry as possible, and stir into the buttermilk. Trim the
scallions, chop fine, and add along with the reserved shrimp. Season
with pepper to taste and a little salt if desired (it may need none).
Refrigerate, covered, for 4 to 8 hours; I find that it gets harsh if kept
longer than overnight.
When ready to serve, snip the dill into bits, chop the optional hard-
boiled eggs, and scatter a little of each over every portion.

B
CHŁODNIK LITEWSKI
(POLISH COLD BEET SOUP)
orscht” is what many American cooks will want to call this
soup. But it couldn’t be more different from the sweet kinds that
often represent the Russian borshch in American kitchens. It
belongs to a family of cold soups, known in all countries of the
Northeastern Cow Belt, that are based on sour milk or cream and
some other sour principle, usually sauerkraut or pickle brine or
some version of the fermented drink called kvas in Russia, kwas in
Poland. Beets are just one of the things that can go into them.
Poles are particularly dedicated to this kind of cold soup
(“chłodnik” in Polish), which they make in an amazing spectrum
of different guises. The original secrets of flavor are two: Chłodnik
used to be made from sour whole milk with all the butterfat intact
—in other words, something at least two or three times as creamy
as the usual American cultured buttermilk. To come close, you
must throw in a good slug of sour cream. In addition, Poles and
most other Eastern Europeans have a summer-fall tradition of
pickling nearly anything that can conceivably be pickled, from
apples to tomatoes. Cooks thus regularly have (or used to have)
several different kinds of brine on hand to add to chłodnik—or
they might put in some kwas/kvas made from bread or beets. The
resulting soups, often enriched with crunchy raw radishes or
cucumbers, are liquid quasi-salads as gloriously varied and
wonderfully refreshing as the gazpachos of Spain. Perhaps the
most famous and certainly the most dramatic-looking of the
Polish chłodnik tribe is this classic version made from beets and
beet greens. Poles attribute it to Lithuania, at one time a Polish
possession (hence the name “Litewski”).
If you live near Polish, Russian, or Serbian communities with
stores selling barrels of summer vegetables and fruits in brine, be
sure to get some in season and add a little of the brine to the soup
in lieu of sauerkraut juice. The color is most beautiful when a
grated raw beet is mixed in at the end.

YIELD: About 2 quarts (8 cups)
4 to 5 medium beets, with leafy tops
4 to 6 radishes
3 to 4 small, thin-skinned Persian-type cucumbers, or an 8-inch piece
of an English hothouse cucumber
6 to 8 scallions, whites and part of green tops
2 garlic cloves, or to taste
1 quart cultured buttermilk, at least 1.5 percent milkfat and made
without salt or gums
1 cup sour cream, preferably Russian-type smetana
½ to ⅔ cup juice from sauerkraut or full-sour kosher-style dill pickles
2 to 3 teaspoons salt, or to taste
A large handful of fresh dill
2 to 3 hard-boiled eggs, chopped (optional)
Cut off the beet tops at least half an inch above the root and rinse
thoroughly. Scrub the beets well. Bring a large saucepan of water to a
boil and add 3 or 4 of the beets along with the greens. Reduce the heat
to medium-low, and cook, covered, until the beets are tender when
probed with a knife, usually 25 to 40 minutes. Drain the beets and
greens separately, and let cool.
Meanwhile, scrub the radishes and cucumbers and grate both on the
coarse side of a box grater. Clean, trim, and mince the scallions. Mince
the garlic, or crush it to a paste using a mortar and pestle.
Chop the drained beet greens fairly coarse. Peel the beets, and cut into
fine slivers or dice.
Now combine the buttermilk, sour cream, ½ cup of the sauerkraut
juice, and 2 teaspoons of the salt in a large bowl, whisking to a smooth
consistency. Stir in all the vegetables. Grate the remaining raw beet on
the fine side of a box grater and add the pulp and juice to the soup.
Taste for seasoning and add more brine or salt as you prefer. Refrigerate,
covered, at least 4 to 6 hours or overnight. Serve very cold, garnished
with plenty of fresh dill and the optional chopped hard-boiled eggs.

T
KADHI OR KARHI
(NORTH INDIAN THICK BUTTERMILK SOUP)
his soupy sauce or saucelike soup from the Punjab and
northern India is one of the many dishes caught up in the great
Indian-American confusion about the difference between
buttermilk and yogurt (see this page). Having first encountered it
(in Madhur Jaffrey’s An Invitation to Indian Cooking) made with
cultured buttermilk, I’ve remained fond of that choice.
Kadhi is usually made with a flotilla of small chickpea-flour
dumpling-fritters called pakodis or pakoras. I think it is also good
either by itself or with a medley of vegetables. Don’t hesitate to
omit any of the suggested choices or add more.
YIELD: About 8 servings
⅔ cup Indian chickpea flour (besan)
6 cups water
2 cups cultured buttermilk or plain whole-milk yogurt
4 tablespoons ghee or vegetable oil
A pinch of ground asafetida
¼ teaspoon each fenugreek seeds, Indian brown mustard seeds,
cumin seeds, and nigella (you can use more or less of any)
6 to 8 fresh curry leaves
4 small dried hot peppers (or to taste)
½ teaspoon ground turmeric
4 small waxy potatoes, peeled and cut in half
4 ounces cauliflower, broken into bite-sized florets
1 medium onion, cut into 8 wedges
4 ounces green beans, trimmed and cut into 1-inch lengths
2 small zucchini, scrubbed and cut into ½-inch chunks
2 teaspoons salt, or to taste
¼ cup sour whey from drained yogurt (this page) or 2 to 3 teaspoons
freshly squeezed lime juice (optional)
Cilantro for garnish

Put the chickpea flour in a bowl and mix to a paste with a little of the
water. Add the rest of the water and the buttermilk and mix as smooth
as possible.
Heat 2 tablespoons of the ghee until fragrant in a deep saucepan. Add
the pinch of asafetida along with the fenugreek and mustard seeds.
When the mustard seeds begin to pop, stir in the cumin seeds and
nigella, then (in a few seconds) the curry leaves and dried peppers. Stir
in the turmeric and let it sizzle a few seconds. Add the thickened
buttermilk, and stir to distribute everything. Let the soup simmer over
very low heat, partly covered, for 30 to 35 minutes.
While the soup cooks, heat the remaining ghee in a deep skillet or
wide saucepan. Add the potatoes and sauté, stirring, for a few minutes.
Stir in the other vegetables and sauté until the onion is translucent. Add
1 cup water and cook, partly covered, over medium-low heat, stirring
occasionally, until the vegetables are tender, about 20 to 25 minutes.
Transfer the vegetables to the buttermilk soup and stir to distribute
everything evenly. Taste for seasoning; add salt and—if you think it can
use a dash of acid—some sour whey or lime juice, a little at a time.
Serve hot, garnished with cilantro. It’s lovely spooned over plain rice.

T
MORU KOZHAMBU
(SOUTH INDIAN BUTTERMILK SOUP)
his dish, also anglicized as mor kozhambu, is the South Indian
counterpart of kadhi. It, too, is often served with chickpea-or
lentil-flour dumplings, but vegetables are just as usual. I use the
same mixture as for kadhi, but one or two of the following would
be more authentic: okra, plantains, small eggplants, tomatoes,
taro, Indian bottle gourd, “ash gourd” (winter melon).
Because of the coconut-laced mixture of ground seasonings and
the smaller amount of starch, the “soup” will be thinner and quite
different in flavor.
YIELD: 6 servings
Vegetables as for the preceding kadhi (potatoes, cauliflower, onion,
green beans, zucchini)
1 tablespoon toor dal (“red gram,” hulled split pigeon peas)
1 tablespoon channa dal (“yellow gram,” hulled split Indian
chickpeas)
4 to 6 small hot green peppers, deseeded if desired
A 1-inch chunk of peeled fresh ginger, coarsely chopped
2 teaspoons cumin seeds
2 teaspoons coriander seeds
⅓ cup grated coconut, fresh or frozen
A pinch of asafetida
¼ teaspoon ground turmeric
4 cups cultured buttermilk or plain whole-milk yogurt
3 tablespoons ghee or vegetable oil
1 teaspoon Indian brown mustard seeds
6 to 8 fresh curry leaves
2 small dried red peppers, deseeded if desired
1 to 1½ teaspoons salt, or to taste
Prepare and cook the vegetables as directed for kadhi. Meanwhile, soak
both kinds of dal in a small bowl of water for 30 to 40 minutes. Drain

well and put in a blender or food processor with the hot peppers, ginger,
cumin seeds, coriander seeds, grated coconut, asafetida, and turmeric.
Process to a paste, adding water if necessary to help the grinding. Mix
the paste into the buttermilk.
Heat the ghee in a saucepan until fragrant. Add the mustard seeds and
cook until they start to pop. Add the curry leaves and dried red peppers.
Pour the buttermilk mixture into the pan, and cook over low heat,
stirring, just until heated through. (It will curdle if allowed to boil.) Stir
in the cooked vegetables, let heat through, and serve at once. This also is
perfect with rice.

C
COLD BLUEBERRY SOUP
old fruit soups, among the most refreshing of summer dishes,
flourish vigorously in eastern and northeastern Europe. They fall
into several families—starch-bound, creamy, or based on sour
milk. This version with blueberries is a nontraditional composite
of the latter two approaches that I found long ago in The Berry
Cookbook by Barbara R. Fried. The original called for two cups of
sour cream. I now find this too heavy and replace it with part
buttermilk. Vary the proportions of sugar, sour cream, buttermilk,
and wine according to your preference and the flavor of the
berries.
Americans have great difficulty figuring out just where to fit
fruit soups into a meal. I think they make excellent first courses
for a summer lunch menu featuring a light main-dish salad or
vegetarian grain dish. They also win converts as dessert,
accompanied by crackers or plain, not-very-sweet cookies.
YIELD: About 6 cups (6 servings)
2 cups blueberries, rinsed and drained
½ cup sugar, or to taste
A 3-inch piece of cinnamon stick
1 lemon, sliced thin
½ cup red wine (any preferred kind)
1 cup sour cream
1 cup cultured buttermilk
Put the berries in a nonreactive saucepan with 2 cups water and the
sugar, cinnamon stick, and lemon. Bring to a boil and simmer,
uncovered, for about 10 minutes or until the berries are cooked; add the
wine during the last minute or two. Pour through a mesh sieve into a
bowl, pushing with a spoon to extract as much liquid as possible.
Discard the solids. Let cool to room temperature. Whisk in the sour
cream until smooth. Add the buttermilk, a little at a time, until it is
thinned to your taste. Taste for sweetness and acidity, adding a little

sugar (dissolved in water for easier mixing) or lemon juice if desired.
Chill in the refrigerator for 2 to 3 hours before serving.
VARIATION: During the brief summer season of sour cherries, I sometimes
turn this into a cold cherry soup very inauthentically based on the
celebrated Hungarian meggykesköce or meggyleves. Use 2 pints (about 1½
pounds) fresh sour (not sweet!) cherries, ¾ cup sugar or to taste, 3
inches of cinnamon stick, the juice of 1 large lemon, a dash of red wine,
a dash of almond extract (bitter almond, if you can find it), 1 cup sour
cream, and a little heavy or light cream. (Hungarians mix the sour cream
with flour to prevent curdling and stir it into the hot soup, but I prefer it
flourless.) Pit the cherries, saving a handful to add at the end; place the
rest and their juice in a saucepan with 3 cups water, the ¾ cup sugar,
and the cinnamon stick. Bring to a boil and gently simmer, uncovered,
until the cherries are very soft, 15 to 20 minutes. Remove the pan from
the heat and stir in the lemon juice, wine, and almond extract. Fish out
and discard the cinnamon stick; puree the soup in a blender or food
processor. Pour it into a bowl and let cool to room temperature. Whisk
in the sour cream until smooth. Taste for the balance of sugar, acidity,
and creaminess, and add a little sugar (dissolved in water for easier
mixing), lemon juice, or sweet cream until you like the result. Add the
reserved pitted cherries and chill in the refrigerator for 2 to 3 hours
before serving.

S
SOUR CREAM/CRÈME FRAÎCHE AS COLD SAUCE AND DIP
our cream, crème fraîche, Russian smetana, Latin American
crema, and the rest of the family can effortlessly be turned into
cold sauces and dressings perfect for a hundred purposes. The
story is different as regards hot sauces, because of the ease with
which heated sour cream curdles. The richest versions of crème
fraîche (unfortunately, different brands vary) are more heat-
resistant, as is crema. But in most cases coldness itself is part of
what’s delightful in their pairings with other foods, hot or cold.
The parade of marvelous table sauces or dressings begins with
plain sour cream itself, simply mixed smooth or given a brief
draining as with yogurt. (Draining is helpful if it is to be
combined with anything a little watery.) It responds happily to
minimal additions like salt, lemon juice or wine vinegar, and/or
sugar, with or without some enriching egg yolk. One basic
formula for a savory sour cream sauce—you can omit anything
except the sour cream—would be an egg yolk whisked smooth in
a small bowl and combined with a large pinch of salt, 1 cup sour
cream, ¼ to 2 teaspoons sugar, 1 to 2 teaspoons grated onion, and
1 teaspoon to 1 tablespoon lemon juice or vinegar. Whisk in the
sugar and acid a tiny bit at a time until you like the balance of
flavors.
Many other seasonings can be used with or instead of these.
Dill, fresh or dried, is the classic herb, but minced chives or
scallions are also popular. Caraway seed has the same affinity for
sour cream as cumin for yogurt. Other wonderful additions
include grated apple, minced sour pickles of all sorts, and strong-
flavored accents like prepared horseradish or mustard, Tabasco or
chipotle sauce, cayenne, curry powder, capers, and anchovies.
Chopped hard-boiled egg is a natural. If you can find the Balkan
sweet red pepper and eggplant sauce called ajvar, mix it with sour

cream in any proportion to make a pretty and delicious relish (or
spread for rye toast).
The foods that such sauces go with are numberless. In the
Ashkenazic Jewish kitchen, a bowl of plain or (less often) flavored
sour cream regularly accompanies blintzes, potato pancakes, and
—a truly lovely marriage—pot cheese or farmer cheese.
(Whenever possible, try to look for the best of all sour-cream
versions, smetana, in Russian stores.) It is nearly mandatory with
Russian blini, and I prefer it to syrup on most kinds of pancakes
or fritters. Everyone knows that sour cream goes perfectly with
hot baked potatoes, but it’s just as good with boiled potatoes (dill
is great here), braised red cabbage, or braised sauerkraut. It’s
among the best of all salad-dressing bases; try sour cream instead
of mayonnaise in potato or egg salad as well as cole slaw. Mix it
with sliced or chopped cucumbers or radishes (especially black
radishes). Combined with cured herring, sardines, or smoked chub
or whitefish, it magically cuts their fishiness. And please follow
Mimi Sheraton’s suggestion (in From My Mother’s Kitchen) of
mixing chunks of pumpernickel or rye bread into a bowl of sour
cream.
When it comes to sour cream or crème fraîche as dessert sauce,
all I can say is the plainer, the better. Most seasonings except for
maybe—maybe—a touch of lemon juice, sugar, and/or ground
cinnamon or allspice are just so much lily gilding. All by itself it’s
the ideal dressing for mixed fruit salads (leave out the pineapple
unless it’s cooked or canned) and a heavenly foil for blueberries,
raspberries, strawberries, and sliced peaches or nectarines. Put
some on a dried-fruit compote. Or make an instant and excellent
pseudo-mousse by mixing it into cooked-down fruit pastes like
apple butter and prune or apricot lekvar.
A final use invented by the late Helen Evans Brown and
immensely popular for a couple of generations: For the world’s
simplest chocolate frosting, melt 5 ounces of semisweet chocolate
in the top of a double boiler and stir in ½ cup sour cream.

S
BUTTERMILK SALAD DRESSING
orry if hopeful cooks coming on something called “Buttermilk
Dressing” expect a cousin of Hidden Valley Ranch Dressing. Mine
was designed with potato salad in mind, though I expect it would
also be good with coleslaw.
YIELD: About 1 cup
1 scant cup walnut oil, or any combination you wish of peanut and
walnut oil
3 tablespoons cultured buttermilk
1 tablespoon sour cream
2 to 3 tablespoons sour pickle brine (from half-sour kosher dill
pickles, sauerkraut, or brined capers)
1 garlic clove, mashed to a paste with a knife blade
3 to 4 tablespoons grated onion
1 teaspoon caraway seeds, lightly bruised with a mortar and pestle
Salt if needed (there may be enough in the brine)
Freshly ground pepper
FOR GARNISH:
3 large scallions (whites and some of the green parts), minced
Fresh dill
A handful of walnut meats, coarsely chopped (optional)
Whisk together the oil and all other dressing ingredients. To use for
potato salad, toss with the freshly cooked potatoes while they are still
warm. Scatter the salad with minced scallions, snipped dill, and (if
desired) some chopped walnuts.

I
CUCUMBER-RADISH SOUR CREAM SAUCE
f you are fond of cold yogurt sauces or sauce-salad-relishes like
Turkish Cacık or Indian Raitas (this page and this page), probably
you will enjoy this sour-cream counterpart. One of my longtime
favorites is this fresh, summery version in The Book of New New
England Cookery by Judith and Evan Jones. I generally use one of
the small thin-skinned Persian-type cucumbers and—because I
like the sharp flavor of black radishes—substitute a chunk for one
of the red radishes. This is especially luscious if you use
Homemade Sour Cream.
YIELD: Makes about 1½ cups
½ cup grated cucumber, peeled, split in half, and seeded by scooping
out center
3 fat radishes, grated
2 teaspoons minced fresh dill
2 minced scallions, including tender greens
1 cup sour cream, or 1 part plain yogurt to 1 part sour cream
Salt
3 to 4 shakes Tabasco sauce
After you have grated the cucumber and radishes, squeeze them dry in a
towel. Then mix all of the ingredients together, salting to taste.
Refrigerate for an hour or so before serving.

O
MENNONITE BUTTERMILK “SALAD”
ne of my favorite historically oriented international
cookbooks is The Melting Pot of Mennonite Cookery 1874–1974 by
Edna Ramseyer Kaufman, happily back in print after a hiatus. It
traces the wanderings of the Mennonites from the Low Countries
and Switzerland to parts of the old Prussian, Russian, and Austro-
Hungarian empires and eventually the New World. It’s remarkable
to see the cooking traditions that survived the many journeys of
this sect, some of whom were among my family’s oldest neighbors
in Pennsylvania.
The book contains no fewer than three versions—from three
separate parts of the Mennonite diaspora—of a “salad” that must
stem from a very ancient shared tradition. It takes some
explaining to people who have never seen this kind of peasant
dish: You first soured fresh milk by letting it stand, then added
freshly torn or cut lettuce and sliced or chopped hard-boiled eggs
to it. (There were versions with homemade noodles or cucumber
and scallions.) The resulting soup-salad was seasoned with salt
and eaten very cold, sometimes with a little sugar and vinegar. A
bit of sour cream might enrich the sour milk. It was a summer
dish, considered extremely refreshing and healthful in hot
weather.
I tried it for myself one hot July when I had some freshly made
cultured buttermilk and sour cream on hand. It was indeed
beautifully restorative. You won’t, however, get the same delicate
freshness with commercial buttermilk and sour cream. Made with
the homemade articles, it gives you one of those startling
glimpses into the past achievable by nothing except firsthand
tasting.
Have everything well chilled and mix only at the last minute. The
amounts per person are about 1 cup Homemade Cultured Buttermilk
stirred smooth with ¼ teaspoon salt (or to taste) and a few spoonfuls of
Homemade Sour Cream; a dash of cider vinegar and/or sugar, if desired;
1 sliced hard-boiled egg; and a large handful of tender lettuce (Boston,

Bibb, or any young leaf lettuce), torn into bite-sized pieces. Eat it from a
soup bowl.

B
BEEF STROGANOFF
eef Stroganoff, named for a family of long pedigree in czarist
Russia, was a reigning party favorite a generation ago and is one
of my leading nominees for a return from limbo. The dish started
being extolled in the 1930s by members of the self-styled
“gourmet” movement in the United States. Its distinguishing
features are thin strips of rapidly seared beef, a sauce enriched
with sour cream, and an otherwise complete absence of
agreement on the necessary ingredients.
It takes a lot for any beef Stroganoff to be certifiably
“inauthentic,” though I’d probably draw the line at the addition of
habanero salsas or herbes de Provence. Most recipes have onions
and mushrooms, but there are cooks who reject either or both.
One extremely lofty recipe has you fry some onions in the pan
“for flavor,” then throw them out lest they mar the noble
simplicity of the beef. The amount of sour cream (a few atypical
recipes have sweet cream) can be half a tanker or a few
tablespoons. I have seen Stroganoffs from several continents with
or without tomato paste, catsup, condensed mushroom soup,
tarragon vinegar (not a bad idea, that), Tabasco, cayenne,
paprika, wine marinades, flambéed brandy, sugar, Madeira, and
moose meat (this last in a marvelous book titled Cooking Alaskan).
All I can say about the following version is that I like it. If that
much filet mignon or sirloin is a financial impossibility, try thin-
sliced flank steak for a chewier but still excellent result. The
classic accompaniment is noodles or a rice pilaf; some people
sauté the mushrooms separately and serve them as a garnish or
side dish.
YIELD: 6 to 7 servings
2 pounds filet mignon or beef sirloin
3 to 4 tablespoons flour
1 large onion
½ pound (or more as desired) fresh white mushrooms, cleaned and

trimmed
6 tablespoons butter
½ cup strong beef broth, preferably homemade
2 to 3 teaspoons Dijon mustard
1 cup sour cream, at room temperature
Salt and freshly ground pepper to taste
Parsley or fresh dill for garnish
Cut the meat into strips about 2 to 3 inches long and ⅓ to ½ inch thick.
This is easier if you first put it in the freezer for about 30 minutes. Put
the strips, well separated, on plates or a work surface and dredge with
flour, turning them to coat lightly on all sides. Chop the onion fairly fine
and cut the mushrooms, stem and all, into thin lengthwise slices.
Heat half the butter over high heat in a large heavy (preferably cast-
iron) skillet. When it is sizzling and fragrant, reduce the heat to medium-
high, add a few strips of meat at a time, and brown them very quickly on
both sides, stirring with a wooden spoon. As each batch is done, remove
it to a plate and add a few more strips. From time to time add a little
more of the butter to moisten the pan. The trick is not to crowd the pan
(which makes the meat stew in its own juice) and to brown the meat
rapidly without letting the flour scorch; keep adjusting the heat as
necessary.
When all the meat is browned, sauté the onion in the same pan over
medium heat, stirring, until translucent and lightly browned, about 5
minutes. Add the mushrooms and cook, tossing and stirring, until they
begin to release their juice, another 5 minutes or so. Raise the heat to
high and cook until the liquid is nearly evaporated. Stir in the broth and
mustard; cook, stirring, over medium heat until the sauce is a little
thickened, about 5 to 7 minutes. Add the browned meat with any juices
and cook, stirring and tossing, until it is heated through, 2 to 3 minutes.
Now reduce the heat to very low and stir in the sour cream. It will
curdle if it is too cold or if the sauce boils, so you must let it warm up
for only a minute or two. Season to taste with salt and pepper and serve
at once, garnished with a bit of minced parsley or snipped dill.

P
CHICKEN PAPRIKÁS, OR PAPRIKAHUHN
aprika didn’t exist until chile peppers reached Hungary from
the New World and were bred to a uniquely rich-flavored form
suitable for drying and grinding. As part of what George Lang’s
magisterial The Cuisine of Hungary calls “the holy trinity of lard,
onion, and pure ground paprika,” the new spice worked its way
into various families of traditional braised dishes. Nothing proved
to be a more inspired match for the famous trinity than the sour
cream that is added to certain mild and delicate offshoots of the
classic stew pörkölt. In Hungary this kind of dish is called paprikás
together with the name of the main ingredient (usually chicken,
veal, or fish). All parts of the Austro-Hungarian empire eventually
adopted chicken versions marked by such minor wrinkles as the
use of browned or unbrowned chicken, thrift or profligacy in the
amount of sour cream, and the presence or absence of green
peppers, garlic, and tomatoes.
The following recipe for Viennese Paprikahuhn is broadly
modeled on a version in Franz Maier-Bruck’s Das grosse Sacher-
Kochbuch. The original uses butter; I think lard as the foundation
of the “holy trinity” can’t be improved on except perhaps by
rendered fat from double-smoked Hungarian bacon.
YIELD: About 4 servings
2 tablespoons lard, preferably from a Middle European or Hispanic
pork butcher
A 3½-pound chicken, cut into serving pieces
2 medium onions, chopped
1 garlic clove, crushed or minced
1 Italian frying pepper, cored, seeded, and cut into thin strips
(optional)
½ cup water or chicken stock
2 to 3 tablespoons sweet Hungarian paprika
A dash of hot Hungarian paprika (optional)
A long strip of lemon rind (optional)

1 teaspoon salt, or to taste
1 large ripe globe tomato or 2 to 3 ripe plum tomatoes, peeled,
seeded, and finely chopped
1 tablespoon flour
¼ cup sour cream, plus more for serving if desired
Heat the lard in a heavy-bottomed saucepan and brown the chicken
pieces on all sides over medium heat. Remove to a platter. Reduce the
heat to medium-low and sauté the onion, garlic, and pepper strips in the
remaining fat until slightly softened. Deglaze the pan with the water or
stock. Add the sweet paprika, optional hot paprika and lemon rind, salt,
and tomato pulp. Give everything a good stir, bring to a boil, and return
the chicken pieces to the pan. Cook, tightly covered, over low heat for
about 30 minutes or until the chicken is tender.
Transfer the chicken pieces to a heatproof dish along with a spoonful
or two of the cooking liquid, and keep warm over low heat while you
boil down the rest of the liquid by more than half. Meanwhile, stir
together the flour and a little water to make a thin paste. Whisk the sour
cream into this and stir it all into the reduced liquid in the pan and heat
until warmed through. Serve the chicken pieces with the sauce poured
over them. If you like, pass around more sour cream in a bowl.

P
MUSHROOMS WITH SOUR CREAM SAUCE
eople of a certain age remember this as a once-elegant brunch
or lunch dish served on toast. The suggestion of caraway as a
seasoning comes from Craig Claiborne’s The New York Times Menu
Cookbook, where I first encountered the dish.
It is even better made with a mixture of white and shiitake
mushrooms (caps only) and/or reconstituted dried porcini. If you
happen to have some homemade veal glaze, a teaspoon or so is a
lovely addition.
YIELD: 4 to 5 servings
4 to 5 shallots
3 to 4 tablespoons butter
1 pound fresh white mushrooms, cleaned and trimmed
1 to 2 teaspoons caraway seeds, bruised in a mortar (optional)
A dash of lemon juice
2 tablespoons sherry or Madeira
1 teaspoon salt, or to taste
Freshly ground black or white pepper
2 to 3 teaspoons flour
1 cup sour cream, at room temperataure
Parsley or dill for garnish
Mince the shallots and gently sauté them in the butter while you cut the
mushrooms lengthwise into roughly ¼-inch slices or chop them fairly
coarse. Add the mushrooms to the shallots and cook over medium-high
heat, stirring, until the juice they release is nearly evaporated. Stir in the
optional caraway seeds along with sherry, salt, and pepper.
Mix the flour and sour cream as smooth as possible. Stir into the
mushrooms and cook over very low heat, stirring, for about 6 to 8
minutes. Scatter snipped fresh dill or minced parsley over the
mushrooms, and serve on hot toast or as a side dish by itself.


D
MUSHROOM PIROZHKI WITH SOUR CREAM PASTRY
edicated pastry-makers often have a soft spot for sour cream
because the lactic acid slightly tenderizes the dough while the
cream adds richness. Russians often make pirozhki (small
turnoverlike pastries) with a yeast-raised dough, but this sour-
cream version is a popular alternative. Mushroom pirozhki are a
fine party dish, or nice as part of an otherwise light lunch or
supper.
YIELD: About 4 dozen
FILLING:
½ recipe Mushrooms with Sour Cream Sauce; omit caraway, flour,
and sour cream
2 hard-boiled eggs, chopped
SOUR-CREAM PASTRY:
3 cups flour
1 teaspoon salt
¾ cup cold butter, cut into small bits
¾ cup cold sour cream, drained before measuring if watery
1 to 3 tablespoons ice water, or as needed
1 egg yolk lightly beaten with 2 to 3 tablespoons water
For the filling, cook the mushrooms as directed and mix in the hard-
boiled eggs. Let cool, and refrigerate until ready to use (several hours or
overnight).
Make the dough by sifting the flour and salt into a bowl, then cutting
in the butter with a pastry cutter or two knives until the mixture
resembles coarse grits. Stir in the sour cream with a fork. The mixture
will start coming together in a dough. If necessary, lightly mix in ice
water a teaspoon or so at a time until you can gather it up in a ball.
Wrap the dough in waxed paper or plastic wrap and refrigerate for at
least two hours.

Preheat the oven to 375°F. Lightly flour a pastry cloth or work surface
and roll out the dough a little less than ½ inch thick. Cut out 3-inch
rounds with a cookie cutter or the rim of a glass. Gather up the
trimmings, reroll, and cut into more 3-inch rounds. Put about 2 to 3
teaspoons of mushroom filling on one side of each round and fold over
the edge to make a half moon. Firmly press the edges together with a
fork.
As the pirozhki are filled, place them on baking sheets and brush the
tops with the beaten egg. Bake until golden brown, 20 to 25 minutes.
Serve hot.

T
BUTTERMILK POTATOES
he combination of boiled potatoes and milk used to be part of
the culinary landscape throughout most of northern Europe. Irish
Champ is an example made with sweet milk. As explained earlier,
soured milk predominated from the North Sea eastward. Cultured
buttermilk is the modern substitute.
The general idea is the same in most places: Boil potatoes with
plenty of salt, and mash them, while fresh and hot, with sour milk
or a mixture of sour milk and sour cream, lightly bound with flour
or starch to keep it from curdling. The dish is usually soupy. For
the very poor of earlier generations, it contained no other
ingredients except maybe a little onion. Better-off people topped
it with fried bacon or salt pork and the hot pan drippings. It’s
particularly good made with Homemade Cultured Buttermilk.
YIELD: 4 servings
2 to 3 ounces of slab bacon, coarsely diced
1 medium onion, coarsely diced
4 large boiling potatoes, peeled
1 tablespoon salt
4 to 5 cups cultured buttermilk
1 tablespoon flour
Freshly ground pepper
Cook the bacon over gentle heat in a small heavy skillet until the fat is
well rendered. Scoop out the crisp bits to drain on paper towels; fry the
onion in the bacon fat over medium heat until soft and translucent. Keep
warm over very low heat when it is done.
While the bacon cooks, cut the potatoes into large chunks. Put them in
a large saucepan of cold water and scatter in the salt. Bring to a boil and
cook over medium-high heat until tender, about 20 minutes. Meanwhile,
mix a small amount of the buttermilk with the flour until smooth. Pour 4
cups of the remaining buttermilk into a saucepan, stir in the flour
mixture, and warm over low heat without quite letting it boil.

When the potatoes are done, drain them thoroughly. Either return
them to the pan and mash with a potato masher or put them through a
ricer back into the pan. Turn the heat to low and start mashing in the
hot buttermilk a little at a time until the dish is slightly soupy, or add an
extra cup of buttermilk to make it very soupy. Season with pepper to
taste.
Pour the hot bacon drippings and onion over the potatoes, and top
with the crisp fried bacon. Serve at once.
VARIATION: A nice Belgian version of this dish (“stampers,” or taatjespap in
Flemish) in Ruth Van Waerebeek’s Everyone Eats Well in Belgium
Cookbook omits the onion, adds a grating of fresh nutmeg, and finishes
everything off with Beurre Noisette instead of bacon fat.

I
FRIED BANANAS WITH CREMA
f you are unacquainted with Latin American–style crema, this
simple dish is a lovely introduction. The cool saltiness of the
crema is irresistible against the melting sweetness of the banana.
(If you like, and can get, blackened superripe plantains, they are
as good or better.) You may find the crema delicious enough by
itself not to need the suggested additional touch of rum and lime
juice. Serve it as a side dish in a meal featuring something like
Cuban-style roast pork and black beans, or by itself as a very nice
dessert.
YIELD: 4 servings
1½ cups Central American–type crema (see this page)
A dash of rum (optional)
A dash of freshly squeezed lime juice (optional)
1 or 2 pinches of finely grated lime zest (optional)
3 medium bananas, very ripe but not black
4 tablespoons butter, or 2 tablespoons each butter and any preferred
vegetable oil
Stir the crema smooth in a small bowl, and stir in the optional rum, lime
juice, and lime zest. Peel the bananas and slice them into roughly ¾-inch
chunks.
Heat the butter in a heavy medium skillet until it sizzles. Add the
sliced bananas at once and cook over medium heat, shaking the pan and
turning the pieces frequently to brown them lightly on all sides. They are
done as soon as browned. Scoop out the bananas before they can burn,
arrange in a serving dish, and serve hot with the crema.

T
SOUTHERN BUTTERMILK PIE
he American South is home to a family of pies consisting of a
pastry crust with a very sweet custard filling—a particular sort of
custard made from sugar or syrup, eggs, and butter bound with a
small amount of some starchy ingredient (cornmeal, cornstarch,
or flour). Pecan pie (visualize the filling minus the pecans) is a
classic twentieth-century example. Older members of the group
include chess pie, transparent pie, Jefferson Davis pie, and lemon
or lime pie. (In some recipes you find them shading into one
another.) This cousin based on buttermilk harks back to pre-
refrigeration days in the South, when unpasteurized milk at
ambient temperatures rapidly curdled (clabbered) and was
churned to butter in that condition, leaving plenty of nice sour
buttermilk for drinking or cooking. Today people use cultured
buttermilk.
YIELD: One 9-inch pie
1 cup sugar
3 tablespoons cornstarch
A pinch of salt
4 egg yolks
4 tablespoons butter, melted
1½ cups cultured buttermilk
1 tablespoon freshly squeezed lemon juice
Freshly grated nutmeg
A 9-inch pie shell, made by any preferred recipe and partly baked by
any preferred method
Preheat the oven to 350°F.
Sift the sugar, cornstarch, and salt together into a mixing bowl. Whisk
the egg yolks in a separate bowl. Stir the egg yolks, butter, buttermilk,
and lemon juice into the dry ingredients and grate in the nutmeg. Pour
the mixture into the pie shell and bake for about 40 minutes, or until
slightly puffed and very lightly set. Let cool on a wire rack. The pie can

be served at room temperature or (more often) chilled.
VARIATION I: Many people either incorporate the egg whites into the filling
or use them as a meringue. For the first option, beat the 4 egg whites
stiff and fold them into the buttermilk–egg yolk mixture before baking.
For the second, bake the filled shell for 25 to 30 minutes; meanwhile,
beat the 4 egg whites stiff, adding ⅓ cup superfine sugar and a pinch of
cream of tartar partway through the beating. Remove the partly baked
pie from the oven, carefully spread the meringue over the whole surface,
and bake for another 10 to 15 minutes.
VARIATION II: In the nineteenth century, custardy fillings of the general
sugar-butter-eggs type were often baked without a crust; both crusted
and crustless versions were commonly called “puddings.” For a
buttermilk pudding made without a crust, use 1½ cups sugar, 4
tablespoons cornstarch, ¼ teaspoon salt, 6 egg yolks, 6 tablespoons
melted butter, 2 cups buttermilk, 4 teaspoons lemon juice, and a
generous grating of nutmeg; mix as above, pour into a buttered 1½-quart
baking dish, and bake in a preheated 350°F oven for 35 to 40 minutes.

T
HANGOP (DUTCH BUTTERMILK DESSERT)
he name means “hang up,” and the dish consists of buttermilk
poured into a cloth that gets tied into a bag and hung up to drain
until it reaches the consistency of sour cream. It is eaten lightly
sugared. Nowadays many people in the Netherlands use yogurt
instead. I think the flavor of cultured buttermilk goes better with
the usual garnish of crumbled Holland rusks. Recently I realized
that rusks seem to have become an obscure item, at least in the
United States. So has zwieback, my second choice. The best thing
to use if you can’t find either is plain Italian biscotti.
This no-work dessert is often enriched with a little whipped
cream, and it goes beautifully with all kinds of fresh berries. The
recipe can easily be doubled, though it’s probably quicker to drain
it in two separate cloth bags than one. For suggested uses of the
leftover whey, see this page.
YIELD: About 3 cups hangop, 5 cups buttermilk whey
2 quarts cultured buttermilk, preferably at least 1.5 percent milkfat
¼ to ½ cup heavy cream (optional)
¼ cup (or to taste) crumbled Holland rusks, zwieback, or plain
biscotti
2 to 4 tablespoons sugar or any preferred kind of unrefined or brown
sugar
Ground cinnamon
Line a colander with tight-woven cheesecloth or other clean cotton cloth
and set it over a bowl or pan as for Fresh White Cheese with Cultures.
Pour the buttermilk into the lined colander and let the whey drain until
it is only intermittently dripping, usually about 1 hour. Gather up the
corners of the cloth and tie them together to make a bag that will hang
as compact and high as possible. (If necessary, tie the neck of the bag
with butcher’s twine to pull it up more.) Hang the bag of curd over a
container deep enough to hold the accumulating whey without letting it
touch the bottom of the bag.

Let the buttermilk curd drain overnight, or until it has lost more than
half its volume in whey and resembles thick sour cream. Turn it out into
a bowl, scraping off the last bits that cling to the cloth. Beat the creamy
curd smooth with a wooden spoon. If you want to enrich it a little, whip
the optional cream stiff and fold it into the hangop. You can fold in a
little of the sugar now, but I prefer to pile the unsweetened hangop in a
serving dish and scatter it with crumbled rusks, sugar, and cinnamon.
Serve with fresh fruit.

F
BUTTERMILK AS DRINK
or some reason, people who love buttermilk don’t always like
yogurt. I have on occasion sung the praises of cold yogurt drinks
to doubting Thomases whose mood altered completely when I
asked whether they liked drinking buttermilk. As mentioned in
the yogurt chapter, there’s considerable confusion in Anglo-Indian
usage about what constitutes “buttermilk” or “yogurt,” the reason
being the Indian custom of souring milk to a yogurtlike state
before churning it to butter. The resulting buttermilk is closer in
flavor and consistency to yogurt than our true buttermilk
(whether made from ripened or unripened cream) or cultured
buttermilk. Indian cooks in both India and this country often
cheerfully call for “buttermilk” in a recipe when they’re really
thinking of yogurt or something yogurty-tasting. This is my idea
of a useful and productive misunderstanding. If Americans fond of
buttermilk are thereby sparked to try something that they’d
otherwise ignore, why not?
So I advise buttermilk lovers to explore its possibilities as a
drink by taking a little inspiration from yogurt country. The
American ways of using this deeply satisfying thirst-quencher
have not been especially adventurous. Some seventy years ago
people might mix it with some sugar and ground cinnamon.
Occasionally contemporary cooks turn it into a kind of fruit
smoothie, thinned or not with some plain milk or water. I suggest
going further: Glance through the recipes for Indian sweet or
“salt” lassi as well as Turkish ayran in the yogurt chapter, and
experiment with buttermilk versions of any that take your fancy.
Please be sure to use the richest cultured buttermilk you can find
(at least 1.5 percent milkfat), made without added thickeners. It
makes a wonderful drink with nothing but a dash of salt and some
crumbled dried mint. I think it’s even better with Indian
seasonings like cumin seeds, cilantro, hot green pepper, and

slivered ginger.

BUTTER AND TRUE BUTTERMILK
Introduction
Salted versus Unsalted Butter: Some Historical Perspective
A Shopping and Handling Primer
Home-Churned Butter and Buttermilk: Sweet-Cream Type
Home-Churned Butter and Buttermilk: Ripened-Cream Type
Clarified Butters: A Revisionist View
European-Style Clarified Butter
Ghee (Indian Clarified Butter)
Nit’r Kibeh (Ethiopian Spiced Clarified Butter)
Beurre Manié
Flavored or Compound Butters: Some Suggestions
Beurre Blanc/Beurre Rouge
Beurre Noir/Beurre Noisette (“Black Butter”/“Brown Butter”)
About Butter-and-Egg Custards
Hollandaise Sauce
“Buttered Eggs” (Skillet-Custard Eggs)
Lemon Curd
About Butter in Pastry
Basic Pâte Brisée

Lemon Tart
Canadian Butter Tarts

Butter is one of life’s simple pleasures—except that nothing about it is
simple but the eating. What you detect in even the most plebeian mass-
produced cows’-milk butter has depths only half-fathomed by modern
chemistry.
To get a small glimpse of the complexities beneath the surface, take
about one or two tablespoons’ worth of cows’-milk butter—real 100
percent butter, not something dubbed “light butter” or “spreadable
butter”—and plan to sample it at refrigerator temperature, room
temperature, barely melted, briefly cooked, and resolidified. It can be
salted or unsalted, but there should be no other added ingredients.
Start by unwrapping some cold butter and sniffing it. Depending on
the individual batch, you may smell almost nothing or a tantalizing
lactic quality without a name. Cut yourself four small pieces. A fraction
of a tablespoon each will suffice. Watch the way the knife goes through
the clean, cold, waxy substance. Return three pieces (and the stick they
came from) to the refrigerator. Carve off a tiny bit of the fourth and put
it in your mouth. Like the Cheshire Cat, it will vanish a little at a time,
with a long, elusive finish. Eat another bit, trying to register the stages of
smiling disappearance: waxy and solid, less solid but mysteriously
cooling, more and more melted, nearly gone, gone but not forgotten.
Different flavors will blossom in your mouth as all this unfolds. If your
sample came from cultured butter, you may fleetingly think of crème
fraîche or a soft red wine. If not, those notes will be missing;
nonetheless, what you taste will echo what Henry James tasted in the
words “summer afternoon.”
Now put the rest of the piece on a plate, and leave it in a warm room
—close to 80°F, if possible—for an hour or two. Give it another sniff.
Any prior aroma will be amplified. Nick off a bit to eat. This time the
fatly glistening stuff will offer about as much resistance to the knife as
face cream. You will recognize some of what you tasted before, but not
the same progression of effects. The first sensation on the tongue will be
close to greasiness, and the act of tasting will be somewhat truncated, as
if some part of the original butter had just flown off into thin air. (It
has.)
Now take one of the remaining chunks out of the refrigerator and

prepare to just barely melt it. The best way is to start warming a little
water in a small shallow pan, taking it off the heat when it is slightly
hotter than lukewarm. Cut the butter into bits no larger than small peas
and put it in a heatproof container like a glass custard cup or small
measuring cup. Lower this into the pan of water and watch while the
butter gradually melts. Don’t be in a rush; what you want to see is the
moment at which the last identifiably solid bit is gone. Sniff and taste
the butter from time to time while this is happening. The fragrance will
become less delicate and perhaps almost cheesy. The marvelous fusion of
nameless flavors will begin to come unglued, with a bland, oily taste
poised against a faint sourness (how faint depends on the particular
batch and how it was made). At the same time, you will see the butter
resolving itself into clear fat and shoals of infinitesimal white flecks.
When it is fully melted, some of the white parts will almost cloud over
the top while some float toward the bottom.
Put the melted butter back into the refrigerator to chill until it is
completely solid. Taste it a few times during this brief process. When it
is hard and cold, take a good look and a good taste. It will never go back
to what it was. You may be able to thaw and refreeze ice, or melt and
recongeal an aspic. Nobody can do anything of the kind with butter.
Once it has melted, its major components go their separate ways and can
no more be put together again than Humpty Dumpty. As low as the
melting temperature was (the last bits would have dissolved at about
99°F), your resolidified butter has lost the silky closeness and marble
opacity of the original and is more like some congealed oil. It has a
slightly coarse, grainy feel on the tongue, and a trace of sour whitish
liquid may cling to the underside.
Now take another chunk of butter from the refrigerator and put it in a
small heavy saucepan or skillet. Melt it on low heat, standing over the
pan to observe everything as closely as possible. After the stage at which
the last piece melted, the white flecks will start to swim around briskly
and gather themselves into a sort of foam. Swirl the pan from time to
time; stick in a spoon and carefully taste the hot butter once or twice. It
will seem less and less recognizable as butter, but the kitchen will be
filled with the deep, soul-warming smell that all right-thinking
Americans once knew as “buttery.” You will see a little steam rising from
the butter before the foam dies away. Another few seconds, and the

white stuff—now easier to make out as separate specks—will start
turning brown. Swirl the pan and take it off the heat just as the fat itself
begins to change color, before everything careens down the slippery
slope toward absolutely burned butter.
Spoon out a little and taste it, being careful not to burn yourself. The
lightly browned fat will be still oilier than the batch you tasted at
melting point. But the tiny brown scintillas will have a nutty sweetness
unlike anything you’ve encountered in the earlier samples. Let it solidify
at room temperature and taste it before briefly chilling it in the
refrigerator and tasting it again. Both times you will find the texture still
less whole—that is, grainier, more congealed, less waxy, and further
from melt-in-the-mouth suavity—than the barely melted sample you
tried before. And the browned bits will just reinforce the nonbutteriness,
or ex-butteriness, of the flavor.
And now for something completely different: Take the fourth piece of
butter and put it in a small lidded container. Find a good strong-tasting
onion, cut off a slice, and put it in with the butter. Cover the container
tightly and return it to the refrigerator for a day (or until you next
remember it). Remove the lid and take out the onion before smelling and
tasting the butter. It will have acquired a distinct onioniness that will
remain until the end of its existence. The onion, on the other hand,
won’t be in the least buttery.
COMPLEXITY COMPOUNDED
You have now proved something known to everyone who works with
dairy products: No other food you can name exists in a state of more
fragile chemical equilibrium—translating into flavor equilibrium—than
butter and the milkfat from which it is made. The old superstitions about
butter spoiling or not “coming” if somebody merely looked at it the
wrong way aren’t far off the mark. It can hardly sit still for a minute
without risking intervention from the universe at large. The agents of
drastic, irreversible change are all around milkfat as soon as it is
removed from the rest of the milk and chemically turned inside out by
some form of churning. And the same is true whether the milk comes
from a cow, goat, sheep, buffalo, or other animal.
Some of the potential changes are delightful, some ghastly. They

would not occur if the chemist’s laboratory of the rumen and the
finishing shop of the udder did not direct thousands of different
substances into the milkfat, over and above those that go into the much
less complex casein and whey. Butter is made up of so many components
that some probably still don’t have names. The slightest shift in balance
can mean an immense flavor difference. This incredible delicacy reflects
the life-giving importance of milk itself.
Milkfat is the most concentrated source of energy for nurslings. And it
is the crux of their first taste experience. As cooks know, fat is the soul of
taste. Vegetable fats like olive or walnut oil impart their unmistakable
note to anything cooked in them. But when it comes to milkfat
—“butterfat” in its pre-butter state—flavor also plays a biological role.
Every species of mammal, from mouse to rhinoceros, produces milk with
a “lipid profile,” or mixture of fat components, peculiar to itself and not
to be confused with any other creature’s milkfat. This species-to-species
variation in the flavor palette of milkfat is the strongest marker by which
newborns instinctively recognize the milk of their own kind.
Divert milk into the outside world, and all the intricacies of milkfat
have a new theater in which to operate. It’s a subject to defeat even
textbooks of dairy chemistry, which always acknowledge that much
remains to be discovered about such-and-such aspects of milkfat. The
only aspects I will touch on, as the ones most related to flavor, are
globule membranes, fatty-acid content, and true buttermilk.
Milkfat exists in milk as tiny globules surrounded by delicate but
surprisingly strong membranes whose composition is still not fully
understood because even trying to study them under a microscope
distorts their structure. To an extent, the membranes protect the globule
contents—a soup of different fatty acids, together with other fat-related
substances too complicated to discuss here—against attack by outside
forces.
You can think of the membranes as something like the film around
soap bubbles, except that they have a much more complex architecture,
with microscopically thin outer and inner layers comprising intricate
mixtures of fat-related substances and numerous enzymes. If you have
tried the mini-experiment in buttermaking at the start of this book, or
whipped some cream by the directions on this page, you have explored
one way to knock apart the many substances making up the globule

membrane—releasing flavors that would not register as clearly otherwise
—while also letting the enclosed fat flow out of the former “bubble.”
There are other conditions under which the membrane can be
breached and the contents spilled out, but usually with nastier or at least
trickier results. Handle milk, cream, or butter without an eye to
sanitation, and eventually you will invite certain bacteria or enzymes
that dismantle fat globules, releasing the hideously penetrating flavors of
rancidity. “Lipolysis,” or breakdown of fat, is the technical name. But
curiously enough, small amounts of controlled lipolytic action are
exactly what’s needed to produce the bracing sting of several excellent
Italian cheeses—just one instance of the truth that harnessing the flavor
potential of milkfat takes exceeding skill and experience.
The next culinary dimension of milkfat that cooks need to know
something about is what kinds of fatty acids it contains. Here I must
gloss over many niceties of technical definition to explain that any
edible fat in our kitchens, from peanut oil to rendered lard, basically
consists of compounds properly called “triglycerides.” The last three
syllables reflect the fact that they all involve a molecule of an alcohol
known as “glycerol,” which is reponsible for the basic effect of suave
fattiness in fats. The “tri” part means that they all contain three fatty-
acid molecules tacked on to the glycerol like three pennants waving
from a pole. The truly dizzying aspects of the picture are first, that fatty
acids come in phenomenal numbers of different configurations; second,
that any triglyceride molecule can contain a mix-and-match assortment
of any three fatty acids from the whole spectrum; and third, that all the
resulting permutations and combinations will taste different.
Most of the vegetable oils used in cooking contain at least dozens of
individual fatty acids. But by comparison, the fat in cows’ milk is now
known to have more than four hundred, shuffled like cards in a deck to
furnish the different “tri’s” in thousands of triglycerides. Undoubtedly,
milkfat from other animals is equally complex. But the unique
commercial importance of cows’ milk means that it’s been better studied
than any of the others.
There are several ways to distinguish different kinds of fatty acids.
Most are beyond the scope of a book like this. Those important enough
for cooks and consumers to warrant brief explanations start with
volatility, or the tendency to evaporate at fairly low temperatures. Heat

a bit of butter barely above lukewarm and, as you have just seen, the
more volatile fatty acids will vanish in a puff of fragrance, never to be
recovered.
Individual members of the fatty-acid tribe are also often grouped
under the rubrics “short chain,” “medium chain,” and “long chain,”
referring to the actual length of the molecule as measured by counting
basic architectural units. These units consist of carbon atoms—in most
cases from four to twenty-two—linked with one another in arrangements
that can be very crudely visualized as daisy chains with many odd twists
and turns in three-dimensional space. Every carbon atom on the chain
has hydrogen atoms attached, but here a whole cluster of variables
occurs. Each carbon atom could potentially link up with two hydrogen
atoms via straightforward connections called “single bonds.” When every
one actually is so linked, the fatty acid is said to be “saturated,” meaning
that all potential vacancies for hydrogen are filled. If, however, some are
linked with only one hydrogen atom apiece by more tricky and unstable
connections (“double bonds”), there are unfilled vacancies and the
molecule is said to be “unsaturated.”
For about half a century Americans have been absorbing news
bulletins about the qualities of saturated and unsaturated fatty acids; at
times it seems as if more pieces of nomenclature are being added every
other week. Gradually the experts began explaining that there are kinds
and degrees of saturation, and the names of different classifications—
sometimes of different individual acids—started showing up in media
coverage of health issues. What generally seems to have got lost in the
fog of nutribabble is the culinary picture.
Different fats, as we encounter them in the kitchen, contain different
balances of saturated and unsaturated fatty acids. Broadly speaking, the
ones more weighted toward unsaturation are liquid at room temperature
and are called “oils,” while the more saturated fats are solid at the same
temperature. But what’s unique about butter is that because of the huge
number of different saturated and unsaturated fatty acids stuck onto
triglyceride molecules in different combinations, it undergoes a uniquely
subtle transition between solid and liquid.
You must also take into account that acids of different chain lengths
all have their particular flavors. The shorter ones, which also happen to
be somewhat volatile, include the pungent butyric acid and the trio of

capric-caproic-caprylic acids that in large amounts produces “goaty-
sheepy” effects. The longer ones are usually milder-tasting. Imagine the
four hundred–plus chemically distinct fatty acids in cows’-milk butter,
all contributing separate jots and tittles of sharpness, roughness,
floweriness, waxiness, mellowness, and meltability to what we taste as a
single substance.
The butter story involves many other wrinkles that can’t be dealt with
here; I have ignored whole categories of compounds that enter into its
taste and smell. I will mention only one final factor that sets it apart
from all other culinary fats: the strategic impurities of “buttermilk.” If
you remember the concept of “phase inversion” (this page), you know
that churning milk or cream to butter means agitating an emulsion of fat
globules dispersed in a water-based solution, thus breaking up the
individual globules enough to let the milkfat inside them separate—more
or less—from the rest of the milk and form the continuous mass that we
call butter. But butter is never pure butterfat, unless you resort to very
drastic industrial separation techniques that produce something lacking
the nuances of proper butter. When the formerly dispersed milkfat
comes together in a body through churning, it retains minuscule droplets
of “buttermilk,” the incompletely separated liquid residue. Even after
freshly churned butter is worked and rinsed to remove the buttermilk,
faint traces of it remain dispersed through the body of the butter. They
contain enough of the original skim-milk solids to contribute a very
faint, elusive milkiness without which butter never quite achieves its full
flavor potential.
These same milk solids illustrate just how close the rewards of cooking
with dairy products are to the pitfalls. They have the wonderful property
of browning, caramelizing, and developing a heavenly flavor when
butter is heated to fairly low temperatures, somewhere around 250°F.
The white stuff that you saw separating from the clear butterfat in
slowly heated butter, then resolving itself into nutty browned particles,
was milk solids from retained buttermilk. Unfortunately, their burning
point is far below the smoking point of the actual butterfat. Let the
temperature increase even slightly, and in a flash the delicious brown
flecks will become acridly reeking black flecks, the hallmark of
irretrievably burned butter.
Most butter as sold in the United States is only about 80 to 81 percent

butterfat. The makeup of the remainder varies according to such factors
as whether the butter is salted or unsalted and made from sweet or
ripened cream. Most of it is water (either in the retained buttermilk or
incorporated in the process of rinsing out the buttermilk) and milk
solids. For some purposes such as pastry-making (see the recipe for Pâte
Brisée), butterfat content of 82 percent or higher is desirable. In most
other kinds of cooking, the nuances contributed by trace amounts of
buttermilk are actually a virtue—though too much gives the butter a
leaky body and a propensity to go bad.
Why does melting butter so irreversibly change its basic consistency?
The answer lies in the breaking up of fat globules in the churning
process. Milk or cream is ordinarily chilled in preparation for churning.
Chilling any liquid fat to a solid state causes it to form crystals. The
enclosure of milkfat within membrane-surrounded globules adds another
complication. As some of the globule contents become crystallized, the
sharp crystal edges are in effect primed to start rupturing globule
membranes even before churning, encouraging the formation of a
continuous butter mass. But not entirely continuous; even after churning,
some of the original fat globules remain intact, distributed throughout
the body of the butter. The cold butter takes on a triple interior
structure: part crystalline (which makes it brittle), part continuous
(which makes it malleable), part globular. When it melts, this unique
architecture is effaced a little at a time along with other changes
including the escape of volatile components. Once rechilled, the butter
hardens into coarser crystals large enough to be detected as a grainy
“mouthfeel.”
The ease with which butter absorbs the smells and tastes of other
foods is yet another effect of membrane disruption. Components that
were comparatively impervious to outside influences while they
remained locked up in the inner or outer face of the globule membrane
are now distributed through the butter. They include various unstable
radicals, or unattached fragments of molecules, that are ready to react
with whatever they come in contact with. It so happens that raw onions
or other alliums, once cut, release their own arsenal of highly reactive
volatile sulfurous radicals in search of attachment points on other
substances. Put butter in contact with these “allicins” (in fact, nearly
anything vigorously smelly), and you have something like the meeting of

two desperately lonely people in a singles bar. All fats and oils tend to be
affected by foreign aromas and flavors, but the unique composition of
butter makes it the most susceptible of all.
Today various foods seem to be the beneficiaries of a backlash against
the more naive preachments of yesteryear, and butter is among them.
The nutrition vigilantes who spent much of the 1980s and ’90s assuring
us that various margarines were a far more healthful alternative have
changed their tune following a spate of reports about the effects of trans
fatty acids, a class of unsaturated fatty acids in which carbon atoms
accept extra hydrogen atoms attached by peculiarly angled double bonds
that make the resulting compounds look and behave more like saturated
fats. (Small amounts of trans fatty acids occur naturally in milkfat, but
they represent only a tiny fraction of the volume now pouring into the
food supply from commercially manufactured fats.) To an extent, butter
is getting cleared of a disrepute that it never should have incurred in the
first place. But I should hate to see its fortunes tied only to the
fluctuations of pop diet theory. In the end, the best reason to love it and
welcome it (with a good dose of common sense) to our diets is that no
other food even remotely mimics the unimaginable intricacies we
experience in the ravishing effect of butter on bread, butter melted over
a baked potato, butter in a frying pan, butter in a sauce or pastry.
Here I should point out that the global diversity of butter is still pretty
much a closed book in this country. As far as I know, strong-flavored
versions produced by different kinds of handling with lengthy
fermentation have not yet arrived here from places like Tibet, parts of
the Arab world, or odd corners of Africa. It’s not only possible but
probable that in a few years Americans will be readjusting their
gastronomic compasses to take in kinds of butter far beyond Eurocentric
models. Meanwhile, you can learn a lot about international preferences
by searching for goats’-, sheep’s-, or even buffaloes’-milk butter and
registering how greatly they differ from cows’-milk butter. (A few Greek
groceries carry imported sheep’s-milk butter, and buffaloes’-milk butter
from Italy shows up in a few specialty venues.)

U
SALTED VERSUS UNSALTED BUTTER: SOME HISTORICAL
PERSPECTIVE
nlike most milk and cream, plain butter as it reaches
American consumers today in either salted or unsalted state
probably is better made and better tasting than most of the
counterparts produced on this continent before the twentieth
century. I don’t mean butter inflated with gases or mixed with
vegetable oils, but the ordinary mass-produced kind put up in
quarter-pound sticks. It is a very particular, fairly modern artifact
of northwestern European culinary culture, and its uniqueness is
difficult to understand without some explanation of how butter
reached different cuisines at different times. If you harbor strong
prejudices about the superiority of either salted or unsalted
butter, much of the reason lies in this same past.
I have mentioned that the ancient Greeks, who didn’t raise
milch animals for butter, puzzled their heads over the butter, or
“cow cheese,” that they saw being scarfed down by barbarian
cattle herders (this page). It’s highly unlikely that this curiosity
resembled modern table butter, because it couldn’t possibly have
been produced under the conditions that make butter waxy and
delicate-tasting. Before modern chilling technology, a more
important consideration would have been making the butter keep.
Butter does last longer than the milk or cream that furnishes it,
but that’s not very long. People therefore took to salting it, and
sometimes burying it underground in pots or casks. To this day
people in parts of the Middle East and North Africa bury butter
long enough to reach some desired state of fermentation, and the
custom of burying it in Irish peat bogs seems to be centuries if not
millennia old.
Given the perishablility of butter, it’s impossible to generalize
about what it tasted like in ancient and perhaps early medieval

Europe. Did people clarify it for longer keeping, or mix it with
herbs for more complex flavors, as many of the world’s butter-
eating peoples still do? Was it strong and almost cheesy-smelling
like the North African smen? We may never know. But we do
know that plenty of it was salted, probably to a degree that we
would find harsh. And with repeated use the vessels it was
churned in (animal skins in earliest times, later unglazed clay and
wood) would have acquired penetrating smells and tastes that
they then communicated to the butter.
The butter of the Middle Ages was more a humble rural staple
than a delicacy. The situation changed with the eighteenth-
century rise of specialized modern dairying, when farmstead
butter freshly churned for market became something of a luxury
article for town-dwellers’ tables in England and northern Europe.
The buttermaking scene in George Eliot’s novel Adam Bede, set in
1799, marvelously evokes what might be called the modern
European butter esthetic: “it is so pure, so sweet-scented; it is
turned off the mould with such a beautiful firm surface, like
marble in a pale yellow light!”
But fine, expensive butter made to exacting tastes was very far
from most of the butter sold and eaten throughout the nineteenth
century. From contemporary accounts, the usual article was likely
to be ill-flavored or frankly rancid through poor handling. In
countries that put up a lot of butter for mass commercial
distribution (especially the United States and Ireland), it was
routinely made with gross amounts of undissolved salt worked in
before the butter was packed for keeping into large firkins—
sometimes meant to last through a winter—that might be topped
up with brine, resulting in a further salt crust on the surface. This
did not stop poorly made butter from still being rancid or
contaminated with foreign flavors.
“America must have the credit of manufacturing and putting
into market more bad butter than all that is made in the rest of
the world together,” announced the domestic science writer
Catharine Beecher and her sister Harriet Beecher Stowe in The
American Woman’s Home (1869). By their reckoning, “about one

pound of salt to every ten of butter” was a usual ratio—not
surprising, with salt costing “five cents a pound and butter fifty.”
The disdain for salted butter among many modern American
food authorities is a remnant of this era. The Beecher sisters, who
had tasted exquisite unsalted butter in France and England, saw
the matter in better perspective. One could, they wrote, find at
least some American butter “salted with care and delicacy, so that
it might be a question whether even a fastidious Englishman
might not prefer its golden solidity to the white, creamy freshness
of his own.”
The new dairying technology of the late nineteenth century
resulted in butter of much more uniform and, on the whole, better
quality, generally produced at centrifuge-equipped industrial
creameries rather than on farms. There are advantages to doing
some things on at least a modest industrial scale, and
buttermaking is one of them. The fact is that being able to
precisely measure fat content, buttermilk content, temperature,
and other conditions, while using vessels and churning equipment
a great deal cleaner than many earlier counterparts, raised the
average quality of creamery butter well above any but the very
finest farmstead article. (Eventually, batch churning was
supplanted by more highly automated continuous-flow processes.)
At the same time, revolutions in packaging, transportation, and
home storage meant that nearly everyone could frequently buy
butter put up in small amounts and keep it for short periods in an
icebox or refrigerator. Before that, you either bought whole
firkins meant to last you for months or went to the grocer’s for a
pound or so dug out of a barrel, in either decent or horrible
condition.
By the time creameries proliferated, most American consumers
had a taste for salted butter that persists to this day. The minority,
at around the turn of the twentieth century, included culinary
writers who fancied that unsalted butter was an elegant French
preference, as well as a rising tide of Ashkenazic Jewish
immigrants from the Pale of Settlement.
Today salting is done less for preservation than because of taste

preference, and salted butter is almost invariably made with
amounts of smoothly incorporated salt that the Beechers would
have thought quite delicate. Both salted and unsalted versions
have a fine, waxy consistency and gratifying flavor that would
have been far from routine 150 years ago. But the question of
which kind is preferable still tends to be debated as if we were
awash in butter coarsely oversalted to mask awful defects. I think
the facts are much misunderstood.
In the first place, good-tasting butter can be salted or unsalted.
Setting aside the differences between butter churned from sweet
or slightly soured cream (this page), the most important factors
are first, cream without off flavors contributed by the animals’
feed or poor handling; second, meticulous control of temperature
at every stage of churning and draining; and third, scrupulous
working to remove nearly all the buttermilk while leaving just the
tiny residue that will lend soul to the butter. Salt does not ruin
well-made butter; it imparts something that some people care for
and others don’t. Its aficionados can taste just as much complexity
in salted butter as can the opposite party in unsalted.
Though I was raised on salted butter, I eventually switched
allegiances. Still, I’ve tasted enough good salted butter to disagree
with knee-jerk responses about its invariable inferiority for
spreading on bread or melting over vegetables. Other purposes
are a different story. Unsalted butter is a must in any situation
where the salt would tend to crystallize out of the whole and form
a crust on the bottom of the pan—Beurre Noisette or Beurre Noir,
any kind of clarified butter, or most dishes involving butter
heated to a fairly high temperature for a long time. Pastry-makers
say that salted butter often gives poorer results in baking because
it tends to retain slightly more water. It also has disadvantages
when you’re trying to pregauge the amount of salt needed for
seasoning, especially since degrees of saltiness vary from brand to
brand. If you cook with salted butter, it’s always a good idea to
use much less salt than is called for in a recipe, then add more to
taste if needed.
Supermarket butter today may not be the ne plus ultra of

wonderful butter, but whether salted or unsalted it’s usually
pretty good. And even pretty good butter is a treasure beyond the
power of industrial chemistry to imitate by playing games with
either animal or vegetable fats.

B
A SHOPPING AND HANDLING PRIMER
uying butter is not absolutely a guessing game, but you have
to expect much inconsistency in labeling. The fine print may or
may not clear things up. Some common terms are:
• Sweet butter: Often incorrectly used as a synonym for unsalted
butter. Properly speaking, it is butter made from sweet cream, as
in the recipe on this page. Sweet butter can be salted or unsalted.
The basic butter flavor is pure and simple.
• Cultured or ripened butter: In the strictest sense, butter churned
from cream that has been lightly soured by culturing with lactic-
acid bacteria (see this page). Whether salted or unsalted, it has
nuances of flavor and aroma not found in sweet butter. The
genuine article is time-consuming and expensive to produce, and
has largely been replaced by easier methods. Small amounts of
lactic-acid cultures are often pumped into the butter after
churning; this may not be easy to detect from the label, since
“cultures,” “bacterial cultures,” or “cultured cream” can be listed
among the ingredients of butter made by either method. A still
more convenient shortcut is to buy distillates of the main flavoring
substances that would have been developed by ripening and inject
them into the churned butter. The most usual is diacetyl, a volatile
compound with a bloomy fragrance. Lactic acid may also be
directly added. The labels of butter so treated probably will have
no clue except “natural flavoring,” which is accurate only in a
pretty strained sense of “natural.” You know that you are getting
true cultured butter if the label says that the cream was cultured
before churning, but perhaps one maker out of dozens will
vouchsafe this information.
• European-style butter: A term with no fixed meaning, sometimes
referring to cultured butter and sometimes to butter with a
butterfat content higher than the usual 80 to 81 percent in
American butter.

• Creamery butter: A phrase left over from the late nineteenth
century, when buttermaking largely moved from farms to small
centrifuging plants called creameries (this page). People hearing
the word “creamery” today usually don’t know that its prior
associations were industrial, not pastoral, and it’s been
appropriated by a spectrum of small-scale artisanal milk
processors and even a few cheesemakers. “Creamery butter” in
itself may or may not be better than any other butter.
• Whipped butter: The dairy industry’s pseudo-solution to the
pseudo-problem of chilled butter’s resistance to spreading. In the
late 1960s someone had the idea of pumping butter full of
nitrogen gas (sometimes air), which both softened the texture and
handily increased the volume. Because of its reduced density, it
cannot be substituted for plain butter in cooking. (Anyone who
finds that regular butter won’t spread easily on bread should
either put out a little butter to warm up to room temperature
before using it or buy more substantial bread—you can’t expect
mass-produced stuff with all the sturdy texture of marshmallow
whip to be buttered without tearing into holes.) I skip whipped
butter, with one odd but delightful exception: a version of the
famous Russian butter made in Vologda, frequently sold in stores
that carry imported foods from the ex–Soviet Union. It bears the
words “Sweet Whipped Butter” prominently printed on the
package below a Cyrillic label, and judging by the taste must be
made from cream put through something like the English clotted-
cream process. It’s just as hard to spread as any regular butter, but
the flavor is phenomenal.
• USDA butter grades: Marks (AA, A, B) assigned under a
Department 
of 
Agriculture 
evaluation 
system 
that 
today
unfortunately has no relevance to most of the butter sold in any
retail venue. Most manufacturers decline to be involved in the
voluntary grading program, and those that do go along don’t
necessarily make better butter than the nonparticipants.
WHAT YOU SEE AND WHAT YOU GET

Judging the quality of butter from external factors is dicey. Price
and distinguished-sounding Old World (or domestic) origins are
no guarantee of anything. Neither is color. Butter can be any
shade from nearly white to deep yellow, mostly depending on
whether the vitamin A in the milkfat occurs in the finished form
(colorless) or as the precursor beta-carotene (yellow). Jersey and
Guernsey cows give the deepest-colored butter, Holstein-Friesians
the palest. Butter from goats’, sheep’s, and buffaloes’ milk is
always ivory-white. The color of cows’-milk butter can vary by
season, if the animals have access to spring pasturage (which puts
more beta-carotene into the milk). Bear in mind that color has no
necessary connection with butteriness; in some parts of the
country where people strongly prefer a bright yellow, the color
may come from dyes such as annatto.
Real quality, as opposed to cosmetics, depends not only on how
the butter was made but on whether it has been exposed to air or
allowed to stand at warm temperatures between the time of
manufacture and the time of consumption. Every few degrees of
temperature above about 45° or 50°F mean some loss of volatile
compounds, some irreversible shift in the intricacies of the fragile
substance. Then there is the question of packaging. The onion
experiment shows how quick butter is to react with its
surroundings. 
Let 
it 
sit 
uncovered 
even 
at 
refrigerator
temperatures, and it will soon oxidize enough to develop a
discolored and greasy-looking outer layer. It also will either pick
up the smell of other foods or simply lose its own pristine flavor.
Moral: Tight, secure packaging in materials like foil or stout
laminated cardboard—or both together—is a big plus in choosing
butter. Some otherwise excellent butters come in flimsy, ill-sealed
wrappings. If you take the plunge and buy these, then
scrupulously rewrap them the minute you get them home in some
impermeable arrangement like plastic wrap inside a layer of foil.
(And maybe a freezer bag for good measure.) I don’t have a home
vacuum-seal device, but it sounds like a useful idea for butter.
Well-wrapped butter keeps quite well in the refrigerator and
even better in the freezer. Salt butter has a longer life expectancy

than unsalted, but it’s hard to give rules of thumb. Today
refrigerated butter almost never goes spectacularly bad in the
sense meant by the Beecher sisters; rather, it just keeps taking on
whiffs of something slightly foreign while losing the luxe, calme, et
volupté that set butter apart from other fats. It may still be quite
good after a week’s or two weeks’ sojourn in the refrigerator, but
the safest thing is to cut off a chunk for immmediate use and store
the rest in the freezer, carefully wrapped. Here again there’s no
hard and fast rule about storage times. Good, fresh butter that’s
never been taken out of sealed packaging can last in excellent
condition for many months.
I have pointed out that the general run of butter available to
modern consumers is greatly superior to most butter made and
sold before about the mid-nineteenth century. Still, I don’t want
to leave the impression that that’s as good as it gets. Our mostly
good and useful factory-made butter isn’t the same thing as
ambrosial, ethereal, extraordinary butter, which does exist here
and there—salted or unsalted, “sweet” or ripened. You are less
likely to find it by sampling expensive imported or domestic
brands in fancy stores than by exploring butter from small-scale
producers. This is elusive, but sometimes to be encountered at
local farmers’ markets. The critical factors are particularly good
cream from herds managed for excellence rather than maximum
volume; minute adjustment of temperature through all stages of
churning and handling; and freshness so extreme that cooking
with the butter seems like a desecration when you could simply
sit there and eat it in its pure, virginal glory. When made with
care, home-churned butter can match the flavor of this exercise in
amazing grace—but I’ve never produced anything to match the
beautiful nuances of the consistency.

D
RECIPES
HOME-CHURNED BUTTER AND BUTTERMILK: SWEET-
CREAM TYPE
espite what I consider the better texture of good commercial
butter, homemade butter fresh from working and rinsing can’t be
equaled for delivering the taste of cream to the nth power, cream
newly translated to some rarefied spiritual afterlife. Some of this
same flavor will linger in the new buttermilk, which resembles
the commercial cultured product in name only.
I recommend plain sweet-cream butter for a first effort because
it is the simpler of the two main types. If you tried the brief
“White Magic” experiment on this page, you’ll already have
grasped the general process. But for best results you need to
understand a few other things.
To start with, it isn’t necessary to use only heavy cream. In
many parts of the world people have always used unhomogenized
milk (though usually soured), and light cream works fine as long
as it isn’t ultrapasteurized. The advantage of heavy cream is that
it churns faster and more completely, with more butter and less
buttermilk to show for your pains. Experiment as you like with
combinations of light and heavy cream. Unhomogenized cream
“comes” faster than homogenized because of its larger milkfat
globules.
The most important factor is temperature control. At a
buttermaking demonstration, I once saw dozens of pounds of
wonderful Jersey cream churned into something like a mound of
yellow petroleum jelly because the ambient temperature in a sun-
broiled farm shed on a hot summer day was about thirty degrees
too high. The cream itself should be well chilled, which increases
the proportion of crystallized fat in the complex milkfat structure
(this page) and primes the original fat globules for strategic
disruption. Commercial makers call the chilling stage “aging.”

Maintaining the proper temperature is many times more
predictable with factory-scale machinery churning hundreds of
pounds than with home equipment churning small amounts. The
speediest and most practical home method for most people—the
food processor—is also extremely friction-inducing. The mere
action of the metal blades will raise the temperature enough
during the churning process to affect the texture of the finished
butter. For this reason, you must compensate or overcompensate
by keeping all materials and implements as cold as possible at
every stage. Old-fashioned buttermaking manuals used to suggest
bringing the cream to between 55° and 65°F before starting to
churn. In my experience this is a mistake for people working in
modern home kitchens; the butter is likely to get well over 65°F
before you finish.
Before refrigeration, farm families in my part of Pennsylvania
used to store new milk and cream in springhouses built over
groundwater springs that generally kept springhouse temperatures
somewhere between 55° and 60°F except in extreme weather.
People also churned—in the springhouse or the coolest room in
the house—using wooden butter churns that provided some
temperature insulation. We can’t replicate these conditions today,
but we can at least seek to ensure that the kitchen is as cool as
possible during churning. Never try to make butter in a hot
kitchen.
Read through everything and have all equipment organized
before beginning; once the butter starts to come, you’ll have to
work fast.
Note: I am not giving directions for salted butter because it is
very difficult for home buttermakers to work in the salt closely
without grittiness.
YIELD: About ½ pound (1 cup) butter and 2 cups buttermilk
(relative amounts will vary greatly with the butterfat content of
the cream)
3 cups well-chilled nonultrapasteurized cream (light, heavy, or any
desired mixture), preferably unhomogenized

You will need a food processor fitted with the steel blade, a wire-mesh
strainer, a couple of mixing bowls, a rubber spatula, a wooden spoon or
two, and a lidded storage container. Chill the processor bowl and blade
in the refrigerator along with everything else. Have plenty of ice water
on hand.
Set up the food processor, and add half the cream (or all of it, if you
have a processor model of at least 11-cup capacity). Leave the rest in the
refrigerator. Begin processing and watch closely as the cream thickens
and whips. Within a few minutes or even seconds, it will start to look
less white. As soon as you see signs that it is breaking into something
slightly granular, stop the machine and take a look. Cautiously proceed
in stops and starts until the cream is quite definitely separated into thin,
cloudy whitish buttermilk and clumps of ivory or yellow (depending on
the breed of cow) butter.
Set the strainer over a mixing bowl and dump in the contents of the
processor, scraping out any clinging butter particles with a rubber
spatula. Put the strainer and bowl in the refrigerator while you repeat
the processing with the rest of the cream. Add the second batch of butter
to what you have in the strainer. Pour off the buttermilk into another
container.
Turn out the butter into another bowl and add roughly as much
(strained) ice water as you have buttermilk. Work the butter into a mass
with a stout wooden spoon or spatula. (The cheesemaker Jonathan
White recommends a potato masher, which is quite efficient. In the day
of home buttermaking, the usual implement was one or two wooden
butter paddles.) Drain off as much liquid as you can and go on working
the butter. You will see it becoming smoother and waxier under the
spoon, as butterfat freed from its previous encapsulation in distinct
globules comes together in a continuous mass. When no more liquid
seems to be coming out, pat the butter dry with paper towels, pack it
into a container, and promptly refrigerate it, tightly covered. It is more
fragile than commercial butter. To taste its incomparable freshness at the
full, you must use it within hours. But up to about four or five days you
will still get much of that pure, delicate quality.
Taste the buttermilk, which will be a new experience to most
Americans. You can drink it as is, throw it out if you dislike it, or use it
for the same cooking purposes as sweet whey (this page). Store it tightly

covered in the refrigerator. It will keep for four or five days.

M
HOME-CHURNED BUTTER AND BUTTERMILK: RIPENED-
CREAM TYPE
ost butter in most parts of the world has always come from
ripened cream or milk. In hot climates this is because virtually all
milk is soured before use. In the colder environments of northern
Europe and North America, pre-industrial buttermakers usually
saved the skimmed cream from several days’ milking and added
one batch to the next until they had enough to justify the effort of
churning. When the housewife or dairymaid got around to the
week’s or half-week’s churning, a little of this ripened flavor
persisted in the butter while much more remained in the
buttermilk.
Today most American consumers tend to have a marked
preference for either sweet-cream or ripened-cream butter; I’m a
fanatic for the latter. I urge you to try making it once you’ve had
success with the sweet-cream butter recipe.
The process is really the same except that the first step is to
sour the cream by bacterial “ripening” (culturing) at room
temperature before it is aged in the refrigerator. Ripening not
only makes the butter come more efficiently but results in the
most wonderful thick white buttermilk, silkier than the sweet-
cream version and with a clean but complex lactic-acid flavor.
(You may get an inkling of why buttermilk vendors, as described
in James Fenimore Cooper’s novel Satanstoe, used to cruise the
streets of colonial New York calling out, “White wine!”) The
butter itself will retain a lovely, aromatic hint of fermentation.
For home cooks, the best ripening agent is commercial cultured
buttermilk containing at least 1.5 percent milkfat and made
without gum thickeners or salt. The true buttermilk that you end
up with will far surpass this in flavor. I like to use heavy and light
cream in about a 2 to 1 ratio, because I get more (and better)
buttermilk than with all heavy cream.
YIELD: Roughly ½ pound (1 cup) butter and 2 cups buttermilk

(relative amounts will vary with the butterfat content of the
cream)
3 cups nonultrapasteurized cream (light, heavy, or any desired
mixture), preferably unhomogenized
¼ cup cultured buttermilk with live cultures and 1.5 percent (or
more) milkfat, as fresh as possible
Stir together the cream and buttermilk in a bowl and let stand at room
temperature until it becomes thick and sour-smelling (usually 16 to 24
hours). Cover tightly and refrigerate for several hours or overnight, until
thoroughly chilled.
Now proceed exactly as for the preceding butter and buttermilk made
by the sweet-cream method, chilling the equipment and taking the same
precautions to keep things cold.

N
CLARIFIED BUTTERS: A REVISIONIST VIEW
inety percent of the time, my general take on clarifying
butter in the classic European style is “DON’T.” This kind of
clarifying—melting butter to separate the clear butterfat and
discarding all traces of other milk residue—removes the whole
poetry of butter and irrevocably alters the intricate original
profile of different fatty acids with their many different melting
points. In short, it converts butter into the one form of rendered
grease that can legitimately claim to taste somewhat—certainly
not completely—like real butter.
True, there is the other ten percent. I grant that clarified butter
has advantages for pan-frying meat, chicken, or fish at a brisk
temperature without leaving smeary black speckles on the food.
But it has no special point in baking, and in emulsions like
hollandaise sauce contributes less body and flavor than good
butter added as is. Its main virtue is the negative one of not
burning when it gets above about 250°F.
The only forms of clarified butter that have positive culinary
interest are non-European, and involve their own special
approaches. Let’s start by explaining what happens in clarifying.
With the European method, you melt the butter very briefly and
gently until its finely dissolved droplets of original true buttermilk
release their contents: dissolved minerals, water-soluble proteins,
and tiny particles of solid casein. Some rise to the top while
others sink to the bottom. Once you have skimmed the top froth
and carefully poured off the butterfat from the bottom residue,
you have a cooking fat less temperamental than unclarified
butter. It also lasts months longer because the most perishable
parts have been removed.
The process of making Indian ghee or spice-infused clarified
butters is not at all the same. Instead of pouring off the butter as
soon as possible, you let it cook long enough to develop a whole
different complex of flavors. At the end you have not a cooking

fat partly robbed of its original identity but something ready to
make its own unique and decisive contribution to anything
cooked in it or served with it. Ghee simmers slowly until the
water gradually evaporates and the milk solids start to brown,
while the composition of the fat alters far more drastically than
with orthodox clarified butter. The result, when strained, is a
wonderfully rich and nutty-flavored sublimation of butter. The
same is true of the Ethiopian nit’r kibeh, but it also contains a
marvelous bouquet of aromatics melded with the simmered-butter
flavor. I suggest that you experiment with either of these in
savory dishes where a recipe calls for regular clarified butter.

M
EUROPEAN-STYLE CLARIFIED BUTTER
y idea of what to cook in simple clarified butter would be
Wienerschnitzel or a large mess of pan-fried trout—large enough
that nonclarified butter might be starting to burn by the time
you’d finished.
Making up a batch is an education in the vagaries of butter.
Starting with a pound of butter, you may end up with more than
14 ounces or as little as 12 ounces of clarified butter, depending
on the amount of water and milk solids that were in the butter
before clarifying. High-fat, low-moisture butter (83 percent or
higher butterfat content, by weight) will give a higher yield than
the more usual 80 to 81 percent American butter.
Be sure not to discard the buttermilk residue left from the
process! It is quite perishable but absolutely delicious
(particularly that from cultured butter), and can be saved in small
amounts in the freezer until you have enough to use as a
seasoning on vegetables, add to sauces as a flavor enhancer, or
put into a batch of bread dough. (Madeleine Kamman’s When
French Women Cook has a wonderful walnut-oil bread using the
buttermilk residue from clarified butter—gape or gappe, as
churned buttermilk is known in the Auvergne.)
YIELD: Highly variable, but generally about 14 to 15 ounces
(slightly less than 2 cups) per original pound
Use only unsalted butter. A pound or half a pound is the most
convenient-sized batch to experiment with, but you can use any
preferred amount. If you are starting with a pound or less, use a 2-to 3-
quart saucepan. Pouring off the clear butterfat will be easier if it is
narrow rather than wide. The bottom must be heavy enough to diffuse
heat well without scorching.
Have ready a heatproof storage container for the clarified butter, a
smaller one for the buttermilk residue, and a small spoon for skimming.
Cut the butter into chunks of 1 tablespoon or less and place it in the
saucepan over medium-low heat. Watch as it melts. It must not reach a

sizzle; reduce the heat if necessary. Do not shake or stir it. As it fully
melts, some crinkly-looking foam (mostly water-soluble whey proteins)
may swim to the top. Carefully skim this off into your smaller container,
trying to disturb the butter as little as possible. Remove the pan from the
heat and let it stand a few minutes, to allow the buttermilk residue to
separate from the lighter butterfat by gravity.
Slowly pour the clear golden butterfat into the larger container, being
sure to stop before any of the cloudy white liquid at the bottom gets into
it. Spoon off as much more of the clear fat as you can. Obsessive types
can salvage the last smidgin of clarified butter by pouring what’s left
into a small cup, refrigerating it until it solidifies into a cake, and
scraping the buttermilk residue off the bottom with a knife.
The clarified butter should be stored, tightly covered, in a cool place
or the refrigerator. It keeps for months. Add all remaining buttermilk
leavings to the container with the skimmed foam and freeze, tightly
covered.
Some people clarify butter in the oven. To do this, put the butter in a
heatproof glass measuring cup and place it in a preheated 225°F oven
until melted. Continue as directed above.

T
GHEE
(INDIAN CLARIFIED BUTTER)
his is the usli ghee (Hindi for “pure ghee”) long held holy in
Hindu thought, as opposed to the partially hydrogenated
vegetable-oil substitute called vanaspati ghee (“plant ghee”) that is
now overtaking it in sales as attachment to former dietary
observance weakens in much of India. The special status of real
ghee reflected the belief that it had undergone two kinds of
refining or subliming process. The cow herself performed the first
by distilling milk for butter out of the grasses of the earth; people
completed the second by subjecting churned butter to the
purifying medium of fire.
In contrast to simple clarified butter, ghee is simmered for a
long time to bring out complex flavors that never develop in the
briefly melted kind. Once you become familiar with its heavenly
toasted aroma and flavor, you may fall in love with it much as
many American cooks have fallen in love with things like
Vietnamese fish sauce, smoked Spanish paprika, and toasted
sesame oil.
Before you begin, please remember that different kinds of
butter vary greatly in water content. This makes it difficult to
predict the total cooking time for ghee. I’ve seen recipes blithely
estimating less than fifteen minutes; all I can say is that it usually
takes me between forty minutes and an hour. The exact yield also
will vary. To partly duplicate some of the lactic-acid flavor that
churned sour milk imparts to Indian ghee, try to use butter from
cultured cream. It’s best to start with at least a pound of butter—
unsalted only.
YIELD: About 12 to 14 ounces (slightly more than 1⅞ cups) per
original pound
Have ready a heatproof storage container for the clarified ghee, a
smaller one for the buttermilk residue, a small spoon for skimming, and
a small strainer lined with several layers of tight-woven cheesecloth or a

clean cotton handkerchief, set over a small heatproof bowl.
Cut the butter into chunks of about a tablespoon each, and melt it in a
heavy-bottomed 2-or 3-quart saucepan over low heat. It must melt
evenly so that part isn’t sizzling while the rest is still solid; shake the pan
to even things out if necessary. When it is fully melted, you can increase
the heat slightly, but it should never be higher than medium-low. The
butter will crackle and sputter as the watery part starts to evaporate.
Carefully skim off as much of the rising foam as you can into the smaller
container, and push the rest to one side so that you can see the color of
the butter.
The pan can now mind its own business for between 30 minutes and
an hour (depending on the amount of water to be driven off), but you
must keep checking it at frequent intervals. Gradually the butterfat will
become clearer as the water evaporates and the temperature rises; the
bubbling and hissing will subside, and you will see the milky residue
forming into clumps on the bottom. This must not be allowed to burn; if
it becomes darker than golden brown, the ghee will taste scorched. If
you see it darkening too fast, briefly remove the pan from the burner
and lower the heat before resuming. Eventually the butterfat will be
deep golden and have a ripe, walnutlike smell. Set it aside to cool
slightly before proceeding.
Carefully pour off and spoon the clear ghee into the larger container.
When you’re down to the last bit that you can get, strain the rest
through the cheesecloth and scrape all the leavings into the container
with the skimmed foam. (Save this in the freezer as for the residues from
European-style clarified butter. It will taste even better because of the
lengthy browning process.) Let the ghee cool to room temperature before
covering tightly. It will keep at least six months in the refrigerator,
indefinitely in the freezer.

T
NIT’R KIBEH
(ETHIOPIAN SPICED CLARIFIED BUTTER)
he European-style flavored butters discussed on this page
place the flavoring ingredients (lemon juice, chives, parsley,
anchovies, or whatnot) in strong perspective against the pure,
creamy butter vehicle. In much of northern Africa and the
Mideast, people have adopted different approaches. Ethiopian nit’r
kibeh (there are various English transliterations from Amharic)
exemplifies one of these. You begin by simmering the butter with
various spices and flavorings. In the process, you cook out both
the perishable and the creamy qualities, while the strong flavors
of many different ingredients fuse into a subtle bouquet that
registers less immediately on the palate than the warm, nutty
fullness of the transformed butter. What remains when the
aromatics are strained out is one of the world’s finest cooking fats,
as rich-flavored as ghee but with other elusive complexities.
In Ethiopia nit’r kibeh is a favorite sautéing or braising medium
for a wide variety of meat, chicken, and vegetable dishes, and
serves as a sauce or dressing for k’itfo t’re, the celebrated national
counterpart of steak tartare. Among the usual constellation of
flavorings, black or “false” cardamom (the pungent Aframomum
korarima), ajowan (Trachyspermum ammi; also called bishop’s
weed or carom), and fenugreek are available in Indian grocery
stores. If you are unable to obtain one or two of the ingredients,
simply leave them out; the butter will still have plenty of flavor. If
you can find fresh turmeric (also sold in Indian groceries), use a
nickel-sized slice, minced, in place of dried ground turmeric.
The recipe can be halved, though I find it easier to make at
least a 2-cup batch.
YIELD: About 2 cups
1 pound unsalted butter, cut into small pieces
3 to 4 large shallots, minced
3 large garlic cloves, minced

3 to 4 quarter-sized slices of fresh ginger, minced
Seeds from 3 black cardamom pods (do not substitute green
cardamom)
Cinnamon stick (a 1-to 2-inch piece)
1 to 2 whole cloves, bruised
½ teaspoon fenugreek seeds
½ teaspoon ajowan seeds
½ teaspoon dried ground turmeric (or fresh, see above)
Melt the butter over medium-low heat in a small heavy saucepan. When
it is hot and fragrant and the sizzling begins to subside, add all the
remaining ingredients. Reduce the heat to very low and cook,
uncovered, for 45 to 60 minutes, until the shallots and ginger have
stopped bubbling and there is a layer of clear golden fat on top. If
necessary, push any rising foam to the side so that you can see the
butter; do not let the aromatics brown.
Let the nit’r kibeh cool slightly. Place a colander lined with tight-woven
cheesecloth or a clean cotton handkerchief over a heatproof bowl; pour
the contents of the pan into it, letting the clarified fat drain through.
Strain twice if necessary to eliminate any cloudy sediment, which would
shorten the keeping time. Discard the residue. Transfer to storage
containers and let cool to room temperature before refrigerating; store,
tightly covered, in the refrigerator. It will keep for four to six months.

D
BEURRE MANIÉ
espite its usual name, beurre manié, or “kneaded butter,” is
not an exclusively French invention. It was perfectly at home in
nineteenth-century American kitchens, where people often called
it “braided butter.” It isn’t a sauce in itself but a variation of the
same principle—fat plus flour—that thickens roux-based sauces.
In both cases the fat protectively coats the separate flour granules
so that they will not coalesce into a sticky mass as soon as they
meet some hot liquid ingredient. This allows them to gradually
soften (by absorption of water) on exposure to heat and
progressively release their starch into the liquid. Result: binding
of a sauce.
The main difference is that in a beurre manié the flour starts
out with a coating of more or less cool, solid butter, whereas in a
roux the fat is already liquefied and heating up fast. Melt butter
for a roux and add flour, and the mixture quickly reaches
temperatures higher than the boiling point of water. But the flour
and butter for a beurre manié are worked together off the heat
and added to a simmering liquid, meaning that the temperature
never will go above 212°F. The flour-fat mixture undergoes a
nuanced melting and melding before the butter becomes fully
liquefied. Thus the flour granules can first absorb liquid and then
release starch into a sauce in gentle stages. In a roux-based sauce,
by contrast, the amalgamation of flour and (already heated) fat
happens more abruptly, and by the time the liquid is added more
of the butter’s original qualities have been lost. There is the
further wrinkle that flour cooked at high temperatures loses more
of its thickening power than at low temperatures, so that a certain
amount of flour will thicken a certain amount of liquid more in a
beurre manié than in a roux.
There is no use trying to reduce a beurre manié to a set of
recipe directions, but this is the gist of the process: Put equal
amounts of flour and butter (by volume—say, 4 tablespoons each)
on a plate or clean work surface. The butter should be very little

softened, if at all. The softer and easier to work it is, the likelier
the mixture is to be borderline greasy before you add it to any
would-be sauce.
With the tines of a fork, patiently mash the flour into the butter
until no loose flour is visible and the mixture is perfectly smooth.
(I use a fork rather than my fingers in order to keep it as cool as
possible.) If it will have to wait a while in a hot kitchen before
use, refrigerate it.
To use beurre manié, whittle off bits equal to about ¼ to ½
teaspoonful each and add them to the simmering sauce over low
heat. It is hard to give a rule about how much to use, because any
liquid to which you add it—say, unthickened gravy from a roast,
or a soup that you want to lightly bind—will have a particular
viscosity. After a few times you will learn to judge by eye without
laborious measuring. Begin by adding the equivalent of about 1 to
2 teaspoons beurre manié per cup of liquid. Stir it in well (or
shake and swirl the pan if it’s full of meat or vegetables in large
chunks). Watch for signs of thickening and add a bit more if after
a minute or two the sauce or soup looks too thin, but remember
that it will slightly thicken of its own accord after it reaches
serving plates. Once the paste is well incorporated and the sauce
thickened to your liking, remove the pan from the heat.
To keep the sauce from acquiring a floury or wheaty taste,
either serve it instantly or briefly keep it warm without boiling
(for instance, on a heat-deflecting device over very low heat). Or
if it fits your schedule, let it simmer at least another 20 minutes.
The floury quality develops when a beurre manié–thickened sauce
cooks for more than a few minutes, but goes away with longer
simmering.
Beurre manié will keep in the refrigerator, tightly covered, for a
week or two, but I prefer to make up small amounts as needed.


A
FLAVORED OR COMPOUND BUTTERS: SOME
SUGGESTIONS
s you saw if you put butter in a closed container with onion
as suggested on this page, it’s a magnet for penetrating smells and
flavors. Merely “cutting the butter with an oniony knife” was the
thoroughly English proposal for getting rid of an unwelcome
visitor in one of Arthur Ransome’s “Swallows and Amazons”
children’s books. Of course, there are those of us who like raw
onion or other assertive, aromatic ingredients just begging to pair
up with some of the highly sensitive and reactive chemical
components of butter. This affinity is part of the reason that even
uncooked butter can be one of the most magical sauces, or sauce
bases, in the canon.
Cooked butter can play a similar role when heated with desired
ingredients long enough to become infused with their essence.
Anglophiles may think of shellfish butter made by simmering the
crushed shells of shrimp or lobster in butter, or potted savories in
which gently melted butter is poured over a rillette-like mixture
of shredded long-simmered meat. I’m a fan of the quite different
approach represented by the Ethiopian spiced butter, nit’r kibeh
(this page). But uncooked flavored butters are both easier to
produce and much more diverse.
In this large tribe of savory toppings, spreads, and quasi-sauces,
the butter is worked with some chosen flavor foil until thoroughly
combined. Such mixtures, often called “compound butters,”
belong to the fill-in-the-blank category of recipes that really
amount to no more than “Take some butter and mix it with some
(insert name) to suit your taste.” The partnering ingredients can
be in any kind of ground, puréed, mashed, grated, finely minced,
or liquid form that permits even distribution.
For practice purposes, try making up a small amount as follows:
Put about ¼ cup of butter in a mixing bowl and let it warm to the

temperature of a cool room. (It can be salted or unsalted, but the
latter is better if you’ll be adding a salty ingredient.) When it’s
just soft enough to work with, before it turns greasy and squishy,
cream it with a stout wooden spoon and work in about 1 teaspoon
of freshly minced chives. Taste it and add more chives if desired.
Refrigerate it, covered, until dinnertime. Let it come to room
temperature and serve with baked potatoes.
That’s really all there is to it, though you’ll usually deal with
larger amounts. One caveat: When you mix perishable raw
aromatics into butter, the insulating fat provides nice growth
conditions for anaerobic bacteria, so you should plan on using (or
freezing) the mixture within twenty-four hours. Dried spices and
most things that have been cooked or pickled present no problem.
The following list of flavoring suggestions is far from
exhaustive. The sky’s the limit, but simplicity is better than
overkill. Note that a little freshly squeezed lemon juice will pep
up many butter-herb combinations. Usually I like to keep to fairly
Eurocentric ingredients, though I have to say that minced Chinese
salted black beans make a great flavored butter. I prefer to work
with ½ to 1 cup of butter, depending on the destined use.
Judgment calls on how much or little of a flavoring ingredient
to use are difficult. Always start with a small amount and add
more to taste. The amounts given here are minimums, meant to
be enlarged at your own discretion.
• Minced or grated raw onion (red, yellow, white); finely minced
raw or blanched garlic; finely minced scallion (whites, greens, or
both). Start with 1 to 2 teaspoons per half cup of butter; use
within a day.
• Good meat glaze (beef or veal). With a dash of lemon juice, this is
the most luxurious thing you can put on poached fish or
asparagus. Start with 1 teaspoon per half cup of butter.
• Balsamic or other preferred vinegar; start with 1 to 2 teaspoons
per half cup of butter.
• Any preferred fresh herb or combination of herbs, such as parsley,
oregano, chives, cilantro, rosemary (sparingly), basil, shiso,

tarragon, minced very fine. Start with 2 teaspoons or less per half
cup of butter; use within a day.
• Any preferred dried ground spice or spice mixture, especially
“savory” or versatile “sweet-savory” spices such as cumin, paprika
or ground red pepper (Hungarian or Turkish), Spanish smoked
paprika, black or white pepper, cardamom, allspice, garam
masala, curry powder, various homemade dry spice rubs. Start
with ½ to 1 teaspoon per half cup of butter.
• Minced or puréed fresh chiles, canned chipotles, roasted sweet red
peppers. Start with ½ to 2 teaspoons per half cup of butter, more
for sweet peppers.
• Prepared mustard, harissa, sun-dried tomato paste, anchovy paste,
hot pepper sauces, miscellaneous herb-based seasoning pastes
meant as rubs or marinades for grilled foods. Start with ½ to 1
teaspoon per half cup of butter.
• Minced anchovies or anchovy paste, sardines (sparingly), smoked
ham or prosciutto, smoked salmon, salmon “caviar.” Start with ½
teaspoon per half cup of butter for anchovies, 1 to 2 teaspoons for
the rest.
• Pesto or fresh Mexican salsa, minced dill pickles or other pickled
vegetables, minced capers. Start with 2 teaspoons per half cup of
butter.
• Freshly ground pistachios or other nuts. Start with 2 to 3
teaspoons per half cup of butter.
• Finely grated lemon or other citrus rind. Start with ½ teaspoon per
half cup of butter.
• Finely grated aged cheese (e.g., Parmesan, aged Gouda). Start with
2 to 3 teaspoons per half cup of butter.

W
BEURRE BLANC/BEURRE ROUGE
hat happens if you half-melt butter while combining it with
a small amount of some water-based liquid such as vinegar, white
wine, or lemon juice? You get a fragile emulsion, pale and
opaque, that makes the best of all sauces for fish (especially pike
or shad), poached shellfish, and some vegetables (especially
artichokes, asparagus, or leeks). From the miracle of butter
chemistry as described earlier, you know that the unique manner
in which warmed butter gradually changes from solid to liquid is
a heaven-sent gift to cooks, a subtle transition that can be stopped
at different points for certain purposes. At about 125° or 130°F
the balance of barely solid and fully liquid components creates
the richly satiny but ethereal effect synonymous with a proper
beurre blanc. Not surprisingly, it can’t be held for more than
minutes and does not bear reheating.
The idea is quite old. The sauce for “buttered eggs” (hard-
boiled and sliced) in John Murrell’s 1621 A Booke of Cookerie is
“sweet butter drawne thicke with faire water.” Something like this
was the usual “drawn butter” or “melted butter” of eighteenth-
and early nineteenth-century English and American cookbooks,
but by then it had become standard practice to hedge the bet by
adding a little flour to stabilize the mixture at a higher
temperature. (In fact, in some cookbooks “drawn butter” later was
degraded into a roux thinned with water.) The flourless French
beurre blanc in the style of Anjou became familiar to American
cooks only about a generation ago. The splendid food writer
Sheila Hibben was already presenting a flourless “white butter” as
a New Orleans fish sauce in The National Cook Book in 1932, but I
don’t know of any Angevin-type “white butter” in a major all-
purpose American kitchen bible before the 1962 Joy of Cooking.
The sauce is not at all tricky. It is both better-flavored and more
stable if made with a dash of acid, which usually comes from
boiling down a little vinegar, dry white wine, or a combination to
a few tablespoons. You then start beating the butter into the hot

liquid a little at a time. Adding the fat faster won’t ruin the sauce
as with mayonnaise; it just makes the deliberately incomplete
melting process slightly harder to supervise. What you want is to
keep the butter continually starting to melt without starting to
cook. If fully liquefied, it will break the emulsion and turn a
velvety sauce into grease, albeit good-tasting grease. (If this
happens on your first try, say nothing and serve it anyhow—just
remember where things went wrong for next time.) Have the food
piping hot when you pour the sauce over it.
The proportions of wine and vinegar can be altered to taste—1
to 1 as given here, or 2 or even 3 parts wine to 1 of vinegar. Some
people add a tablespoon of heavy cream to the reduction before
starting to add the butter, on the theory that it stabilizes the
emulsion, but it isn’t really necessary. Nor do you have to strain
the sauce before serving. The bits of shallot accentuate the flavor.
YIELD: 1 cup
½ pound (2 sticks) butter, preferably unsalted and made from
cultured cream
1 medium shallot
¼ cup white wine vinegar
¼ cup dry white wine (Muscadet is traditional)
¼ to ½ teaspoon salt (omit if using salted butter)
Cut the butter into tablespoon-sized pieces, and keep it cold.
Mince the shallot very fine. Bring the vinegar and wine to a boil in a
small heavy-bottomed saucepan. Add the shallot and simmer over
medium heat, not letting the edges scorch, until only 1 to 2 tablespoons
of liquid are left. (If the liquid evaporates completely, add 1 to 2
tablespoons water.)
Remove the pan from the heat, let stand for a minute or two, and beat
in 1 to 2 tablespoons of cold butter with a wooden spoon or wire whisk.
When it is almost completely melted, return the pan to the stove, either
keeping the heat very low or being prepared to snatch it off the burner.
Begin vigorously beating or whisking in the rest of the butter, 1 or 2
tablespoons at a time; the sauce will thicken and turn pale as you

proceed. Keep watching the consistency; the sauce should never become
fully liquefied. If the butter seems to be melting too fast, quickly remove
the pan from the heat and set it in a larger saucepan of cold water before
proceeding. Add the salt (if using) just before the last few tablespoons of
butter. Whisk the sauce for a few seconds off the heat, and serve at once.
VARIATIONS: For Beurre Rouge, replace the white wine with red wine. You
can also use lemon juice (for Beurre Citronné).

P
BEURRE NOIR/BEURRE NOISETTE
(“BLACK BUTTER”/“BROWN BUTTER”)
robably everyone who has cooked with butter has burned it
on at least one occasion. In fact, you can learn a lot about the
chemistry of butter by following the process to the smelly and
bitter end. But if you break off shortly before the smoke-alarm
stage, the result is one of the simplest and best butter sauces. It’s
something like the early steps of making either clarified butter or
ghee, where you sacrifice the creamy lusciousness of barely
melted butter for other effects.
The heavenly butteriness of butter, you will remember, rests on
the wheels-within-wheels circumstances of its composition: a
complex emulsion of compounds with many different melting
points, holding tiny droplets of water-based true buttermilk that
in turn contain various suspended milk solids. Above a
temperature of 212°F any water starts boiling off. In unclarified
butter the solid particles remain in the hot fat, where they would
eventually darken and burn if allowed to get much hotter than
250°F. But before this happens, some of the melted milkfat lipids
become hot enough to volatilize, or escape as gases that release a
hazelnutlike fragrance (hence the French name “noisette”). At the
same time, the milk solids begin to caramelize and acquire a
wonderfully nutty flavor, while the golden color of the butter
deepens to a light brown. (Clarifying the butter after melting it, as
some American writers suggest, certainly lessens the risk of
scorching, but it also eliminates something intrinsic to the sauce.)
You can just get by with beurre noisette as a sautéing medium for
something such as very rapidly scrambled eggs—but not with
beurre noir, which is what you get if you let the cooking proceed
even half a minute longer. This so-called black butter actually is a
rich dark brown from almost-burnt milk solids, and has a stronger
flavor than brown butter. At this instant (or seconds before), the
pan must be snatched from the stove before you have really black
butter, which would be inedible.

The main difference between “brown” and “black” butter is not
so much the degree of cooking as the way they are then treated.
Black butter is invariably (and brown butter almost invariably)
used sizzling hot, as a sauce for already cooked foods—
cauliflower, artichokes, poached or fried eggs, cooked brains or
sweetbreads, and most classically pan-fried fish such as skate,
tinker mackerel, and smelts. Brown butter can be served as is, but
usually includes a dash of lemon juice and sometimes chopped
parsley (in which case, it is often called beurre meunière.) Black
butter is always given a contrasting accent of vinegar (usually
reduced) as well as a final handful of parsley. Capers can go into
either, but are more usual with black butter.
The procedure is as follows: Put some unsalted butter in a small, fairly
heavy saucepan or skillet. The amount depends on how much food you
want to sauce; I’d allow about 1½ to 2 tablespoons per serving. Have the
cooked food within easy reach, along with a small handful each of
capers and minced parsley if you want to include them. For beurre noir,
you should also have a few tablespoons of wine vinegar (any preferred
kind) in a separate small saucepan; for beurre noisette, have a halved
lemon ready for squeezing.
Melt the butter slowly over low heat, shaking the pan occasionally and
watching it like a hawk. After the foam dies away, you will see it
gradually change to a pale brown. If you are making beurre noir, bring
the vinegar to a boil while the butter heats and let it reduce by about
half. Keep it hot.
There are various ways of combining the butter and vinegar or lemon
juice. For beurre noisette, the simplest is to promptly empty the pan of
hot butter over the food, squeeze on a bit of lemon juice, and serve at
once with or without parsley and capers scattered on top. Beurre noir
takes a little more logistics to avoid a boil-over of something uniting the
worst features of burnt butter and burnt vinegar. I find it easiest to let
the butter cool for a few minutes before adding the hot vinegar, then
returning the butter to the stove just long enough to make it sizzling hot.
You can either toss the optional parsley and capers into the pan or
scatter them over the food. In either case, pour the butter mixture over
the food and serve at once. It should be eaten as hot as possible, before it

loses its élan.
If either brown or black butter threatens to darken too fast,
immediately arrest the cooking by setting the pan in a larger pan of cold
water. Some people routinely do this the minute the butter is
approaching the desired point. But be sure to reheat it before pouring it
over the food.
Once you know how to make brown butter, you can experiment with
melting it directly in a skillet that you have just used for fried eggs, pan-
fried fish, etc. (I wouldn’t try it with black butter.) The goal here—a
matter of practice—is to pick up nice browned flavors from the sautéing
residues in the skillet, without letting them burn.
VARIATIONS: Butter cooked to the brown stage with no added ingredients
is a wonderful sauce or hot topping for hot cooked spinach or other
greens. It is also great splashed over dishes topped with Yogurt-Garlic
Sauce. Goats’-milk and sheep’s-milk butter are particularly delicious for
this purpose. A similar and very pretty last touch in Turkish cooking is to
stir Aleppo pepper or other red pepper flakes into melting butter, take it
off the heat just before the pepper burns, and drizzle it over a dish.

T
ABOUT BUTTER-AND-EGG CUSTARDS
he custard tribe is familiar to most of us through mixtures of
the crème anglaise kind (this page), in which milk or cream
dilutes eggs to a point where they become fairly stable under at
least gentle cooking and will thicken to a smooth amalgam. But
there is another custard-family branch based on subjecting butter
and eggs to heat under conditions that stop them from curdling.
The addition of sugar is one means. Highly sweetened butter-egg
custards can take quite a lot of heat without breaking down, an
aptitude that makes possible “sugar pie” fillings like those for
pecan pie, Southern chess pie, and the famous Canadian butter
tarts. (The Southern Buttermilk Pie is a cousin with more added
liquid.)
Acid also helps increase the tolerance of egg proteins for heat;
hence the allied clan of butter custards involving a combination of
sugar and acid added to egg and butter. Like the sugar pie fillings,
these can be cooked to higher temperatures than plain egg-and-
butter mixtures without the egg proteins congealing into a
curdled mess. Lemon Curd is the best-known acid-and sugar-
stabilized custard.
Take away the sugar and you have something more fragile.
Hollandaise sauce, with only a small amount of acid to temper the
effect of heat, is the classic example: a delicate emulsion that
needs just the right degree of cooking in order not to be ruined.
Still trickier and more demanding is the ultimate in butter-custard
minimalism: butter and eggs with no added ingredients, turned
into a rarefied transformation of scrambled eggs that must cook at
a snail’s pace over the lowest possible heat until it slowly thickens
to a rich-flavored, barely runny custard.
What all these butter-egg custard dishes have in common is a
magical way of melding the most delicate, evocative qualities of
fresh butter and eggs into something more sensuous than either

W
one alone. Aside from butter itself, eggs have a more intrinsically
buttery flavor than almost any other food I can think of. Cooking
the two together by gentle methods that let the egg proteins
retain a fine, smooth continuity without degenerating into coarse
clumps seems to take butter to another dimension.
HOLLANDAISE SAUCE
hy we stopped calling this “Dutch sauce” and started
assuming that it was French in origin, I have no idea. It did
indeed reach something like perfection when French cooks took to
making it with Normandy butter, but it really dates back to the
spectacular success of the seventeenth-and eighteenth-century
Dutch in grazing cattle on reclaimed sea bottom and selling butter
and cheese to the rest of Europe. At the time, butter happened to
be a surefire choice as an exportable cash crop; it had recently
taken on new elegance and cachet as a sauce foundation in the
cuisines of England, France, and the rest of northern Europe.
An influential kitchen preference of the day (especially in the
Low Countries) was for sauces of melted butter combined with
some acid element. A stewed-eel recipe in the celebrated
seventeenth-century Dutch kitchen manual De Verstandige Kock
mentions a sauce involving butter and vinegar mixed with a
binder—in this case, egg. Here we have in at least rudimentary
guise the elements of the later hollandaise, drawing on both the
butter-based and the egg-based emulsion principles. But this
didn’t instantly become the standard form.
Early “Dutch sauces” in English cookbooks often call for a
strong-flavored vinegar mixture as the acid element and flour
rather than egg as the binder. Though Eliza Acton’s magisterial
Modern Cookery for Private Families (1845) presents a “Dutch
sauce” that any cook today would call a classic hollandaise,
various roux-based mixtures continued to share the title. Toward

the end of the nineteenth century the name “Dutch” was
universally replaced by “hollandaise” in English and American
cookbooks, and by the time of Fannie Farmer’s The Boston
Cooking-School Cookbook (1896), the sauce was generally
understood to be an egg, butter, and lemon-juice emulsion.
That much is still generally understood, but otherwise it would
be hard to find any classic sauce whose making is the object of as
many disagreements. Any search of a few basic cookbooks will
give you close to a dozen hollandaise philosophies. Before getting
to my own preference, let me state that people who are already
happy with another should stick to it. Good hollandaise can be
made with the butter solid or previously melted, over direct heat,
in a double boiler, altogether off the heat, with a whisk, with a
wooden spoon, in a blender, in a food processor, with plain lemon
juice or vinegar, with lemon juice or vinegar diluted with water
and slightly reduced.… To cut to the chase, all these have been
known to work just fine in plain hollandaise or its two most
popular variations: béarnaise, made with a tarragon-and shallot-
flavored vinegar reduction; and maltaise, where Seville orange
juice replaces lemon juice. The only approach that I strongly
quarrel with is using clarified butter. According to one wing of
opinion, this produces a thicker sauce and eliminates any off
flavors lurking in the residual buttermilk. I submit that (a) plain
butter tastes more buttery; (b) there’s nothing wrong with a
thinner sauce; and (c) if you don’t trust the butter to be delicious
you shouldn’t be using it. It does, however, seem smart to use the
kind of high-fat, low-moisture butter favored by pastry chefs, the
fresher the better.
What to put it on? Addicts may wonder what not to put it on. It
is a peerless partner to grilled, poached, or steamed fish, shellfish,
and vegetables (especially asparagus). I have eaten it with plain
poached chicken, broiled lamb chops, baked and boiled potatoes
and sweet potatoes, and believe it or not, rice. Given the
opportunity, I’d probably eat it with boiled newspaper.
I always use lemon juice, not vinegar, in hollandaise. If you’d
like to try vinegar, I suggest the plainest possible white wine
vinegar rather than something syrupy or herb-infused. I add the

lemon juice straight and probably would do the same with
vinegar, but there’s something to be said for an acid reduction
with a slight concentration of flavors, as long as it’s not allowed
to become too metallic-tasting. If you want to try it, replace the
plain lemon juice in the following recipe with 2½ tablespoons
white wine vinegar and 2½ tablespoons water. Put these in a
small saucepan, carefully boil down to half the starting volume,
and stir in a dash of cold water before adding the reduction to the
eggs and proceeding as directed.
The following recipe is based on a version that I encountered
decades ago in Elizabeth David’s French Provincial Cooking. I have
never had the courage to make the sauce directly on the heat
instead of in a double boiler. I have also found that it’s a blessing
and a reassurance to have a few emergency rescue measures—as
suggested below—in place before you start, so that if the dread
signs of curdling from excessive heat appear you can quickly stop
or temper the cooking.
YIELD: About 1 cup
6 ounces (12 tablespoons, 1½ sticks) very fresh high-fat (about 83 to
85 percent) butter, either salted or unsalted
2 tablespoons freshly squeezed lemon juice (or the reduction
described above)
½ to ¾ teaspoon salt (omit if using salted butter)
3 or (for more richness) 4 egg yolks
A pinch to ⅛ teaspoon cayenne pepper (optional)
Cut the butter into about a dozen pieces, and set it on a plate to warm to
room temperature.
Heat a little water—it should be less than an inch deep—in the bottom
of a double boiler and turn it off when it comes to a boil. Mix the lemon
juice and salt in the double boiler top and set it over the bottom. Whisk
in the egg yolks. Turn on the heat but keep it low, so that the water
remains hot without boiling. Whisking steadily, add a piece of butter and
work it into the eggs as it melts. Give it a moment to become warmed
and fully incorporated before adding another piece, whisking it in, and

adding another. The trick is to add butter a little at a time while
gradually achieving a temperature (about 160°F) that will semi-cook the
egg protein without either thickening it so rapidly as to make it curdle
or letting it languish in a cautious coolness that won’t thicken it at all.
If you think the mixture is heating too fast, there are four ways of
slowing it down: (1) Whisk in a tablespoon of hot water; (2) take the
whole double boiler from the burner and place it on a Flame Tamer over
low heat; (3) briefly lift the top off the bottom and set it aside; or (4) put
the top in a pan or bowl of cold water. Whisk furiously while performing
any of these measures, then put everything back on the stove as before.
At intervals, check to see that the water is not boiling in the bottom of
the double boiler. By the time you have incorporated all the butter, the
sauce should have a beautiful satiny sheen and the consistency of a light
mayonnaise.
Quickly remove the double-boiler top and taste the sauce for
seasoning. Add a little more salt or lemon juice to taste. If desired, add
enough cayenne to give it a mild kick. Use it promptly, while still warm.
Hollandaise is by nature a last-minute preparation, one of those things
that people wait for instead of having it wait for them. If held for more
than a few minutes it may break, but if it isn’t too far gone you may be
able to salvage it by whisking in a little boiling water, or whisking a
fresh egg yolk in a bowl and beating the sauce into it.
VARIATION: The hollandaise is just finished, the kitchen is steaming like a
cauldron, and the dinner timetable has been thrown into chaos by some
unforeseen glitch. How to avoid ruin? On such an occasion I discovered
an out that actually proved to be a useful cold sauce in its own right:
Scrape the warm hollandaise into a small pitcher or glass measuring cup.
Pour in enough cold heavy cream to cover the top by barely half an inch.
Set it in the refrigerator, where the hollandaise will quickly thicken.
When it is nearly solid, work the cream into the sauce with a fork or
whisk, adding a little more cream if necessary to bring it to a spreadable
consistency. Stir in an extra dash or two of lemon juice and salt. Serve
cool or at room temperature. Unlike freshly made hot hollandaise, this
daughter-of-necessity version is blessedly stable. It goes beautifully with
any of the usual hollandaise partners in their cold (or room-temperature)
poached form.

T
“BUTTERED EGGS”
(SKILLET-CUSTARD EGGS)
he plainest of all egg-and-butter custards is also the most
demanding to make, because there is nothing to hinder it from
curdling except low heat and endless patience. Scrambled eggs
cooked in this manner are to ordinary scrambled eggs as quenelles
are to fish burgers, and are the one reason I see for anybody to
own a nonstick pan. The only elements are eggs and butter very
slowly stirred over the lowest possible heat until the whites
coagulate in small, delicate bits and—this is the tricky part—the
yolks and butter set to a thin custard, about the consistency of a
faintly runny lemon curd without the lemon. If you are willing to
dedicate three-quarters of an hour to standing over a nonstick
skillet and don’t mind eating the result with a spoon, it is the holy
grail of scrambled eggs. Needless to say, the freshest eggs and
butter will taste the best.
For each serving
2 tablespoons butter
3 eggs
1 to 2 tablespoons heavy cream (optional)
The frugal-minded can cut back slightly on the butter and use two eggs.
Since I make this only about twice a year, I usually splurge on three.
Gently melt half of the butter in a heavy nonstick skillet, tilting the pan
to coat the sides. Turn off the heat and let the pan cool to room
temperature. Break the eggs directly into the pan and turn the heat to
the lowest possible setting—and I mean lowest; if necessary, use a heat
diffuser such as a Flame Tamer. With a wooden spatula or spoon, break
up the yolks and begin stirring as slowly and evenly as possible. Keep
stirring … and stirring and stirring. It’s like watching paint dry, but
there are no shortcuts. The eggs and butter will at first look like a
blotchy and very peculiar soup. The egg whites will appear at least
partly cooked after 10 or 15 minutes, but the yolks have a long way to

go. Keep breaking up any clumps that threaten to form on the bottom of
the pan. After 25 to 30 minutes of cooking, stir in the remaining butter
along with the optional cream. By degrees the mixture will get smoother
and slightly thicker, first starting to coat the back of a spoon, then
throwing off a wisp of evaporation and leaving a clean track as you draw
the spatula across the bottom of the pan. Keep going until it has cooked
for 45 to 50 minutes in all and is a little thinner than a crème anglaise,
then pour it over any preferred kind of toast and eat at once. Let
everyone season his or her own with salt and pepper.
VARIATION: The scrambled-egg recipe in M. F. K. Fisher’s How to Cook a
Wolf is a very similar but less labor-intensive dish of custardy eggs made
with cream instead of butter. The ingredients are eight eggs and a cup of
cream. The cream makes the mixture a little more tolerant of heat than
the butter-custard version.
Fisher’s general instructions are to break the eggs into an
unwarmed iron skillet before adding the cream, then begin to stir
—not beat—from time to time “from the middle bottom” over
very gentle heat without letting it boil. Continue to stir
occasionally for about half an hour; some optional enrichment
like herbs, cheese, mushrooms, or chicken livers (“and so forth”)
can be added halfway through the cooking. Don’t try to hurry it.
Stir in any seasonings at the very end and serve, just about set, on
toast.

A
LEMON CURD
few years ago Regina Schrambling wrote a piece for the Los
Angeles Times food section announcing that she couldn’t
understand why people swoon over killer chocolate desserts when
such a thing as lemon curd exists on this earth. A woman after my
own heart! Like Regina, I was born without the chocolate gene—
but put me in front of anything made with lemon curd and I go
wild. For me, it’s the most magical application of the custard
principle that enables egg yolks to thicken a liquid (here, lemon
juice) in the presence of heat.
Lemon “curd,” which technically isn’t a curd, contains neither
milk nor cream. The eggs are coaxed to maximum thickening
power, without turning into a grainy mass, through an acid-sugar
combination that allows the egg protein to coagulate smoothly
without breaking, and to emulsify with melted butter at a higher
temperature than is possible with most egg-based emulsions. The
flavors of the result are simultaneously buttery, sweet, sharp, and
silky, all fused into one angelic whole. And it is amazingly easy to
make, far easier than any milk-or cream-based egg custard. The
one technical necessity is a double boiler or some equivalent
arrangement.
Lemon curd is the best of all fillings for a Lemon Tart and
marvelous in layer cakes. It also makes a glorious mousse when
whisked together with whipped cream (in any proportion you
want), an excellent topping for bar cookies, a magnificent
breakfast jam for toast or scones, or—all by itself—a piece of
shameless indulgence for anyone equipped with a spoon. It would
also be a natural for the old Southern “pinch pie” or “angel pie,”
which consists of a baked meringue shell (voilà—a fine
destination for the leftover egg whites) with a rich filling such as
ice cream or lemon custard. On occasion I have successfully
improvised a sort of trifle using lemon curd and day-old angel
food cake (another use for the egg whites).
I always make a large (3-cup) batch using only egg yolks; other

people may want to halve the recipe or use whole eggs. Note that
the number of lemons needed for a given amount of juice varies
phenomenally between different seasons of the year. You will
need more in summer, fewer at the height of the winter citrus
season. Some people prefer to use much more lemon zest, not
peeled in strips but finely grated and added directly to the curd
after it has been cooked and strained.
YIELD: About 3 cups
12 tablespoons unsalted butter (1½ sticks), cut into small bits
12 large egg yolks or 6 large eggs
A pinch of salt
1⅓ cups sugar
⅔ to ¾ cup freshly squeezed lemon juice, from 3 to 4 (in winter) or 7
to 8 (in summer) large lemons
Zest of 2 lemons, peeled off in strips
Melt the butter in a double boiler over simmering water; whisk in the
other ingredients and cook, stirring or whisking constantly, for 15 to 20
minutes, until the mixture thickens enough to coat a spoon. Pour the
curd through a fine-mesh strainer into a heatproof bowl, and let it cool
with a sheet of plastic wrap pressed over the surface (to prevent a skin
from forming). It will keep in the refrigerator, tightly covered, for three
to four days.
VARIATION(S): For Lime Curd, use limes instead of lemons. Any citrus juice
will work, though with orange juice you should slightly reduce the
amount of sugar. In fact, you can make this from just about any tart,
fresh fruit juice.

I
ABOUT BUTTER IN PASTRY
’m reluctant to give advice about things that I never make
myself, and this is why bakers will find no recipes here for butter
cakes or butter cookies. On the other hand, I do occasionally
make pastry—not the tour-de-force kinds like puff pastry or
strudel dough, but simple versions for pies and tarts. And no lover
of these could live without butter.
From a flavor standpoint, butter is the ideal fat for pastry. But
the technical standpoint is another matter. The very complexities
that make butter a wonderful partner for flour in sauces have
difficult effects on its interactions with flour in pastry doughs.
When you work butter into a dough at ordinary room
temperatures, it will perform its usual subtle transitions between
the solid and melted states—unfortunately meaning that some of
the fat will prematurely melt into the flour particles while the rest
is still solid enough to simply coat them from outside. It’s the
external coating action that’s important for tender, flaky pastries
such as the kind used for American pies. The thin shielding of fat
retards the development of gluten during the initial mixing of the
dough. There is the added problem of water content in butter. It
comes mostly from the dispersed buttermilk droplets, but
sometimes also from rinsing water that wasn’t completely
expelled in the final working of commercial butter. The leakage of
fat and water into the flour is what often makes all-butter pastry
brittle, tough, or both.
Lard and partially hydrogenated shortenings don’t share these
disadvantages. In the first place, they liquefy more uniformly and
at higher temperatures than butter, so that melting can be
delayed until the pastry actually goes into the oven. They also
contain virtually a hundred percent fat, and so have no water to
release into the dough and throw off a cook’s calculations about
how much water to add in mixing. Shortenings like Crisco have

long been the mainstay of cooks devoted to the goal of tender,
flaky American-style pie crust. (I don’t know whether recent
reformulations to eliminate trans fatty acids have changed these
products’ baking qualities.) A few, like me, rely on a combination
of butter and lard to offset the problems inherent in using butter
alone.
But there’s another family of pastry doughs in which butter is
not only the best but the only fat you can use: the very fine-
textured, almost shortbreadlike ones such as French pâte brisée
and German Mürbeteig. Higher in fat content than American pie
doughs, they start with butter being worked into dry ingredients
in rather coarse bits at as cold a temperature as possible. A small
amount of water with or without some other liquid (egg yolk is
the most usual for pâte brisée) is then added, and the dough
loosely gathered together in a mass. It is now ready for the crucial
stage of fraisage—in this context, something like “rumpling.”
Fraisage is accomplished by rapidly and firmly smearing the
dough across the work surface with the heel of your hand in order
to amalgamate the fat and flour very closely. The dough is then
chilled for at least an hour (preferably longer) before the final
rolling out. Pastry made by this method is simultaneously firm
and crumbly, with just enough gluten development to hold
together. And it practically sings of the butter that went into it.
Some version of pâte brisée is the backbone of classic French
tart shells. For savory tarts like quiche, the pastry is usually
unsweetened or made with only a tiny bit of sugar. For dessert
tarts it can be sweetened or not. The reason for adding sugar is
not only flavor but ease of working; it tends to inhibit the
development of gluten and lets the cook handle the dough more
swiftly and decisively without causing the pastry to toughen.
Moderately sweetened pâte brisée is usually called pâte sucrée. An
especially crumbly version, pâte sablée, uses more sugar for a
more cookie-like effect.

I
BASIC PÂTE BRISÉE
t is important to start out with very cold butter and take all
precautions against letting it get warm and greasy. Have the
kitchen as cool as possible while you work. To mix the dough
ingredients, handle them as little as you can and use only your
fingertips or a pastry blender.
If possible, use unsalted butter (salted butter often retains more
water after churning) with a butterfat score of at least 83 to 85
percent.
YIELD: Enough for a 9-or 10-inch tart
1¼ cups all-purpose flour
¼ teaspoon salt
2 teaspoons sugar (optional)
1 stick (¼ pound, 8 tablespoons) unsalted butter, cut into bits no
larger than ½ inch
1 large egg yolk
1 to 2 tablespoons ice water, or as necessary
Sift the flour, salt, and sugar (if using) onto a work surface or into a
large bowl. Make a well in the center and put the butter into it. Work
the butter into the flour with your fingertips or a pastry blender,
gradually sweeping everything from the edges of the well toward the
center as the mixture starts to come together. Add the egg yolk, thinned
with 1 to 2 teaspoons of the ice water; quickly work it into the flour and
butter until you have a loose dough. Add just as much more ice water, a
teaspoon at a time, as you need to make the dough hold together. Put
the dough on a lightly floured work surface. Working with a little at a
time, use the heel of your hand to push the dough straight away from
you with a strong, rapid pressure that nearly mashes it into the work
surface. You are trying to eliminate lumps of butter and make the
texture somewhat smoother than for an American flaky pastry.
When you have finished this stage, gather the dough up into a ball.
Flatten this into a 5-to 6-inch disk, quickly rounding off the edges as

evenly as possible. Wrap the dough in plastic wrap and refrigerate for at
least 2 hours, preferably longer.
Put the chilled dough on a lightly floured work surface or pastry cloth.
Whacking it a few times with a rolling pin may make it cooperate more
in the next stage: Roll it out into an 11-or 12-inch circle. Carefully lift
the sheet of dough to a 9-or 10-inch tart pan with a removable bottom.
Ease it into the pan as gently as you can; press to anchor the base and
sides firmly to the bottom and rim of the pan. Trim away the excess of
dough from the edges, leaving at least a ½-inch overhang that you can
press to the sides.
Use a fork to prick the bottom and sides of the pastry shell all over. It
is now ready to use in recipes from any cookbook that call for a
shortcrust tart shell. Consult particular cookbooks to decide whether to
use the crust as is or to give it a preliminary “blind” baking. It is the
ideal crust for Lemon Tart.
VARIATION: For Pâte Sucrée, use 3 to 4 tablespoons sugar and proceed as
directed.
NINETEENTH-CENTURY GERMAN BUTTER CASK

P
LEMON TART
ossibly the most elegant use to which lemon curd can be put.
YIELD: A 9-or 10-inch tart
1 recipe Pâte Brisée or Pâte Sucrée (this page and this page)
1 recipe (3 cups) Lemon Curd
Prepare the pastry and fit it into a tart pan as directed. Prick the bottom
and sides all over with a fork while preheating the oven to 400°F. Line
the pastry shell with a round of parchment paper or aluminum foil and
add several cups of something that will weigh it down without imparting
peculiar flavors—dry beans or lentils, rice, ceramic pastry weights. Bake
it for 10 to 12 minutes to set the pastry. (Either a pie-crust shield or a
narrow band of aluminum foil carefully crimped around the rim of the
pan is a great help in preventing the edges from burning.) Remove from
the oven, and reduce the oven temperature to 375°F.
Take out whatever baking weights you used and let the partly baked
tart shell cool to room temperature. Brush the bottom and sides with
lightly whisked egg white thinned with a tablespoon or so of water. Pour
in the lemon curd and bake for 25 to 30 minutes. Remove from the oven
and let cool to room temperature.
There are various currently popular ways of finishing and serving a
lemon tart; most kitchen bibles today will have some suggestions. My
own strong preference is to simply let it cool thoroughly, cover (or dot)
the top with plain whipped cream, and set to chill thoroughly in the
refrigerator. Let warm up not quite to room temperature before serving.

I
CANADIAN BUTTER TARTS
didn’t know anything about Canadian butter tarts until I
happened to be in the vicinity of Toronto about two years ago.
One bite, and I wondered why they haven’t become a mad
passion here, as they certainly are north of the border.
The general idea is very simple: Line small tartlet pans with any
preferred pie or tart crust pastry and fill them with a delectable
butter-based custard somewhat resembling pecan pie or other
“sugar pie” fillings; bake until the filling is well set. In Ontario,
butter tarts are often made with additions like plumped raisins or
chopped nut meats (generally walnuts or pecans). I like them
plain. The usual filling uses sugar (white or brown) and corn
syrup (light or dark) combined with eggs and butter. Cane syrup
is a nice substitute for corn syrup.
Since I don’t have a set of tartlet pans, I use standard muffin
tins with cups of about ½ cup capacity. Slight differences in depth
and width between different models can affect the exact yield.
YIELD: 18 to 20 individual tarts
Pie or tart crust from any preferred recipe, enough for 1 double-crust
or 2 single-crust pies or tarts (I like Pâte Brisée)
3 eggs, lightly beaten
1 cup white sugar or any preferred kind of dark sugar (light brown,
dark brown, or unrefined)
1 cup golden syrup, light corn syrup, or dark corn syrup
⅓ cup butter, barely melted
¼ teaspoon salt
1 to 2 teaspoons pure vanilla extract, rum, or rye whiskey
Make and chill the pastry according to your chosen recipe. When you are
ready to bake, preheat the oven to 400°F. Roll out the dough about ⅛
inch thick (a tiny bit thicker for Pâte Brisée). Use a round cookie or
vegetable cutter to cut it into circles about 4 inches in diameter. Fit and
pat these into muffin tin cups; don’t worry if they look a little

misshapen.
Beat all the filling ingredients into the eggs to combine smoothly.
Pour about ¼ cup of the filling into each tart shell, topping it up as
evenly as possible with what’s left over. Bake for 15 to 20 minutes, or
until the filling is set and slightly browned on top. Cool on a wire rack.
Serve plain or—for an inauthentic touch—with whipped cream.

FRESH CHEESES (INCLUDING BRINED CHEESES)
Introduction
Sorting Out Names and Cheeses
About Brined Cheeses
Getting Organized for Cheesemaking
Fresh White Cheese: Kindergarten Version
Fresh White Cheese with Cultures
Fresh White Cheese with Cultures and Rennet
About Cream Cheese
Cream Cheese: Creamy
Cream Cheese: Light
Cervelle de Canut
Cream Cheese–Scallion Dip
About Liptauer Cheese
Liptauer Cheese I
Liptauer Cheese II
Tyrokafteri or Htipiti (Whipped Feta-Cheese Spread)
Syrniki or Tvorozhniki (Russian Pot-Cheese Fritters)
Savory Lokshen Kugel (Noodle Pudding)
Non-Nursery Junket

Paskha (Russian Easter Dessert)
Uses of Whey
Bulgur Pilaf with Whey

Fresh cheese is one of those things that nobody had to “invent.” It
undoubtedly invented itself many times over in the original dairying
lands that I call the Diverse Sources Belt—and later just as often in other
regions—when someone let soured milk sit around too long for drinking.
Sooner or later it would have become two substances, one of which
could be progressively drained off to leave the other more and more
solid. Before draining, it was curds and whey; afterward, the first version
of fresh cheese.
The first cheeses were from sheep’s and goat’s milk. Other animals—
chiefly camels, cattle, and water buffaloes—got in on the act later in
different reaches of the Diverse Sources Belt. Eventually, cheesemaking
would spread to northerly Old World climates—but not the biggest
southerly dairying region, the Indian subcontinent. The closest Indian
counterparts of cheese, chhenna and panir, lack the main elements that
give true cheeses their curd structure: fermentation by lactic-acid
bacteria and/or coagulation by enzymes.
Fresh cheeses produced by one or both of these means gradually
proliferated through a wide geographical range, and other refinements
appeared over time. They came to exist in a range of forms that defied
logical classifications. At one time there were not only regional but
neighborhood-to-neighborhood or household-to-household variations.
Even today, when most of this diversity has been ironed out, it is
difficult to line up fresh cheeses in strict categories. One type has a way
of shading subtly into others.
The two main ways of turning milk into curd have both existed since
prehistoric times. The older was bacterial fermentation—a prolonged
version of the process responsible for the earliest counterparts of yogurt.
What happens partly resembles what happens in a nursing infant’s
stomach where acid is being secreted: Lactic-acid fermentation
eventually creates a low enough pH (or high enough acidity) to knock
out the negative electric charge that keeps casein particles separated
from each other in fresh milk. As they become free to precipitate, or
start coming together in a body, the milk first takes on the consistency of
thin yogurt and then, with increasing acidity, forms a defined curd with
somewhat more distinct separation from the whey.
The second means of curd formation also mimics something that

happens in actual digestion—at least, digestion of mothers’ milk by
nursing infants. Much of the business is carried out by enzymes
specifically tailored to reconfigure casein—the most important source of
protein in milk—so that it will be more slowly, complexly, and
completely absorbed than if the enzymes weren’t there. After weaning
there is a general rearrangement of digestive enzymes, with the original
milk-digesting ones ceasing to be produced. In infant ruminants like
lambs, kids, and calves, there is another wrinkle: Unlike adults, they
receive food straight into the fourth stomach, or abomasum (see this
page), bypassing the three other ruminant stomach chambers that will
take over digestion when they are old enough to eat grass.
The milk-digesting enzyme secreted by the lining of the abomasum is
chymosin (“rennin” in older sources, but latterly rechristened). It snips
off certain parts of the casein micelle more neatly and predictably than
acid alone, though actually it is better activated in the presence of
digestive acids. The newly pruned casein particles gather together in a
firm curd that can be digested in gradual stages.
How did people first learn about this mysterious milk transformer?
Our best guess is that someone either inadvertently discovered the
curdled contents of a young lamb’s or kid’s stomach bag in butchering
the animal or tried using the bag as a container for previously drawn
milk and found that the milk had turned into something else. In any
case, long before classical times the layer of tissue that produced the
effect had become a prized cheesemaking resource, and remains so to
this day under the name of “rennet.”
Until a few centuries ago, cheesemakers used dried pieces of the actual
abomasal lining, or sometimes soaked it in brine to make an extract, or
ground it to a paste or powder. This comparatively unrefined rennet had
strong effects on the character of the finished cheese. Unlike modern
purified rennets or rennet equivalents, it contained not just chymosin but
a bouquet of other enzymes designed to tackle other parts of the milk
besides casein. From a flavor standpoint, the most important ones are
lipases, or fat-digesting enzymes. Part of their role is to chop up the
long, mild-tasting fatty-acid molecules into shorter ones that are
aggressively pungent. Short-chain fatty acids are responsible for the
piquant bite of provolone and a few other Italian cheeses (nowadays,
manufacturers add lipase to cheesemilk in refined form for just this

purpose). We can pretty certainly surmise that fresh cheeses made with
older versions of lamb, kid, or calf rennet were not as bland and
unindividualized as the ones we’re used to. Their flavor must have
varied sharply with the lipase content of the rennet and the way
different farmers prepared the rennet for use.
Wherever fresh cheeses existed, up to the dawn of modern agriculture
they remained simple peasant standbys, only marginally less perishable
than the milk from which they were made. The earliest means developed
to preserve them more than a few days was brining. Brined cheeses more
or less resembling Greek feta are nearly as pervasive and defining a
culinary feature of the eastern Mediterranean and lands to the east as
yogurt. What sets them apart from the ripened or aged cheeses more
familiar to Western cheese lovers is that immersing the curd in brine
keeps it from undergoing a progression of further enzymatic changes
that would otherwise cause it to knit into a smooth, close, homogeneous
texture. Feta and its many Diverse Sources Belt counterparts retain much
of the looser casein structure of fresh cheese.
When 
dairying 
and 
cheesemaking 
moved 
north 
to 
colder
environments, the technique of brine preservation didn’t. The climate
difference meant that unbrined (or only very lightly salted) fresh cheeses
had a better chance of lasting more than a few days without spoiling.
They assumed great importance throughout both the Northeastern and
Northwestern Cow Belts of Europe, where temperatures were generally
favorable to fermentation by mesophilic bacteria, or kinds suited to
conditions slightly cooler than those needed by the thermophilic kinds
endemic to the Middle East. But as pointed out earlier, the role of fresh
cheeses was to decline in western regions with the arrival of modern
commercial dairying geared toward an urban market. Both drinkable
fresh milk and specialized ripened cheeses took on an unprecedented
prominence as cash crops. Especially in the English-speaking world, sour
milk and fresh cheeses became archaic or marginalized for much of the
nonrural population. It was chiefly from eastern Scandinavia through the
Baltic lands and Mittel-europa into Russia and Ukraine that they
remained a universally loved everyday sustenance.
Fresh cheeses must have existed in North America as early as colonists
and cows, but they certainly were not stars of the commercial dairying
scene that emerged within half a century of independence. Nineteenth-

century American cookbooks occasionally give recipes for making some
kind of fresh cheese—sometimes called “cottage cheese”—at home.
Often there is a Philadelphia or Pennsylvania connection, as shown by
the fact that nearly all authors mention “smearcase” (from Pennsylvania
German Schmierkäse) as a familiar if less elegant name. It also came to
be called “Dutch,” probably meaning “Pennsylvania Dutch.” The cheese
itself usually is a simple cousin of the Fresh White Cheese with Cultures
—milk soured to a clabber, or soft curd, drained of whey, and worked
smooth. A richer cousin, “cream cheese,” also has been a Philadelphia
specialty since at least the early nineteenth century.
Cream cheese seems to have achieved commercial popularity in the
last decades of the century. But Ralph Selitzer’s invaluable history The
Dairy Industry in America reports that cottage cheese was of minor
importance until World War I, when the Dairy Division of the
Department of Agriculture launched a campaign for “rediscovering” it as
a thrifty, nutritious use for skim milk.
The moment could not have been better, because the nation was also
being seized by its first infatuation with the cult of extreme slimness.
Mass-produced cottage cheese appeared on the scene just in time to be
hailed as the dieter’s friend, an association that has never vanished.
Cream cheese also underwent a timely makeover in the mid-1920s when
manufacturers introduced the new “hot pack” technology (this page)
that would extend its shelf life and enable it to emerge as an inexpensive
all-purpose “cocktail spread” base.
For the better part of the twentieth century, these two products were
virtually the only fresh cheeses known to most Americans. The great
exceptions were the Ashkenazic Jews and other immigrants from the
Northeastern Cow Belt who began coming to major cities after about
1880 and were entrenched ethnic presences by the time immigration
was cut off by congressional fiat in 1924. Fresh cheeses were too
important a part of their heritage to be given up, either in their own
right or as a cooking ingredient. It was Jewish food lovers who kept
alive a taste for more flavorful, meaty alternatives to watery American-
style cottage cheese. The usual versions of these well-flavored fresh
cheeses were generally called “farmer cheese” and “pot cheese.” They
went into many kinds of dumplings, pastry or blintz fillings, sweet and
savory puddings, and fritters. People often tossed a few spoonfuls with

hot cooked noodles, or ate a generous serving as an accompaniment to
raw vegetables. For several generations American Ashkenazim also
formed a loyal clientele for cream cheese fresher-tasting and less
gummy-textured than the hot-pack version.
This heritage was fading fast when reinforcements started to arrive
during the final throes of the Soviet Union. With them came not only
many of the same cooking traditions but enough of a taste for good fresh
cheese to fuel some small-scale manufacturing in major cities. Today
domestically produced Russian-style tvorog is probably the best choice in
nearly any recipe calling for any cheese from the cottage-cheese clan.
Brined white cheeses have continued to occupy the same central role
throughout most of the Diverse Sources Belt as nonbrined fresh cheeses
in Eastern Europe. They remained little known in this country—people
still vaguely call them all “feta” and assume that they are or ought to be
Greek—until waves of immigration began after 1965 from many regions
where brined cheese was simply an indispensable part of culinary life.
You can now buy versions imported from many countries—even France,
where cheesemakers have taken to manufacturing brined sheep’s-milk
cheese for worldwide export, using surplus milk that would otherwise go
into Roquefort. Their culinary uses almost exactly parallel those of fresh
cheeses in Eastern European traditions, down to pastry fillings (most
famously, in such phyllo-wrapped specialties as the Greek tiropita and
the small cylindrical Turkish sigara böregˇi) and the partnership with
fresh raw vegetables.
Generally speaking, American cheesemakers have been slow to
recognize what wonderful opportunities await someone with the
initiative to make first-class fresh or brined cheese. The inspiring
exception is the goat contingent. Goat cheeses are the fastest-growing
segment of the artisanal-cheese industry, and the most popular of all are
the fresh young versions that most people firmly if illogically assume to
be synonymous with “chèvre.” In other words, there’s a market ready to
be instructed in the pleasures of very good fresh cheese. Many of its
members would equally adore the brined cousins of fresh cheese if they
had ever tasted a really excellent Greek feta or Bulgarian sirene. And
there is the added advantage that today’s small-scale cheesemakers have
a sizable pool of knowledge about such subtleties as flavor-affecting
enzymes and particular combinations of lactic-acid bacteria. I would not

be surprised if something like a minor golden age dawns in the next few
years for fresh cheeses. In the meanwhile, making a few simple versions
of your own is an eye-opener.

F
SORTING OUT NAMES AND CHEESES
orewarned is forearmed: There is no such thing as consistency
in popular names for the many different fresh cheeses. None
except cottage cheese and cream cheese has been assigned a
formal “standard of identity” in the FDA Code of Federal
Regulations, and even those specifications are broad enough that
things barely resembling the most familiar supermarket cottage
and cream cheese versions could conceivably qualify. Besides,
shopkeepers and restaurateurs trying to explain the unfamiliar to
English-speaking patrons inevitably get their own off-the-cuff
translations going—e.g., “cottage cheese” for Indian panir (which
isn’t a cheese at all, much less cottage cheese). I hope that the
following list will help you either make sense of some terms or
accept the limitations of sense. All entries are for varieties of fresh
cheese—meaning unripened cheese made by the action of lactic-
acid bacteria, enzymes, or both—with the exception of ricotta and
queso blanco, which defy easy classification.
BRINED OR PICKLED CHEESES See this page. You will most often find
them labeled “feta.” As of 2008 the use of that name on labels
will be (illogically) restricted to brined cheeses made in, or at
least shipped from, Greece. I doubt that this will affect informal
signs on store shelves, but you may want to know some other
names by which to search for brined cheeses in ethnic groceries.
In most stores catering to émigrés from Russia and parts of the
former Soviet Union, look for “brinza” or “bryndza.” In many
parts of the old Diverse Sources Belt, from the Balkans to the
Central Asian republics, brined cheeses are so universally taken
for granted that people simply call them “cheese”—e.g., sirene in
Bulgaria, gibneh or jibna in much of the Arab world, or “white
cheese”—as in Turkey, where they’re collectively beyaz peynir.
This makes for communication problems in some neighborhood

shops. Try to find out the source of the milk; the most lusciously
creamy brined cheese comes from sheep’s milk.
CHÈVRE In American parlance, fresh young goat cheese, though in
French any goats’-milk cheese is fromage de chèvre.
CLABBER OR CLABBERED MILK A regional (mostly Southern) term for
milk curdled by the natural action of ambient bacteria. Before
pasteurization became universal, this happened pretty quickly in
all parts of the Deep South, especially during the warm months.
People either drank clabber while it was no thicker than cultured
buttermilk or let it sit until the curd was firm enough to eat as
fresh cheese, often sweetened and accompanied with rich cream.
COTTAGE CHEESE This has come to be the standard American term
for most fresh cheeses made by lactic-acid fermentation, usually
in combination with curdling by rennet or some other enzyme
source. But a shortcut version can also be made through direct
injection of an acid, which eliminates the small amount of flavor
nuance that most mass-produced cottage cheese has to begin
with. Read labels and look for the words “cultured milk” and
“enzymes” (not some weaselly term like “natural flavoring”). The
main thing that distinguishes American cottage cheese from most
other fresh cheeses of the world is that the curd remains in small,
slightly chewy bits instead of forming a smooth paste.
There is really no way to tell what any brand will taste like
except by buying some and sampling it. The milk is usually nonfat
or reduced-fat, often with the addition of nonfat milk solids.
Manufacturers loosely distinguish between “large-curd” and
“small-curd” cottage cheese, referring to the way the curd is cut
during heating. The large-curd kind contains more rennet and has
a shorter setting time, meaning that it stays blander. The other
develops more acidity—that is, a livelier flavor—through longer
fermentation. “Creamed” cottage cheese has a small amount of
cream (usually thin half-and-half) worked in to moisten the
finished curds. Most cottage cheese is also lightly salted.

In American usage, POT CHEESE AND FARMER CHEESE are slightly
different versions of cottage cheese, but there is no general
agreement on how they differ from one another. Get them all
figured out in one part of the country and you may scratch your
head when you encounter them someplace else. But broadly
speaking, both have more flavor and character than the usual run
of supermarket cottage cheese. In the Northeast, farmer (or
farmer’s) cheese usually has a fine, grainy, homogeneous texture
while pot cheese contains larger and more distinct curds. Both are
usually drier and cheesier than other versions of cottage cheese.
One kind of farmer cheese is pressed very firm and dry (somewhat
like the lean, meaty old-fashioned fresh cheese called “hoop
cheese”) and sold in a kind of flat lozenge shape. Most farmer
cheese, however, is softer and moister. I usually find American
pot cheese and farmer cheese much better for both eating and
cooking than other forms of cottage cheese, though not as good as
Russian-style tvorog (this page).
In all versions of cottage/pot/farmer cheese, I look for a good
lactic-acid flavor and a bit of texture or bite. Without these, it’s
pretty vacuous.
CREAM CHEESE Any bland, rich-textured fresh cheese made with a
cream-milk mixture can technically be labeled “cream cheese.”
But today the name almost universally refers to the standardized
result of “hot pack” processing (this page)—not just in the United
States but in dozens or hundreds of other venues, testifying to the
global reach of Kraft’s “Philadelphia” brand. Its characteristic
feature, aside from the somewhat gluey texture conferred by
stabilizers, is a distinctive cooked flavor irresistible to fans.
Explore cheese stores for the unfortunately rare “cold pack”
versions, or make your own for a real revelation. Ignore anything
purporting to be nonfat or reduced-fat cream cheese.
CURD CHEESE General British term for all fresh cheeses of the
cottage-cheese type.
FROMAGE BLANC, FROMAGE FRAIS French for “white cheese” and “fresh

cheese,” referring to various unripened French cheeses of fresh,
delicate flavor and smooth, close texture. Several United States
producers now make similar cheeses labeled “fromage blanc.” Be
warned that there is no single agreed-on standard, so one maker’s
version may differ markedly from another’s.
JUNKET Originally, a loose term for fresh curds from cream or milk,
lightly drained in a rush basket (French jonquette). By the early
nineteenth century it usually meant sweetened milk curdled with
rennet and eaten while barely set with a topping of fresh or
clotted cream (see recipe). “Curds and whey” as a sales pitch
often referred not to plain curds and whey but a heavily
sweetened kind of junket sold by London street vendors (Henry
Mayhew’s 1851 survey of London street sellers gives the usual
proportions as half a pound of sugar to eight quarts of milk). In
1915 a canny manufacturer registered “Junket” as a trademarked
name for its rennet tablets, thereby taking the term out of
circulation as a general description. As explained on this page,
plain Junket brand rennet tablets are what I prefer for renneting
fresh cheeses.
NEUFCHÂTEL Another good name traduced by American sales
initiative. In France it is an estimable mold-ripened young
appellation contrôlée cheese from Neufchâtel in the Bray district of
Normandy. In this country it now refers to a spreadable fresh
cheese made by the same hot-pack method as most commercial
cream cheese, but with less milkfat, fewer calories, and if
anything a gummier effect.
QUARK OR QUARGEL The general German term for all kinds of fresh
unripened cheese. The Austrian equivalent is Topfen. On home
ground, the character of the cheese varies from region to region—
drier, creamier, finer-textured, grainier, curdier. (Usually,
however, Topfen more resembles our farmer cheese or Russian
tvorog.) Today there are several American-made versions, usually
very smooth-textured and mildly tart. As with our “fromage
blanc,” there are no accepted manufacturing standards, and you

should expect great variation among different brands.
QUESO BLANCO, QUESO FRESCO Spanish for “white cheese” and “fresh
cheese.” In the Latin American countries, these terms can embrace
a spectrum of cheeses. In the United States, they don’t have an
absolutely fixed meaning but nearly always refer to milk
completely or partly curdled by acid precipitation. Sometimes
queso blanco or fresco also undergoes a little exposure to rennet
(or other enzyme sources) and/or lactic-acid bacteria. But it is
essentially one of the noncheese cheeses like Indian panir. Very
mild-flavored and rather rubbery, it is popular with Mexican and
many other Latin American cooks because it keeps its shape
instead of melting when cooked.
RICOTTA Also an anomaly on the cheese map. True Italian ricotta
differs from real cheese in containing virtually no casein. This is
because it is made from what’s left after the casein has been
removed from milk in cheesemaking: the whey. Reheating whey
(hence the name “ricotta,” or “recooked”) precipitates the water-
soluble proteins (lactoglobulins and lactalbumins) to a white
substance distantly resembling cheese curd, but moister and more
fine-grained in texture. The yield is very low compared to that
from true curd precipitation, though it increases slightly with
higher acidity (lower pH); vinegar is often added to the whey for
ricotta for more efficient separation.
In Italy, industrial ricotta-making is a thrifty form of recycling
what would otherwise go to waste. The best comes from sheep’s-
milk whey. There is also good buffaloes’-milk ricotta. That from
cows’ milk is the blandest and least interesting. Most commercial
American “ricotta” (so called) is a very different, fairly insipid
product. This is another of those cases where manufacturers are
held to no particular standard, and what most of them seem to
have in mind is a sort of imitation cottage cheese made by
acidifying whole or skim milk (sometimes part whey) with
vinegar or another souring agent. If the result is too watery it gets
thickened with gums. The usual recipes for homemade ricotta in
American cookbooks are no closer to whey-based ricotta. They

call for curdling heated milk with lemon juice, and produce
something very like the Indian chhenna. Real whey-protein ricotta
has an altogether different texture, thin-bodied and not
particularly cheesy.
I have not tried to give a recipe for true ricotta because none of
the fresh-cheese recipes in this book yields enough whey to make
more than a few spoonfuls. If you hanker to make your own,
chhenna isn’t any more inauthentic than the expedients in other
cookbooks. But what I really recommend is searching out fresh
sheep’s-milk ricotta (not to be confused with the hard cheese
called ricotta salata) in a cheese store. It will spoil you for other
kinds.
TVOROG The Russian word for what we call farmer cheese or pot cheese—
a firm-textured small-curd fresh cheese with excellent flavor and little of
the extraneous liquid that American cottage cheese often swims in.
Salted and saltless versions are now produced, usually in half-pound
cartons, by several American manufacturers for a diverse buyership of
émigrés from the ex-Soviet bloc. Large Russian-American delis often sell
it in bulk. It is the most consistently good commercial fresh cheese that I
know; I prefer it in virtually any recipe calling for anything like cottage
cheese, especially dishes such as blini, cheese-filled pastries, or noodle
kugels. Don’t even think of making Russian Paskha without good tvorog.
It is also perfectly delicious eaten by itself, but even better with a dollop
of Russian-style sour cream.

S
ABOUT BRINED CHEESES
ome rough-and-ready cousin of the “Fresh White Cheese with
Cultures” in this chapter was the first of all cheeses, allowing for
such circumstances as the absence of cows’ milk, or of nice
purified cultures to be added in measured amounts. Cheese made
by a combination of culturing and renneting came later. But what
came next was not cheese ripened or aged by the techniques later
developed in northwestern Europe. Once fresh cheeses had
become ubiquitous in the Diverse Sources Belt, people discovered
the simplest means of preventing the onset of ripening: putting the
cheese in brine. The modern example that most people know by
name is Greek feta.
The curd structure of brined (also often called “pickled”)
cheeses has more in common with that of fresh cheeses than those
that have undergone prolonged, progressive changes through
ripening and perhaps protracted aging. The main difference is in
the degree to which the original casein gets rearranged. A good
deal of the somewhat spongy original casein matrix remains in
brined curd. Prompt salting and brining are what keep it from
starting down the cascade of reactions known as ripening.
At the stage where a fresh cheese would be deemed ready for
eating, brined cheese takes a detour. The curd is cut into slabs or
chunks, salted, and left to firm up by releasing more whey for
some hours or days before being put into a container with a brine
solution of salt, water, and—usually though not always—some of
the whey, which lightly acidifies the brine. In this state, it keeps
for weeks or months, depending on the strength of the brine.
When removed and desalted by soaking in fresh water, it can be
nearly as close to the milky quality of the fresh curd as soaked
salt codfish is to the character of fresh cod.
GETTING ORGANIZED FOR CHEESEMAKING

I never use any special equipment or ingredients from
cheesemaking-supply companies. These expenses may make sense
if you’re working on a professional scale with dozens of gallons of
milk at a time. But for one or two pounds (roughly two to four
cups) of cheese, anybody can get equally good results with pretty
ordinary kitchen resources and a little planning. (If you decide to
explore fresh cheeses more zealously, see the Note on Shopping
Sources.)
The only necessary ingredients are milk or a milk-cream
mixture, a source of live lactic-acid bacteria to inoculate and
culture the milk, and in three of the following five cheese recipes,
an enzyme to help set up the curd.
Very fresh milk from a small dairy is always preferable, but
supermarket milk will do. As for the inoculant, I use plain
cultured buttermilk. You may need to try a few supermarkets
before finding a brand with active cultures and without added salt
or gums. My enzyme source is plain unflavored Junket brand
rennet tablets, and here some people will have easier hunting
than others. Some supermarket chains and specialty food shops
still carry this once-common ingredient. If you strike out, I
suggest asking the maker of Junket about local sources (Redco
Foods, Inc., P.O. Box 879, Windsor, CT. 06095; or e-mail
info@junketdesserts.com). Vegetarians and kosher cooks please
note: This rennet is an animal product. Luckily you have an
excellent alternative in the rennetless cheese on this page.
The steps you will be going through in most cases are putting
the milk in a nonreactive saucepan or other container, warming it
to a suitable inoculation temperature (generally between about
85° and 100°F; I recommend an instant-reading thermometer),
letting it incubate for a prescribed period of usually between 8
and 24 hours at (preferably warm) room temperature, and
draining the whey from the curd. This last part of the procedure is
the only one requiring much advance organization. For it you will
need a colander or strainer set over a pan or bowl and lined with
tight-woven cheesecloth—not the loose, flimsy supermarket article
—or another good-sized piece of clean cotton cloth such as a large

handkerchief or remnant of old bedsheet. The cloth must be large
enough to line the colander with some overhang and to tie up into
a bag for the final stage: hanging up to finish draining for an
unpredictable interval of (usually) several hours. You will need
something to hang it on, like the kitchen faucet (if you won’t be
using it for a while) or a sturdy wooden spoon placed over a pail
deep enough for the bag of curd not to touch the bottom.
Remember that the curd will be in a messy, sloshy state when you
actually start transferring it between the first vessel and the
colander or getting the cloth bag hung up. You’ll thank yourself
later if you can get as prepared as possible beforehand.
The most complex recipe in this chapter, “Fresh White Cheese
with Cultures and Rennet,” involves an additional stage of cutting
the incubated curd into cubes and gradually heating it to a
temperature high enough to firm it up by expelling whey more
efficiently. The extra equipment you will need is described in the
recipe. For the last stage of the two creamcheese recipes, a weight
of several pounds (another whey-expelling measure) is helpful.

H
FRESH WHITE CHEESE: KINDERGARTEN VERSION
ere is cheese for the scientifically challenged. In somewhat
telescoped form, it illustrates the stages of curd formation and
draining explained above. I originally came across it in several
American-published Russian cookbooks as a resourceful substitute
for tvorog, the beloved Russian pot or farmer cheese. Though it’s
a little tougher than fresh cheese made by more orthodox
methods, the flavor is good.
The reason this is easier to make than other fresh cheeses is
that you have a head start on the task of precipitating the casein
from the whey. It’s already been incompletely precipitated by the
lactic-acid bacteria added to the milk at the manufacturing plant
to make cultured buttermilk. Just heating it speeds up the process
enough for better curd formation. Other fresh cheeses require you
to add the bacteria yourself, and rest on a much more cautious
application of heat that leaves the curd more tender and delicate.
Still, the general principle is the same.
YIELD: About 1 cup cheese and 3 cups sour whey per starting quart
of buttermilk. (See Uses of Whey.)
Go buy a cardboard carton—two, if you’re game—of cultured
buttermilk. It should be made without salt or gummy stabilizers, and
preferably should have a milkfat content of at least 1.5 percent. Place
the unopened carton(s) in a deep pan such as a stockpot or asparagus
steamer and add enough cold water to come close to the top of the
cartons. Bring the water to a full boil over high heat. Remove the pot
from the heat and let the whole thing cool to room temperature.
Read the directions on this page for preparing a cloth-lined colander
set over a saucepan or other vessel, tying the cloth into a bag, and
hanging it up to drain. Open the carton(s) and dump the contents into
the colander, then proceed with the tying-up and draining stages. When
the whey stops dripping, turn out the drained curd into a bowl and
briefly work it with a wooden spoon. Work in a pinch or two of salt and
a dash of cream, if desired. Store in the refrigerator, tightly covered, for

three to four days, and use in any way you would use commercial
cottage or pot cheese.

T
FRESH WHITE CHEESE WITH CULTURES
his version of fresh cheese is somewhat more complicated
than the preceding one but has no real hurdles as long as the
inoculated milk doesn’t get bumped or jounced while incubating.
The recipe calls for skim milk not because whole milk won’t work
but in order to eliminate one variable during a first effort. Later
you can try the whole-milk version (this page). But this cheese
actually is one thing that I prefer made with skim milk.
To repeat my inevitable mantra, the flavor will be best if you
look for very fresh milk, without added milk solids, from a small
dairy that does batch pasteurizing. But freshness really is more
crucial with the second essential ingredient: a mixture of several
different mesophilic starter bacteria. As explained earlier, my
preferred source of these organisms is simply a little cultured
buttermilk of at least 1.5 percent milkfat content. If it has been
sitting around long enough in the store or your refrigerator to lose
a lot of the original bacterial activity, the milk either will take
longer to curdle or may scarcely curdle at all. Read labels and
don’t buy anything that lacks the magic words “live cultures,” or
that contains gums and salt. If you can find cultured buttermilk at
a local farmers’ market, snap it up at once and use it that day or
the next.
The recipe can be halved if a gallon of milk sounds
intimidating, but don’t try to cut it beyond that.
YIELD: About 4-plus cups cheese and 11 to 12 cups slightly soured
whey per starting gallon of milk. (Expect wide variation. See Uses
of Whey.)
1 gallon skim milk
½ cup cultured buttermilk
½ to ¾ teaspoon salt
A dash or two of cream, if desired
Read the directions on this page for preparing a cloth-lined colander set

over a saucepan or other vessel, tying the cloth into a bag, and hanging
it up to drain. Have the kitchen sink clear, to be used as a water bath.
Pour the milk into a 6-quart pot. Run hot water into the sink to a
depth of several inches, set the pot in it, and test the temperature of the
milk. Stir it gently, occasionally rechecking the temperature, until it
reaches about 85° to 90°F. If you have to add more hot water or resort to
heating some in a kettle, be sure not to splash it into the milk. And it’s
better to warm the milk cautiously than find that you’ve suddenly gotten
it much hotter than you meant to.
Remove the pot of milk from the sink, and set it in a warmish spot
(things will proceed faster if the room is at 75° to 80°F) where it will not
be disturbed for the next day. Shake up the carton of buttermilk in case
the thicker part has settled; stir in ½ cup. Loosely cover the pot with a
cloth, and go away and leave it. The inoculated milk must not be jostled,
and the room temperature shouldn’t fluctuate wildly.
After about 12 hours, take a look at the milk, without moving or
jiggling the pot, to see whether it has started to set in a curd. Most likely
it won’t be well set until 18 to 24 hours after inoculation. You will know
it’s ready when, as you cautiously test the edge with a small spoon, you
see a bit of soft but definite curd break from the mass like a very tender
custard.
Set the colander, with cloth lining in place, over a bowl to catch the
whey. Very gently ladle the contents of the milk pan into the colander,
carefully pouring in the last bit of whey and scraping out any clinging
curd. Let the whey drain for 1 to 2 hours. When the surface is less
flooded, gather up the corners of the cloth and shift the weight around a
little to encourage more draining. Tie the corners into a bag and hang it
up to drain until the whey has stopped dripping. This will take anywhere
from 4 to 8 hours. If you get discouraged, you can hasten things by
putting the bag in a strainer over a bowl and weighting it with
something like a heavy can set on a plate. When it gets to soft-cheese
consistency, turn the curd out into a mixing bowl and work it smooth
with a wooden spoon. Work in about ½ to ¾ teaspoon of salt (less for a
half-sized batch). You can also add a very little cream if you like, but I
prefer it without. It will keep in the refrigerator, tightly covered, for four
to seven days.
Call it anything you like, from cottage cheese to fromage blanc to

Schmierkäse; names for cheeses of this ilk are notoriously unsystematic
and imprecise in every language. By all means mix it with any
seasonings you like—green herbs, scallions, horseradish, blue cheese,
chutney, minced celery or olives, pickled jalapeños, salmon caviar, or
anything else that occurs to you—before serving it to guests in the form
of a spread (it’s great on open-faced sandwiches). Or put the unadorned
cheese on the table and eat it with apple butter or prune lekvar. The
nineteenth-century cookbook author Mary Lincoln reports that it “is
delicious with warm gingerbread.”
You are now primed to understand the main factors that make any
fresh cheese tick. A little practice with this version will equip you to go
on to another “cottage cheese” made with just two added factors: rennet
and a little more heat.

F
FRESH WHITE CHEESE WITH CULTURES AND RENNET
or makers of aged cheeses, renneting is a complex business
involving many factors. Those of us interested only in making
small batches of fresh cheese have only a few things to keep in
mind. First of all, rennet and lactic-acid fermentation reinforce
each other’s action; second, renneted curd is profoundly affected
by temperature. Curd produced by culturing alone is more
forgiving of heat. But if you slap a pot of renneted milk on the
stove and rapidly heat it above 120°F, the result will be as fresh
and tender as boiled rubber. Thus you need to do more advance
thinking than for other kinds of fresh cheese, and plan on
spending an hour or more at the stove during the heating stage.
The advantage is that with a little practice you will be able to
better manipulate such factors as degree of firmness or softness,
sourness or blandness, than with culturing alone.
Before you begin, read through the directions on this page for
preparing a cloth-lined colander set over a saucepan or other
vessel, tying the cloth into a bag, and hanging it up to drain. But
this time you will also have to get together some extra equipment:
a pot large enough to hold the one containing the milk, a sturdy
rack to set the (heavy) milk pot on inside the larger one, a long
thin-bladed knife or metal spatula, a heat deflector such as a
Flame Tamer, a stirring implement (wooden spoon or rubber
spatula) long enough to reach the bottom of the milk pot, and an
instant-reading thermometer, preferably one with a long probe.
You had better try out the rack arrangement beforehand. The
top rims of the smaller and larger pots should be at least roughly
level. If you don’t have a rack high and strong enough for the
purpose, use a few empty cans with tops and bottoms removed.
Or try my improvised “rack” for setting a 6-quart Dutch oven
inside a 12-quart one: two 5-pan sets of 3-x-5-inch disposable
aluminum loaf pans from the supermarket, left stacked for extra
strength. Use a screwdriver to punch about a dozen holes through
the bottoms of each set, and put them in the larger pot, upside

down. Luckily they can be endlessly reused for this purpose.
Look when possible for fresh skim milk made without added
milk solids, as well as very fresh buttermilk with live cultures. As
with the preceding fresh cheese version (this page), the recipe can
be halved.
YIELD: About 4 cups cheese, 12 cups faintly soured whey. (See Uses
of Whey.)
1 gallon skim milk
½ cup cultured buttermilk
¼ plain Junket brand rennet tablet (see this page)
½ teaspoon salt, or to taste
A dash or two of cream, if desired
Get together all the equipment listed above. Have the kitchen sink clear
for use as a water bath.
Pour the milk into a 6-quart pot, run hot water into the sink to a depth
of several inches, and set the pot in it. Stir the milk gently, occasionally
rechecking the temperature and carefully adding hot water if necessary,
until it reaches about 85° to 90°F. Carefully remove the pot. Shake up
the buttermilk before measuring. Crush the piece of rennet tablet in a
few spoonfuls of water in a cup, making sure it dissolves thoroughly. Stir
the buttermilk and rennet into the milk, then go away and leave the
lightly covered pot completely undisturbed in a warm spot (preferably at a
temperature of 75° to 80°F).
In about 10 to 12 hours the milk will show the first sign of the
difference between fresh cheese curdled by lactic fermentation alone and
that with a combination of culture and rennet: more rapid curd
formation, with clearer separation of whey. This may be hard to judge
without jostling the milk. As gently as possible, test it by slipping a thin
knife blade just under the surface. When the curd seems almost to
“unzip” in a clean cut revealing fairly clear-looking whey, it’s ready. The
texture will be slightly firmer than that of simply cultured curd.
Now for the most delicate part of the operation, which will take at
least an hour: First, set the larger pot on a Flame Tamer or other heat
deflector over a stove burner and put your rack arrangement in it.

Next, use your knife or spatula to very carefully cut straight down
through the curd at roughly ⅓-to ½-inch intervals. (Don’t worry about
mathematical precision.) Make a second set of cuts at right angles to the
first. Holding the blade at a forty-five-degree angle to the vertical cuts,
make a third set of cuts, this time oblique—an inexact but good enough
home equivalent of professional curd-cutting with wire “cheese harps”
that do both vertical and horizontal cutting. The aim is to encourage still
more curd-whey separation.
Now carefully set the pot of curd on the rack and even more carefully
pour enough lukewarm water into the larger pot to come most of the
way up the sides of the smaller one (leave a few inches of leeway). This
is your equivalent of an industrial-scale water jacket. Turn on the heat,
keeping it fairly low, and begin checking the water temperature, which
has to rise slowly rather than rapidly. Be aware that once it starts
heating you may have trouble slowing it down. When it gets above
about 100°F, turn your attention to the milk pot.
You must now bring the curd from about room temperature (say,
75°F) to roughly 108°F at the rate of only two or three degrees every five
minutes—thirty-some degrees in about an hour. Begin testing the
temperature in different parts of the pot. Every few minutes, carefully
stir the curd with a long spoon or spatula. The object is not to agitate or
mix the contents of the pot but to let the whey circulate as freely as
possible around the pieces of cut curd, evening out their temperature
and making the curd firmer by promoting more whey loss. As the casein
matrix knits together more firmly, it will literally squeeze out more and
more moisture. The longer you continue, the more whey in proportion to
curd you will see in the kettle.
It doesn’t matter if bits of curd break off in stirring; they will be
retrieved in the final straining. Keep checking the temperature and as it
reaches about 100°F, turn the heat as low as possible. If the curd seems
to be warming up too fast, lift the pot from the larger vessel, turn off the
heat, and add some cold water or ice cubes to the warm water before
cautiously resuming operations. When the temperature of the curd
reaches 108°F (or something between 105° and 110°F—on the whole,
better a bit too cool than too warm), try to hold it at that level without
further warming for about 15 minutes. (If necessary, add ice to the water
bath or briefly lift the milk pot out of it.)

Now set up your cloth-lined-colander arrangement. Carefully ladle in
the curd and some of the whey; pour in the remaining whey as gently as
possible. Tie the cloth into a bag for draining as before. It will drain
more promptly and completely than the rennetless version, yielding
anything from an ounce to a few ounces less cheese and more whey.
When the whey has stopped dripping, decide whether to take or omit
a step that I never bother with myself: Fill the sink with ice water and
slosh the bag around while kneading the cheese with your hands to rinse
out the last remnants of partly sour whey. Many people regard this as
standard practice; I can only suppose that they want something as
“sweet” and innocuous as supermarket cottage cheese. Personally, I
think the small amount of residual whey gives the cheese character.
If you have rinsed the curd, hang it up to drain again (this time it will
go faster) before proceeding to the end stage: Turn out the cheese into a
mixing bowl, and work it as smooth as possible with a wooden spoon.
Work in salt to taste. Some people like to add a little fresh cream at the
same time; I usually prefer the cheese without. Store and use as for the
rennetless version.
VARIATIONS: I think there is nothing better than either rennetless or
renneted fresh cheese made with skim milk. But excellent ones can also
be made with whole milk, either homogenized or (as I prefer)
unhomogenized. They are nearly creamy enough to pass for cream
cheese. If you use unhomogenized milk you will see some melted
butterfat appearing on the surface as you heat it. But most of the
butterfat will remain with the curd when you drain it in cheesecloth, and
any that goes off in the whey can easily be salvaged by chilling the whey
and lifting the fat from the surface, to be worked back into the cheese.
The same technique can be used to make a simple culture-and-rennet
fresh goats’-milk cheese. But trial and error are even more the rule here
than in most home dairying experiments. The huge variations in the
chemical makeup of any species’s milk that have been partly erased from
the modern commercial cows’-milk supply remain glaringly obvious in
goats’ milk from different herds and dairies. All goats’ milk differs from
cows’ milk in casein structure, the factor that most directly affects
curdling behavior. But there is also a range of differences in goats’-milk
casein not only among particular breeds but—because of the strongly

seasonal tendency of goats’ mating patterns—among samples taken at
different times of the year. Also, not all processors will label the milk to
tell you if it’s been frozen. The practical result for a home cheesemaker
is that no recipe can reliably tell you the correct amount of rennet for a
gallon of goats’ milk or the time the milk should be left to curdle after
renneting and inoculation. With identical amounts and timings I have
ended up with a curd that refused to become curd at all (it tasted great,
though, and I successfully presented it to friends as “goat buttermilk”), a
curd too unpleasantly tough for anything but throwing out, and a nice
soft cheese.
A fresh white goats’-milk cheese is good enough to risk a few failures.
I suggest starting to check the degree of curdling after eight hours; do
not let the curd become as stubbornly firm as a wrong opinion. Omit the
steps of cutting and heating the curd. The cheese will be ready to drain
once you have a somewhat (not decidedly) firm curd. When finished it
will be very mild, with scarcely a hint of goatiness. (That characteristic
emerges only after brief aging.) The main clue that it comes from goats’
rather than cows’ milk will be the more smoothly, finely knit texture of
the curd.

C
ABOUT CREAM CHEESE
ream cheese is a great confidence builder for neophyte
cheesemakers. Cream is really far easier to work with than milk.
Its comparatively small casein content means that even after
renneting it never forms a curd requiring to be cut and
laboriously brought to a crucial temperature; there’s scarcely
anything you need to do to the cream once it’s set except drain it.
If you have never eaten any kind of cream cheese except Kraft’s
Philadelphia Cream Cheese and other commercial knockoffs, the
homemade version free of gums and stabilizers will require some
mental readjustment. Like most other kinds of fresh cheese, cream
cheese has meant many things to many people in the last few
centuries. We can only guess at what the term referred to before
the global triumph of the foil-wrapped product baptized with the
name “Philadelphia.”
The only wisp of certainty in a vacuum of information is that
cream cheese from perhaps the eighteenth century on usually
involved cream curdled and drained to a cheesy consistency. As
mentioned earlier, something called “cream cheese” had been
considered a Philadelphia delicacy for more than a generation
before the Empire Cheese Company began selling “Philadelphia
Brand Cream Cheese” from a plant in Otsego County, New York,
in the early 1880s. (“Dear Longo,” the New York bon vivant Sam
Ward wrote to his friend Henry Wadsworth Longfellow in 1841,
“Just returned from Philadelphia.… What took me there?…Not
creamcheese, nor melons, nor Preciosa [the ballerina Fanny
Elssler], but the Chinese Museum, which closes tonight.”) One can
only guess how much it resembled today’s commercial cream
cheese. In 1867 the New York market chronicler Thomas F. De
Voe described as a Philadelphia specialty one kind of cream
cheese “made from rich sour cream tied up in linen cloth to drain,

then laid on a deep dish, still covered around, and turned every
day, and sprinkled with salt for ten days or a fortnight, until it is
ripe. If wanted to ripen quick, cover it with mint or nettle leaves.”
De Voe’s Philadelphia cream cheese sounds much more
interesting (and creamier) than the kind now known from Rome
to Rio, which undoubtedly didn’t reach anything like its present
form until the late 1920s. That was when a series of technological
innovations began paving the way for cream cheese made by
liquefying a not particularly creamy curd at a temperature well
above the boiling point of water, concentrating it in a mechanical
separator, standardizing it to a desired fat percentage, and
pumping the hot fluid mixture directly into small rectangular foil
packages for retail sale. Because the heat-treated cheese tends to
leak water, gums such as guar and locust bean are routinely
added at the standardizing stage. The end product, “hot pack
cream cheese,” has a distinctly cooked flavor and gummy
consistency that cannot have belonged to cream cheese before the
hot-pack revolution. Today even gourmet and health-food shops
and some cheese stores are unlikely to carry anything but hot-
pack cream cheese, under whatever label.
Given the popularity of cream cheese made by this technique,
talk of fresher-tasting alternatives may sound like an affectation.
But I honestly recommend looking for gum-free brands, if only to
be able to make the comparison. Or for an idea of what really
fresh cream cheese can be, try one of the following two recipes.

C
CREAM CHEESE: CREAMY
reaminess is a relative concept. Make cream cheese with the
richest, heaviest cream you can find, and it may prove a
disappointment. The curd sets up more satisfactorily and with
better flavor if you aim for a higher protein content and lower fat
content than that of heavy cream. (It still won’t behave exactly
like the curd from cultured and renneted skim milk, but it will
make a nice cheese.)
My idea of an agreeably creamy cream cheese starts with a
mixture of about two parts whole milk—unhomogenized is best—
to one part not-too-rich cream made by combining equal amounts
of half-and-half and heavy cream—both also unhomogenized, if
possible. Remember that what’s labeled half-and-half in one store
might pass muster as light cream in another; there is no
uniformity in these matters from region to region or even
processor to processor.
Your advance planning for cream cheese should include both
lining up some small weights and clearing the decks in the
refrigerator for the last stage of draining.
YIELD: About 2¼ cups of cheese, 6¾ cups of slightly sour whey
(but every batch may be different; the richer the cream, the
higher the proportion of cheese to whey)
1½ quarts (6 cups) milk, preferably unhomogenized and very fresh
1½ cups nonultrapasteurized rich half-and-half or light cream,
preferably unhomogenized
1½ cups nonultrapasteurized heavy cream, preferably
unhomogenized
½ cup cultured buttermilk of at least 1.5 percent milkfat content, as
fresh as possible and made without salt or stabilizing gums
½ unflavored Junket brand rennet tablet
½ teaspoon salt, or to taste
Pour the milk, half-and-half, cream, and buttermilk into a saucepan. Set

the pan on a heat deflector over very low heat and slowly heat the milk
to about 98° to 100°F. Put the piece of rennet tablet in a small bowl or
cup, crush it to a powder, and add a few tablespoons of water, stirring to
dissolve it thoroughly.
Find a spot in a warm room where the pan of milk and cream can rest
absolutely undisturbed for the better part of a day. Remove it from the
heat, stir in the dissolved rennet, and loosely cover the pan with a
kitchen towel. Let the inoculated mixture sit without jostling or jiggling
for 12 to 16 hours, or until you can see by very gently testing the edge
with a spoon that it has become about as thick as sour cream. It should
smell slightly sour.
Follow the directions on this page for preparing a cloth-lined colander
set over a saucepan or other vessel, tying the cloth into a bag, and
hanging it up to drain. After about 5 or 6 hours of draining you will
have something approaching cream cheese, but it will still contain some
residual whey. (Cream cheese has less of a casein matrix than milk-based
cheese to squeeze out moisture from the interior.) Get the cloth-
swaddled curd arranged in the colander so that you can place a weight
on it. A few beach stones are good, or something like a few heavy cans
set on a small plate. For years I used a couple of my husband’s 2-pound
lead diving weights (on a plate, natch). Put the whole affair over a bowl
in the refrigerator until the curd is about as firm as commercial cream
cheese and virtually no whey is coming from it. This may take another 6
to 10 hours—some batches drain more cooperatively than others. Check
it at intervals.
Turn out the drained cheese into a mixing bowl and taste it. It should
be beautifully creamy but not cloying, with a fresh lactic-acid flavor.
Beat it smooth with a wooden spoon and work in a little salt. It will keep
in the refrigerator, tightly covered, for about a week.

L
CREAM CHEESE: LIGHT
ight,” that is, by comparison with the previous example. But
please don’t expect anything “lite.” To me this is the ideal cream
cheese. I think it strikes just the right balance between creamy
and cheesy. It also spreads a little more easily than the preceding
version.
The yield is nearly the same as for “creamy” cream cheese (a tiny bit
more whey and less cheese). The procedure is identical. The ingredients
are 7 cups unhomogenized whole milk, 1 cup rich half-and-half or light
cream, ½ cup gumless and saltless cultured buttermilk (at least 1.5
percent milkfat), ½ unflavored Junket brand rennet tablet, and ½ to ¾
teaspoon salt. Follow the directions in the preceding recipe; the cheese
will drain a little more quickly and more completely. It will also be
slightly more perishable. Allow a day or two less keeping time.

I
CERVELLE DE CANUT
n the heyday of the Lyon silk industry, canuts was local slang
for weavers in the region’s mills. Apparently some wag decided
that this strong and highly seasoned cheese spread—clearly a
counterpart of Liptauer cheese and Greek tyrokafteri—resembled
what silk weavers used for brains.
Any unripened curd cheese will do as the foundation of a
pleasant copy, but American-style cottage cheese or ricotta should
be well drained of whey and either beaten smooth in a food
processor or worked through a fine-mesh strainer. Of course it
tastes best when made with a homemade fresh white cheese or
good commercial fromage blanc. The seasonings can vary widely
as long as shallot and chives predominate. I tend to think that the
fewer herbs, the better.
YIELD: About 2 cups
2 cups fresh white cows’-milk cheese, or any preferred mixture of
fresh chèvre and cows’-milk cheese
1 to 2 shallots
1 small garlic clove (optional)
A bunch of chives
A small handful of chervil, tarragon, and/or flat-leaf parsley
(optional)
1 to 2 teaspoons salt, or to taste
Freshly ground white or black pepper to taste
1 tablespoon dry white wine or white wine vinegar
2 to 3 tablespoons olive oil
2 to 3 tablespoons heavy cream or crème fraîche
Work the cheese smooth with a wooden spoon. Mince the shallots very
fine; crush the garlic (if using) to a paste with the flat of a knife blade.
Mince or snip the chives very fine, together with the chervil and other
optional herbs. Work all these seasonings into the cheese along with salt
and pepper. Beat in the wine or vinegar, oil, and cream. Let sit in the

refrigerator, well covered, for at least an hour before serving it as a
spread for coarse country bread or dip for crudités.

S
CREAM CHEESE–SCALLION DIP
ay what you will of commercial American cream cheese made
by the standard hot-pack method with an array of gums (see this
page), the fact remains that it is useful. This truth dawned on a
large public during Prohibition and Repeal, when booze-
absorbing cocktail nibbles for one-handed eating multiplied like
rabbits. In contrast to the elaborately decorated canapés of the
previous era, they tended to require almost no time or attention
on anyone’s part. Cream cheese turned out to be the perfect all-
purpose vehicle for many of the new filler-uppers. Having a
pleasantly neutral flavor that clashed with nothing, it could be
almost instantly mixed to a kind of cement for chopped olives,
bacon, sweet pickle relish, raisins, or some stronger cheese like
Roquefort.
Ashkenazic Jews viewed cream cheese a little differently, as
uniting the handier qualities of Russian-style sour cream and pot
cheese. (A few places on New York’s Lower East Side continued to
make their own cream cheese—sometimes really creamy cold-
pack versions—until the last years of the twentieth century. But
by then only a handful of diehards cared about the difference.)
People took to putting cream cheese on bread or rolls, either plain
or mixed with something else—for instance, some member of the
onion fraternity. By the 1950s “scallion cream cheese” or “chive
cream cheese” was an indispensable Sunday brunch adjunct to
bagels and bialys. By the turn of the twenty-first century it was
being presented as a dip for crudités, widely sold in prepackaged
versions that don’t hold a candle to anything you can mix yourself
—especially if the cream cheese is homemade or gum-free.
Scallion (or chive) cream cheese scarcely needs a recipe. For every cup
(8 ounces) of cream cheese, use a few tablespoons of cream or whole
milk and two or three large scallions (the white and a few inches of the
green part), cleaned, trimmed, and coarsely chopped. Mash everything
together with a wooden spoon, adding cream a tablespoon at a time to
make a spread (thicker) or dip (thinner) and using as much or as little

scallion as you like. It will keep for several days in the refrigerator,
tightly covered, but be sure to let it warm to room temperature before
using.
VARIATIONS: There are dozens of other possibilities. I like creamcheese
spread or dip made with a few crunchy raw vegetables, for instance,
shredded carrots and minced celery. Clam dip with minced clams
(usually canned) and a few seasonings like a little garlic, prepared
horseradish, and/or Tabasco sauce is a Superbowl party perennial.
People also love smoked fish, especially salmon, in creamcheese dips and
spreads. Roasted red peppers (coarsely chopped) are wonderful. There is
a big fan club of blue-cheese dips. In fact, nearly any of the suggestions
for sour-cream dips on this page can be easily adapted for use with
cream cheese, as long as you thin the cheese slightly with cream. Some
people add mayonnaise for easier spreading, but I like the flavor better
without it.

L
ABOUT LIPTAUER CHEESE
ike many American cooks, I first met Liptauer cheese as a
spread made from ordinary cottage cheese (generally enriched
with butter) or cream cheese, with a little paprika, caraway,
onion, and/or anchovy paste. And such versions are perfectly
good in their own way. But Liptauer cheese really started as
something more characterful.
Its historical and culinary career involves many confusing
wrinkles. In the first place, the popular Austrian and German
name “Liptauer” refers to a Slovakian district that was once a
county named Liptó in the medieval Kingdom of Hungary. Long
ago it received a large influx of Vlach (Wallachian) sheepherders
from parts of present-day Romania and Moldava. Through them,
sheep’s milk became dominant in local dairying. The cheese
called Liptovsky/Liptoi/Liptauer was a version of sheep’s-milk
“bryndza,” or “brinza”—the name for brined cheeses like feta
throughout much of Eastern Europe, locally Germanized to
“Brimsen”—that came from Romania with the Vlachs. It is still
made in the former Liptó county.
The eponymous “Liptauer cheese,” meaning the seasoned
spread made from the cheese itself, originally was nothing but a
western cousin of Greek Tyrokafteri. Before commercial versions
were developed, it was a household or farmstead production
whose flavor and texture varied with the quality of the main
ingredient—younger/older, milder/saltier, softer/firmer. When
the dish caught on along the western Danube, the usual local
farmer cheese or pot cheese made from cows’ milk generally
replaced brined sheep’s-milk cheese.
In the course of its Austro-Hungarian adventures, “Liptauer
cheese”—the spread, that is—acquired a lacing of sweet paprika
and caraway seeds, usually with some chopped onion. There are
factory versions with these seasonings or others already mixed in.
It usually has a good dose of butter (corresponding to the Greek
olive oil) worked into the cheese. Some people consider it

incomplete without capers, dry or prepared mustard, or
anchovies.
I have come to like Liptauer made with sheep’s-milk feta. But
Liptauers based on fresh cows’-milk cheese now have a long track
record of their own that merits a separate version. The
proportions are highly elastic; don’t hesitate to use more or less of
any seasoning.
LIPTAUER CHEESE I
YIELD: About 2 cups
1 pound feta cheese, preferably a creamy sheep’s-milk kind
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter, at room temperature, cut into 6 to 8
pieces
1 to 2 teaspoons Hungarian sweet paprika
1 to 1 ½ teaspoons caraway seeds, bruised in a mortar to release the
flavor
1 small onion, chopped fine or grated
1 small garlic clove, crushed to a paste, or a few chives, minced
(optional)
Coarsely crumble the cheese or cut it into largish (1-inch) chunks. Put it
in a bowl and let stand, covered with cold water, for between half an
hour and 1 hour. Change the water once or twice and taste a bit of
cheese for saltiness (but remember that the butter will further dilute the
briny flavor). When it is desalted to your liking, drain it in a colander
until it stops dripping.
Either process the drained cheese in a food processor or blender with
the butter, paprika, and caraway, or use a stout wooden spoon to force
the cheese and butter through a coarse-mesh sieve into a bowl. Add the
onion and optional garlic or chives and process for a few seconds longer,
or work them in with the spoon. Let stand at room temperature 1 to 2
hours, to let the flavors develop. Serve it as a spread for good bread,
preferably pumpernickel or Jewish rye; it’s also excellent with crisp fresh
radishes and scallions.

LIPTAUER CHEESE II
YIELD: About 2 cups
1 pound farmer cheese
2 tablespoons (¼ stick) butter, at room temperature
1 to 2 teaspoons Hungarian sweet paprika
1 to 1 ½ teaspoons caraway seeds, bruised in a mortar to release the
flavor
1 teaspoon dry mustard or 1 to 2 teaspoons prepared German-style
hot mustard (optional)
1 to 2 teaspoons capers, drained and chopped (optional)
1 or 2 small anchovy fillets, minced (optional)
1 small onion, chopped fine or grated
1 small garlic clove, crushed to a paste, or a few chives, minced
(optional)
Omit the soaking of the cheese; otherwise combine the ingredients as
directed in the previous recipe, adding any or all of the stronger-flavored
seasonings in small increments to taste.
VARIATIONS: Many people like cream cheese as a Liptauer base, though I
find it lacking in texture. For this version, omit the butter and use two 8-
ounce packages of cream cheese.
The farmer cheese can also be replaced with an equal amount of a
fresh young goat cheese.

I
TYROKAFTERI OR HTIPITI
(WHIPPED FETA-CHEESE SPREAD)
first encountered this silky, pungent stuff as “tyrokafteri” in the
Greek neighborhood of Astoria, Queens. Later I learned that htipiti
is a more common name in Greece. Some people also call it
kopanisti, though that risks confusion with the soft ripened cheese
of the same name. By whatever handle, it belongs to a large
family of whipped feta preparations eaten everywhere throughout
the Diverse Sources Belt. You can’t miss the similarity to its
Carpathian descendant, Liptauer cheese. The irreducible elements
of the many Greek versions are feta cheese, olive oil, and some
kind of hot or sweet peppers, usually but not always charred over
a flame or fried in hot oil. You can use anything from fire-roasted
sweet red peppers to small dried hot ones, or even pickled cherry
peppers. Once you’ve tried it, vary the proportions to suit your
mood. Some people add lemon juice, yogurt, and/or a favorite
green herb. I like garlic, but it’s not essential.
The intrinsic creaminess of sheep’s-milk feta gives the most
irresistible texture. Whatever kind you use, taste it before soaking
so that you can gauge the desalting process. The briny sting
should be softened, not completely washed out.
YIELD: About 2 cups
1 pound feta cheese, preferably made from sheep’s milk
2 long green hot chile peppers (or any preferred kind; see above)
1 to 2 garlic cloves
¼ to ½ cup (or to taste) sharp, peppery olive oil
Coarsely crumble the cheese or cut it into roughly 1-inch chunks; put it
in a bowl and cover it well with cool water. Let stand for half an hour to
1 hour; every 15 minutes or so change the water and taste a crumb of
cheese for saltiness. (Remember that the oil will temper the salt
somewhat.)
While the cheese soaks, roast the chiles over a gas flame until

blackened all over. (Alternatively, blacken them, turning a few times,
under a broiler, or char them on a dry griddle or in a heavy skillet set
over high heat.) Scrape off the charred skin. (Some people recommend
first letting them sit briefly in a closed paper bag to soften the skins, but
I’ve never found much difference.) Scrape out and discard the core and
seeds. Chop the flesh very fine or mash with a mortar and pestle. Mash
the garlic to a pulp with the flat of a knife blade.
When the cheese is desalted to your taste, drain it in a colander until it
stops dripping. Turn out the cheese into a mixing bowl and begin
vigorously beating it with a stout wooden spoon. (Or process it in a food
processor.) Beat in the oil a little at a time, tasting at intervals, and stop
when the balance of oil and cheese is to your liking. With a sheep’s-milk
feta the texture will gradually turn light and creamy, becoming almost
like a heavy whipped cream when you have added the full amount of
oil. The effect won’t be as airy and satiny with goats’-milk or cows’-milk
cheese.
Stir in the minced green pepper and crushed garlic. Serve as a spread
with good crusty bread or a dip with crudités.
A small dab is a lovely addition to a simple oil-and-vinegar salad
dressing.
VARIATION(S): People who don’t like feta will be glad to know that similar
spreads are frequently made (minus the soaking step) with blander fresh
goat and sheep cheeses. Greek manouri cheese is one good choice. Or
substitute any fresh, soft goat cheese, using just as much oil as you need
to make a spreadable paste.

L
SYRNIKI OR TVOROZHNIKI
(RUSSIAN POT-CHEESE FRITTERS)
ike pancakes or French toast, this useful breakfast/brunch
dish can be given any number of sweet or savory spins. Creativity
(e.g., rum instead of vanilla or crystallized ginger instead of
raisins) will not be misplaced here. Russians usually serve syrniki
with jam as well as sour cream and/or melted butter; all of these
strike me as too much of a good thing. To me they taste better
with fresh fruit or an uncooked fruit sauce (say, pureed
blueberries or raspberries). Maple-syrup lovers may like to try
that pairing. The only indispensable elements are very good pot
cheese or farmer cheese—Russian-style tvorog, if you can find it—
for the fritters and very good butter for the frying. I prefer
cultured butter with a slight lactic tang.
YIELD: 8 small patties (4 servings)
1 pound firm, dry, well-flavored pot cheese or farmer cheese,
preferably tvorog (do not use cottage cheese)
½ teaspoon salt
1 to 4 tablespoons sugar (I use 1)
½ to 1 teaspoon finely grated lemon zest (optional)
1 egg or 2 egg yolks
A dash of pure vanilla extract (optional)
¼ cup golden raisins, briefly plumped in hot water and well drained
(optional)
⅓ cup (approximately) flour, plus more for shaping the fritters
⅓ to ½ cup (6 to 8 tablespoons) unsalted butter, cut into chunks
If your pot cheese has the least suspicion of excess moisture, wrap it in
dampened, wrung-out cheesecloth and place it in a colander under a
weight (e.g., a heavy can on a small plate) to press out any whey. If it is
not very fine-textured, force it through a coarse-mesh sieve.
Beat the cheese as smooth as possible with a wooden spoon. Beat in
the salt, sugar, and optional lemon zest. Whisk the egg lightly and beat it

in along with the optional vanilla and raisins. A little at a time, sift the
flour over the cheese and beat it in until you have a dough that is almost
too stiff to work.
Turn out the dough onto a lightly floured work surface. With floured
hands, shape it into a log about 10 to 12 inches long. Wrap it in waxed
paper and refrigerate for at least half an hour (it’s easier to shape when
chilled).
Cut the cheese log into 8 slices. With floured hands, shape these into
small hamburgerlike patties.
Melt the butter in a heavy skillet just large enough to hold the syrniki
easily in one layer. When it is good and fragrant, adjust the heat to
medium and add the cheese patties, which should be half-swimming in
hot butter. Fry until nicely browned on both sides, turning several times.
Drain briefly on paper towels and serve at once.
Nutmeg is a popular and good seasoning for syrniki; pass a whole
nutmeg and a grater around at the table.
VARIATION: For a savory rather than sweet version, cut the sugar to 1½
teaspoons and omit the lemon zest, vanilla, and raisins. Add a handful of
minced scallions (or chives), dill, or parsley—or all three—to the
mixture before working in the flour.

T
SAVORY LOKSHEN KUGEL
(NOODLE PUDDING)
he word “kugel” (German for anything spherical, from a
cannonball to Planet Earth) covers a lot of ground in the baked-
pudding department for Ashkenazic Jews, and for many non-
Jewish food lovers who register such things the way they register
bagels or “Jewish” rye bread. Probably the earliest versions of
kugel were more or less round in shape and tied in a pudding
cloth for steaming or simmering. Different kinds made from
matzoh, potatoes, various other vegetables, or noodles have their
adherents today. But lokshen kugel, from the Polish word for
noodles, is by far the most popular. It usually contains fresh
cheese, sour cream, and eggs, and amounts to a sort of noodle-
and-cheese pudding.
Jewish noodle kugels almost surely originated as offshoots of
very similar German noodle dishes—which, however, often
include such distinctly nonkosher elements as bacon or ham. I
much prefer these to the sweet, raisin-studded casseroles that
have come to be the favorite American versions of lokshen kugel.
The following recipe is a sort of shotgun marriage between a
savory kugel and the well-known German Schinkennudeln (“ham
noodles”). Vegetarians and people keeping kosher kitchens please
note: It may be completely nontraditional, but coarsely chopped
walnut meats and/or chopped green olives make a flavorful
substitute for the ham.
YIELD: About 6 servings
4 tablespoons butter
2 medium onions, minced
2 garlic cloves, minced
2 eggs
1 cup sour cream
1 cup coarse bread crumbs, from any preferred sturdy-textured bread
8 ounces broad egg noodles

8 ounces (1 cup) dry farmer cheese, pot cheese, or Russian-style
tvorog (do not use creamed cottage cheese)
½ cup finely chopped smoked ham
Salt to taste
Freshly ground black pepper
Freshly grated nutmeg
Preheat the oven to 350°F.
Melt half the butter in a small skillet and sauté the onions and garlic
until translucent. Scrape the mixture into a bowl; beat in the eggs and
sour cream.
In the same skillet, lightly brown the bread crumbs in the remaining
butter.
Meanwhile, cook the noodles by package directions in well-salted
water, drain, and return them to the pot. Toss the hot noodles with the
cheese, trying to distribute it evenly. Add the onion–sour cream mixture
and ham; toss to combine. Season liberally with salt, pepper, and
nutmeg.
Turn the mixture out into a 1½-quart baking dish, scatter the buttered
crumbs over the top, and bake for 30 minutes or until nicely browned.
Serve at once.
VARIATION: “Kugel Meets Borek,” my contribution to the fusion wars, was
inspired by cheese-filled versions of the Turkish “water borek” (su
böreği). Sold in borek or baklava shops, it’s a baked dish of large lasagne-
like fresh pasta sheets layered with a filling. For this hybrid, which
undoubtedly would be disowned by Jews and Turks alike, omit the sour
cream, ham, and nutmeg, and replace the farmer cheese with ½ pound
feta cheese (preferably Bulgarian sheep’s-milk feta), crumbled and mixed
with 2 eggs, ⅓ cup milk, a large handful of chopped flat-leaf parsley,
and 6 to 8 large scallions, trimmed and chopped. Toss the cooked
noodles with the cheese-scallion mixture, top with bread crumbs, and
bake as above.

T
NON-NURSERY JUNKET
he name of this renneted milk dessert—which is essentially
an almost-cheese of half-set curd still swimming in its whey—was
around hundreds of years before the American branch of a large
Danish dairy-supply company trademarked it. As late as my
childhood it was a fairly common nursery “pudding” of wan
consistency and bland flavor, but that was a fairly recent
development. Nineteenth-century English versions commonly
included brandy or rum as well as a final dose of cream. Mrs.
Beeton’s “Devonshire Junket” of 1861 calls for “2
dessertspoonfuls of brandy, 1 dessertspoonful of sugar, and 1½
dessertspoonful of prepared rennet” per “pint of new milk”; when
the mixture is set she finishes it with “thick or clotted cream,”
nutmeg or cinnamon, and a little more sugar.
Like many very simple dishes harking back to an era of better
milk, this really has to be made with very fresh unhomogenized
milk (or a milk-cream mixture) in order to taste like anything.
YIELD: 4 servings
1 plain Junket brand rennet tablet
2 cups unhomogenized milk, as fresh as possible
1 to 2 tablespoons sugar
A pinch of salt
1 to 2 tablespoons brandy, rum, or Scotch
Heavy cream, preferably unhomogenized
Freshly grated nutmeg or cinnamon
Superfine sugar
Crush the rennet tablet in a tablespoon or so of cold water until
thoroughly dissolved. Gently warm the milk, sugar, and salt to 100° to
110°F in a small saucepan, stirring to dissolve the sugar. Add the liquor.
Quickly and lightly stir in the dissolved rennet; pour the mixture into
four 8-ounce Pyrex custard cups or other small dessert bowls. Let stand
with no jiggling or jouncing until lightly set (10 to 15 minutes), then

carefully transfer to the refrigerator to chill thoroughly.
To serve, very gently pour or spoon a dollop of heavy cream over each
portion without disturbing the surface. Add a sprinkling of nutmeg or
cinnamon and let everyone sweeten his or her own with sugar to taste.

T
PASKHA
(RUSSIAN EASTER DESSERT)
his is as good a place as any to apologize to anyone who has
been looking forward to an Ultimate Cheesecake Recipe. I just
don’t like the ultra-creamy texture of today’s cheesecakes. My
heart belongs to the lighter, drier filling of cheese pie as made in
the Pennsylvania of my youth. Alas, I’ve never managed to
duplicate it. But half a lifetime ago I transferred allegiance to the
very different charms of paskha.
“Paskha”—pronounced “PAHS-khah,” with an aspirated “kh”—
is the Russian word for Easter, and in Russian Orthodox
households the chief glories of the Easter table after colored
Easter eggs are a “butter lamb” (butter molded in the shape of a
lamb); a tall, round iced yeast loaf called kulich, rich with eggs
and butter; and this sumptuous cheese creation named for the
day.
No, it isn’t a cheesecake, though the ingredients resemble those
of a cheesecake based on a dry fresh cheese like pot cheese rather
than cream cheese. (The difference is that paskha isn’t baked and
has no crust.) Like the lamb and the kulich, it announces the
return of foods prohibited in Lent (butter, eggs, cheese, cream, in
proportions that vary widely from cook to cook). Traditionally it
is made in a pyramidal wooden mold that permits excess liquid to
drain from the cheese mixture. Russian émigrés in this country
long ago took to substituting a suitably sized flowerpot. In either
case it is decorated after unmolding with dried or candied fruit or
nuts forming the Cyrillic letters “XB” (for Khristos Voskrese,
“Christ Is Risen”).
Paskha is not complicated to make, but it takes elbow grease
and planning. First, you must round up several pounds of a fresh
cheese like Russian tvorog, and reduce it to a smooth texture by
putting it through a sieve. You must then beat the heavy cheese as
smooth as you can with butter, eggs, sugar, cream, and (usually)
vanilla before getting a bulky flowerpot-over-a-rack arrangement

into the refrigerator to drain until the paskha is firm enough to
unmold, which may take a day. Lastly, you should either make a
kulich yourself (there are nice recipes in Darra Goldstein’s A Taste
of Russia and Anya von Bremzen’s Please to the Table) or go out
and buy a super-excellent coffeecake, because for Russians paskha
and kulich go together like a horse and carriage.
Note that the recipe calls for uncooked egg yolks, which some
people will prefer to avoid. (There are versions of paskha where
the mixture is cooked or the yolks are hard-boiled, but I’ve never
experimented with them.) The presence of raw egg yolks is also
the reason for draining the mixture in the refrigerator, not at
room temperature.
Before beginning the recipe, be sure that you have room for the
cheese-filled flowerpot in the refrigerator.
YIELD: 12 or more servings (about 2 pounds)
2 pounds dry, compact farmer cheese or pot cheese, preferably
Russian tvorog (do not use cottage cheese)
½ pound unsalted butter
1 cup sugar
4 egg yolks, from very fresh and, if possible, free-range eggs
1 cup heavy cream
1 tablespoon pure vanilla extract
Currants, raisins, sliced almonds, or bits of different-colored candied
fruit for decoration
Have ready a clean terra-cotta or other ceramic flowerpot of about 2½-to
3-quart capacity, with a hole in the bottom for draining. Also assemble a
length of tight-woven cheesecloth, butter muslin, or other clean cotton
cloth large enough to line the pot with some overhang; a rack and a
deep plate to stand the pot on; and a means of weighting the cheese such
as a small plate with a couple of heavy cans or large beach pebbles
placed on it.
With a large wooden spoon or a pusher of the type French cooks call a
champignon, force the cheese a little at a time through a fine-mesh
strainer set over a deep bowl. Work it as smooth as possible with a large

spoon.
Using a wooden spoon, cream the butter in a large mixing bowl. Beat
the sugar into the egg yolks in a separate bowl, then work them
thoroughly into the butter. Gradually beat the cheese in until it is
smoothly incorporated. Work in the cream and vanilla extract.
Line the flowerpot with the cheesecloth, trying to eliminate wrinkles
as much as possible. (The ones that remain will be clearly visible when
you unmold the paskha.) Spoon in the cheese mixture, and smooth the
top (which later will be the base of the paskha) as level as possible. Fold
the edges of the cloth over the top.
Set the flowerpot on the rack over the larger plate, set the smaller
plate and weights on top of the paskha, and put the whole arrangement
in the refrigerator to drain for 18 to 24 hours, or until it has stopped
dripping.
Unwrap the edges of the cloth and unmold the paskha by carefully
inverting it onto a serving plate. Gently peel away the cheesecloth and
use the dried fruit and nuts to spell out the letters “XB” on the side.
Serve the paskha with kulich (see above). People can either eat it in
spoonfuls or spread it on slices of kulich with a knife.

F
USES OF WHEY
irst-time cheesemakers are often dismayed to see how much
whey (and how little cheese) they end up with at the end of their
labors. Their predicament is also that of the cheese industry as a
whole. In a few parts of the world, practical uses have been
devised for whey—e.g., the curious boiled-down brown substance
that Norwegians adore as mysost (“whey cheese”). Or people have
learned to recycle the whey in order to make what Italians call
ricotta. Farmers used to feed whey to pigs (who love it) in copious
amounts. It also has often been a useful aid to home breadmakers,
as the liquid in a yeast dough.
In modern times, resourceful American marketers have
succeeded in promoting spray-dried whey powder as a nutritional
supplement (my advice is “Save your money”). Schemes to put it
through alcoholic fermentation to produce “whey wine” have
been around for a long time, and today some visionaries claim to
glimpse a bright future for whey as a source of ethanol.
For home cooks who find themselves awash in whey after
making some simple fresh cheese or Indian panir, I suggest
looking back to the time—not much more than a century ago—
when it was considered a nutritious, cooling drink.
To me, the most delicious whey for drinking is the soured kind,
like that drained from yogurt (this page). “Sweet” (unsoured)
whey from various kinds of cheesemaking with little or no
culturing of the milk has much blander flavor. But it makes an
agreeable enough drink mixed with a good dash of lemon juice
and a little sugar and poured over ice cubes. (People with lactose-
digestion problems should know that unsoured whey is a
concentrated source of lactose.) Still, I prefer it converted into
sour whey by simple culturing: Inoculate the whey by stirring in
some plain yogurt or buttermilk with active cultures. (The

I
proportions can be flexible, but about ¼ to ⅓ cup of yogurt or
buttermilk to 2 quarts of whey is a good rule of thumb. Yogurt
works better if the whey is a little warmer than room temperature
when you start.) Let it sit at room temperature until it is well
soured; as with other forms of cultured milk, the timing will vary
a lot. It is delicious poured over ice with a pinch each of salt and
crushed dried mint, or a little sugar and lemon juice as for sweet
whey.
BULGUR PILAF WITH WHEY
f you don’t want to drink whey, another good use is as a
cooking stock in cereal-based dishes such as pilafs. If you are
going to make a renneted, not very sour cheese or the
chhenna/panir in the chapter on Fresh Milk and Cream, build
something like this into the menu plans. The whey makes a
pleasantly neutral cooking liquid, adding a little more body than
plain water without absolutely taking over as a strong meat stock
would. (Caution: Whey that is too acid may make the bulgur
remain overchewy even with long cooking.)
Middle Eastern cooks use bulgur in three grades of fineness.
Coarse bulgur is the best for pilafs. If you have to settle for the
medium grind of most supermarket bulgur, slightly reduce the
cooking and resting time.
YIELD: About 6 servings
1 ½ cups coarse bulgur
2 large shallots
1 garlic clove
2 to 3 tablespoons butter
2¼ cups sweet or nearly sweet whey (from making a renneted cheese
or panir, this page; do not substitute whey from drained yogurt or

a cheese made only by souring)
1¼ teaspoons salt
½ teaspoon Turkish paprika (optional)
A handful each of parsley and mint leaves
¼ cup pine nuts
Rinse the bulgur under cold running water, and let drain very
thoroughly. Meanwhile, mince the shallots with the garlic.
Melt the butter in a saucepan. When it is fragrant and sizzling, add the
shallot-garlic mixture and sauté over moderate heat just until
translucent. Add the drained bulgur, and stir to coat the grains well.
Cook, stirring, just until very lightly browned, about 3 to 4 minutes. Add
the whey, salt, and optional paprika, cover the pan, and cook over low
heat until the liquid is almost completely absorbed, about 15 to 20
minutes.
While the pilaf cooks, mince the parsley and mint together. In a small
heavy skillet, toast the pine nuts over medium-low heat, stirring, until
they are lightly browned; remove from the heat.
When the bulgur has absorbed nearly all the whey, put a kitchen
towel over the pan, to absorb any condensation, and cover with the lid.
Let the pilaf sit, either off the heat or over the lowest possible heat on a
heat deflector like a Flame Tamer, for about 7 to 8 minutes. Fluff up the
grains and serve at once, garnished with the minced herbs and toasted
pine nuts. A little creamy yogurt stirred in at table is a pleasant addition.
VARIATION: For Barley Pilaf with Whey, replace the bulgur with ¾ cup
pearl barley. Use 4 cups whey and 3 to 4 tablespoons butter. Increase the
cooking time to 45 to 60 minutes (35 to 40 minutes if you like it
extremely chewy). Check toward the end and add more whey or water if
the barley is absorbing liquid too fast. Omit the resting and fluffing
steps.

A NOTE ON SHOPPING SOURCES
I have never found it necessary to invest in specialized equipment for
making yogurt, butter, and fresh cheeses. The cultures I use to inoculate
milk or cream can easily be obtained from commercial plain yogurt or
cultured buttermilk. (The supermarket articles will work just fine as long
as they contain live cultures; you may get even better-tasting results
using artisanal versions from small local producers at farmers’ markets
or specialty shops.)
My rennet source for cheeses (plain unflavored Junket brand tablets)
is also available in some supermarkets and can sometimes be ordered
through pharmacies. If you strike out, it is not difficult to contact the
manufacturer online: www.junketdesserts.com/.
The really crucial pieces of equipment—as described in the yogurt,
butter, and fresh cheeses chapters—usually have to do with temperature
measurement and control, jiggle-proof incubators, and draining
arrangements. I’ve always been content to improvise with inexpensive
insulated containers, kitchen colanders, and sturdy tight-woven
cheesecloth or cotton handkerchiefs. Still, I’d be delighted if some users
of this book were sufficiently bitten by the home dairying bug to try
experimenting with specialized bacterial strains and slightly more
elaborate equipment. In that case, I recommend the New England
Cheesemaking Supply Company (P.O. Box 85, Ashfield, MA 01330), a
mail-order source and information center founded and maintained by
Ricki Carroll. Send inquiries to info@cheesemaking.com, or telephone
413–628–3808 to request a catalogue.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Among the many people who made this book possible, Judith Jones
deserves my greatest thanks for the skill, patience, and insight with
which she faced a most eccentric project. Judith’s indefatigable assistant,
Ken Schneider, salvaged the entire manuscript from an eleventh-hour
computer meltdown. (Up to then my nephew, Jorg F. Bauer, Jr., had
managed to nurse an aging iMac through innumerable tragicomedies.)
Many additional thanks to Iris Weinstein (who designed the interior of
the book), Barbara De Wilde (who created such a delightful jacket), and
to everyone else at Knopf.
Elisabeth Sifton encouraged me in an earlier version of this project
and introduced me to the late Walter D. Howard, who put me on the
path to understanding something about cows and dairying. Years later,
Colman Andrews and Margo True at Saveur brought me back to the
subject with a magazine assignment on milk.
Special thanks to my agent, the one and only Jane Dystel.
Thanks to many dairy and cheese professionals, including Art Hill,
Allison Hooper, Paul Kindstedt, Paula Lambert, Patrick Longo, John
Loomis, Max McCalman, the Murray’s Cheese crew (especially Taylor
Cocalis), Debra and Eran Wajswol, and Karen Weinberg.
Equal thanks to some probers of nutrition-and-health questions,
including Susan Allport (who read a portion of the manuscript in draft),
Nina Planck, David Schleifer, and Nina Teicholz.
For assistance in historical research I am greatly indebted to the staffs
of the American Museum of Natural History Library, the Bergen County
(New Jersey) Cooperative Library System, the New-York Historical
Society Library, and the New York Public Library (especially Tom
Lisanti, Stefan Saks, and the peerless Dave Smith). Jack Hawley, Andrew
F. Smith, Joanna Waley-Cohen, and Nach Waxman helped steer me to
needed materials.
More steering came from fellow culinary historians and other dairy-
history buffs including Gary Allen, Darra Goldstein, Annie Hauck-

Lawson, Lisa Heldke, Ben Katchor, Rachel Laudan, Jan Longone, Sandra
L. Oliver, Krishnendu Ray, Laura Shapiro, William Rubel, Robin Weir,
and many, many members of the Association for the Study of Food and
Society (ASFS) listserv.
My very great thanks to many cooks, culinary experts, and assorted
colleagues and friends, including Joan Bolker, Cara De Silva, Naomi
Duguid, Nicki Kalish, Leslie Land, Zarela Martínez, Lynda Owen, Maricel
E. Presilla, Nachammai Raman, and Susan J. Talbutt.

SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
Culinary works for a general audience can’t accommodate the sort of
reference apparatus that one expects in works of scholarship—a
drawback, perhaps, in a cookbook that strays as far into polemical
territory as this one. Readers interested in finding out more about milk
and its history will find paths to further learning in the works listed
below. I will be happy to direct people frustrated by the absence of
documentation for particular factual claims to specific sources; please
write to me at knopfwebmaster@randomhouse.com.
HISTORICAL, SCIENTIFIC, AND OTHER SPECIALIZED WORKS
Allport, Susan. The Queen of Fats: Why Omega-3s Were Removed from the
Western Diet and What We Can Do to Replace Them. Berkeley:
University of California Press, 2006.
Atherton, Henry V., and J. A. Newlander. Chemistry and Testing of Dairy
Products, 4th edition. Westport, Conn.: AVI Publishing, 1977.
Aubaile-Sallenave, Françoise. “Al-Kishk: The Past and Present of a
Complex Culinary Practice,” in A Taste of Thyme: Culinary Cultures of
the Middle East, ed. by Sami Zubaida and Richard Tapper, 2nd edition.
London: I. B. Tauris, 2000.
Banerji, Chitrita. Eating India: An Odyssey into the Food and Culture of the
Land of Spices. New York: Bloomsbury USA, 2007.
———. Land of Milk and Honey: Travels in the History of Indian Food.
London: Seagull Books, 2007.
Behr, Edward. “Elegy for the Taste of Cream: Low Technology and Old
Pastures,” in The Art of Eating, 1990, no. 15, pp. 1–8.
Du Puis, E. Melanie. Nature’s Perfect Food: How Milk Became America’s
Drink. New York: New York University Press, 2002.
Hoffpauir, Robert. “Water Buffalo,” in The Cambridge World History of

Food, eds. Kenneth F. Kiple and Kriemhild Coneè Ornelas. Cambridge,
U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 2000; see vol. I, pp. 583–607.
International Dairy Foods Association. Dairy Facts, 2005 Edition.
Washington, D.C.: International Dairy Foods Association, 2005.
Jensen, Robert G., ed. Handbook of Milk Composition. San Diego:
Academic Press, 1995.
Kindstedt, Paul, with the Vermont Cheese Council. American Farmstead
Cheese: The Complete Guide to Making and Selling Artisan Cheeses. White
River Junction, Vt.: Chelsea Green, 2005.
Kosikowski, Frank V., and Vikram V. Mistry. Cheese and Fermented Milk
Foods, 3rd edition. 2 vols. Westport, Conn.: F. V. Kosikowski, 1997.
Kramer, Mark. Three Farms: Making Milk, Meat, and Money from the
American Soil. Boston: Little, Brown, 1980.
Lampard, Eric E. The Rise of the Dairy Industry in Wisconsin: A Study in
Agricultural Change. Madison: State Historical Society of Wisconsin,
1963.
Lampert, Lincoln M. Modern Dairy Products: Composition, Food Value,
Processing, Chemistry, Bacteriology, Testing, Imitation Dairy Products, 3rd
edition. New York: Chemical Publishing, 1975.
Lysaght, Patricia, ed. Milk and Milk Products from Medieval to Modern
Times. Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on
Ethnological Food Research. Edinburgh: Canongate Academic, 1994.
McGee, Harold. On Food and Cooking: The Science and Lore of the Kitchen,
2nd edition. New York: Scribner, 2004.
Mahias, Marie-Claude. “Milk and Its Transformations in Indian Society.”
Food and Foodways, 1988, vol. 2, pp. 265–88.
Nantet, Bernard, et al. Cheeses of the World. New York: Rizzoli, 1993.
Park, Young W., and George F. W. Haenlein, eds. Handbook of Milk of
Non-Bovine Mammals. Ames, Iowa: Blackwell, 2006.
Porter, Valerie. Cattle: A Handbook to the Breeds of the World. London:
A&C Black/Christopher Helm, 1991.
———. Goats of the World. Ipswich, U.K.: Farming Press, 1996.
Sabban, Françoise. “Un savoir-faire oublié: le travail du lait en Chine

ancienne.” Zinbun: Memoirs of the Research Institute for Humanistic
Studies, Kyoto University, 1986, vol. 21, pp. 31–65.
Selitzer, Ralph. The Dairy Industry in America. New York: Dairy & Ice
Cream Field and Books for Industry, 1976.
Simoons, Frederick J. Food in China: A Cultural and Historical Inquiry.
Boca Raton, Fla.: CRC Press, 1991.
Smith, Bruce D. The Emergence of Agriculture. New York: Scientific
American Library, 1995.
Trout, G. Malcolm. Homogenized Milk: A Review and Guide. East Lansing:
Michigan State College Press, 1950.
Tyler, Howard D., and M. E. Ensminger. Dairy Cattle Science, 4th edition.
Upper Saddle River, N.J.: Pearson/Prentice Hall, 2006.
Walker, Harlan, ed. Milk: Beyond the Dairy. Proceedings of the Oxford
Symposium on Food and Cookery 1999. Totnes, U.K.: Prospect Books,
2000.
Wilson, C. Anne. Food and Drink in Britain: From the Stone Age to Recent
Times. New York: Harper & Row/Barnes & Noble, 1974.
Wong, Noble P., ed. Fundamentals of Dairy Chemistry, 3rd edition. New
York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1988.
Wright, Russell O. Life and Death in the United States: Statistics on Life
Expectancies, Diseases and Death Rates for the Twentieth Century.
Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland, 1997.
COOKBOOKS
Acton, Eliza. Modern Cookery for Private Families. Non-facsimile reissue of
1855 edition. Lewes, U.K.: Southover Press, 1993.
Batra, Neelam. 1,000 Indian Recipes. New York: Wiley, 2002.
Carroll, Ricki. Home Cheesemaking: Recipes for 75 Homemade Cheeses, 3rd
edition. North Adams, Mass.: Storey Books, 2002.
David, Elizabeth. French Provincial Cooking. Harmondsworth, U.K.:
Penguin Books, 1969.
Diat, Louis. Cooking à la Ritz. Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1941.

Field, Michael. Michael Field’s Cooking School: A Selection of Great Recipes
Demonstrating the Pleasures and Principles of Fine Cooking. New York:
William Morrow, 1965.
Fried, Barbara R. The Berry Cookbook. New York: Collier Books, 1962.
Goldstein, Darra. A Taste of Russia: A Cookbook of Russian Hospitality.
New York: Harper Perennial, 1991.
Hazelton, Nika Standen. The Continental Flavor: A Cookbook. Garden City,
N.Y.: Doubleday, 1961.
Hom, Ken. Fragrant Harbor Taste: The New Chinese Cooking of Hong Kong.
New York: Simon & Schuster, 1989.
Jaffrey, Madhur. An Invitation to Indian Cooking. New York: Random
House/Vintage Books, 1975.
———. Madhur Jaffrey’s World-of-the-East Vegetarian Cooking. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf, 1981.
———. Madhur Jaffrey’s World Vegetarian. New York: Clarkson Potter,
1999.
Jones, Evan. The World of Cheese. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1976.
Jones, Judith, and Evan Jones. The Book of New New England Cookery.
Hanover, N. H.: University Press of New England, 2001.
Kachru, Purnima. Kashmiri Kitchen. New Delhi: Roli Books/Lustre Press,
2000.
Kaneva-Johnson, Maria. The Melting Pot: Balkan Food and Cookery.
Totnes, U.K.: Prospect Books, 1995.
Kaufman, Edna. Melting Pot of Mennonite Cookery, 1874–1974, 3rd
edition. North Newton, Kans.: Bethel College Women’s Association,
1975.
Kochilas, Diane. The Glorious Foods of Greece: Traditional Recipes from the
Islands, Cities, and Villages. New York: William Morrow, 2001.
Kremezi, Aglaia. The Foods of Greece. New York: Stewart, Tabori &
Chang, 1993.
Lambert, Paula. The Cheese Lover’s Companion & Guide. New York: Simon
& Schuster, 2000.
Lang, George. The Cuisine of Hungary. New York: Atheneum, 1971.

Maier-Bruck, Franz. Das Grosse Sacher Kochbuch: Die österreichische
Küche. Munich: Schuler Verlagsgesellschaft, 1975.
———. Vom Essen auf dem Lande: Das grosse Buch der österreichischen
Bauernküche und Hausmannskost. Vienna: Kremayr und Scheriau, 1981.
Ozan, Özcan. The Sultan’s Kitchen: A Turkish Cookbook. Boston: Periplus
Editions, 1998.
Roden, Claudia. A Book of Middle Eastern Food. New York: Random
House/Vintage Books, 1974.
Rose, Peter G., trans. and ed. The Sensible Cook (De Verstandige Kock):
Dutch Foodways in the Old and the New World. Syracuse, N.Y.: Syracuse
University Press, 1989.
Saberi, Helen. Afghan Food and Cookery (Noshe Djan). New York:
Hippocrene Books, 2000.
Saint-Ange, E. La Cuisine de Madame Saint-Ange: recettes et méthodes de la
bonne cuisine française. Paris: Librairie Larousse, 1982.
Scharfenberg, Horst. Die deutsche Küche. Bern, Switzerland: Hallwag AG
Bern, 1980.
Shaida, Margaret. The Legendary Cuisine of Persia. New York: Interlink
Books, 2002.
Sheraton, Mimi. From My Mother’s Kitchen: Recipes and Reminiscences,
rev. edition. New York: HarperCollins, 1991.
Shroff, Veema, and Vanmala Desai. 100 Easy-to-Make Gujarati Dishes, 7th
edition. New Delhi: Vikas Publishing/Tarang Paperbacks, 1990.
Strybel, Robert, and Maria Strybel. Polish Heritage Cookery. New York:
Hippocrene Books, 1993.
Uvezian, Sonia. The Book of Yogurt: An International Collection of Recipes.
Hopewell, N.J.: Ecco Press, 1999.
———. Recipes and Remembrances: From an Eastern Mediterranean
Kitchen, 2nd edition. Northbrook, Ill.: Siamanto Press, 2001.
von Bremzen, Anya, and John Welchman. Please to the Table: The Russian
Cookbook. New York: Workman Publishing, 1990.
Wolfert, Paula. The Cooking of the Eastern Mediterranean. New York:
HarperCollins, 1994.

———. Mediterranean Grains and Greens. New York: HarperCollins, 1998.
INTERNET SOURCES
A great deal of information is now available online along with even
greater amounts of misinformation, politicking, and rumormongering.
Some sites that may be of interest to readers of this book:
tp://www.aphis.usda.gov/vs/ceah/ncahs/nahms/dairy/ Web site of the
USDA animal health monitoring and surveillance division.
tp://classes.ansci.uiuc.edu/ansc438/ Online review and syllabus of
Professor Walter L. Hurley’s class in lactation biology, Department of
Animal Sciences, University of Illinois at Urbana.
tp://www.foodsci.uoguelph.ca/dairyedu/home.html Wide-ranging
source on dairy science and technology, maintained by the dairy science
department of the University of Guelph, Ontario.
tp://webexhibits.org/butter/ Extremely diverse and entertaining (if not
always factually reliable) site dedicated to butter and its
historical/culinary/cultural fortunes.

INDEX
(Page references in italic refer to illustrations. Page references in
boldface refer to recipes.)
abomasum, 2.1, 9.1
acid coagulation, 4.1, 5.1
acidophilus milk
acidosis, ruminal
Acton, Eliza
Africa, 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 6.1, 6.2, 8.1
agglutinins, 5.1, 5.2, 5.3
Agriculture Department, U.S. (USDA), 2.1, 2.2, 8.1
ahimsa
Ají de Leche (Venezuelan Milk-Chile Infusion), 5.1
alcoholic fermentation, 7.1, 7.2, 7.3, 9.1
Alderney cows, 2.1, 2.2, 2.3
Alphabet for Gourmets, An (Fisher)
American Heart Association, 2.1, 2.2
American Woman’s Home, The (Beecher and Stowe)
antibiotics
appetizers and first courses:
Blueberry Soup, Cold, 7.1
Herring with Sour Cream Sauce, 7.1
see also dips and spreads
Apple-Onion Cream Soup, 5.1
aseptic packaging
asses, 1.1, 1.2
aurochsen, 1.1, 1.2, 1.3
Austria, Austrian cuisine
Buttermilk-Caraway Soup, 7.1
Chicken Paprikás, 7.1
Liptauer cheese, 9.1

Ayran (Turkish-Style Yogurt Drink), 6.1
Ayrshire cows
Babcock test
bacteria, 2.1, 8.1
dairying practices and
health claims for yogurt and, 6.1, 6.2
pasteurization and, 2.1, 3.1, 3.2, 3.3, 6.1
bacteria, lactic-acid, prf.1, 1.1, 1.2, 2.1, 2.2, 4.1
cultured milk or cream and
cultured or ripened butter and
fresh cheeses and, 9.1, 9.2, 9.3
mesophilic, 1.1, 6.1, 7.1, 9.1
thermophilic, 1.1, 6.1, 7.1, 9.1
yogurt and, 1.1, 1.2, 6.1, 6.2
see also starter bacteria
bacteria, psychrophilic
Balkans, Balkan cuisines, 1.1, 6.1, 9.1
Milk Toast with Feta, 5.1
Tarator (Cold Yogurt Soup with Cucumbers and Walnuts), 6.1
banana(s):
Fried, with Crema, 7.1
Raita, 6.1
Barley Pilaf with Whey, 9.1
Batidos (Latin American Milkshakes), 5.1, 5.2
Batra, Neelam
béarnaise sauce
béchamel grasse
Béchamel Maigre, 5.1
Beecher, Catharine
Beef Stroganoff, 7.1
Beeton, Isabella, 5.1, 9.1
Beet Soup, Cold, Polish (Chłodnik Litewski), 7.1
Belgian Stampers or taatjespap, 7.1
Berry Cookbook, The (Fried)
Beurre Blanc/Beurre Rouge, 8.1
Beurre Manié, 8.1

beurre meunière
Beurre Noir/Beurre Noisette (“Black Butter”/“Brown Butter”), 8.1
beverages:
Ayran or Doogh (Turkish-or Persian-Style Yogurt Drink), 6.1
Batidos (Latin American Milkshakes), 5.1, 5.2
buttermilk as
Chocolate Malted, 5.1
condensed and evaporated milk in
Hoppelpoppel: Eggnog with a Difference, 5.1
Hot Chocolate, 5.1
Iced Coffee, Thai-Style, 5.1
Milk Punch, 5.1
yogurt-based, about
see also lassi
blancmange
Blueberry Soup, Cold, 7.1
Bonne Cuisine de Madame Saint-Ange, La, 5.1, 5.2
Booke of Cookerie, A (Murrell)
Book of New New England Cookery, The (J. and E. Jones), 7.1
Borden, Gail
“Borek Meets Kugel”, 9.1
Boston Cooking–School Cookbook, The (Farmer), 5.1, 8.1
Bovine and Buffalo Belt, 1.1, 1.2, 6.1
bovines
bovine somatotropin (BST), bovine growth hormone (BGH), 2.1, 3.1
breeding dairy cows, 2.1, 2.2, 3.1, 3.2
breeding schedules, 1.1, 1.2, 4.1
Bremzen, Anya von
brined (pickled) cheeses, prf.1, 1.1, 1.2, 9.1, 9.2, 9.3, 9.4
brine-pickled vegetables and fruits
British cuisine, see Great Britain, English cuisine
Brown, Helen Evans
Brown Swiss cows
Bryan, Lettice
buffaloes, see water buffaloes and water buffaloes’ milk
Bulgaria, Bulgarian cuisine, 1.1, 9.1
health claims for yogurt in

Tarator (Cold Yogurt Soup with Cucumbers and Walnuts), 6.1
“Bulgarian buttermilk”
Bulgur Pilaf with Whey, 9.1
butter, prf.1, 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 4.1, 5.1, 8.1, 8.2
Beurre Blanc/Beurre Rouge, 8.1
Beurre Manié, 8.1
Beurre Noir/Beurre Noisette (“Black Butter”/“Brown Butter”), 8.1
buying and handling
clarified, see clarified butter
color of
cultured
Flavored or Compound, 8.1
flavor nuances in
Home-Churned: Ripened-Cream Type, 8.1
Home-Churned: Sweet-Cream Type, 8.1
milkfat in, 8.1, 8.2
in pastry-making, 8.1, 8.2
perishability of
salted vs. unsalted
smells and tastes of other foods absorbed by, 8.1, 8.2
transition between solid and melted state of, 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 8.4, 8.5
whipped
yogurt as starting point of
butter-and-egg custards
“Buttered Eggs” (Skillet-Custard Eggs), 8.1
Hollandaise Sauce, 8.1, 8.2
Lemon Curd, 8.1
Lime Curd, 8.1
buttermilk (cultured), 4.1, 4.2, 7.1, 7.2
“Bulgarian”
as culinary resource
as drink, 7.1, 7.2
history of
Homemade, 7.1
Indian vs. American, 6.1, 7.1
buttermilk (true), 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 4.1, 7.1, 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 8.4, 8.5
Fresh, 8.1

Buttermilk Dessert, Dutch (Hangop), 7.1
Buttermilk Pie, Southern, 7.1
Buttermilk Potatoes, 7.1
Buttermilk Salad Dressing, 7.1
Buttermilk “Salad,” Mennonite, 7.1
buttermilk soups
Blueberry, Cold, 7.1
Caraway, 7.1
Cherry, Cold, 7.1
Cold Savory (Michael Field’s “Chłodnık”), 7.1
North Indian Thick (Kadhi or Karhi), 7.1
South Indian (Moru Kozhambu), 7.1
Butter Tarts, Canadian, 8.1
Cacık, 6.1
Cajeta Mexicana (Mexican Dulce de Leche), 5.1
Cake, Yogurt-Semolina, with Lemon Syrup (Revani), 6.1
calcium, 2.1, 4.1
camels and camels’ milk, 1.1, 1.2, 7.1, 9.1
Canadian Butter Tarts, 8.1
canned milk, 5.1, 5.2, 5.3, 5.4
Dulce de Leche with, 5.1
caprines
see also goats and goats’ milk; sheep and sheep’s milk
Carasso, Isaac
cardboard milk containers
Carême, Marie-Antoine
casein, 2.1, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 6.1, 6.2, 7.1, 9.1, 9.2, 9.3, 9.4, 9.5, 9.6
centrifuging, 2.1, 2.2, 3.1, 3.2, 4.1, 5.1, 5.2, 5.3
certification campaigns
Cervelle de Canut, 9.1
Champ, Irish (Mashed Potatoes with Milk and Greens), 5.1
cheeses, 2.1, 3.1
aged or ripened, prf.1, 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 2.1
cheeses (fresh), prf.1, 1.1, 9.1
brined (pickled), prf.1, 1.1, 1.2, 9.1, 9.2, 9.3, 9.4
curd formation and, 1.1, 9.1

getting organized for making
Goats’-Milk, 9.1
names for
origins and history of, 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, 1.6, 1.7, 9.1, 9.2
White: Kindergarten Version, 9.1
White, with Cultures, 9.1
White, with Cultures and Rennet, 9.1
see also cream cheese; feta; specific recipes listed on this page
Cherry Soup, Cold, 7.1
chèvre, 9.1, 9.2
chhenna, 1.1, 4.1, 5.1, 9.1, 9.2, 9.3
Homemade, 5.1
Saag Panir or Palak Panir, 5.1
Vegetarian Malai Kofta, 5.1
chicken:
Paprikás, or Paprikahuhn, 7.1
Salad à la Tandoor, 6.1
Chile-Milk Infusion, Venezuelan (Ají de Leche), 5.1
China, Chinese cuisine, 5.1, 6.1, 6.2, 7.1
“Fried Milk”, 5.1
“Chłodnik,” Michael Field’s (Cold Savory Buttermilk Soup), 7.1
Chłodnik Litewski (Polish Cold Beet Soup), 7.1
chocolate:
Hot, 5.1
Malted, 5.1
Pudding, 5.1
cholesterol
chowders:
Clam, New Englandish, 5.1
Corn, Spiced, 5.1
Chutney, Walnut-Yogurt, 6.1
Çilbir (Turkish Poached Eggs in Yogurt Sauce), 6.1
clabber or clabbered milk, 2.1, 9.1
Claiborne, Craig
Clam Chowder, New Englandish, 5.1
clarified butter, 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 8.4
Ethiopian Spiced (Nit’r Kibeh), 8.1, 8.2

European-Style, 8.1
Indian (Ghee), 1.1, 1.2, 8.1, 8.2
clotted cream, 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 5.1
Homemade, 5.1
coeur à la crème
Coffee, Iced, Thai-Style, 5.1
colostrum
concentrate (feed)
condensed milk, 5.1, 5.2
Dulce de Leche with, 5.1
condiments:
Banana Raita, 6.1
Butters, Flavored or Compound, 8.1
Cacık and Relatives, 6.1
Clotted Cream, 5.1
Cucumber Pachadi, 6.1
Cucumber Raita, 6.1
Walnut-Yogurt Chutney, 6.1
see also dips and spreads; sauces
Continental Flavor, The (Hazelton)
Cooking à la Ritz (Diat)
Cooper, James Fenimore
corn:
Chowder, Spiced, 5.1
“Kees” (Gujarati Stovetop Corn Pudding), 5.1
cottage cheese, 9.1, 9.2, 9.3
cows and cows’ milk, prf.1, 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, 1.6, 1.7, 4.1, 5.1, 8.1,
9.1
antibiotic treatment of
breeding of, 2.1, 2.2, 3.1, 3.2
domestication of
feeding of, 2.1, 2.2, 3.1, 3.2
in Indian subcontinent, 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5
lactation in, 1.1, 4.1
in Northeastern Cow Belt, 1.1, 1.2
in Northwestern Cow Belt, 1.1, 1.2, 1.3
zebu-type, 1.1, 1.2, 1.3

see also milk (fresh unsoured)
crabmeat, in Chinese “Fried Milk”, 5.1
cream (fresh), prf.1, 1.1, 1.2, 2.1, 5.1, 5.2, 5.3
beating into butter
buying, 5.1, 5.2
Clotted, 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 5.1, 5.2
historical ups and downs of
label designations for
separating from milk, 4.1, 4.2
ultrapasteurized, 5.1, 5.2, 5.3
see also cream soups; whipped cream; specific recipes listed on this page
cream, cultured, 1.1, 1.2, 1.3
see also sour cream
cream cheese, 1.1, 9.1, 9.2, 9.3, 9.4
Creamy, 9.1
Light, 9.1
as Liptauer base, 9.1
Scallion Dip, 9.1
Creamed Spinach, Madame Saint-Ange (Épinards à la Crème), 5.1
creamlines, cream layers, 2.1, 2.2, 4.1, 5.1
cream soups
Apple-Onion, 5.1
Clam Chowder, New Englandish, 5.1
Corn Chowder, Spiced, 5.1
Tomato, 5.1
Vichyssoise, 5.1
crema, 7.1, 7.2
Fried Bananas with, 7.1
Crème Anglaise (Stirred Custard), 5.1
crème fraîche, 7.1, 7.2
as cold sauce and dip
Homemade Sour Cream, 7.1
Cremets d’Angers, 5.1
cucumber(s):
Cacık and Relatives, 6.1
Cold Yogurt Soup with Walnuts and (Tarator), 6.1
Pachadi, 6.1

Radish Sour Cream Sauce, 7.1
Raita, 6.1
Cuisine of Hungary, The (Lang)
cultured butter
cultured milk and cream
as culinary resource
exotic kinds of
history of, 7.1, 7.2
survey of
see also buttermilk (cultured); sour cream; sour milk; yogurt; specific
recipes listed on this page
curd cheese
“Curd Rice”, 6.1
curds, formation of, 1.1, 4.1, 5.1, 9.1
Curnonsky
custard:
-Based Vanilla Ice Cream, 5.1
Southern Buttermilk Pie, 7.1
Stirred (Crème Anglaise), 5.1
see also butter-and-egg custards
dairy chemistry, home experiments in
Dairy Industry in America, The (Selitzer)
Dannon
Davaasambuu, Ganmaa
David, Elizabeth, 5.1, 5.2, 8.1
Desai, Vanmala
desserts:
Bananas, Fried, with Crema, 7.1
Blueberry Soup, Cold, 7.1
Buttermilk Pie, Southern, 7.1
Butter Tarts, Canadian, 8.1
Cajeta Mexicana (Mexican Dulce de Leche), 5.1
Chocolate Pudding, 5.1
Crème Anglaise (Stirred Custard), 5.1
Cremets d’Angers, 5.1
Dulce de Leche with Canned Condensed Milk, 5.1

Hangop (Dutch Buttermilk Dessert), 7.1
Junket, Non-Nursery, 9.1
Lemon Curd, 8.1
Lemon Sponge Pudding, 5.1
Lemon Tart, 8.1
Lime Curd, 8.1
Panna Cotta and Relatives, 5.1
Paskha (Russian Easter Dessert), 9.1
Revani (Yogurt-Semolina Cake with Lemon Syrup), 6.1
Rice Pudding, 5.1
Shrikhand (Saffron-Scented Yogurt Dessert), 6.1
sour cream or crème fraîche as sauce for
Vanilla Ice Cream, Custard-Based, 5.1
Vanilla Ice Cream, Philadelphia-Style, 5.1
deutsche Küche, Die (Scharfenberg)
De Voe, Thomas F.
Diamond, Jared
Diat, Louis, 5.1, 5.2
dips and spreads:
Cacık and Relatives, 6.1
Cervelle de Canut, 9.1
Cream Cheese–Scallion Dip, 9.1
Liptauer Cheese, 9.1
Smoked Whitefish Salad, 7.1
Tyrokafteri or Htipiti (Whipped Feta-Cheese Spread), 9.1
Walnut-Yogurt Chutney, 6.1
Yogurt “Cheese” and “Cheese” Balls, 6.1
Diverse Sources Belt, 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 6.1, 6.2, 9.1, 9.2, 9.3, 9.4, 9.5
distinctive flavors, preference for
earliest milk-eating experiments in, 1.1, 1.2
milch animals in
origins of herding and milking in
Dodd, George
domestication of animals
Doogh (Persian-Style Yogurt Drink), 6.1
dressings
Buttermilk Salad, 7.1

Spicy-Milky Peanut Sauce, 5.1
dried milk
dulce de leche
with Canned Condensed Milk, 5.1
Mexican (Cajeta Mexicana), 5.1
Durham or milking Shorthorn cows
Dutch cuisine, See Netherlands, Dutch cuisine
Easter Dessert, Russian (Paskha), 9.1
Eggnog with a Difference (Hoppelpoppel), 5.1
eggs:
“Buttered” (Skillet-Custard Eggs), 8.1
Poached, in Yogurt Sauce, Turkish (Çilbir), 6.1
scrambled
see also butter-and-egg custards
Eliot, George
England, see Great Britain, English cuisine
enzymes, cheeses and, 1.1, 9.1, 9.2
Épinards à la Crème (Creamed Spinach, Madame Saint-Ange), 5.1
Escherichia coli
Ethiopia, Ethiopian cuisine
Nit’r Kibeh (Spiced Clarified Butter), 8.1, 8.2
evaporated milk, 5.1, 5.2
Everyone Eats Well in Belgium Cookbook (Van Waerebeek), 7.1
Farmer, Fannie, 5.1, 8.1
farmer cheese, 9.1, 9.2
as Liptauer base, 9.1
fat, see milkfat
fat-free milk, see skim milk
fatty acids, 8.1, 8.2
saturated, health concerns and
feeding dairy cows, 2.1, 2.2, 3.1, 3.2
fermentation, prf.1, 1.1, 2.1, 6.1, 7.1
alcoholic, 7.1, 7.2, 7.3, 9.1
fresh cheeses and, 1.1, 9.1
lactic-acid, 6.1, 9.1; see also bacteria, lactic-acid

yogurt and, 6.1, 6.2, 9.1
feta, prf.1, 1.1, 1.2, 9.1, 9.2, 9.3
as Liptauer base, 9.1
Milk Toast with, 5.1
Spread, Whipped (Tyrokafteri or Htipiti), 9.1
“filled” milk
Fisher, M. F. K., 5.1, 8.1
flour:
and butter in pastry
and butter in sauces, 8.1, 8.2
“Fontainebleau”
Food and Drug Administration, U.S. (FDA), 2.1, 5.1
Food of London, The (Dodd)
Foods of Greece, The (Kremezi)
Fragrant Harbor Taste (Hom)
fraisage
France, French cuisine, 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 5.1, 5.2, 6.1, 7.1, 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 9.1,
9.2, 9.3
Cervelle de Canut, 9.1
Cremets d’Angers, 5.1
Pâte Brisée, 8.1, 8.2
Sauce Béchamel Maigre, 5.1
French Provincial Cooking (David), 5.1, 8.1
Fried, Barbara R.
Fried Bananas with Crema, 7.1
“Fried Milk,” Chinese, 5.1
Fritters, Pot-Cheese, Russian (Syrniki or Tvorozhniki), 9.1
fromage blanc, fromage frais
“Fromage de Fontainebleau”
From My Mother’s Kitchen (Sheraton), 7.1
galactose, 2.1, 2.2
Garlic-Yogurt Sauce, 6.1
gelatin, in Panna Cotta and Relatives, 5.1
Germany, German cuisine, 1.1, 1.2, 7.1, 9.1, 9.2
Hoppelpoppel: Eggnog with a Difference, 5.1
Ghee (Indian Clarified Butter), 1.1, 1.2, 8.1, 8.2

Glorious Foods of Greece, The (Kochilas)
glucose, 2.1, 2.2
goat cheese
as base for Whipped Cheese Spread, 9.1
Fresh, with Cultures and Rennet, 9.1
goats and goats’ milk, prf.1, 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, 1.6, 1.7, 1.8, 1.9,
1.10, 1.11, 1.12, 2.1, 4.1, 8.1, 9.1
lactation in, 4.1, 4.2
yogurt made from, 1.1, 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, 6.4, 6.5
Goldstein, Darra
Gourmet
grasses, ruminant, digeston of
Gravy, Pan, with Cream, 5.1
Great Britain, English cuisine, prf.1, 1.1, 1.2, 2.1, 2.2, 5.1, 9.1
breeding of cows in
Clotted Cream, 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 5.1, 5.2
rise of market for fresh milk in
Greece, Greek cuisine, 1.1, 1.2, 6.1, 6.2, 8.1, 9.1
Tyrokafteri or Htipiti (Whipped Feta-Cheese Spread), 9.1
yogurt in
see also feta; tarhana or trahana
greens:
Mashed Potatoes with Milk and (Irish Champ), 5.1
Saag Panir or Palak Panir, 5.1
grosse Sacher-Kochbuch, Das (Maier-Bruck)
Guernsey cows, 2.1, 2.2, 5.1, 5.2, 8.1
Gujarati cuisine:
Shrikhand (Saffron-Scented Yogurt Dessert), 6.1
Stovetop Corn Pudding (“Corn Kees”), 5.1
Guns, Germs, and Steel (Diamond), 1.1
half-and-half, 5.1, 5.2
Hangop (Dutch Buttermilk Dessert), 7.1
Hazan, Marcella
Hazelton, Nika Standen
health issues, 2.1, 2.2
and claims on behalf of yogurt, 6.1, 6.2

heart disease, 2.1, 2.2
heavy cream, 5.1, 5.2
Herring with Sour Cream Sauce, 7.1
Hibben, Sheila
high-temperature/short-time pasteurization (HTST), 2.1, 3.1
Hindu creation myth, 1.1, 1.2
Hollandaise Sauce, 8.1, 8.2
Holstein-Friesian cows, 2.1, 3.1, 4.1, 8.1
Hom, Ken
homogenization, 1.1, 2.1, 2.2, 3.1, 3.2, 4.1, 5.1, 7.1
Hoppelpoppel: Eggnog with a Difference, 5.1
hormones
horses, mares’ milk, 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 7.1, 7.2
Hot Chocolate, 5.1
How to Cook a Wolf (Fisher)
Htipiti (Whipped Feta-Cheese Spread), 9.1
Hungary, Hungarian cuisine, 6.1, 7.1
Chicken Paprikás, 7.1
Liptauer Cheese, 9.1
ice cream, 2.1, 5.1
custard-based vs. “Philadelphia”
see also vanilla ice cream
Iced Coffee, Thai-Style, 5.1
imitation milks
immigration, prf.1, prf.2, 1.1, 9.1
India, Indian cuisine, prf.1, prf.2, 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, 4.1, 5.1
buttermilk in, 6.1, 7.1
Chicken Salad à la Tandoor, 6.1
“Corn Kees” (Gujarati Stovetop Corn Pudding), 5.1
Cucumber Pachadi, 6.1
culinary traditions in, 1.1, 1.2
“Curd Rice”, 6.1
Ghee (Clarified Butter), 1.1, 1.2, 8.1, 8.2
Kadhi or Karhi (North Indian Thick Buttermilk Soup), 7.1
milch animals in
Moru Kozhambu (South Indian Buttermilk Soup), 7.1

Shrikhand (Saffron-Scented Yogurt Dessert), 6.1
Vegetarian Malai Kofta, 5.1
Walnut-Yogurt Chutney, 6.1
yogurt in, 1.1, 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, 6.4, 6.5, 6.6, 6.7
see also chhenna; lassi; panir; raitas
Invitation to Indian Cooking, An (Jaffrey)
Irish Champ (Mashed Potatoes with Milk and Greens), 5.1
Italy, Italian cuisine, 1.1, 8.1
Mascarpone, 5.1
Panna Cotta and Relatives, 5.1
ricotta in, 9.1, 9.2, 9.3
Jaffrey, Madhur, 6.1, 7.1
Jersey cows, 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 3.1, 4.1, 5.1, 5.2, 5.3, 8.1
Jewish cuisine and food traditions, 1.1, 1.2, 2.1, 7.1, 7.2, 7.3, 8.1, 9.1,
9.2
Jones, Evan, 5.1, 7.1
Jones, Judith
Joy of Cooking, 5.1, 7.1, 8.1
Julius Caesar
junket
Non-Nursery, 9.1
Kadhi or Karhi (North Indian Thick Buttermilk Soup), 7.1
Kamman, Madeleine
Kaneva-Johnson, Maria, 5.1, 6.1
Kashmiri Walnut-Yogurt Chutney, 6.1
Kaufman, Edna Ramseyer
kaymak, 5.1, 5.2
kefir, 1.1, 7.1, 7.2
Kentucky Housewife, The (Bryan)
Keys, Ancel
Koch, Robert
Kochilas, Diane, 6.1, 6.2
Kofta, Vegetarian Malai, 5.1
Köfte, Lamb, in Yogurt Sauce, 6.1
Kremezi, Aglaia

kugel:
“Meets Borek”, 9.1
Savory Lokshen (Noodle Pudding), 9.1
kumys (kumis or koumiss), 1.1, 7.1, 7.2
kvas or kwas
lactalbumins, lactoglobulins
lactase, lactase persistence
lactation, 1.1, 4.1
lactic acid, 1.1, 1.2, 1.3
see also bacteria, lactic-acid
lactose, 1.1, 2.1, 2.2, 4.1, 5.1, 6.1
reduced-, dairy products, 2.1, 5.1
tolerance or intolerance for, prf.1, 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, 2.1, 2.2, 2.3,
2.4, 4.1, 5.1, 6.1, 6.2
Lamb Köfte in Yogurt Sauce, 6.1
laminitis
Lang, George
lassi
Mango, 6.1
Salt, 6.1
seasoning variations for, 6.1
Sweet, Punjabi-Style, 6.1
Latin America, Latin American cuisines, 1.1, 1.2, 5.1, 5.2, 5.3, 5.4, 9.1
Ají de Leche (Venezuelan Milk-Chile Infusion), 5.1
Batidos (Milkshakes), 5.1, 5.2
crema
see also dulce de leche
leaveners, sour milk and
leeks:
Irish Champ (Mashed Potatoes with Milk and Greens), 5.1
Vichyssoise, 5.1
Legendary Cuisine of Persia, The (Shaida)
lemon:
Curd, 8.1
Sponge Pudding, 5.1
Tart, 8.1

Leslie, Eliza
light cream, 5.1, 5.2
Lime Curd, 8.1
Lincoln, Mary
lipolysis
Liptauer Cheese, 9.1
Lockwood, Yvonne and William
Lokshen Kugel, Savory (Noodle Pudding), 9.1
Longfellow, Henry Wadsworth
Los Angeles Times
low-fat milk, 2.1, 5.1
Maier-Bruck, Franz
main dishes:
Beef Stroganoff, 7.1
Buttermilk Potatoes, 7.1
Champ, Irish (Mashed Potatoes with Milk and Greens), 5.1
Chicken Paprikás, or Paprikahuhn, 7.1
Chicken Salad à la Tandoor, 6.1
Çilbir (Turkish Poached Eggs in Yogurt Sauce), 6.1
“Corn Kees” (Gujarati Stovetop Corn Pudding), 5.1
“Fried Milk,” Chinese, 5.1
Lamb Köfte in Yogurt Sauce, 6.1
Saag Panir or Palak Panir, 5.1
Vegetarian Malai Kofta, 5.1
malai
Kofta, Vegetarian, 5.1
maltaise sauce
Malted, Chocolate, 5.1
malted-milk powder, 5.1, 5.2
mammary glands, 1.1, 4.1
Mango Lassi, 6.1
Marcella Cucina (Hazan)
mares’ milk, see horses, mares’ milk
marinade, buttermilk as
Mascarpone, 5.1
Mashed Potatoes with Milk and Greens (Irish Champ), 5.1

Massialot, François
mastitis
Mayhew, Henry, 2.1, 9.1
medieval Europe
Mediterranean Grains and Greens (Wolfert)
Melting Pot: Balkan Food and Cookery, The (Kaneva-Johnson), 5.1, 6.1
Melting Pot of Mennonite Cookery 1874–1974, The (Kaufman)
Mennonite Buttermilk “Salad”, 7.1
Mesopotamia
Metchnikoff, Élie
Mexican Dulce de Leche (Cajeta Mexicana), 5.1
Michael Field’s Cooking School
milk (fresh unsoured), prf.1, prf.2, prf.3, 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, 1.6, 2.1,
5.1, 5.2
buying
canned, 5.1, 5.2, 5.3
clabbered, 2.1, 9.1
dried or powdered
earliest experiments in eating of
efforts to boost production of
infusing with other essences
label designations and
niche marketing and, 2.1, 2.2, 5.1
nutritional reputation of, 1.1, 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 3.1
organic, 3.1, 3.2
price regulation and price supports and
raw vs. pasteurized, 3.1, 7.1
rise of urban market for
see also sour milk; specific recipes listed on this page
milk-based sauces
Ají de Leche (Venezuelan Milk-Chile Infusion), 5.1
Spicy-Milky Peanut Sauce, 5.1
“White Sauce” or Sauce Béchamel Maigre, 5.1
milkfat, 4.1, 8.1, 8.2
cow breeding and, 2.1, 2.2
dairy processors and, 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 3.1
health concerns and, 2.1, 2.2

milk and cream designations and
milking, origins of
Milk Punch, 5.1
Milkshakes, Latin American (Batidos), 5.1, 5.2
Milk Toast, 5.1
Miss Leslie’s Directions for Cookery (Leslie)
Modern Cookery for Private Families (Acton)
molds, 7.1, 7.2
monounsaturated fatty acids, 2.1, 2.2
Monsanto Corporation
Moru Kozhambu (South Indian Buttermilk Soup), 7.1
Mouflon, 1.1
Murrell, John
mushroom(s):
Pirozhki with Sour Cream Pastry, 7.1
with Sour Cream Sauce, 7.1
National Cook Book, The (Hibben)
Neolithic civilization, 1.1, 1.2, 1.3
Netherlands, Dutch cuisine, 1.1, 7.1
Buttermilk Dessert (Hangop), 7.1
Hollandaise Sauce, 8.1, 8.2
neufchâtel
New Englandish Clam Chowder, 5.1
New Yorker
New York Times Menu Cookbook, The (Claiborne)
niche marketing, 2.1, 2.2, 5.1, 6.1
Nit’r Kibeh (Ethiopian Spiced Clarified Butter), 8.1, 8.2
nomadism, 1.1, 1.2, 1.3
nonfat milk, see skim milk
Noodle Pudding (Savory Lokshen Kugel), 9.1
Northeastern Cow Belt, 1.1, 1.2, 5.1, 7.1, 7.2, 9.1, 9.2
culinary traditions in
milch animals in
North Indian Thick Buttermilk Soup (Kadhi or Karhi), 7.1
Northwestern Cow Belt, 1.1, 1.2, 5.1, 9.1
culinary traditions in, 1.1, 2.1

influx of immigrants and
lactose tolerance in, 1.1, 2.1
in medieval times
milch animals in, 1.1, 1.2
in Roman era
100 Easy-to-Make Gujarati Dishes (Shroff and Desai)
1,000 Indian Recipes (Batra)
okroshka
omasum
Onion-Apple Cream Soup, 5.1
organic milk, 3.1, 3.2
Ozan, Özcan, 6.1, 6.2
pachadis
Cucumber, 6.1
Palak Panir, 5.1
Pan Gravy with Cream, 5.1
panir, 1.1, 5.1, 9.1, 9.2, 9.3
Homemade, 5.1
Saag or Palak, 5.1
Panna Cotta and Relatives, 5.1
Papashvily, Helen and George
Parmalat
Paskha (Russian Easter Dessert), 9.1
Pasteur, Louis
pasteurization, 1.1, 2.1, 2.2, 6.1, 7.1
raw-vs.-pasteurized debate and
see also ultrapasteurization
pastry:
butter in, 8.1, 8.2
Sour Cream, 7.1
pâte brisée
Basic, 8.1
pâte sablée
Pâte Sucrée, 8.1, 8.2
Peanut Sauce, Spicy-Milky, 5.1

Persian wild goat, 1.1
Persian Yogurt Drink (Doogh), 6.1
phase inversion, 4.1, 8.1
phases of milk
pickled cheeses, see brined cheeses
pie doughs, American
pigs, 1.1, 1.2, 9.1
pilafs:
Barley, with Whey, 9.1
Bulgur, with Whey, 9.1
Pirozhki, Mushroom, with Sour Cream Pastry, 7.1
Please to the Table (Bremzen)
Pliny the Elder
plowing, milch animals in, 1.1, 1.2
Poland, Polish cuisine:
“Chłodnik,” Michael Field’s (Cold Savory Buttermilk Soup), 7.1
Chłodnik Litewski (Cold Beet Soup), 7.1
polyunsaturated fatty acids, 2.1, 2.2
Popara, 5.1
porridges, 1.1, 1.2
see also tarhana or trahana
potatoes:
Buttermilk, 7.1
Mashed, with Milk and Greens (Irish Champ), 5.1
Scalloped, 5.1
Vichyssoise, 5.1
pot cheese, 9.1, 9.2
Fritters, Russian (Syrniki or Tvorozhniki), 9.1
powdered milk
prehistoric milking traditions, 1.1, 1.2, 1.3
Presilla, Maricel
price regulation, price supports
puddings:
Chocolate, 5.1
Corn, Gujarati Stovetop (“Corn Kees”), 5.1
Lemon Sponge, 5.1
Noodle (Savory Lokshen Kugel), 9.1

Rice, 5.1
Punch, Milk, 5.1
Punjabi-Style Sweet Lassi, 6.1
quark or quargel, 1.1, 9.1
queso blanco, queso fresco, 9.1, 9.2
Radish-Cucumber Sour Cream Sauce, 7.1
raitas
Banana, 6.1
Cucumber, 6.1
rancidity, 2.1, 8.1
Ransome, Arthur
raw milk, 3.1, 6.1, 7.1
reduced-fat milk, 2.1, 5.1
refrigeration, 2.1, 2.2, 5.1
reindeer
rennet, 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 9.1, 9.2, 9.3, 9.4, 9.5
Fresh White Cheese with Cultures and, 9.1
Non-Nursery Junket, 9.1
reticulum
Revani (Yogurt-Semolina Cake with Lemon Syrup), 6.1
rice:
“Curd”, 6.1
Pudding, 5.1
ricotta, 9.1, 9.2, 9.3
Roden, Claudia
Rome and Romans, ancient
ropy milks
roux, 8.1, 8.2
rumen, rumination, 2.1, 2.2, 8.1
Russia, Russian cuisine, prf.1, 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 8.1, 9.1
cultured milk in, 7.1, 7.2, 7.3
Easter Dessert (Paskha), 9.1
fresh cheeses in, 9.1, 9.2, 9.3, 9.4, 9.5, 9.6
Mushroom Pirozhki with Sour Cream Pastry, 7.1
Pot-Cheese Fritters (Syrniki or Tvorozhniki), 9.1

“Russian Cream,” 5.1, 5.2
Saag Panir, 5.1
Sabban, Françoise
Saffron-Scented Yogurt Dessert (Shrikhand), 6.1
Saint-Ange, Madame E., 5.1, 5.2
Salad Dressing, Buttermilk, 7.1
salads:
Chicken, à la Tandoor, 6.1
Smoked Whitefish, 7.1
Zucchini-Yogurt, with Fresh Dill, 6.1
Salt Lassi, 6.1
saturated fatty acids, 2.1, 8.1
sauces
Ají de Leche (Venezuelan Milk-Chile Infusion), 5.1
Beurre Blanc/Beurre Rouge, 8.1
Beurre Manié for, 8.1
Beurre Noir/Beurre Noisette (“Black Butter”/“Brown Butter”), 8.1
Buttermilk Salad Dressing, 7.1
cold, sour cream or crème fraîche as
Crème Anglaise (Stirred Custard), 5.1
Cucumber-Radish Sour Cream, 7.1
Hollandaise, 8.1, 8.2
Pan Gravy with Cream, 5.1
Peanut, Spicy-Milky, 5.1
“White, ” or Sauce Béchamel Maigre, 5.1
Yogurt-Garlic, 6.1
sautéing mediums
Scallion–Cream Cheese Dip, 9.1
Scalloped Potatoes, 5.1
Scandinavia, Scandinavian cuisines, 1.1, 1.2, 7.1, 7.2, 9.1, 9.2
see also Northwestern Cow Belt
Scharfenberg, Horst
Schrambling, Regina
scrambled eggs
“Buttered Eggs” (Skillet-Custard Eggs), 8.1
Selitzer, Ralph

Semolina-Yogurt Cake with Lemon Syrup (Revani), 6.1
Shaida, Margaret
sheep and sheep’s milk, 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, 1.6, 1.7, 1.8, 1.9, 1.10,
1.11, 1.12, 2.1, 4.1, 6.1, 8.1, 9.1, 9.2
lactation in, 4.1, 4.2
yogurt made from, 1.1, 6.1, 6.2, 6.3
sheep’s-milk cheese
Liptauer, 9.1
Sheraton, Mimi
Shrikhand (Saffron-Scented Yogurt Dessert), 6.1
shrimp:
Chinese “Fried Milk”, 5.1
“Chłodnik,” Michael Field’s (Cold Savory Buttermilk Soup), 7.1
Shroff, Veena
side dishes:
Barley Pilaf with Whey, 9.1
Bulgur Pilaf with Whey, 9.1
Champ, Irish (Mashed Potatoes with Milk and Greens), 5.1
“Corn Kees” (Gujarati Stovetop Corn Pudding), 5.1
“Curd Rice”, 6.1
Mushrooms with Sour Cream Sauce, 7.1
Scalloped Potatoes, 5.1
Spinach, Creamed, Madame Saint-Ange (Épinards à la Crème), 5.1
Zucchini-Yogurt Salad with Fresh Dill, 6.1
skim milk, 2.1, 2.2, 4.1, 5.1, 5.2, 5.3
hand-skimmed
skyr, 7.1, 7.2
small-scale dairying, revival of, prf.1, 5.1, 6.1, 9.1
smetana, 7.1, 7.2
Smoked Whitefish Salad, 7.1
SNF (solids nonfat)
Solzhenitsyn, Aleksandr
soups, 1.1, 5.1
Chłodnik Litewski (Polish Cold Beet Soup), 7.1
Cucumber-Yogurt, 6.1
Milk Toast, 5.1
origins of

Tarator (Cold Yogurt Soup with Cucumbers and Walnuts), 6.1
Tarhana, Turkish, 6.1
see also buttermilk soups; cream soups
sour cream, 1.1, 5.1, 7.1, 7.2
as cold sauce and dip
crema
commercial processing of
cultured, 7.1, 7.2, 7.3
Homemade, 7.1
smetana
see also specific recipes listed on this page
Sour Cream Pastry, Mushroom Pirozhki with, 7.1
sour cream sauce:
Cucumber-Radish, 7.1
Herring with, 7.1
Mushrooms with, 7.1
sour milk, prf.1, 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, 2.1, 2.2, 4.1, 7.1, 9.1
see also buttermilk
South, Southern cuisine, 1.1, 2.1, 9.1
Buttermilk Pie, 7.1
South Indian Buttermilk Soup (Moru Kozhambu), 7.1
soy milk
Spiced Corn Chowder, 5.1
Spicy-Milky Peanut Sauce, 5.1
spinach:
Creamed, Madame Saint-Ange (Épinards à la Crème), 5.1
Palak Panir, 5.1
spreads, see dips and spreads
starter bacteria
commercial products as, 7.1, 7.2
for kefir
sources for
for yogurt
Stowe, Harriet Beecher
Straus, Nathan
Sultan’s Kitchen, The (Ozan), 6.1, 6.2
swill milk, 2.1, 2.2

Syrniki (Russian Pot-Cheese Fritters), 9.1
Tacitus
Tarator (Cold Yogurt Soup with Cucumbers and Walnuts), 6.1
tarhana or trahana, 1.1, 6.1
commercial
Cooking: Basic Method, 6.1
Homemade Greek-Style Sour, 6.1
Soup, Turkish, 6.1
tart(s):
Butter, Canadian, 8.1
Lemon, 8.1
shells, Basic Pâte Brisée for, 8.1
Taste of Russia, A (Goldstein)
Thai-Style Iced Coffee, 5.1
Toast, Milk, 5.1
Tomato Soup, Cream of, 5.1
Topfen
trahana, see tarhana or trahana
trans fatty acids, 2.1, 8.1, 8.2
triglycerides
Trollope, Anthony
Turkey, Turkish cuisine, 1.1, 5.1, 5.2, 9.1
Cacık, 6.1
Lamb Köfte in Yogurt Sauce, 6.1
Poached Eggs in Yogurt Sauce (Çilbir), 6.1
Revani (Yogurt-Semolina Cake with Lemon Syrup), 6.1
Yogurt Drink (Ayran), 6.1
yogurt in, 1.1, 6.1, 6.2
see also tarhana or trahana
tvorog, 9.1, 9.2, 9.3, 9.4
Tvorozhniki (Russian Pot-Cheese Fritters), 9.1
Tyrokafteri (Whipped Feta-Cheese Spread), 9.1
ultrapasteurization, 2.1, 3.1, 3.2
cream and, 5.1, 5.2, 5.3
unsaturated fatty acids, 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 8.1

urus
vanilla ice cream
Custard-Based, 5.1
Philadelphia-Style, 5.1
Van Waerebeek, Ruth
Vegetarian Malai Kofta, 5.1
Venezuelan Milk-Chile Infusion (Ají de Leche), 5.1
Verstandige Kock, De
Vichyssoise, 5.1
vitamins, 1.1, 2.1, 3.1, 5.1
walnut(s):
Cold Yogurt Soup with Cucumbers and (Tarator), 6.1
Yogurt Chutney, 6.1
Ward, Sam
water buffaloes and water buffaloes’ milk, 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, 1.6, 2.1,
4.1, 4.2, 5.1, 8.1, 9.1
yogurt made from, 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 6.1
Waugh, Evelyn
When French Women Cook (Kamman)
whey, 1.1, 1.2, 2.1, 4.1, 4.2
Barley Pilaf with, 9.1
Bulgur Pilaf with, 9.1
culinary uses for, 6.1, 9.1
ricotta made from
separating from yogurt, 4.1, 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, 6.4, 6.5, 9.1
whipped cream, 1.1, 5.1, 5.2
beating devices for
with pasteurized vs. ultrapasteurized cream
prewhipped commercial
Whitefish, Smoked, Salad, 7.1
“White Sauce”, 5.1
whole milk, 2.1, 2.2, 4.1, 4.2, 5.1, 5.2, 5.3
health concerns and
Wolfert, Paula, 6.1, 6.2
World of Cheese, The (Jones), 5.1

yaks, 1.1, 1.2
yeasts, 7.1, 7.2, 7.3
yogurt, prf.1, prf.2, 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 4.1, 6.1, 7.1, 7.2
bacteria and fermentation process in, 1.1, 1.2, 6.1, 6.2
boiling milk for, 1.1, 6.1
“breaking” or separation of
butter churned from
buying
commercial production of, in West
cooking with
definition of
draining whey from, 4.1, 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, 6.4, 9.1
Goats’-Milk, 6.1
health claims for, 6.1, 6.2
Homemade, 6.1
in Indian cuisine, 1.1, 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, 6.4, 6.5, 6.6, 6.7; see also lassi;
raitas
origins and history of, 1.1, 1.2, 6.1
see also specific recipes listed on this page
yogurt-based drinks
Ayran or Doogh (Turkish-or Persian-Style Yogurt Drink), 6.1
see also lassi
Yogurt “Cheese” and “Cheese Balls”, 6.1
Yogurt Dessert, Saffron-Scented (Shrikhand), 6.1
Yogurt-Garlic Sauce, 6.1
Yogurt-Semolina Cake with Lemon Syrup (Revani), 6.1
Yogurt Soup, Cold, with Cucumbers and Walnuts (Tarator), 6.1
zebu-type cows, 1.1, 1.2, 1.3
Zucchini-Yogurt Salad with Fresh Dill, 6.1

A NOTE ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Anne Mendelson grew up in southeastern Pennsylvania, in an area
where small dairy farms were once common. She is a freelance
writer who has specialized in food and culinary history for the
last thirty years. Ms. Mendelson is the author of Stand Facing the
Stove, a history of The Joy of Cooking and its authors. She has
collaborated on three Mexican cookbooks with chef-writer Zarela
Martínez, and writes for Gourmet and Saveur magazines as well as
the New York Times Dining Section. She now lives in a multi-
ethnic neighborhood of northern New Jersey.

ALSO BY ANNE MENDELSON
Stand Facing the Stove: The Story of the Women Who Gave America The Joy of Cooking

