This is a contribution from Pragmatics & Cognition 18:1
© 2010. John Benjamins Publishing Company
This electronic file may not be altered in any way.
The author(s) of this article is/are permitted to use this PDF file to generate printed copies to 
be used by way of offprints, for their personal use only.
Permission is granted by the publishers to post this file on a closed server which is accessible 
to members (students and staff) only of the author’s/s’ institute, it is not permitted to post 
this PDF on the open internet.
For any other use of this material prior written permission should be obtained from the 
publishers or through the Copyright Clearance Center (for USA: www.copyright.com). 
Please contact rights@benjamins.nl or consult our website: www.benjamins.com
Tables of Contents, abstracts and guidelines are available at www.benjamins.com
John Benjamins Publishing Company

Pragmatics & Cognition 18:1 (2010), 188–195.  doi 10.1075/p&c.18.1.10mil
issn 0929–0907 / e-issn 1569–9943 © John Benjamins Publishing Company
Mark Wilson, Wandering Significance: An Essay on Conceptual Behaviour. 
Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2006, 690 pages. IBSN: 9780199269259 (2008, 
paperback edition, IBSN: 9780199532308)
Reviewed by Nikolay Milkov (University of Paderborn)*
This is an investigation in conceptual semantics; it claims that the analytic tradi-
tion in philosophy has painted an overoptimistic picture of the human capacity to 
formulate concepts with sharp and objectively assessable boundaries that correctly 
present objects of the external world. Wilson’s thesis is that the task of putting real-
ity into concepts is not thus easy. Instead of using a “general theory of concepts”, he 
seeks a solution in a liberalized program to adjust the meaning and use of concepts 
in every new language situation. Roughly speaking, we must set out the concep-
tual characteristics by recurrent corrections of our concepts, closely, following the 
shape of the external world.
To be true to facts, the belief that we can frame exact concepts was challenged 
in analytic philosophy of language long before Wilson. Already in the 1950s, J.L. 
Austin insisted that the word “exact” has no privilege over some other predicates of 
conceptual assessment (Austin 1954: 161). Rather, it receives its meaning in a close 
relationship to a family of words used in appraising statements: “precise”, “rough”, 
“accurate”. Even before J.L. Austin, Otto Neurath fought against “the fiction of an 
ideal language” constructed out of clean, clear cut terms (Neurath 1932: 160).
Unfortunately, these critical remarks on the pursuit of rigorously formed con-
cepts were soon forgotten. Arguably, this was a consequence of the hegemony of sci-
entism and formalism in analytic philosophy in the 1960s–1990s. The fight against 
rigor was only resumed in recent years, Wilson being one of its first contenders. 
As early as 1992 he declared, albeit in more subdued voice, that “rigor is not ev-
erything” (Wilson 1992: 175). It is only now, however, that he advances a balanced 
argument against the injudicious pursuit of exactness in philosophy of language.
Wilson himself furnishes valuable information about the philosophical roots 
of his philosophy of language. His interest in concepts and predicates grew out of 
a thesis he wrote under Hilary Putnam, as well as from Putnam’s work from the 
early 1970s, in particular from his scientific realism. At the same time, the author 
conceives of his program as a continuation of Quine’s critique of Russell’s and Car-
nap’s philosophy of language (see Quine 1960).
By way of genealogy, we can easily trace the sources of Wilson’s project with 
the help of this simple scheme: Neurath influenced Quine on this point and, as just 

© 2010. John Benjamins Publishing Company
All rights reserved
	
Book Reviews	 189
noted, Quine influenced Wilson. In what follows, however, I shall not discuss the 
genealogy of Wilson’s ideas. Rather, I am going to review his arguments as well as 
the context in which they were developed.
Wilson’s general position in his semantics of concepts can be called anti-clas-
sicism. His main target is “the classical view of concepts”, first launched by Frege. 
Surprisingly enough, Wilson’s paragon of classicism is not Frege but Russell’s The 
Problems of Philosophy (1912). Philosophers like Russell believe in a “controllable 
semantic invariant that ‘core conceptual content’ provides. [They embrace …] the 
notion that predicates carry with them relatively permanent bundles of directives 
which are open to our inspection and modification” (99). The author strongly op-
poses this belief. In truth, our descriptive practice often demands idiosyncratic 
strategies that cannot be anticipated in advance; when using concepts, we often 
need to closely keep to Nature instead.
In fact, the “classicists” admit that real life usage often behaves unevenly. At 
the same time, however, they continue to follow a strong methodological program. 
In particular, they assume that if we think “about the meanings of our terms care-
fully enough, any uneven usage can be regularized” (382). Typically, the classicists 
believe that difficulties in describing reality only arise with the introduction of the 
theory of relativity and of quantum mechanics. Wilson, in contrast, insists that 
such problems emerge even in the most solid corners of engineering. We often fail 
to exactly conceptualize even quite trivial situations.
The problem is that our whole vocabulary is shaped by largely unforeseeable 
directives which are constantly improved when vocabulary contacts the external 
world in order to fit it. In such cases, Nature itself determines which way to go. Of 
course, we posses control over our words. However, this control is rather limited.
Wilson does not deny that, in many cases, such concepts like “hardness”, 
“force”, “causation”, and even “red”, serve our usage pretty well. The problem is that 
in specific delicate cases of our concrete conceptual practice they stop working. 
They simply suffer from “conceptual overloading”.
Take, for example, the word “hardness”. It only offers a general direction for 
classifying our sensations. This is what presents a problem: the concept is rather 
abstract, which opens up the possibility to deviating from the profile of Nature by 
its use. Wilson’s conclusion is that when we frame concepts, we lose the directives 
of immediate sensation-based classification.
In order to cope with this problem, he introduces (377 ff.) the idea of multi-
dimensional mapping reality. It presents language-functioning by way of models 
the author calls atlases (alternatively, he calls them façades) which contain many 
sheets, or patches (indeed, an atlas consists of many cards stitched together). Ev-
ery element in the patches corresponds to, and so presents particular elements of 
reality. Patches have natural boundaries which fit together quite well, so that we 

© 2010. John Benjamins Publishing Company
All rights reserved
190	 Book Reviews
can make a full-length portrait of the world with the help of a single patchwork of 
sheets. Furthermore, every patch also has specific tools of reasoning. Their rules 
are valid only for a particular patch and are determined exclusively by their practi-
cal validity: they have a top-down instrumental “correctness”, or “truth”.
Charting multi-dimensional maps of specific parts of the external world is 
a task of fine-grained examination of language in order to resettle it upon less 
confusing rails: it closely inspects the oddities of the environment. The problem 
with the classical thinking of philosophers like Russell is that it characteristically 
advances atlases of one patch only and so has a flat structure. In a way, it resembles 
the first-order theories of logicians. Wilson opposes the flat structure model with 
a system of atlas assemblies. It has multiple dimensions and is based on atlases 
with many patches, or on façades-ensembles, upon which we can evolve a reli-
able language usage. In various situations we can put into use different patches of 
the atlas.
By way of assessing Wilson’s theory of conceptual semantics, I shall set out 
four points of criticism:
i.	
As I have already hinted at, it is not easy to understand why Wilson’s criticism 
concentrates on Russell, and even less so on Russell’s The Problems of Philoso-
phy. Indeed, the philosopher who first put exactly formulated concepts, with 
clear-cut boundaries, at the focus of our attention was Frege — the author of 
Conceptual Notation (1879) — not Russell. Especially problematic is Wilson’s 
claim that Russell’s classical theory of concepts semantics was primarily ad-
vanced in his 1912 theory of universals. Indeed, the author correctly under-
lines that Russell’s universals are both ontological and epistemological. At the 
same time, however, he mistakenly claims that they are also linguistic unities. 
In fact, Russell accepted the identity between ontological and linguistic uni-
ties only with his anti-Hegelian turn in 1898, and rejected it when he intro-
duced his theory of denoting (later replaced with the theory of descriptions) 
in 1903.
	
	
Wilson expresses strong antipathy to Russell’s alleged belief that we know 
universals fully: he calls this doctrine “semantic finality”. In fact, however, in 
The Problems of Philosophy Russell only made the epistemological claim that 
we completely grasp (or are acquainted with) universals — not that we fully 
know concepts. Furthermore, this thesis was advanced in defense of the ab-
solute validity of truth and was directed against what Russell believed to be 
Hegelian relativism.
ii.	 Wilson’s conception was mainly inspired by remarks about conceptual ambi-
guity made by some applied mathematicians and engineers in the second half 
of the nineteenth century, above all Oliver Heaviside (1850–1925), Jacques 

© 2010. John Benjamins Publishing Company
All rights reserved
	
Book Reviews	 191
Hadamard (1865–1963), and Franz Reuleaux (1829–1905). They have con-
vincingly demonstrated that when applied to different environments, con-
cepts, in particular those used in mechanics, change their meaning.
	
	
Above all, these authors worked before Russell entered the scene, and Rus-
sell had his reasons to be more interested in the works of Dedekind, Peano, 
and Frege than in their works: indeed, they simply offered him more powerful 
tools for his purposes. This is not surprising since Russell and Wilson’s au-
thors worked in different sub-disciplines: whereas Russell explored problems 
of pure mathematics, Heaviside, Hadamard, and Reuleaux worked in the field 
of applied mathematics. The legitimate question is: can Wilson’s obscure au-
thors help to reach a theory with the same deductive power as that developed 
in Principia Mathematica?
iii.	 An interesting characteristic of Wandering Significance is that in it Wilson also 
gives examples from different branches of science, rarely discussed by philoso-
phers, such as cartography and ethnomusicology. This point makes it difficult 
to understand why the author failed to notice that the problem with “semantic 
mimicry” is successfully treated by other special sciences, for example, by the 
so called grammar of words (concepts), first developed in the late 1930s (see 
Palmer 1938). This new subdiscipline showed that the words/concepts do not 
have meanings in and by themselves. Rather, their meaning is determined by 
the way they are used in different combinations (collocations) with members 
of closed groups of words with which they keep company. In fact, every word 
has a conventionally limited range that determines with which other words it 
can collocate (for instance, putrid, rancid, and addled are synonymous; nev-
ertheless, putrid collocates with fish, rancid with butter, oil, lard, and addled 
with eggs only). This is how ordinary language achieves plasticity with a lim-
ited vocabulary; to put it in Wilson’s idiom, that is how concepts like decayed, 
which are only abstract directives for use, can (relatively) exactly denote het-
erogeneous elements of the external world.
iv.	 Wilson’s book takes a radically critical stance. In particular, the author de-
plores the fact that the drift towards using concepts that are far away from 
Nature, “has increased in recent years and many of [our] contemporaries now 
pursue projects that strike as functionally pointless, often under the self-styled 
banner of analytic metaphysics” (p. xv). For him, this is a drift towards scho-
lastic aloofness and intellectual inertia. The anti-classicist opposes it by way of 
meticulously evaluating concepts.
	
	
I for my part, am more prone to see here a problem in philosophy as such, 
which has the propensity to give birth to ever new sub-disciplines. Some 
one hundred years ago, it split into what are called today, analytic and con-
tinental philosophy. Wilson faces now another cleavage, this time in analytic 

© 2010. John Benjamins Publishing Company
All rights reserved
192	 Book Reviews
philosophy itself: that between (a) analytic metaphysics; and (b) empirical 
philosophy which is close to science — which is the type of philosophy Wilson 
practices. It is worth noting that, in the last decades, similar cleavages were ar-
ticulated in mainstream analytic philosophy: for example, that between meta-
ethics and applied ethics. Today it is clear that it made analytic ethics more 
perspicuous. I am convinced that a similar division of labor between analytic 
metaphysics and empirical philosophy will introduce more order to analytic 
philosophy in general. In other words, Wilson’s project will be more appealing 
if he abandons the idea to reconstruct the whole of analytic philosophy, by 
focusing his energy on exploring the conceptual changes (the “mimicries”) in 
different engineering disciplines and in applied mathematics instead.
It may be helpful for clearing up Wilson’s project further, to view it in a historical-
philosophical context. One central point of the book is that “much of a language’s 
potential usage is likely to be currently formless, in that it is not yet settled how its 
terminology should be employed over domains as yet rarely visited” (381). Lan-
guage only takes its final shape when it comes in contact with external reality. This 
claim strongly reminds Donald Davidson’s anti-realistic philosophy of language, 
set out in especially clear form in “The nice derangement of epitaphs” (1986) where 
it is argued that in an act of communication, there is no language in the sense of 
some well-formed theory. Instead of theories, it is more appropriate to refer to the 
skills or dispositions of the two sides of the communication act before its start. In 
the moment of communication, these skills, or apparent theories, actualize into a 
“momentary theory” which is now shared by both sides.
Despite this kinship, Wilson’s conception is clearly different from Davidson’s. 
Indeed, he is neither interested in communication, nor in inter-subjectivity, nor in 
our speech acts, and also not in the meaning of propositions: his subject-matter is 
the words (concepts).
Wilson is not sure about the relatedness of his study to Wittgenstein’s ideas. 
He tells us that the first readers of his work — still in manuscript form — asked 
about his possible Wittgensteinian influences. Indeed, there are clear similarities 
between Wilson’s view and that of Wittgenstein. First of all, both fight our “craving 
for generality”. Wilson, in particular, underlines that “we are naturally inclined, 
without benefit of any philosophical indoctrination, to picture ‘concepts’ corrective 
functions in simple and overly schematic terms. … It is from this native semantic 
naivete that the classical picture of concepts emerges” (11). In this key the author 
criticizes some of our everyday attitudes as “ur-philosophy”. Arguably, Wittgen-
stein claimed the same. A further similarity is the doctrine that our a priori con-
cepts — the river-bed of the actual use (“flow”) of concepts — change according to 
the way the river flows. This is expressed in the metaphor “river/riverbed” Wilson 

© 2010. John Benjamins Publishing Company
All rights reserved
	
Book Reviews	 193
uses (102, 111), which is also used almost in the same sense in Wittgenstein’s 1969 
On Certainty, § 97 (Wilson himself failed to notice this).
Despite these similarities, the two philosophers clearly defend different posi-
tions. Above all, Wilson dislikes Goethe as a theoretician, and has special res-
ervations vis-à-vis Wittgenstein, exactly because he is afraid that Wittgenstein 
follows Goethe’s explorations in morphology and metaphysics. This shows Wil-
son as fighting on two fronts: on the one hand, against “Russell” ’s penchant for 
conceptual overloading; on the other, against the metaphysical stance of the later 
Wittgenstein.
At the same time Wilson declares that he “will be flattered if [his] work is 
regarded as a worthy continuation of the school of tempered common sense pio-
neered by Thomas Reid and J.L. Austin” (xviii). As regards J.L. Austin he is right. 
Similarly to Wilson, he stressed the situations in which words are used. Further-
more, as already noted above, Austin was one of the first critics of the concept of 
exactness in the analytic philosophy of language.
But Wilson’s project is also close to that of Gilbert Ryle (and the author failed 
to notice that either). In particular, it is related to Ryle’s endeavor to chart our 
“logical geography” anew since the old one is “infected” with bad philosophy (Ryle 
1949: 9). Furthermore, similarly to Wilson, Ryle and his friends at Oxford saw 
the task of philosophy as consisting in examining the patterns of behaviour of 
language-units in specific situations in order to illuminate the status of every par-
ticular concept. It studies the “logical behaviour which the concepts of daily life 
exhibit” (Strawson 1967: 313).
In fact, Wilson’s Essay on Conceptual Behaviour continues this project. Of 
course, I do not believe that he does so because he is influenced by the Oxford 
philosophers. Wilson simply rediscovered their ideas. This point is clearly seen in 
the fact that our author does not just repeat the ideas of the ordinary language 
philosophers. Indeed, much of what we read in his book is new — specifically, the 
close attention he pays to the conceptual behaviour in applied mathematics and 
his general reverence to science.
Being conscious of his relatedness to J.L. Austin as he is, Wilson neverthe-
less insists that his position is radically different from that of Austin. In this con-
nection, the author underlines Austin’s reference to the practice of the ordinary 
language as a highest court of appeal. In contrast, Wilson develops his theory of 
conceptual semantic along the lines of engineering: this is his starting point. More-
over, he claims that these are “diametrically opposed presumptions” (473). Indeed, 
the realm of ordinary language “is precisely where the streams of ur-philosophical 
though initiate” (ibid.).
I cannot agree with this interpretation. Above all, at least for today’s philoso-
phers, the dichotomy:

© 2010. John Benjamins Publishing Company
All rights reserved
194	 Book Reviews
1.	 investigation of concepts in the situations of their use / in isolation,
is of much greater theoretical interest than the dichotomy:
2.	 philosophy of common sense (of ordinary language) / philosophy of science / 
of applied mathematics, of engineering.
This is the case because today we cannot set out a convincing philosophical op-
position starting from the dichotomy “philosophy of common sense / philosophy 
of science”: these are simply different philosophical stances that have coexisted 
peacefully for decades. This is not the case, however, with the dichotomy “concepts 
in situation / concepts in isolation”, which is a rather unexplored dichotomy and 
thus can be a source of new insights. To be sure, in the last decades, the study of 
the concrete situations in which the concepts are used was almost totally neglect-
ed. Even when Austin’s philosophy was exploited further (in such works as Searle 
1969; Cavell 1969; and Skinner 2002), the first concern was his theory of speech 
acts, not his situational semantics of concepts.
To conclude, Wilson’s work demonstrates that the philosophy of the so-called 
“Oxford School” of the 1950s, which practically lost its influence in the 1970s, was 
not just an abortive development in analytic philosophy. It started an important 
direction of study that is capable of reviving, albeit in new forms. Wandering Sig-
nificance is such a revival in the field of the scientifically informed philosophy.
Acknowledgment
*  My work on this review was generously supported by the Fritz-Thyssen Stiftung.
References
Austin, J.L. 1954/1970. “Unfair to Facts”. In G.J. Warnock and J.O. Urmson (eds), J.L. Austin 
Philosophical Papers, 2nd ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 154–74.
Cavell, S. 1969. Must We Mean what We Say?. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Davidson, D. 1986. “A nice derangement of epitaphs”. In E. LePore (ed), Truth and Interpreta-
tion. Oxford: Blackwell, 433–46.
Frege, G. 1879. Begriffsschrift. Halle a. S.: Nebert.
Neurath, O. 1932/1981. “Protocol Sentences”. In O. Hanfling (ed), Esseential Readings in Logical 
Positivism. Oxford: Blackwell, 160–9.
Palmer, H. 1938. A Grammar of English Words. London: Longman.
Quine, W.V.O. 1960. Word and Object. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Russell, B.A.W. 1912. The Problems of Philosophy. London: T. Butterworth [2nd ed. 1932].

© 2010. John Benjamins Publishing Company
All rights reserved
	
Book Reviews	 195
Ryle, G. 1949. The Concept of Mind. Harmondsworth: Penguin [2nd ed. 1973].
Searle, J. 1969. Speech Acts: An Essay in the Philosophy of Language. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Skinner, Q. 2002. Regarding Method. vol. 1 of Visions of Politics. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Strawson, P.F. 1967. “Analysis, science, and metaphysics”. In R. Rorty (ed), The Linguistic Turn. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 312–20.
Wilson, M. 1992. “Frege: The royal road from geometry”. Nous 26: 149–180.
Wittgenstein, L. 1969. On Certainty. G.E.M. Anscombe and G.H. von Wright (eds), D. Paul and 
G.E.M. Anscombe (trans). Oxford: Blackwell.
Reviewer’s address
Nikolay Milkov
Universität Paderborn
Fakultät für Kulturwissenschaften
Institut für Humanwissenschaften: Philosophie
Warburger Str. 100
D-33098 Paderborn
Germany
nikolay.milkov@upb.de
About the reviewer
Nikolay Milkov is Associate Professor (Privatdozent) at the University of Paderborn, Germany. 
His publications include the books Kaleidoscopic Mind: an Essay in Post-Wittgensteinian Phi-
losophy (1992), Varieties of Understanding: English Philosophy After 1898, 2 vols. (1997) and A 
Hundred Years of English Philosophy (2003). Milkov authored papers in British Journal for the 
History of Philosophy, Studies in History and Philosophy of Science, Axiomathes, Essays in Philoso-
phy and Grazer Philosophische Studien.

