
This page intentionally left blank

Minimalist Syntax
Exploring the Structure of English
Andrew Radford’s latest textbook, Minimalist Syntax:
ExploringtheStructureofEnglish,providesaclearandacces-
sible introduction to current work in syntactic theory, draw-
ing on the key concepts of Chomsky’s Minimalist Program.
Assuming little or no prior knowledge of syntactic theory,
Radford takes students through a diverse range of topics in
English syntax – such as categories and features, merger, null
constituents, movement, case, split projections and phases –
and shows how the ‘computational component’ works within
the minimalist framework. Beginning at an elementary level,
the book introduces grammatical concepts and sets out the
theoretical foundations of Principles and Parameters and Uni-
versal Grammar, before progressing in stages towards more
complex phenomena. Each chapter contains a workbook sec-
tion, in which students are encouraged to make their own
analyses of English phrases and sentences through exercises,
model answers and ‘helpful hints’. There is also an extensive
glossary of terms.
Although designed primarily for courses on syntactic the-
ory or English syntax, this book also provides an up-to-date,
clear and straightforward introduction to the ﬁeld.
andrew radford is Professor of Linguistics at the Uni-
versity of Essex. He has published six books on syntax with
Cambridge University Press: Italian Syntax (1977); Transfor-
mational Syntax (1981); Transformational Grammar (1988);
Syntactic Theory and the Structure of English (1997); Syntax:
a Minimalist Introduction (1997) and Linguistics: an Intro-
duction (co-authored with a group of his Essex colleagues,
1999). He has also published a book on Syntactic Theory
and the Acquisition of English Syntax (Blackwell, Oxford,
1990) and numerous articles on syntax and the acquisition of
syntax.


CAMBRIDGE TEXTBOOKS IN LINGUISTICS
General editors: s. r. anderson, j. bresnan, b. comrie, w. dressler,
c. ewen, r. huddleston, r. lass, d. lightfoot, j. lyons,
p. h. matthews, r. posner, s. romaine, n. v. smith, n. vincent
Minimalist Syntax: Exploring the Structure of English

In this series:
p. h. matthews Morphology Second edition
b. comrie Aspect
r. m. kempson Semantic Theory
t. bynon Historical Linguistics
j. allwood, l.-g. anderson and ¨o. dahl Logic in Linguistics
d. b. fry The Physics of Speech
r. a. hudson Sociolinguistics Second edition
a. j. elliot Child Language
p. h. matthews Syntax
a. radford Transformational Syntax
l. bauer English Word-Formation
s. c. levinson Pragmatics
g. brown and g. yule Discourse Analysis
r. huddleston Introduction to the Grammar of English
r. lass Phonology
a. comrie Tense
w. klein Second Language Acquisition
a. j. woods, p. ﬂetcher and a. hughes Statistics in Language Studies
d. a. cruse Lexical Semantics
a. radford Transformational Grammar
m. garman Psycholinguistics
g. g. corbett Gender
h. j. giegerich English Phonology
r. cann Formal Semantics
j. laver Principles of Phonetics
f. r. palmer Grammatical Roles and Relations
m. a. jones Foundations of French Syntax
a. radford Syntactic Theory and the Structure of English: a Minimalist Approach
r. d. van valin, jr, and r. j. lapolla Syntax: Structure, Meaning and Function
a. duranti Linguistic Anthropology
a. cruttenden Intonation Second edition
j. k. chambers and p. trudgill Dialectology Second edition
c. lyons Deﬁniteness
r. kager Optimality Theory
j. a. holm An Introduction to Pidgins and Creoles
c. g. corbett Number
c. j. ewen and h. van der hulst The Phonological Structure of Words
f. r. palmer Mood and Modality Second edition
b. j. blake Case Second edition
e. gussman Phonology: Analysis and Theory
m. yip Tone
w. croft Typology and Universals Second edition
f. coulmas Writing Systems: an Introduction to their Linguistic Analysis
p. j. hopper and e. c. traugott Grammaticalization Second edition
l. white Second Language Acquisition and Universal Grammar
i. plag Word-Formation in English
w. croft and a. cruse Cognitive Linguistics
a. siewierska Person
d. b ¨uring Binding Theory
a. radford Minimalist Syntax: Exploring the Structure of English

Minimalist Syntax
Exploring the Structure of English
ANDREW RADFORD
University of Essex

cambridge university press
Cambridge, New York, Melbourne, Madrid, Cape Town, Singapore, São Paulo
Cambridge University Press
The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge cb2 2ru, UK
First published in print format 
isbn-13    978-0-521-83497-1
isbn-13    978-0-521-54274-6
isbn-13    978-0-511-21185-0
© Andrew Radford 2004
2004
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9780521834971
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception and to the provision of
relevant collective licensing agreements, no reproduction of any part may take place
without the written permission of Cambridge University Press.
isbn-10    0-511-21362-x
isbn-10    0-521-83497-x
isbn-10    0-521-54274-x
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy of urls
for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this publication, and does not
guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain, accurate or appropriate.
Published in the United States of America by Cambridge University Press, New York
www.cambridge.org
hardback
paperback
paperback
eBook (EBL)
eBook (EBL)
hardback

Contents
Preface
page xi
1
Grammar
1
1.1
Overview
1
1.2
Traditional grammar
1
1.3
Universal Grammar
6
1.4
The Language Faculty
10
1.5
Principles of Universal Grammar
13
1.6
Parameters
16
1.7
Parameter-setting
21
1.8
Evidence used to set parameters
23
1.9
Summary
25
Workbook section
26
2
Words
33
2.1
Overview
33
2.2
Grammatical categories
33
2.3
Categorising words
38
2.4
Functional categories
40
2.5
Determiners and quantiﬁers
41
2.6
Pronouns
44
2.7
Auxiliaries
47
2.8
Inﬁnitival to
49
2.9
Complementisers
52
2.10
Labelled bracketing
57
2.11
Grammatical features
58
2.12
Summary
60
Workbook section
62
3
Structure
66
3.1
Overview
66
3.2
Phrases
66
3.3
Clauses
71
3.4
Speciﬁers
76
3.5
Intermediate and maximal projections
80
3.6
Testing structure
84
3.7
Syntactic relations
90
3.8
Bare phrase structure
94
vii

viii
Contents
3.9
Summary
96
Workbook section
98
4
Null constituents
106
4.1
Overview
106
4.2
Null subjects
106
4.3
Null auxiliaries
111
4.4
Null T in auxiliariless ﬁnite clauses
115
4.5
Null T in bare inﬁnitive clauses
121
4.6
Null C in ﬁnite clauses
124
4.7
Null C in non-ﬁnite clauses
128
4.8
Defective clauses
131
4.9
Case properties of subjects
134
4.10
Null determiners
140
4.11
Summary
145
Workbook section
146
5
Head movement
151
5.1
Overview
151
5.2
T-to-C movement
151
5.3
Movement as copying and deletion
154
5.4
V-to-T movement
158
5.5
Head movement
162
5.6
Auxiliary raising
166
5.7
Another look at negation
170
5.8
do-support
173
5.9
Head movement in nominals
178
5.10
Summary
181
Workbook section
183
6
Wh-movement
188
6.1
Overview
188
6.2
Wh-questions
188
6.3
Wh-movement as a copying operation
190
6.4
Wh-movement, EPP and the Attract Closest Principle
197
6.5
Explaining what moves where
202
6.6
Wh-subject questions
206
6.7
Pied-piping
211
6.8
Yes–no questions
220
6.9
Wh-exclamatives
222
6.10
Relative clauses
223
6.11
That-relatives
228
6.12
Summary
234
Workbook section
236
7
A-movement
241
7.1
Overview
241
7.2
Subjects in Belfast English
241

Contents
ix
7.3
Quotatives and idioms
244
7.4
Argument structure
248
7.5
Thematic roles
250
7.6
Unaccusative predicates
254
7.7
Passive predicates
260
7.8
Long-distance passivisation
264
7.9
Raising
266
7.10
Comparing raising and control predicates
268
7.11
Summary
274
Workbook section
276
8
Agreement, case and movement
281
8.1
Overview
281
8.2
Agreement
281
8.3
Feature valuation
284
8.4
Uninterpretable features and feature-deletion
287
8.5
Expletive it subjects
291
8.6
Expletive there subjects
298
8.7
Agreement and A-movement
307
8.8
EPP in control inﬁnitives
309
8.9
EPP in other inﬁnitives
313
8.10
Summary
322
Workbook section
323
9
Split projections
327
9.1
Overview
327
9.2
Split CP: Force, Topic and Focus projections
327
9.3
Split CP: Finiteness projection
332
9.4
Split VPs: VP shells in ergative structures
336
9.5
VP shells in resultative, double-object and object-control
structures
344
9.6
VP shells in transitive, unergative, unaccusative, raising
and locative inversion structures
348
9.7
Transitive light verbs and accusative case assignment
356
9.8
Evidence for a further projection in transitive verb phrases
362
9.9
Extending the shell analysis to nominals
367
9.10
Summary
372
Workbook section
374
10
Phases
381
10.1
Overview
381
10.2
Phases
381
10.3
Intransitive and defective clauses
385
10.4
Wh-movement through spec-CP
388
10.5
Wh-movement through spec-vP in transitive clauses
391
10.6
Evidence for successive-cyclic wh-movement through
spec-CP
394

x
Contents
10.7
Evidence for wh-movement through spec-vP in transitive
clauses
401
10.8
The role of phases in lexical selection
407
10.9
Questions about phases
409
10.10
The nature of A-bar movement
419
10.11
Summary
426
Workbook section
427
Glossary
432
References
485
Index
498

Preface
Aims
This book has two main aims, reﬂected in its title and subtitle. The ﬁrst
is to provide an intensive introduction to recent work in syntactic theory (more
particularly to how the computational component operates within the model of
grammar assumed in recent work within the framework of Chomsky’s Minimalist
Program). The second is to provide a description of a range of phenomena in
English syntax, making use of minimalist concepts and assumptions wherever
possible. The book can be seen as a successor to (or updated version of) my
(1997a) book Syntactic Theory and the Structure of English. There is quite a
lot of duplication of material between the earlier book and this one (particularly
in the ﬁrst few chapters), though the present book also contains substantial new
material (e.g. on agreement, case, split projections and phases), and the analysis
of many phenomena presented in this book differs from that in its predecessor
(agreement being handled in terms of a feature-matching rather than a feature-
checking framework, for example).
Key features
The book is intended to be suitable both for people with only minimal
grammatical knowledge, and for people who have already done quite a bit of
syntax but want to know something (more) about Minimalism. It is not historicist
or comparative in orientation, and hence does not presuppose knowledge of earlier
or alternative models of grammar. It is written in an approachable style, avoiding
unnecessary complexity. I’ve taught earlier versions of the book to more than 200
students over the past three years, and greatly beneﬁted from their mutterings
and mystiﬁcation, as well as their assignments (which told me a lot about what
they didn’t understand, and about what I needed to explain more carefully). I’ve
worked through (and reﬁned) the exercise material with the students, and the
helpful hints which the exercises contain have been developed in order to try and
eliminate some of the commonest errors students make. The book is intensive
and progressive in nature, which means that it starts at an elementary level but
gets progressively harder as you get further into it. A group of students I taught
xi

xii
Preface
an earlier version of the book to gave the following mean degree-of-difﬁculty
score to each chapter on a ﬁve-point scale ranging from 1 = very easy to 5 =
very hard: chapter 1 = 1.6; chapter 2 = 1.8; chapter 3 = 2.2; chapter 4 = 2.7;
chapter 5 = 2.9; chapter 6 = 3.2; chapter 7 = 3.4; chapter 8 = 3.7; chapter 9 =
4.2; chapter 10 = 4.4. Successive chapters become cumulatively more complex,
in that each chapter presupposes material covered in previous chapters as well
as introducing new material: hence it is helpful to go back and read material
from earlier chapters every so often. In some cases, analyses presented in earlier
chapters are subsequently reﬁned or revised in the light of new assumptions made
in later chapters.
Organisation
Each of the ten chapters in the book contains a detailed text discus-
sion of a particular topic (divided into sections to facilitate reading), together
with an integral workbook section at the end of the chapter, containing exercise
material (to be done as classwork or homework) with model answers and helpful
hints provided. Although the book contains numerous references to (often highly
technical) primary research works, the exercises are designed in such a way that
they can be tackled on the basis of the coursebook material alone. The book
also includes an extensive glossary which provides simple illustrations of how
key technical terms are used (both theory-speciﬁc terms like EPP and traditional
terms like subject): technical terms are written in bold print in the main text
(italicsbeingusedforhighlightingparticularexpressions–e.g.akeywordappear-
ing in an example sentence). The glossary contains entries for key technical terms
in syntax which are used in a number of different places in the text (though not
for terms which appear in only one part of the main text, and which are glossed
in the text where they appear). The glossary also includes an integrated list of
abbreviations.
Companion volume
This book is being published in parallel with an abridged version
entitled English Syntax: an Introduction. In this longer version of the text, the
main text (particularly in the later chapters) is generally 30–50 per cent longer
than the main text in the abridged version. This longer version is aimed primarily
at students with (near-) native command of English who are taking syntax as
a major rather than a minor course. The two books have an essentially parallel
organisation into chapters and sections (though additional sections and technical
discussion have been added in this longer version), and contain much the same
exercise material (though with exercise material based on additional sections

Preface
xiii
of text included in the longer version). In keeping the two books parallel in
structure and organisation as far as possible, I am mindful of the comment made
in a review of two earlier books which I produced in parallel longer and shorter
versions (Radford 1997a,b) that some readers may wish to read the short version
of a given chapter ﬁrst, and then look at the longer version afterwards, and that
this ‘is not facilitated by an annoyingly large number of non-correspondences’
(Ten Hacken 2001, p. 2). Accordingly, I have tried to maximise correspondence
between the ‘long’ and ‘short’ versions of these two new books.
Acknowledgments
Particular thanks are due to three brave Musketeers (Hajime Hattori,
Cris Lozano and Peter Evans) for shooting down some of the more inane parts of
an earlier draft of the book when they had it inﬂicted on them as students. I’d also
like to thank Cambridge University Press’s series editor (Neil Smith) for patiently
wading through and commenting on two drafts of the longer version and one of
the shorter one, and managing to make his comments challenging and good-
humoured at the same time. Thanks also go to Bob Borsley and Martin Atkinson
for helpful thoughts on particular issues. And above all to my wife Khadija, for
putting up with extended periods of authorial autism during the gestation period
for the book.
Dedication
This book (like my 1981 Transformational Syntax book) is dedicated
to Joe Cremona, who sadly died shortly before it went to press. Joe was my tutor
at Cambridge for three of my undergraduate courses (History of Italian, History
of Romanian, Vulgar Latin and Romance Philology). As I wrote in the preface
to my 1981 book, Joe ‘did more than anyone to awaken my interest in language,
and to persuade me that just maybe linguistic theory wasn’t quite as pointless as
it seemed at the time’ (when linguistics seemed to most students to be designed
solely to inﬂict taxonomic torture on them). Thanks for everything, Joe – you will
be sorely missed by the many people you helped go on to successful academic
careers.


1
Grammar
1.1
Overview
In broad terms, this book is concerned with aspects of grammar. Gram-
mar is traditionally subdivided into two different but interrelated areas of study –
morphology and syntax. Morphology is the study of how words are formed out
of smaller units (called morphemes), and so addresses questions such as ‘What
are the component morphemes of a word like antidisestablishmentarianism, and
what is the nature of the morphological operations by which they are combined
together to form the overall word?’ Syntax is the study of the way in which
phrases and sentences are structured out of words, and so addresses questions
like ‘What is the structure of a sentence like What’s the president doing? and
what is the nature of the grammatical operations by which its component words
are combined together to form the overall sentence structure?’ In this chapter, we
begin (in §1.2) by taking a brief look at the approach to the study of syntax taken
in traditional grammar: this also provides an opportunity to introduce some
useful grammatical terminology. In the remainder of the chapter, we look at the
approach to syntax adopted within the theory of Universal Grammar developed
by Chomsky.
1.2
Traditional grammar
Within traditional grammar, the syntax of a language is described in
terms of a taxonomy (i.e. classiﬁcatory list) of the range of different types of
syntactic structures found in the language. The central assumption underpinning
syntactic analysis in traditional grammar is that phrases and sentences are built
up of a series of constituents (i.e. syntactic units), each of which belongs to
a speciﬁc grammatical category and serves a speciﬁc grammatical function.
Given this assumption, the task of the linguist analysing the syntactic structure of
any given type of sentence is to identify each of the constituents in the sentence,
and (for each constituent) to say what category it belongs to and what function it
serves. For example, in relation to the syntax of a simple sentence like:
(1)
Students protested
1

2
1 grammar
it would traditionally be said that the sentence consists of two constituents (the
word students and the word protested), that each of these constituents belongs
to a speciﬁc grammatical category (students being a plural noun and protested a
past-tense verb) and that each serves a speciﬁc grammatical function (students
being the subject of the sentence, and protested being its predicate). The overall
sentence Students protested has the categorial status of a clause which is ﬁnite
in nature (by virtue of denoting an event taking place at a speciﬁc time), and has
the semantic function of expressing a proposition which is declarative in force
(in that it is used to make a statement rather than, for example, ask a question).
Accordingly, a traditional grammar of English would tell us that the simplest
type of ﬁnite declarative clause found in English is a sentence like (1) in which
a nominal subject is followed by a verbal predicate. Let’s brieﬂy look at some of
the terminology used here.
In traditional grammar, words are assigned to grammatical categories (called
parts of speech) on the basis of their semantic properties (i.e. meaning), mor-
phological properties (i.e. the range of different forms they have), and syntactic
properties (i.e. word-order properties relating to the positions they can occupy
within sentences): a set of words which belong to the same category thus have
a number of semantic, morphological and syntactic properties in common. For
example, nouns are traditionally said to have the semantic property that they
denote entities: so, bottle is a noun (since it denotes a type of object used to
contain liquids), horse is a noun (since it denotes a type of animal), and John is a
noun (since it denotes a speciﬁc person). Typical nouns (more speciﬁcally, count
nouns) have the morphological property that they have two different forms: a
singular form (like horse in one horse) used to denote a single entity, and a plu-
ral form (like horses in two horses) used to denote two or more entities. Nouns
have the syntactic property that only (an appropriate kind of) noun can be used
to end a four-word sentence such as They have no . . . In place of the dots here we
could insert a singular noun like car or a plural noun like friends, but not other
types of word (e.g. not see, or slowly or up, since these are not nouns).
In contrast to nouns, verbs are traditionally said to have the semantic property
that they denote actions or events: so, eat, sing, pull and resign are all (action-
denoting) verbs. From a syntactic point of view, verbs have the property that only
an appropriate kind of verb (in its uninﬂected form) can be used to complete a
three-word sentence such as They/It can . . . So, words like stay, leave, hide, die,
starve and cry are all verbs and hence can be used in place of the dots here (but
words like apple, under, pink and if aren’t). From a morphological point of view,
regular verbs like cry (in English) have the property that they have four distinct
forms: e.g. alongside the dictionary citation form cry we ﬁnd the present-tense
form cries, the past-tense/perfect participle/passive participle form cried and
the progressive participle form crying. Since chapter 2 is devoted to a discus-
sion of grammatical categories, we shall have no more to say about them for
the time being. Instead, we turn to look at some of the terminology used in

1.2 Traditional grammar
3
traditional grammar to describe the different grammatical functions that con-
stituents fulﬁl.
Let’s begin by looking at the following set of sentences:
(2) (a)
John smokes
(b)
The president smokes
(c)
The president of Utopia smokes
(d)
The former president of the island paradise of Utopia smokes
Sentence (2a) comprises the noun John which serves the function of being the
subject of the sentence (and denotes the person performing the act of smoking),
and the verb smokes which serves the function of being the predicate of the
sentence (and describes the act being performed). In (2a), the subject is the single
noun John; but as the examples in (2b–d) show, the subject of a sentence can
also be an (italicised) phrase like the president, or the president of Utopia or the
former president of the island paradise of Utopia.
Now consider the following set of sentences:
(3) (a)
John smokes cigars
(b)
John smokes Cuban cigars
(c)
John smokes Cuban cigars imported from Havana
(d)
John smokes a speciﬁc brand of Cuban cigars imported by a friend of his from Havana
Sentence (3a) comprises the subject John, the predicate smokes and the comple-
ment (or direct object) cigars. (The complement cigars describes the entity on
which the act of smoking is being performed; as this example illustrates, subjects
normally precede the verb with which they are associated in English, whereas
complements typically follow the verb.) The complement in (3a) is the single
noun cigars; but a complement can also be a phrase: in (3b), the complement of
smokes is the phrase Cuban cigars; in (3c) the complement is the phrase Cuban
cigars imported from Havana; and in (3d) the complement is the phrase a speciﬁc
brand of Cuban cigars imported by a friend of his from Havana. A verb which
has a noun or pronoun expression as its direct-object complement is traditionally
said to be transitive.
From a semantic perspective, subjects and complements share in common the
fact that they generally represent entities directly involved in the particular action
or event described by the predicate: to use the relevant semantic terminology,
we can say that subjects and complements are arguments of the predicate with
which they are associated. Predicates may have one or more arguments, as we see
from sentences such as (4) below, where each of the bracketed nouns is a different
argument of the italicised predicate:
(4) (a)
[John] resigned
(b)
[John] felt [remorse]
(c)
[John] sent [Mary] [ﬂowers]

4
1 grammar
A predicate like resign in (4a) which has a single argument is said to function as
a one-place predicate (in the relevant use); one like feel in (4b) which has two
arguments is a two-place predicate; and one like send in (4c) which has three
arguments is a three-place predicate.
In addition to predicates and arguments, sentences can also contain adjuncts,
as we can illustrate in relation to (5) below:
(5) (a)
The president smokes a cigar after dinner
(b)
The president smokes a cigar in his ofﬁce
In both sentences in (5), smokes functions as a two-place predicate whose two
arguments are its subject the president and its complement a cigar. But what is
the function of the phrase after dinner which also occurs in (5a)? Since after
dinner isn’t one of the entities directly involved in the act of smoking (i.e. it
isn’t consuming or being consumed), it isn’t an argument of the predicate smoke.
On the contrary, after dinner simply serves to provide additional information
about the time when the smoking activity takes place. In much the same way, the
italicised expression in his ofﬁce in (5b) provides additional information about the
location of the smoking activity. An expression which serves to provide (optional)
additional information about the time or place (or manner, or purpose etc.) of an
activity or event is said to serve as an adjunct. So, after dinner and in his ofﬁce
in (5a,b) are both adjuncts.
Sofar,allthesentenceswehavelookedatin(1)–(5)havebeensimplesentences
which contain a single clause. However, alongside these we also ﬁnd complex
sentences which contain more than one clause, like (6) below:
(6)
Mary knows John smokes
If we take the traditional deﬁnition of a clause as a predication structure (more
precisely, a structure containing a predicate which has a subject, and which may or
may not also contain one or more complements and adjuncts), it follows that since
there are two predicates (knows and smokes) in (6), there are correspondingly two
clauses – the smokes clause on the one hand, and the knows clause on the other. The
smokes clause comprises the subject John and the predicate smokes; the knows
clause comprises the subject Mary, the predicate knows and the complement
John smokes. So, the complement of knows here is itself a clause – namely
the clause John smokes. More precisely, the smokes clause is a complement
clause (because it serves as the complement of knows), while the knows clause
is the main clause (or principal clause or independent clause or root clause).
The overall sentence (6) Mary knows John smokes is a complex sentence because
itcontainsmorethanoneclause.Inmuchthesameway,(7)belowisalsoacomplex
sentence:
(7)
The press clearly think the president deliberately lied to Congress
Once again, it comprises two clauses – one containing the predicate think, the
other containing the predicate lie. The main clause comprises the subject the

1.2 Traditional grammar
5
press, the adjunct clearly, the predicate think and the complement clause the
president deliberately lied to Congress. The complement clause in turn comprises
the subject the president, the adjunct deliberately, the predicate lied, and the
complement to Congress.
As was implicit in our earlier classiﬁcation of (1) as a ﬁnite clause, traditional
grammars draw a distinction between ﬁnite clauses (which describe events taking
place at a particular time) and non-ﬁnite clauses (which describe hypothetical
or projected future events). In this connection, consider the contrast between
the italicised clauses below (all three of which function as the complement of
remember):
(8) (a)
John couldn’t remember what pills he is taking
(b)
John couldn’t remember what pills he took
(c)
John couldn’t remember what pills to take
In (8a), the clause what pills he is taking is ﬁnite by virtue of containing present-
tense is: likewise, the clause what pills he took in (8b) is ﬁnite by virtue of
containing past-tense took. However, the clause what pills to take in (8c) is non-
ﬁnite by virtue of containing no tense speciﬁcation – take here is an inﬁnitive
form which is not inﬂected for tense, as we see from the fact that it could not
be replaced by the past-tense form took here (cf. ∗‘John couldn’t remember what
pills to took’ – the star indicating ungrammaticality).
Whether or not a clause is ﬁnite in turn determines the kind of subject it
can have, in that ﬁnite clauses can have a nominative pronoun like he as their
subject, but non-ﬁnite clauses cannot (as we see from the ungrammaticality of
∗‘John couldn’t remember what pills he to take’). Accordingly, one way of telling
whether a particular clause is ﬁnite or not is to see whether it can have a nominative
pronoun (like I/we/he/she/they) as its subject. In this connection, consider whether
the italicised clauses in (9a,b) below are ﬁnite or non-ﬁnite:
(9) (a)
I didn’t know students have problems with syntax
(b)
I have never known students have problems with syntax
The fact that students in (9a) can be replaced by the nominative pronoun they (as in
‘I didn’t know they have problems with syntax’) suggests that the italicised clause
in (9a) is ﬁnite – as does the fact that the present-tense verb have can be replaced by
its past-tense counterpart had in (9a). Conversely, the fact that students in (9b) can
be replaced by the accusative pronoun them (as in ‘I have never known them have
problems with syntax’) suggests that the italicised clause in (9b) is non-ﬁnite –
as does the fact that we can optionally use the inﬁnitive particle to in (9b) (as in
‘I have never known students to have problems with syntax’), and the fact that
we can replace the have expression by one containing the inﬁnitive form be (as
in ‘I have never known students be worried about syntax’).
In addition to being ﬁnite or non-ﬁnite, each clause within a sentence has a
speciﬁc force. In this connection, consider the following simple (single-clause)
sentences:

6
1 grammar
(10) (a)
He went home
(b) Are you feeling OK?
(c)
You be quiet!
(d) What a great idea that is!
A sentence like (10a) is traditionally said to be declarative in force, in that it is
used to make a statement. (10b) is interrogative in force in that it is used to ask
a question. (10c) is imperative in force, by virtue of being used to issue an order
or command. (10d) is exclamative in force, in that it is used to exclaim surprise
or delight. In complex sentences, each clause has its own force, as we can see in
relation to (11) below:
(11) (a)
He asked where she had gone
(b)
Did you know that he has retired?
(c)
Tell her what a great time we had!
In (11a), the main (asked) clause is declarative, whereas the complement (gone)
clause is interrogative; in (11b) the main (know) clause is interrogative, whereas
the complement (retired) clause is declarative; and in (11c), the main (tell) clause
is imperative, whereas the complement (had) clause is exclamative.
We can summarise this section as follows. From the perspective of traditional
grammar, the syntax of a language is described in terms of a taxonomy (i.e. a
classiﬁcatory list) of the range of different phrase-, clause- and sentence-types
found in the language. So, for example, a typical traditional grammar of (say)
English will include chapters on the syntax of negatives, interrogatives, exclama-
tives, imperatives and so on. The chapter on interrogatives will note (e.g.) that in
main-clause questions in English like ‘Is he winning?’ the present-tense auxiliary
is inverts with (i.e. moves in front of) the subject he, but not in complement-clause
questions like the if-clause in ‘I wonder if he is winning’, and will typically not
be concerned with trying to explain why auxiliary inversion applies in main
clauses but not complement clauses: this reﬂects the fact that the primary goal of
traditional grammar is description rather than explanation.
1.3
Universal Grammar
In contrast to the taxonomic approach adopted in traditional gram-
mar, Chomsky takes a cognitive approach to the study of grammar. For Chomsky,
the goal of the linguist is to determine what it is that native speakers know about
their native language which enables them to speak and understand the language:
hence, the study of language is part of the wider study of cognition (i.e. what
human beings know). In a fairly obvious sense, any native speaker of a language
can be said to know the grammar of his or her native language. For example,
any native speaker of English can tell you that the negative counterpart of I like
syntax is I don’t like syntax, and not e.g. ∗I no like syntax: in other words, native
speakers know how to combine words together to form expressions (e.g. nega-
tive sentences) in their language. Likewise, any native speaker of English can tell
you that a sentence like She loves me more than you is ambiguous and has two

1.3 Universal Grammar
7
interpretations which can be paraphrased as ‘She loves me more than she loves
you’ and ‘She loves me more than you love me’: in other words, native speakers
also know how to interpret (i.e. assign meaning to) expressions in their language.
However, it is important to emphasise that this grammatical knowledge of how to
form and interpret expressions in your native language is tacit (i.e. subconscious)
rather than explicit (i.e. conscious): so, it’s no good asking a native speaker of
English a question such as ‘How do you form negative sentences in English?’,
since human beings have no conscious awareness of the processes involved in
speaking and understanding their native language. To introduce a technical term
devised by Chomsky, we can say that native speakers have grammatical compe-
tence in their native language: by this, we mean that they have tacit knowledge of
the grammar of their language – i.e. of how to form and interpret words, phrases
and sentences in the language.
In work dating back to the 1960s, Chomsky has drawn a distinction between
competence (the native speaker’s tacit knowledge of his or her language) and
performance (what people actually say or understand by what someone else
says on a given occasion). Competence is ‘the speaker–hearer’s knowledge of
his language’, while performance is ‘the actual use of language in concrete situ-
ations’ (Chomsky 1965, p. 4). Very often, performance is an imperfect reﬂection
of competence: we all make occasional slips of the tongue, or occasionally mis-
interpret something which someone else says to us. However, this doesn’t mean
that we don’t know our native language or that we don’t have competence in it.
Misproductions and misinterpretations are performance errors, attributable to a
variety of performance factors like tiredness, boredom, drunkenness, drugs, exter-
nal distractions and so forth. A grammar of a language tells you what you need
to know in order to have native-like competence in the language (i.e. to be able to
speak the language like a ﬂuent native speaker): hence, it is clear that grammar
is concerned with competence rather than performance. This is not to deny the
interest of performance as a ﬁeld of study, but merely to assert that performance
is more properly studied within the different – though related – discipline of
psycholinguistics, which studies the psychological processes underlying speech
production and comprehension.
In the terminology adopted by Chomsky (1986a, pp. 19–56), when we study
the grammatical competence of a native speaker of a language like English
we’re studying a cognitive system internalised within the brain/mind of native
speakers of English; our ultimate goal in studying competence is to characterise
the nature of the internalised linguistic system (or I-language, as Chomsky
terms it) which makes native speakers proﬁcient in English. Such a cognitive
approach has obvious implications for the descriptive linguist who is con-
cerned to develop a grammar of a particular language like English. Accord-
ing to Chomsky (1986a, p. 22) a grammar of a language is ‘a theory of the
I-language . . . under investigation’. This means that in devising a grammar
of English, we are attempting to uncover the internalised linguistic system
(= I-language) possessed by native speakers of English – i.e. we are attempt-
ing to characterise a mental state (a state of competence, and thus linguistic

8
1 grammar
knowledge). See Smith (1999) for more extensive discussion of the notion of
I-language.
Chomsky’s ultimate goal is to devise a theory of Universal Grammar/UG
which generalises from the grammars of particular I-languages to the grammars of
all possible natural (i.e. human) I-languages. He deﬁnes UG (1986a, p. 23) as ‘the
theory of human I-languages . . . that identiﬁes the I-languages that are humanly
accessible under normal conditions’. (The expression ‘are humanly accessible’
means ‘can be acquired by human beings’.) In other words, UG is a theory about
the nature of possible grammars of human languages: hence, a theory of UG
answers the question: ‘What are the deﬁning characteristics of the grammars of
human I-languages?’
There are a number of criteria of adequacy which a theory of Universal
Grammar must satisfy. One such criterion (which is implicit in the use of the
term Universal Grammar) is universality, in the sense that a theory of UG must
supply us with the tools needed to provide a descriptively adequate grammar for
any and every human I-language (i.e. a grammar which correctly describes how
to form and interpret expressions in the relevant language). After all, a theory of
UG would be of little interest if it enabled us to describe the grammar of English
and French, but not that of Swahili or Chinese.
However, since the ultimate goal of any theory is explanation, it is not enough
for a theory of Universal Grammar simply to list sets of universal properties of
natural language grammars; on the contrary, a theory of UG must seek to explain
the relevant properties. So, a key question for any adequate theory of UG to answer
is: ‘Why do grammars of human I-languages have the properties they do?’ The
requirement that a theory should explain why grammars have the properties they
do is conventionally referred to as the criterion of explanatory adequacy.
Since the theory of Universal Grammar is concerned with characterising the
properties of natural (i.e. human) I-language grammars, an important question
which we want our theory of UG to answer is: ‘What are the deﬁning character-
istics of human I-languages which differentiate them from, for example, artiﬁ-
cial languages like those used in mathematics and computing (e.g. Java, Prolog,
C etc.), or from animal communication systems (e.g. the tail-wagging dance per-
formed by bees to communicate the location of a food source to other bees)?’ It
therefore follows that the descriptive apparatus which our theory of UG allows us
to make use of in devising natural language grammars must not be so powerful
that it can be used to describe not only natural languages, but also computer lan-
guages or animal communication systems (since any such excessively powerful
theory wouldn’t be able to pinpoint the criterial properties of natural languages
which differentiate them from other types of communication system). In other
words, a third condition which we have to impose on our theory of language
is that it be maximally constrained: that is, we want our theory to provide us
with technical devices which are so constrained (i.e. limited) in their expres-
sive power that they can only be used to describe natural languages, and are not
appropriate for the description of other communication systems. A theory which

1.3 Universal Grammar
9
is constrained in appropriate ways should enable us to provide a principled expla-
nation for why certain types of syntactic structure and syntactic operation sim-
ply aren’t found in natural languages. One way of constraining grammars is to
suppose that grammatical operations obey certain linguistic principles, and that
any operation which violates the relevant principles leads to ungrammaticality:
see the discussion below in §1.5 for a concrete example.
A related requirement is that linguistic theory should provide grammars which
make use of the minimal theoretical apparatus required: in other words, gram-
mars should be as simple as possible. Much earlier work in syntax involved the
postulation of complex structures and principles: as a reaction to the excessive
complexity of this kind of work, Chomsky in work over the past ten years or so has
made the requirement to minimise the theoretical and descriptive apparatus used
to describe language the cornerstone of the Minimalist Program for Linguistic
Theory which he has been developing (in work dating back to Chomsky 1993,
1995). In more recent work, Chomsky (1998, 1999, 2001, 2002) has suggested
that language is a perfect system with an optimal design in the sense that natural
language grammars create structures which are designed to interface perfectly
with other components of the mind – more speciﬁcally with speech and thought
systems. (For discussion of the idea that language is a perfect system of optimal
design, see Lappin, Levine and Johnson 2000a,b, 2001; Holmberg 2000; Piattelli-
Palmarini 2000; Reuland 2000, 2001b; Roberts 2000, 2001a; Uriagereka 2000,
2001; Freidin and Vergnaud 2001; and Atkinson 2003.)
To make this discussion rather more concrete, let’s suppose that a grammar of
a language is organised as follows. One component of a grammar is a Lexicon
(= dictionary = list of all the lexical items/words in the language and their
linguistic properties), and in forming a given sentence out of a set of words, we
ﬁrst have to take the relevant words out of the Lexicon. Our chosen words are
then combined together by a series of syntactic computations in the syntax (i.e.
in the syntactic/computational component of the grammar), thereby forming
a syntactic structure. This syntactic structure serves as input into two other
components of the grammar. One is the semantic component which maps (i.e.
‘converts’) the syntactic structure into a corresponding semantic representa-
tion (i.e. to a representation of linguistic aspects of its meaning); the other is
a PF component, so called because it maps the syntactic structure into a PF
representation (i.e. a representation of its Phonetic Form, telling us how it is
pronounced). The semantic representation interfaces with systems of thought,
and the PF representation with systems of speech – as shown in diagrammatic
form below:
(12)
semantic
component
semantic
≈
THOUGHT
representation
SYSTEMS
Lexicon
syntactic
Syntax
structure
PF
component
PF
≈
SPEECH
representation
SYSTEMS

10
1 grammar
In terms of the model in (12), an important constraint is that the (semantic and
PF) representations which are ‘handed over’ to the (thought and speech) inter-
face systems should contain only elements which are legible by the appropriate
interface system – so that the semantic representations handed over to thought
systems contain only elements contributing to meaning, and the PF representa-
tions handed over to speech systems contain only elements which contribute to
phonetic form (i.e. to determining how the sentence is pronounced).
The neurophysiological mechanisms which underlie linguistic competence
make it possible for young children to acquire language in a remarkably short
period of time. Accordingly, a fourth condition which any adequate linguistic
theory must meet is that of learnability: it must provide grammars which are
learnable by young children in a short period of time. The desire to maximise the
learnability of natural language grammars provides an additional argument for
minimising the theoretical apparatus used to describe languages, in the sense that
the simpler grammars are, the simpler it is for children to acquire them.
1.4
The Language Faculty
Mention of learnability leads us to consider the related goal of devel-
oping a theory of language acquisition. An acquisition theory is concerned with
the question of how children acquire grammars of their native languages. Children
generally produce their ﬁrst recognisable word (e.g. Mama or Dada) by the age
of twelve months. For the next six months or so, there is little apparent evidence
of grammatical development in their speech production, although the child’s pro-
ductive vocabulary typically increases by about ﬁve words a month until it reaches
around thirty words at age eighteen months. Throughout this single-word stage,
children’s utterances comprise single words spoken in isolation: e.g. a child may
say Apple when reaching for an apple, or Up when wanting to climb up onto her
mother’s knee. During the single-word stage, it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd any clear evi-
dence of the acquisition of grammar, in that children do not make productive use
of inﬂections (e.g. they don’t add the plural -s ending to nouns, or the past-tense -d
ending to verbs), and don’t productively combine words together to form two-
and three-word utterances.
At around the age of eighteen months (though with considerable variation
from one child to another), we ﬁnd the ﬁrst visible signs of the acquisition of
grammar: children start to make productive use of inﬂections (e.g. using plural
nouns like doggies alongside the singular form doggy, and inﬂected verb forms
like going/gone alongside the uninﬂected verb form go), and similarly start to
produce elementary two- and three-word utterances such as Want Teddy, Eating
cookie, Daddy gone ofﬁce etc. From this point on, there is a rapid expansion in
their grammatical development, until by the age of around thirty months they have
typically acquired most of the inﬂections and core grammatical constructions used
in English, and are able to produce adult-like sentences such as Where’s Mummy

1.4 The Language Faculty
11
gone? What’s Daddy doing? Can we go to the zoo, Daddy? etc. (though occasional
morphological and syntactic errors persist until the age of four years or so – e.g.
We goed there with Daddy, What we can do? etc.).
So, the central phenomenon which any theory of language acquisition must
seek to explain is this: how is it that after a long drawn-out period of many
months in which there is no obvious sign of grammatical development, at around
the age of eighteen months there is a sudden spurt as multiword speech starts to
emerge, and a phenomenal growth in grammatical development then takes place
over the next twelve months? This uniformity and (once the spurt has started)
rapidity in the pattern of children’s linguistic development are the central facts
which a theory of language acquisition must seek to explain. But how?
Chomsky maintains that the most plausible explanation for the uniformity and
rapidity of ﬁrst language acquisition is to posit that the course of acquisition is
determined by a biologically endowed innate Language Faculty (or language
acquisition program, to borrow a computer software metaphor) within the brain,
which provides children with a genetically transmitted algorithm (i.e. set of pro-
cedures) for developing a grammar, on the basis of their linguistic experience
(i.e. on the basis of the speech input they receive). The way in which Chomsky
visualises the acquisition process can be represented schematically as in (13)
below (where L is the language being acquired):
(13)
Experience
of L
→
Language
Faculty
→
Grammar
of L
Children acquiring a language will observe people around them using the lan-
guage, and the set of expressions in the language which a child hears (and the
contexts in which they are used) in the course of acquiring the language consti-
tute the child’s linguistic experience of the language. This experience serves as
input to the child’s language faculty, which provides the child with a procedure
for (subconsciously) analysing the experience and devising a grammar of the
language being acquired. Thus, the input to the language faculty is the child’s
experience, and the output of the language faculty is a grammar of the language
being acquired.
The hypothesis that the course of language acquisition is determined by an
innate language faculty is known popularly as the innateness hypothesis. Chom-
sky maintains that the ability to speak and acquire languages is unique to human
beings, and that natural languages incorporate principles which are also unique
to humans and which reﬂect the nature of the human mind:
Whatever evidence we do have seems to me to support the view that the
ability to acquire and use language is a species-speciﬁc human capacity,
that there are very deep and restrictive principles that determine the nature
of human language and are rooted in the speciﬁc character of the human
mind.
(Chomsky 1972, p. 102)

12
1 grammar
Moreover, he notes, language acquisition is an ability which all humans possess,
entirely independently of their general intelligence:
Even at low levels of intelligence, at pathological levels, we ﬁnd a command
of language that is totally unattainable by an ape that may, in other respects,
surpass a human imbecile in problem-solving activity and other adaptive
behaviour.
(Chomsky 1972, p. 10)
In addition, the apparent uniformity in the types of grammars developed by dif-
ferent speakers of the same language suggests that children have genetic guidance
in the task of constructing a grammar of their native language:
We know that the grammars that are in fact constructed vary only slightly
among speakers of the same language, despite wide variations not only in
intelligence but also in the conditions under which language is acquired.
(Chomsky 1972, p. 79)
Furthermore, the rapidity of acquisition (once the grammar spurt has started) also
points to genetic guidance in grammar construction:
Otherwise it is impossible to explain how children come to construct gram-
mars . . . under the given conditions of time and access to data.
(Chomsky 1972, p. 113)
(The sequence ‘under . . . data’ means simply ‘in so short a time, and on the basis
of such limited linguistic experience.’) What makes the uniformity and rapidity of
acquisition even more remarkable is the fact that the child’s linguistic experience
is often degenerate (i.e. imperfect), since it is based on the linguistic performance
of adult speakers, and this may be a poor reﬂection of their competence:
A good deal of normal speech consists of false starts, disconnected phrases,
and other deviations from idealised competence.
(Chomsky 1972, p. 158)
If much of the speech input which children receive is degenerate (because of
performance errors), how is it that they can use this degenerate experience to
develop a (competence) grammar which speciﬁes how to form grammatical sen-
tences? Chomsky’s answer is to draw the following analogy:
Descartes asks: how is it when we see a sort of irregular ﬁgure drawn in
front of us we see it as a triangle? He observes, quite correctly, that there’s a
disparity between the data presented to us and the percept that we construct.
And he argues, I think quite plausibly, that we see the ﬁgure as a triangle
because there’s something about the nature of our minds which makes the
image of a triangle easily constructible by the mind.
(Chomsky 1968,
p. 687)
The obvious implication is that in much the same way as we are genetically
predisposed to analyse shapes (however irregular) as having speciﬁc geometrical
properties, so too we are genetically predisposed to analyse sentences (however
ungrammatical) as having speciﬁc grammatical properties. (For evaluation of this

1.5 Principles of Universal Grammar
13
kind of degenerate input argument, see Pullum and Scholz 2002; Thomas 2002;
Sampson 2002; Fodor and Crowther 2002; Lasnik and Uriagereka 2002; Legate
and Yang 2002; Crain and Pietroski 2002; and Scholz and Pullum 2002.)
A further argument Chomsky uses in support of the innateness hypothesis
relates to the fact that language acquisition is an entirely subconscious and invol-
untary activity (in the sense that you can’t consciously choose whether or not to
acquire your native language – though you can choose whether or not you wish
to learn chess); it is also an activity which is largely unguided (in the sense that
parents don’t teach children to talk):
Children acquire . . . languages quite successfully even though no spe-
cial care is taken to teach them and no special attention is given to their
progress.
(Chomsky 1965, pp. 200–1)
The implication is that we don’t learn to have a native language, any more than
we learn to have arms or legs; the ability to acquire a native language is part of
our genetic endowment – just like the ability to learn to walk.
Studies of language acquisition lend empirical support for the innateness
hypothesis. Research has suggested that there is a critical period for the acquisi-
tion of syntax, in the sense that children who learn a given language before puberty
generally achieve native competence in it, whereas those who acquire a (ﬁrst or
second) language after the age of nine or ten years rarely manage to achieve
native-like syntactic competence: see Lenneberg (1967), Hurford (1991) and
Smith (1998, 1999) for discussion. A particularly poignant example of this is a
child called Genie (see Curtiss 1977; Rymer 1993), who was deprived of speech
input and kept locked up on her own in a room until age thirteen. When eventu-
ally taken into care and exposed to intensive language input, her vocabulary grew
enormously, but her syntax never developed. This suggests that the acquisition
of syntax is determined by an innate ‘language acquisition programme’ which
is in effect switched off at the onset of puberty. (For further discussion of the
innateness hypothesis, see Antony and Hornstein 2002.)
1.5
Principles of Universal Grammar
If (as Chomsky claims) human beings are biologically endowed with
an innate language faculty, an obvious question to ask is what is the nature of the
language faculty. An important point to note in this regard is that children can
in principle acquire any natural language as their native language (e.g. Afghan
orphans brought up by English-speaking foster parents in an English-speaking
community acquire English as their ﬁrst language). It therefore follows that the
language faculty must incorporate a theory of Universal Grammar/UG which
enables the child to develop a grammar of any natural language on the basis
of suitable linguistic experience of the language (i.e. sufﬁcient speech input).

14
1 grammar
Experience of a particular language L (examples of words, phrases and sentences
in L which the child hears produced by native speakers of L in particular contexts)
serves as input to the child’s language faculty which incorporates a theory of Uni-
versal Grammar providing the child with a procedure for developing a grammar
of L.
If the acquisition of grammatical competence is indeed controlled by a geneti-
cally endowed language faculty incorporating a theory of UG, then it follows that
certain aspects of child (and adult) competence are known without experience,
and hence must be part of the genetic information about language with which we
are biologically endowed at birth. Such aspects of language would not have to be
learned, precisely because they form part of the child’s genetic inheritance. If we
make the (plausible) assumption that the language faculty does not vary signiﬁ-
cantly from one (normal) human being to another, those aspects of language which
are innately determined will also be universal. Thus, in seeking to determine the
nature of the language faculty, we are in effect looking for UG principles (i.e.
principles of Universal Grammar) which determine the very nature of language.
But how can we uncover such principles? The answer is that since the relevant
principles are posited to be universal, it follows that they will affect the application
of every relevant type of grammatical operation in every language. Thus, detailed
analysis of one grammatical construction in one language could reveal evidence
of the operation of principles of Universal Grammar. By way of illustration, let’s
look at question-formation in English. In this connection, consider the following
dialogue:
(14)
speaker a: He had said someone would do something
speaker b: He had said who would do what?
In (14), speaker B largely echoes what speaker A says, except for replacing
someone by who and something by what. For obvious reasons, the type of question
produced by speaker B in (14) is called an echo question. However, speaker B
could alternatively have replied with a non-echo question like that in (15) below:
(15)
Who had he said would do what?
If we compare the echo question He had said who would do what? in (14) with
the corresponding non-echo question Who had he said would do what? in (15),
we ﬁnd that (15) involves two movement operations which are not found in (14).
One is an auxiliary inversion operation by which the past-tense auxiliary had
is moved in front of its subject he. (As we shall see in chapter 2, an auxiliary
is a word like had/would in (15) which carries grammatical properties such as
tense/aspect/mood/modality.) The other is a wh-movement operation by which
the wh-word who is moved to the front of the overall sentence, and positioned
in front of had. (A wh-word is a word like who/what/where/when etc. beginning
with wh.)
A closer look at questions like (15) provides evidence that there are UG prin-
ciples which constrain the way in which movement operations may apply. An

1.5 Principles of Universal Grammar
15
interesting property of the questions in (14) and (15) is that they contain two
auxiliaries (had and would) and two wh-expressions (who and what). Now, if we
compare (15) with the corresponding echo question in (14), we ﬁnd that the ﬁrst
of the two auxiliaries (had) and the ﬁrst of the wh-words (who) are moved to the
front of the sentence in (15). If we try inverting the second auxiliary (would) and
fronting the second wh-word (what), we end up with ungrammatical sentences,
as we see from (16c–e) below (the preposed items are italicised, and the corre-
sponding echo question is given in parentheses; (16a) is repeated from the echo
question in (14B), and (16b) from (15)):
(16) (a)
He had said who would do what? (= echo question)
(b)
Who had he said would do what? (cf. He had said who would do what?)
(c)
∗Who would he had said do what? (cf. He had said who would do what?)
(d)
∗What had he said who would do? (cf. He had said who would do what?)
(e)
∗What would he had said who do? (cf. He had said who would do what?)
If we compare (16b) with its echo-question counterpart (16a) He had said who
would do what? we see that (16b) involves preposing the ﬁrst wh-word who and
the ﬁrst auxiliary had, and that this results in a grammatical sentence. By con-
trast, (16c) involves preposing the ﬁrst wh-word who and the second auxiliary
would; (16d) involves preposing the second wh-word what and the ﬁrst auxil-
iary had; and (16e) involves preposing the second wh-word what and the second
auxiliary would. The generalisation which emerges from the data in (16) is that
auxiliary inversion preposes the closest auxiliary had (i.e. the one nearest the
beginning of the sentence) and likewise wh-fronting preposes the closest wh-
expression who. The fact that two, quite distinct, different movement operations
(auxiliary inversion and wh-movement) are subject to the same locality condition
(which requires preposing of the most local – i.e. closest – expression of the
relevant type) suggests that one of the principles of Universal Grammar incor-
porated into the language faculty is a Locality Principle which can be outlined
informally as:
(17)
Locality Principle
Grammatical operations are local
In consequence of (17), auxiliary inversion preposes the closest auxiliary, and wh-
movement preposes the closest wh-expression. It seems reasonable to suppose
that(17)isaprincipleofUniversalGrammar(ratherthananidiosyncraticproperty
of question-formation in English). In fact, the strongest possible hypothesis we
could put forward is that (17) holds of all grammatical operations in all natural
languages, not just of movement operations; and indeed we shall see in later
chapters that other types of grammatical operation (including agreement and case
assignment) are subject to a similar locality condition. If so, and if we assume
that abstract grammatical principles which are universal are part of our biological
endowment, then the natural conclusion to reach is that (17) is a principle which

16
1 grammar
is biologically wired into the language faculty, and which thus forms part of our
genetic make-up.
A theory of grammar which posits that grammatical operations are constrained
by innate principles of UG offers the important advantage that it minimises the
burden of grammatical learning imposed on the child (in the sense that children do
not have to learn, for example, that auxiliary inversion affects the ﬁrst auxiliary
in a sentence, or that wh-movement likewise affects the ﬁrst wh-expression).
This is an important consideration, since we saw earlier that learnability is a
criterion of adequacy for any theory of grammar – i.e. any adequate theory of
grammar must be able to explain how children come to learn the grammar of
their native language(s) in such a rapid and uniform fashion. The UG theory
developed by Chomsky provides a straightforward account of the rapidity of the
child’s grammatical development, since it posits that there are a universal set
of innately endowed grammatical principles which determine how grammatical
operations apply in natural language grammars. Since UG principles which are
innately endowed are wired into the language faculty and so do not have to be
learned by the child, this minimises the learning load placed on the child, and
thereby maximises the learnability of natural language grammars.
1.6
Parameters
Thus far, we have argued that the language faculty incorporates a set
of universal principles which guide the child in acquiring a grammar. However, it
clearly cannot be the case that all aspects of the grammar of languages are univer-
sal; if this were so, all natural language grammars would be the same and there
would be no grammatical learning involved in language acquisition (i.e. no need
for children to learn anything about the grammar of sentences in the language they
are acquiring), only lexical learning (viz. learning the lexical items/words in the
language and their idiosyncratic linguistic properties, e.g. whether a given item
has an irregular plural or past-tense form). But although there are universal prin-
ciples which determine the broad outlines of the grammar of natural languages,
there also seem to be language-particular aspects of grammar which children
have to learn as part of the task of acquiring their native language. Thus, language
acquisition involves not only lexical learning but also some grammatical learning.
Let’s take a closer look at the grammatical learning involved, and what it tells us
about the language acquisition process.
Clearly, grammatical learning is not going to involve learning those aspects of
grammar which are determined by universal (hence innate) grammatical opera-
tions and principles. Rather, grammatical learning will be limited to those param-
eters (i.e. dimensions or aspects) of grammar which are subject to language-
particular variation (and hence vary from one language to another). In other
words, grammatical learning will be limited to parametrised aspects of grammar
(i.e. those aspects of grammar which are subject to parametric variation from

1.6 Parameters
17
one language to another). The obvious way to determine just what aspects of
the grammar of their native language children have to learn is to examine the
range of parametric variation found in the grammars of different (adult) natural
languages.
We can illustrate one type of parametric variation across languages in terms of
the following contrast between the Italian examples in (18a,b) below, and their
English counterparts in (18c,d):
(18) (a)
Maria parla francese
(b) Parla francese
(c)
Maria speaks French
(d) ∗Speaks French
As (18a) and (18c) illustrate, the Italian verb parlare and its English counter-
part speak (as used here) are two-place predicates which require both a subject
argument like Maria and an object argument like francese/French: in both cases,
the verb is ﬁnite (more speciﬁcally it is a present-tense form) and agrees with its
subject Maria (and hence is a third-person-singular form). But what are we to
make of Italian sentences like (18b) Parla francese (= ‘Speaks French’) in which
the verb parla ‘speaks’ has the overt complement francese ‘French’ but has no
overt subject? The answer suggested in work over the past few decades is that
the verb in such cases has a null subject which can be thought of as a silent or
invisible counterpart of the pronouns he/she which appear in the corresponding
English translation ‘He/She speaks French’. This null subject is conventionally
designated as pro, so that (18b) has the structure pro parla francese ‘pro speaks
French’, where pro is a null-subject pronoun.
There are two reasons for thinking that the verb parla ‘speaks’ has a null subject
in (18b). Firstly, parlare ‘speak’ (in the relevant use) is a two-place predicate
which requires both a subject argument and an object argument: under the null-
subject analysis, its subject argument is pro (a null pronoun). Secondly, ﬁnite
verbs agree with their subjects in Italian: hence, in order to account for the fact
that the verb parla is in the third-person-singular form in (18b), we need to posit
that it has a third-person-singular subject; under the null-subject analysis, we
can say that parla ‘speaks’ has a null pronoun (pro) as its subject, and that pro
(if used to refer to Maria) is a third-person-feminine-singular pronoun.
The more general conclusion to be drawn from our discussion is that in lan-
guages like Italian, ﬁnite verbs (i.e. verbs which carry present/past etc. tense)
can have either an overt subject like Maria or a null pro subject. But things are
very different in English. Although a ﬁnite verb like speaks can have an overt
subject like Maria in English, it cannot normally have a null pro subject – hence
the ungrammaticality of (18d) ∗Speaks French. So, ﬁnite verbs in a language
like Italian can have either overt or null subjects, but in a language like English,
ﬁnite verbs can generally have only overt subjects, not null subjects. We can
describe the differences between the two types of language by saying that Italian
is a null-subject language, whereas English is a non-null-subject language.
More generally, there appears to be parametric variation between languages as to
whether or not they allow ﬁnite verbs to have null subjects. The relevant parameter
(termed the Null-Subject Parameter) would appear to be a binary one, with only

18
1 grammar
two possible settings for any given language L, viz. L either does or doesn’t allow
ﬁnite verbs to have null subjects. There appears to be no language which allows
the subjects of some ﬁnite verbs to be null, but not others – e.g. no language
in which it is OK to say Drinks wine (meaning ‘He/she drinks wine’) but not
OK to say Eats pasta (meaning ‘He/she eats pasta’). The range of grammati-
cal variation found across languages appears to be strictly limited to just two
possibilities – languages either do or don’t systematically allow ﬁnite verbs to
have null subjects. (A complication glossed over here is posed by languages in
which only some ﬁnite verb forms can have null subjects: see Vainikka and Levy
1999 and the collection of papers in Jaeggli and Saﬁr 1989 for illustration and
discussion.)
A more familiar aspect of grammar which appears to be parametrised relates
to word order, in that different types of language have different word orders in
speciﬁc types of construction. One type of word-order variation can be illustrated
in relation to the following contrast between English and Chinese questions:
(19) (a)
What do you think he will say?
(b)
Ni
xiangxin ta
hui
shuo shenme
You think
he will say
what?
In simple wh-questions in English (i.e. questions containing a single word begin-
ning with wh- like what/where/when/why) the wh-expression is moved to the
beginning of the sentence, as is the case with what in (19a). By contrast, in
Chinese, the wh-word does not move to the front of the sentence, but rather
remains in situ (i.e. in the same place as would be occupied by a corresponding
non-interrogative expression), so that shenme ‘what’ is positioned after the verb
shuo ‘say’ because it is the (direct object) complement of the verb, and comple-
ments of the relevant type are normally positioned after their verbs in Chinese.
Thus, another parameter of variation between languages is the wh-parameter – a
parameter which determines whether wh-expressions can be fronted (i.e. moved
to the front of the overall interrogative structure containing them) or not. Sig-
niﬁcantly, this parameter again appears to be one which is binary in nature, in
that it allows for only two possibilities – viz. a language either does or doesn’t
allow wh-movement (i.e. movement of wh-expressions to the front of the sen-
tence). Many other possibilities for wh-movement just don’t seem to occur in
natural language: for example, there is no language in which the counterpart of
who undergoes wh-fronting but not the counterpart of what (e.g. no language
in which it is OK to say Who did you see? but not What did you see?). Like-
wise, there is no language in which wh-complements of some verbs can undergo
fronting, but not wh-complements of other verbs (e.g. no language in which it is
OK to say What did he drink? but not What did he eat?). It would seem that the
range of parametric variation found with respect to wh-fronting is limited to just
two possibilities: viz. a language either does or doesn’t allow wh-expressions
to be systematically fronted. (However, it should be noted that a number of
complications are overlooked here in the interest of simplifying exposition: e.g.

1.6 Parameters
19
some languages like English allow only one wh-expression to be fronted in
this way, whereas others allow more than one wh-expression to be fronted; see
Boˇskovi´c 2002a for a recent account. An additional complication is posed by the
fact that wh-movement appears to be optional in some languages, either in main
clauses, or in main and complement clauses alike: see Denham 2000; Cheng and
Rooryck 2000.)
Let’s now turn to look at a rather different type of word-order variation, con-
cerning the relative position of heads and complements within phrases. It is a
general (indeed, universal) property of phrases that every phrase has a head word
which determines the nature of the overall phrase. For example, an expression
such as students of philosophy is a plural noun phrase because its head word
(i.e. the key word in the phrase whose nature determines the properties of the
overall phrase) is the plural noun students: the noun students (and not the noun
philosophy) is the head word because the phrase students of philosophy denotes
kinds of student, not kinds of philosophy. The following expression of philosophy
which combines with the head noun students to form the noun phrase students
of philosophy functions as the complement of the noun students. In much the
same way, an expression such as in the kitchen is a prepositional phrase which
comprises the head preposition in and its complement the kitchen. Likewise, an
expression such as stay with me is a verb phrase which comprises the head verb
stay and its complement with me. And similarly, an expression such as fond of
fast food is an adjectival phrase formed by combining the head adjective fond
with its complement of fast food.
In English all heads (whether nouns, verbs, prepositions, or adjectives etc.) nor-
mally precede their complements; however, there are also languages like Korean
in which all heads normally follow their complements. In informal terms, we
can say that English is a head-ﬁrst language, whereas Korean is a head-last
language. The differences between the two languages can be illustrated by com-
paring the English examples in (20) below with their Korean counterparts in
(21):
(20) (a)
Close the door
(b) desire for change
(21) (a)
Muneul dadara
(b) byunhwa-edaehan galmang
Door
close
change-for
desire
In the English verb phrase close the door in (20a), the head verb close precedes
its complement the door; if we suppose that the door is a determiner phrase,
then the head of the phrase (= the determiner the) precedes its complement
(= the noun door). Likewise, in the English noun phrase desire for change in
(20b), the head noun desire precedes its complement for change; the comple-
ment for change is in turn a prepositional phrase in which the head preposition
for likewise precedes its complement change. Since English consistently posi-
tions heads before complements, it is a head-ﬁrst language. By contrast, we ﬁnd

20
1 grammar
precisely the opposite ordering in Korean. In the verb phrase muneul dadara
(literally ‘door close’) in (21a), the head verb dadara ‘close’ follows its com-
plement muneul ‘door’; likewise, in the noun phrase byunhwa-edaehan galmang
(literally ‘change-for desire’) in (21b) the head noun galmang ‘desire’ follows its
complement byunhwa-edaehan ‘change-for’; the expression byunhwa-edaehan
‘change-for’ is in turn a prepositional phrase whose head preposition edaehan
‘for/about’ follows its complement byunhwa ‘change’ (so that edaehan might
more appropriately be called a postposition; prepositions and postpositions are
differents kinds of adposition). Since Korean consistently positions heads after
their complements, it is a head-last language. Given that English is head-ﬁrst and
Korean head-last, it is clear that the relative positioning of heads with respect to
their complements is one word-order parameter along which languages differ; the
relevant parameter is termed the Head-Position Parameter.
It should be noted, however, that word-order variation in respect of the relative
positioning of heads and complements falls within narrowly circumscribed limits.
There are many logically possible types of word-order variation which just don’t
seem to occur in natural languages. For example, we might imagine that in a
given language some verbs would precede and others follow their complements,
so that (e.g.) if two new hypothetical verbs like scrunge and plurg were coined in
English, then scrunge might take a following complement, and plurg a preceding
complement. And yet, this doesn’t ever seem to happen: rather all verbs typically
occupy the same position in a given language with respect to a given type of com-
plement. (A complication overlooked here in the interest of expository simplicity
is that some languages position some types of head before their complements,
and other types of head after their complements: German is one such language,
as you will see from exercise 1.2.)
What this suggests is that there are universal constraints (i.e. restrictions) on
the range of parametric variation found across languages in respect of the relative
ordering of heads and complements. It would seem as if there are only two
different possibilities which the theory of Universal Grammar allows for: a given
type of structure in a given language must either be head-ﬁrst (with the relevant
heads positioned before their complements), or head-last (with the relevant heads
positioned after their complements). Many other logically possible orderings of
heads with respect to complements appear not to be found in natural language
grammars. The obvious question to ask is why this should be. The answer given by
the theory of parameters is that the language faculty imposes genetic constraints
on the range of parametric variation permitted in natural language grammars. In
the case of the Head-Position Parameter (i.e. the parameter which determines
the relative positioning of heads with respect to their complements), the language
faculty allows only a binary set of possibilities – namely that a given kind of struc-
ture in a given language is either consistently head-ﬁrst or consistently head-last.
We can generalise our discussion in this section in the following terms. If
the Head-Position Parameter reduces to a simple binary choice, and if the
Wh-Parameter and the Null-Subject Parameter also involve binary choices, it

1.7 Parameter-setting
21
seems implausible that binarity could be an accidental property of these particular
parameters. Rather, it seems much more likely that it is an inherent property of
parameters that they constrain the range of structural variation between languages,
and limit it to a simple binary choice. Generalising still further, it seems possible
that all grammatical variation between languages can be characterised in terms
of a set of parameters, and that for each parameter, the language faculty speciﬁes
a binary choice of possible values for the parameter.
1.7
Parameter-setting
The theory of parameters outlined in the previous section has impor-
tant implications for a theory of language acquisition. If all grammatical variation
can be characterised in terms of a series of parameters with binary settings, it fol-
lows that the only grammatical learning which children have to undertake in
relation to the syntactic properties of the relevant class of constructions is to
determine (on the basis of their linguistic experience) which of the two alter-
native settings for each parameter is the appropriate one for the language being
acquired. So, for example, children have to learn whether the native language
they are acquiring is a null-subject language or not, whether it is a wh-movement
language or not, and whether it is a head-ﬁrst language or not . . . and so on for all
the other parameters along which languages vary. Of course, children also face
the formidable task of lexical learning – i.e. building up their vocabulary in the
relevant language, learning what words mean and what range of forms they have
(e.g. whether they are regular or irregular in respect of their morphology), what
kinds of structures they can be used in and so on. On this view, the acquisition of
grammar involves the twin tasks of lexical learning and parameter-setting.
This leads us to the following view of the language acquisition process. The
central task which the child faces in acquiring a language is to construct a grammar
of the language. The innate Language Faculty incorporates (i) a set of universal
grammatical principles, and (ii) a set of grammatical parameters which impose
severe constraints on the range of grammatical variation permitted in natural
languages (perhaps limiting variation to binary choices). Since universal prin-
ciples don’t have to be learned, the child’s syntactic learning task is limited to
that of parameter-setting (i.e. determining an appropriate setting for each of the
relevant grammatical parameters). For obvious reasons, the theory outlined here
(developed by Chomsky at the beginning of the 1980s and articulated in Chomsky
1981) is known as Principles-and-Parameters Theory/PPT.
ThePPTmodelclearlyhasimportantimplicationsforthenatureofthelanguage
acquisition process, since it vastly reduces the complexity of the acquisition task
which children face. PPT hypothesises that grammatical properties which are
universal will not have to be learned by the child, since they are wired into the
language faculty and hence part of the child’s genetic endowment: on the contrary,
all the child has to learn are those grammatical properties which are subject to

22
1 grammar
parametric variation across languages. Moreover, the child’s learning task will be
further simpliﬁed if it turns out (as research since 1980 has suggested) that the
values which a parameter can have fall within a narrowly speciﬁed range, perhaps
characterisable in terms of a series of binary choices. This simpliﬁed parameter-
setting model of the acquisition of grammar has given rise to a metaphorical
acquisition model in which the child is visualised as having to set a series of
switches in one of two positions (up/down) – each such switch representing a
different parameter. In the case of the Head-Position Parameter, we can imagine
that if the switch is set in the up position (for particular types of head), the language
will show head-ﬁrst word order in relevant kinds of structure, whereas if it is set in
the down position, the order will be head-last. Of course, an obvious implication
of the switch metaphor is that the switch must be set in either one position or
the other, and cannot be set in both positions. (This would preclude, for example,
the possibility of a language having both head-ﬁrst and head-last word order in a
given type of structure.)
The assumption that acquiring the grammar of a language involves the rel-
atively simple task of setting a number of grammatical parameters provides a
natural way of accounting for the fact that the acquisition of speciﬁc parameters
appears to be a remarkably rapid and error-free process in young children. For
example, young children acquiring English as their native language seem to set
the Head-Position Parameter at its appropriate head-ﬁrst setting from the very
earliest multiword utterances they produce (at around eighteen months of age),
and seem to know (tacitly, not explicitly, of course) that English is a head-ﬁrst lan-
guage. Accordingly, the earliest verb phrases and prepositional phrases produced
by young children acquiring English consistently show verbs and prepositions
positioned before their complements, as structures such as the following indicate
(produced by a young boy called Jem/James at age twenty months; head verbs
are italicised in (22a) and head prepositions in (22b), and their complements are
in non-italic print):
(22) (a)
Touch heads. Cuddle book. Want crayons. Want malteser. Open door. Want
biscuit. Bang bottom. See cats. Sit down
(b)
On Mummy. To lady. Without shoe. With potty. In keyhole. In school. On
carpet. On box. With crayons. To Mummy
The obvious conclusion to be drawn from structures like (22) is that children like
Jem consistently position heads before their complements from the very earliest
multiword utterances they produce. They do not use different orders for different
words of the same type (e.g. they don’t position the verb see after its complement
but the verb want before its complement), or for different types of words (e.g.
they don’t position verbs before and prepositions after their complements).
A natural question to ask at this point is how we can provide a principled
explanation for the fact that from the very onset of multiword speech we ﬁnd
English children correctly positioning heads before their complements. The
Principles-and-Parameters model enables us to provide an explanation for why

1.8 Evidence used to set parameters
23
children manage to learn the relative ordering of heads and complements in such
a rapid and error-free fashion. The answer provided by the model is that learning
this aspect of word order involves the comparatively simple task of setting a binary
parameter at its appropriate value. This task will be a relatively straightforward
one if the language faculty tells the child that the only possible choice is for a
given type of structure in a given language to be uniformly head-ﬁrst or uniformly
head-last. Given such an assumption, the child could set the parameter correctly
on the basis of minimal linguistic experience. For example, once the child is
able to parse (i.e. grammatically analyse) an adult utterance such as Help Daddy
and knows that it contains a verb phrase comprising the head verb help and its
complement Daddy, then (on the assumption that the language faculty speciﬁes
that all heads of a given type behave uniformly with regard to whether they are
positioned before or after their complements), the child will automatically know
that all verbs in English are canonically (i.e. normally) positioned before their
complements.
1.8
Evidence used to set parameters
One of the questions posed by the parameter-setting model of acqui-
sition outlined here is just how children come to arrive at the appropriate setting
for a given parameter, and what kind(s) of evidence they make use of in set-
ting parameters. As Chomsky notes (1981, pp. 8–9), there are two types of evi-
dence which we might expect to be available to the language learner in principle,
namely positive evidence and negative evidence. Positive evidence comprises
a set of observed expressions illustrating a particular phenomenon: for example,
if children’s speech input is made up of structures in which heads precede their
complements, this provides them with positive evidence which enables them to
set the Head-Position Parameter appropriately. Negative evidence might be of two
kinds – direct or indirect. Direct negative evidence might come from the correc-
tion of children’s errors by other speakers of the language. However, (contrary
to what is often imagined) correction plays a fairly insigniﬁcant role in language
acquisition, for two reasons. Firstly, correction is relatively infrequent: adults
simply don’t correct all the errors children make (if they did, children would
soon become inhibited and discouraged from speaking). Secondly, children are
notoriously unresponsive to correction, as the following dialogue (from McNeill
1966, p. 69) illustrates:
(23)
child: Nobody don’t like me
adult: No, say: ‘Nobody likes me’
child: Nobody don’t like me
(8 repetitions of this dialogue)
adult: No, now listen carefully. Say ‘Nobody likes me’
child: Oh, nobody don’t likes me

24
1 grammar
As Hyams (1986, p. 91) notes: ‘Negative evidence in the form of parental dis-
approval or overt corrections has no discernible effect on the child’s developing
syntactic ability.’ (For further evidence in support of this conclusion, see McNeill
1966; Brown, Cazden and Bellugi 1968; Brown and Hanlon 1970; Braine 1971;
Bowerman 1988; Morgan and Travis 1989; and Marcus 1993.)
Direct negative evidence might also take the form of self-correction by other
speakers. Such self-corrections tend to have a characteristic intonation and rhythm
of their own, and may be signalled by a variety of ﬁllers (such as those italicised
in (24) below):
(24) (a)
The picture was hanged . . . or rather hung . . . in the Tate Gallery
(b)
The picture was hanged . . . sorry hung . . . in the Tate Gallery
(c)
The picture was hanged . . . I mean hung . . . in the Tate Gallery
However, self-correction is arguably too infrequent a phenomenon to play a major
role in the acquisition process.
Rather than say that children rely on direct negative evidence, we might instead
imagine that they learn from indirect negative evidence (i.e. evidence relating to
the non-occurrence of certain types of structure). Suppose that a child’s experience
includes no examples of structures in which heads follow their complements (e.g.
no prepositional phrases like ∗dinner after in which the head preposition after
follows its complement dinner, and no verb phrases such as ∗cake eat in which the
head verb eat follows its complement cake). On the basis of such indirect negative
evidence (i.e. evidence based on the non-occurrence of head-last structures), the
child might infer that English is not a head-last language.
Although it might seem natural to suppose that indirect negative evidence plays
some role in the acquisition process, there are potential learnability problems
posed by any such claim. After all, the fact that a given construction does not
occur in a given chunk of the child’s experience does not provide conclusive
evidence that the structure is ungrammatical, since it may well be that the non-
occurrence of the relevant structure in the relevant chunk of experience is an
accidental (rather than a systematic) gap. Thus, the child would need to process
a very large (in principle, inﬁnite) chunk of experience in order to be sure that
non-occurrence reﬂects ungrammaticality. It seems implausible to suppose that
children store massive chunks of experience in this way and search through it
for negative evidence about the non-occurrence of certain types of structure. In
any case, given the assumption that parameters are binary and single-valued,
negative evidence becomes entirely unnecessary: after all, once the child hears a
prepositional phrase like with Daddy in which the head preposition with precedes
its complement Daddy, the child will have positive evidence that English allows
head-ﬁrst order in prepositional phrases; and given the assumptions that the Head-
Position Parameter is a binary one and that each parameter allows only a single
setting, then it follows (as a matter of logical necessity) that if English allows head-
ﬁrst prepositional phrases, it will not allow head-last prepositional phrases. Thus,
in order for the child to know that English doesn’t allow head-last prepositional

1.9 Summary
25
phrases, the child does not need negative evidence from the non-occurrence of
such structures, but rather can rely on positive evidence from the occurrence of the
converse order in head-ﬁrst structures (on the assumption that if a given structure
is head-ﬁrst, UG speciﬁes that it cannot be head-last). And, as we have already
noted, a minimal amount of positive evidence is required in order to identify
English as a uniformly head-ﬁrst language (i.e. a language in which all heads
precede their complements). Learnability considerations such as these have led
Chomsky (1986a, p. 55) to conclude that ‘There is good reason to believe that
children learn language from positive evidence only.’ The claim that children do
not make use of negative evidence in setting parameters is known as the No-
Negative-Evidence Hypothesis; it is a hypothesis which is widely assumed in
current acquisition research. (See Guasti 2002 for a technical account of language
acquisition within the framework used here.)
1.9
Summary
We began this chapter in §1.2 with a brief look at traditional grammar,
noting that this is a taxonomic (i.e. classiﬁcatory) system in which the syntax of a
language is essentially described in terms of a list of phrase, clause and sentence
types found in the language. We noted that Chomsky adopts a very different cog-
nitive approach to the study of language in which a grammar of a language is a
model of the internalised grammatical competence (or I-language) of a native
speaker of the language. We saw that Chomsky’s ultimate goal is to develop a
theory of Universal Grammar/UG which characterises the deﬁning properties
of the grammars of natural languages – a theory which is universal, explanatory
and constrained, and which provides descriptively adequate grammars which are
minimally complex and hence learnable. In §1.4, we went on to look at the nature
of language acquisition, and argued that the most fundamental question for a
theory of language acquisition to answer is why it should be that after a period
of a year and a half during which there is little evidence of grammatical develop-
ment visible in the child’s speech output, most of the grammar of the language
is acquired by children during the course of the following year. We outlined the
innateness hypothesis put forward by Chomsky, under which the course of lan-
guage acquisition is genetically predetermined by an innate language faculty.
In §1.5, we noted Chomsky’s claim that the language faculty incorporates a the-
ory of Universal Grammar/UG which embodies a set of universal grammatical
principles that determine the ways in which grammatical operations work; and we
saw that the syntax of questions in English provides evidence for postulating that
syntactic operations are constrained by a universal Locality Principle. In §1.6,
we went on to argue that the grammars of natural languages vary along a num-
ber of parameters. We looked at three such parameters – the Wh-Parameter,
the Null-Subject Parameter, and the Head-Position Parameter, arguing that
each of these parameters is binary in nature by virtue of having two alternative

26
1 grammar
settings. In §1.7, we argued that the syntactic learning task which children face
involves parameter-setting – i.e. determining which of two possible settings is
the appropriate one for each parameter in the language being acquired. We fur-
ther argued that if parameters have binary settings (e.g. so that a given kind of
structure in a given language is either head-ﬁrst or head-last), we should expect
to ﬁnd evidence that children correctly set parameters from the very onset of
multiword speech: and we presented evidence to suggest that from their very
earliest multiword utterances, children acquiring English as their mother tongue
correctly set the Head-Position Parameter at the head-ﬁrst value appropriate for
English. We concluded that the acquisition of grammar involves the twin tasks
of lexical learning (i.e. acquiring a lexicon/vocabulary) and parameter-setting.
In §1.8, we asked what kind of evidence children use in setting parameters, and
concluded that they use positive evidence from their experience of the occurrence
of speciﬁc types of structure (e.g. head-ﬁrst structures, or null-subject structures,
or wh-movement structures).
Workbook section
Exercise 1.1
Below are examples of utterances produced by a girl called Lucy at age twenty-four months.
Comment on whether Lucy has correctly set the three parameters discussed in the text (the
Head-Position Parameter, the Wh-Parameter and the Null-Subject Parameter). Discuss the
signiﬁcance of the relevant examples for the parameter-setting model of acquisition.
Child sentence
Adult counterpart
1
What doing?
‘What are you doing?’
2
Want bye-byes
‘I want to go to sleep’
3
Mummy go shops
‘Mummy went to the shops’; this was in reply to
‘Where did Mummy go?’
4
Me have yoghurt?
‘Can I have a yoghurt?’
5
Daddy doing?
‘What’s Daddy doing?’
6
Think Teddy sleeping
‘I think Teddy’s sleeping’; this was in reply to ‘What
d’you think Teddy’s doing?’
7
What me having?
‘What am I having?’; this followed her mother saying
‘Mummy’s having ﬁsh for dinner’
8
No me have ﬁsh
‘I’m not going to have ﬁsh’
9
Where Daddy gone?
‘Where’s Daddy gone?’
10
Gone ofﬁce
‘He’s gone to his ofﬁce’
11
Want bickies
‘She wants some biscuits’; this was her reply to
‘What does Dolly want?’
12
What Teddy have?
‘What can Teddy have?’
13
Where going?
‘Where are you going?’
14
Me go shops
‘I want to go to the shops’
15
Daddy drinking coffee
‘Daddy’s drinking coffee’
16
What Nana eating?
‘What’s Grandma eating?’
17
Want choc’ate
‘He wants some chocolate’; this was her reply to
‘Teddy wants some meat, does he?’

Workbook section
27
18
Dolly gone?
‘Where’s Dolly gone?’
19
Watch te’vision
‘I’m going to watch television’
20
Me have more
‘I want to have some more’
21
In kitchen
‘In the kitchen’ (reply to ‘Where’s Mummy?’)
22
Me play with Daddy
‘I want to play with Daddy’
23
Open door
‘(Please) open the door!’
Helpful hints
If Lucy has correctly set the Wh-Parameter, we should expect to ﬁnd that she systematically
preposes wh-expressions and positions them sentence-initially. If she has correctly set the
Head-Position Parameter, we should expect to ﬁnd (e.g.) that she correctly positions the
complement of a verb after the verb, and the complement of a preposition after the preposition;
however, where the complement is a wh-expression, we expect to ﬁnd that the complement is
moved into sentence-initial position in order to satisfy the requirements of the Wh-Parameter (if
the Wh-Parameter in some sense overrides the Head-Position Parameter). If Lucy has correctly set
the Null-Subject Parameter, we should expect to ﬁnd that she does not use null subjects in ﬁnite
clauses: however, it seems clear that many of the sentences produced by two-year-old English
children like Lucy do indeed have null subjects – and this led Nina Hyams in inﬂuential research
(1986, 1992) to conclude that English children go through a null-subject stage in which they use
Italian-style null ﬁnite (pro) subjects. If Hyams is right, this implies that children may sometimes
start out with incorrect settings for a given parameter, and then later have to re-set the parameter –
a conclusion which (if true) would provide an obvious challenge to the simple parameter-setting
model of acquisition outlined in the main text.
However, the picture relating to the use of null subjects is complicated by the fact that in
addition to ﬁnite null subjects (i.e. the pro subject found in ﬁnite clauses in languages like Italian
but not English), there are three other types of null subject which occur in adult English (and other
languages). One are imperative null subjects, found in imperatives such as Shut up! and Don’t
say anything! (Imperatives are sentences used to issue orders; they are the kind of sentences you
can put please in front of – as in Please don’t say anything!) Another are non-ﬁnite null subjects
which are found in a range of non-ﬁnite clauses in English (i.e. clauses containing a verb which is
not marked for tense and agreement), including main clauses like Why worry? and complement
clauses like those bracketed in I want [to go home] and I like [playing tennis]: the kind of null
subject found in non-ﬁnite clauses in English is usually designated as PRO and called ‘big PRO’
(whereas the kind of null subject found in a ﬁnite clause in a null-subject language like Italian is
designated as pro and called ‘little pro’. The terms big and little here simply reﬂect the fact that
PRO is written in ‘big’ capital letters, and pro in ‘small’ lower-case letters). A third type of null
subject found in English are truncated null subjects – so called because English has a process of
truncation which allows one or more words at the beginning of a sentence to be truncated (i.e.
omitted) in certain types of style (e.g. diary styles of written English and informal styles of spoken
English). Hence in colloquial English, a question like Are you doing anything tonight? can be
reduced (by truncation) to You doing anything tonight? and further reduced (again by truncation)
to Doing anything tonight? Truncation is also found in abbreviated written styles of English: for
example, a diary entry might read Went to a party. Had a great time. Got totally smashed (with the
subject I being truncated in each of the three sentences). An important constraint on truncation is
that it can only affect words at the beginning of a sentence, not, for example, words in the middle
of a sentence: hence, although we can truncate are and you in Are you doing anything tonight? we

28
1 grammar
can’t truncate them in What are you doing tonight? (as we see from the ungrammaticality of
∗What doing tonight?) since here are and you are preceded by what and hence occur in the middle
of the sentence.
What all of this means is that in determining whether Lucy has mis-set the Null-Subject
Parameter and has misanalysed English as a null-subject language (i.e. a language which allows
ﬁnite null ‘little pro’ subjects), you have to bear in mind the alternative possibility that the null
subjects used by Lucy may represent one or more of the three kinds of null subject permitted in
adult English (viz. imperative null subjects, truncated null subjects and non-ﬁnite null subjects).
Since truncation occurs only sentence-initially (at the beginning of a sentence), but ﬁnite null
(little pro) subjects in a genuine null-subject language like Italian can occur in any subject
position in a sentence, one way of telling the difference between a ﬁnite null subject and a
truncated null subject is to see whether children omit subjects only when they are the ﬁrst word in
a sentence (which could be the result of truncation), or whether they also omit subjects in the
middle of sentences (as is the case in a genuine null-subject language like Italian). Another way of
differentiating the two is that in null-subject languages we ﬁnd that overt pronoun subjects are
only used for emphasis, so that in an Italian sentence like L’ho fatto io (literally ‘It have done I’)
the subject pronoun io ‘I’ has a contrastive interpretation, and the relevant sentence is
paraphraseable in English as ‘I was the one who did it’ (where italics indicate contrastive stress);
by contrast, in a non-null-subject language like English, subject pronouns are not intrinsically
emphatic – e.g. he doesn’t necessarily have a contrastive interpretation in an English diary-style
sentence such as Went to see Jim. Thought he might help. A third way of telling whether
truncation is operative in Lucy’s grammar or not is to see whether expressions other than subjects
can be truncated, as can happen in adult English (e.g. What time is it? can be reduced to Time is it?
via truncation in rapid spoken English).
At ﬁrst sight, it might seem unlikely that (some of) Lucy’s null subjects could be non-ﬁnite
(‘big PRO’) subjects, since all the clauses she produces in the data given above occur in ﬁnite
contexts (i.e. in contexts where adults would use a ﬁnite clause). Note, however, that
two-year-old children typically go through a stage which Wexler (1994) calls the Optional
Inﬁnitives/OI stage during which (in ﬁnite contexts) they sometimes produce ﬁnite
clauses, and sometimes non-ﬁnite clauses (the relevant non-ﬁnite clauses typically containing an
inﬁnitive form like go or a participle like going/gone). Hence, an additional possibility to bear in
mind is that some of Lucy’s clauses may be non-ﬁnite and have non-ﬁnite (‘big PRO’) null
subjects.
In relation to the sentences in 1–23, make the following assumptions. In 1 doing is a verb which
has a null subject and the complement what; in 2 want is a verb which has a null subject and the
complement bye-byes; in 3 go is a verb which has the subject Mummy and the complement shops;
in 4 have is a verb which has the subject me and the complement yoghurt; in 5 doing is a verb
which has the subject Daddy, and its complement is a null counterpart of what; in 6 think is a verb
with a null subject and its complement is Teddy sleeping (with Teddy serving as the subject of the
verb sleeping); in 7, having is a verb which has the subject me and the complement what; in 8 no
is a negative particle which has the complement me have ﬁsh (assume that no is the kind of word
which doesn’t have a subject), and have is a verb which has the subject me and the complement
ﬁsh; in 9 gone is a verb which has the subject Daddy and the complement where; in 10 gone is a
verb which has a null subject and the complement ofﬁce; in 11 want is a verb which has a null
subject and the complement bickies; in 12 have is a verb which has the subject Teddy and the
complement what; in 13 going is a verb which has a null subject and the complement where; in 14

Workbook section
29
go is a verb which has the subject me and the complement shops; in 15 drinking is a verb which
has the subject Daddy and the complement coffee; in 16 eating is a verb which has the subject
Nana and the complement what; in 17 want is a verb which has a null subject and the complement
choc’ate; in 18 gone is a verb which has the subject Dolly and its complement is a null counterpart
of where; in 19 watch is a verb which has a null subject and the complement te’vision; in 20 have
is a verb which has the subject me and the complement more; 21 is a prepositional phrase in which
the preposition in has the complement kitchen (assume that phrases don’t have subjects); in 22
play is a verb which has the subject me and the complement with Daddy (and in turn Daddy is the
complement of the preposition with); and in 23 open is a verb whose subject is null and whose
complement is door.
Model answer for sentence 1
In What doing? the two-place predicate doing has an overt object what and a null subject of some
kind. Since the object what does not occupy the normal postverbal position associated with
objects in English (cf. the position of the object something in Do something!), what has clearly
undergone wh-movement: this suggests that Lucy has correctly set the wh-parameter at the
‘requires wh-movement’ value appropriate for English. Because the object complement what has
undergone wh-movement, we cannot tell (from this sentence) whether Lucy generally positions
(unmoved) complements after their heads: in other words, this particular sentence provides us
with no evidence of whether Lucy has correctly set the Head-Position Parameter or not (though
other examples in the exercise do). Much more difﬁcult to answer is the question of whether Lucy
has correctly set the Null-Subject Parameter at the value appropriate to English, and hence
(tacitly) ‘knows’ that ﬁnite clauses do not allow a null ﬁnite pro subject in English. At ﬁrst sight, it
might seem as if Lucy has wrongly analysed English as a null-subject language (and hence
mis-set the Null-Subject Parameter), since What doing? has a null subject of some kind. But the
crucial question here is: what kind of null subject does the verb doing have? It clearly cannot be an
imperative null subject, since the sentence is interrogative in force, not imperative. Nor can it be a
truncated null subject, since truncated subjects only occur in sentence-initial position (i.e. as the
ﬁrst word in a sentence), and what is the ﬁrst word in the sentence in What doing? (since preposed
wh-words occupy sentence-initial position in questions). This leaves two other possibilities. One
is that the null subject in What doing? is the ‘little pro’ subject found in ﬁnite clauses in genuine
null-subject languages like Italian: since the verb doing is non-ﬁnite, this would entail positing
that the sentence What doing? contains a null (i.e. ‘silent’ or ‘invisible’) ﬁnite auxiliary (raising
questions about why the auxiliary is null rather than overt); this in turn would mean that Lucy has
indeed mis-set the Null-Subject Parameter (raising questions about how she comes to do so, and
why she doesn’t mis-set the other two parameters we are concerned with here). However, an
alternative possibility is that the structure What doing? is a non-ﬁnite clause (like adult questions
such as Why worry?) and has the kind of non-ﬁnite (‘big PRO’) null subject found in non-ﬁnite
clauses in many languages (English included). If so (i.e. if What doing is a non-ﬁnite clause which
has the structure What PRO doing?), there would be no evidence that Lucy has mis-set the
Null-Subject Parameter – i.e. no evidence that she ever produces ﬁnite clauses with a ‘little pro’
subject. This in turn would mean that we can maintain the hypothesis put forward in the main text
that children correctly set parameters at their appropriate value from the very earliest stages of the
acquisition of syntax. The error Lucy makes in producing sentences like What doing? would be in
not knowing that main clauses generally have to be ﬁnite in English, and that main clause
questions generally have to contain a ﬁnite auxiliary.

30
1 grammar
Exercise 1.2
In the text, we noted that the Head-Position Parameter has a uniform head-ﬁrst setting (in the
sense that all heads precede their complements) in English, and a uniform head-last setting (in the
sense that all heads follow their complements) in Korean. However, we also noted that there are
languages in which some heads precede their complements (giving rise to head-ﬁrst structures),
and others follow them (giving rise to head-last structures). German is argued by some to be a
language of this latter type, in which (e.g.) prepositions, determiners and complementisers
canonically precede their complements, but (auxiliary and main) verbs canonically follow their
complements. Discuss the extent to which German sentences like those in 1–5 below (kindly
provided for me by Harald Clahsen) bear out this claim, and say which examples prove
problematic and why.
1
Hans muss stolz auf seine Mutter sein
Hans must proud of his
mother be
‘Hans must be proud of his mother’
2
Hans muss auf seine Mutter stolz sein
Hans must of his
mother proud be
‘Hans must be proud of his mother’
3
Hans geht den Fluss entlang
Hans goes the river along
‘Hans goes along the river’
4
Hans muss die Aufgaben l¨osen
Hans must the exercises do
‘Hans must do the exercises’
5
Ich glaube dass Hans die Aufgaben l¨osen muss
I
think
that Hans the exercises do
must
‘I think that Hans must do the exercises’
Likewise, in the text we claimed that the Wh-parameter has a uniform setting in that
languages either do or don’t systematically prepose wh-expressions. Discuss the potential
problems posed for this claim by colloquial French interrogative structures such as those below:
6
O`u
tu
vas?
Where you go?
‘Where are you going?’
7
Tu
vas o`u?
You go where?
‘Where are you going?’
8
Dis-moi o`u
tu
vas
Tell-me where you go
‘Tell me where you are going’
9
∗Dis-moi tu
vas o`u
Tell-me
you go where
(intended as synonymous with 8)

Workbook section
31
Helpful hints
In relation to the German sentences 1–5, make the following assumptions about their structure. In
1 and 2 muss is a ﬁnite (modal) verb, Hans is its subject and stolz auf seine Mutter sein is its
complement; sein is an inﬁnitive verb form and stolz auf seine Mutter is its complement; stolz is
an adjective, and auf seine Mutter is its complement; auf is a preposition and seine Mutter is its
complement; seine is a determiner, and Mutter is its complement. In 3 geht is a verb, Hans is its
subject and den Fluss entlang is its complement; entlang is a preposition (or, more precisely, a
postposition) and den Fluss is its complement; den is a determiner and Fluss is its complement.
In 4 muss is a ﬁnite verb, Hans is its subject and die Aufgaben l¨osen is its complement; l¨osen is a
non-ﬁnite verb in the inﬁnitive form, and die Aufgaben is its complement; die is a determiner and
Aufgaben is its complement. In 5 glaube is a ﬁnite verb, ich is its subject and dass Hans die
Aufgaben l¨osen muss is its complement; dass is a complementiser (i.e. a complement-clause-
introducing particle or conjunction) and Hans die Aufgaben l¨osen muss is its complement; muss is
a ﬁnite verb, Hans is its subject, and die Aufgaben l¨osen is its complement; l¨osen is a non-ﬁnite
verb in the inﬁnitive form and die Aufgaben is its complement; die is a determiner and Aufgaben is
its complement.
In relation to the examples in 1–5, identify all the prepositions, complementisers and
determiners you can ﬁnd in the sentences, and say whether (as claimed above) these precede their
complements. Likewise, identify all the (auxiliary and main) verbs found in the sentences and say
whether they do (or do not) follow their complements, as claimed above. Pay particular attention
to heads which are exceptions to the relevant generalisations about head position. Assume that
exceptional word order can be accounted for either in lexical terms (e.g. that the lexical entry for a
particular preposition may say that it does not occupy the canonical head-ﬁrst position found in
typical prepositional phrases), or in structural terms (in that a particular kind of head may undergo
a movement operation which moves it out of its canonical position). In relation to possible
structural factors which mask the underlying word order in German, bear in mind that German is
traditionally claimed to be a verb-second/V2 language – i.e. a language in which a ﬁnite verb
(= V) in a main clause is moved out of its canonical position into second position in the clause,
e.g. into a position where it immediately follows a subject expression like Hans or ich ‘I’. In
addition, comment on the problems posed by determining the canonical setting of the
Head-Position Parameter for adjectival phrases in German.
In relation to the French sentences 6–9, bear in mind that O`u tu vas and Tu vas o`u are main
clauses in 6 and 7 and complement clauses in 8 and 9 (in that they serve as the complement
of the imperative verb dis ‘tell’ in 8 and 9). Is there an asymmetry between how wh-movement
works in main clauses and in complement clauses? Does this suggest that it may be too
simplistic to posit a Wh-Parameter under which wh-expressions either are or aren’t systematically
preposed? Why?
Model answer for sentence 1
In 1, the determiner seine ‘his’ precedes its complement Mutter ‘mother’, and the preposition auf
‘of’ precedes its complement seine Mutter ‘his mother’, in accordance with the suggested
generalisation that determiners and prepositions in German show canonical head-ﬁrst order and
hence are typically positioned before their complements. The adjective stolz ‘proud’ also precedes
its complement auf seine Mutter ‘of his mother’ in 1. By contrast, the verb sein ‘be’ follows its
complement stolz auf seine Mutter ‘proud of his mother’. One possible generalisation which this
might suggest is the following:

32
1 grammar
(i)
In German, verbs are canonically positioned after their complements, but
other heads are canonically positioned before their complements
However, an apparent exception to the claim made in (i) is posed by the fact that the ﬁnite verb
muss ‘must’ in the main clause precedes its own complement stolz auf seine Mutter sein ‘proud of
his mother be’. This apparently exceptional word order is arguably attributable to the status of
German as a so-called verb-second language – i.e. a language which has a verb-fronting
operation which moves a ﬁnite verb in a main clause out of the canonical clause-ﬁnal position
occupied by verbs (including by the verb muss in 5) into second position within the clause: as a
result of this movement operation, the verb muss comes to follow the main clause subject Hans.
(For a discussion of the structure of verb-second clauses in German, see Radford et al. 1999,
pp. 349–54 – though some of the material there may not be clear to you until you have read the
ﬁrst six chapters in this book.)

2
Words
2.1
Overview
In this chapter, we look at the grammatical properties of words.
We begin by looking at the categorial properties of words and at how we deter-
mine what grammatical category a given word belongs to (in a given use): in the
course of our discussion we introduce some new categories which will not be
familiar from traditional grammar. We go on to show that categorial information
alone is not sufﬁcient to describe the grammatical properties of words, ultimately
concluding that the grammatical properties of words must be characterised in
terms of sets of grammatical features.
2.2
Grammatical categories
In §1.2, we noted that words are assigned to grammatical categories
in traditional grammar on the basis of their shared semantic, morphological and
syntactic properties. The kind of semantic criteria (sometimes called ‘notional’
criteria) used to categorise words in traditional grammar are illustrated in much-
simpliﬁed form below:
(1)
(i) Verbs denote actions (go, destroy, buy, eat etc.)
(ii) Nouns denote entities (car, cat, hill, John etc.)
(iii) Adjectives denote states (ill, happy, rich etc.)
(iv) Adverbs denote manner (badly, slowly, painfully, cynically etc.)
(v) Prepositions denote location (under, over, outside, in, on etc.)
However, semantically based criteria for identifying categories must be used with
care: for example, assassination denotes an action but is a noun, not a verb; illness
denotes a state but is a noun, not an adjective; in fast food, the word fast denotes
the manner in which the food is prepared but is an adjective, not an adverb; and
Cambridge denotes a location but is a noun, not a preposition.
The morphological criteria for categorising words concern their inﬂectional
and derivational properties. Inﬂectional properties relate to different forms of
the same word (e.g. the plural form of a noun like cat is formed by adding the
33

34
2 words
plural inﬂection -s to give the form cats); derivational properties relate to the
processes by which a word can be used to form a different kind of word by the
addition of an afﬁx of some kind (e.g. by adding the sufﬁx -ness to the adjective
sad we can form the noun sadness). Although English has a highly impoverished
system of inﬂectional morphology, there are nonetheless two major categories of
word which have distinctive inﬂectional properties – namely nouns and verbs.
We can identify the class of nouns in terms of the fact that they generally inﬂect
for number, and thus have distinct singular and plural forms – cf. pairs such
as dog/dogs, man/men, ox/oxen etc. Accordingly, we can differentiate a noun
like fool from an adjective like foolish by virtue of the fact that only (regular,
countable) nouns like fool – not adjectives like foolish – can carry the noun plural
inﬂection -s:
(2)
They are fools [noun]/∗foolishes [adjective]
There are several complications which should be pointed out, however. One is
the existence of irregular nouns like sheep which are invariable and hence have
a common singular/plural form (cf. one sheep, two sheep). A second is that
some nouns are intrinsically singular (and so have no plural form) by virtue of
their meaning: only those nouns (called count/countable nouns) which denote
entities which can be counted have a plural form (e.g. chair – cf. one chair,
two chairs); some nouns denote an uncountable mass and for this reason are
called mass/uncountable/non-count nouns, and so cannot be pluralised (e.g.
furniture – hence the ungrammaticality of ∗one furniture, ∗two furnitures). A third
is that some nouns (like scissors and trousers) have a plural form but no countable
singular form. A fourth complication is posed by noun expressions which contain
more than one noun; only the head noun in such expressions can be pluralised,
not any preceding noun used as a modiﬁer of the head noun: thus, in expressions
such as car doors, policy decisions, skate boards, horse boxes, trouser presses,
coat hangers etc. the second noun is the head and can be pluralised, whereas the
ﬁrst noun is a modiﬁer and so cannot be pluralised.
In much the same way, we can identify verbs by their inﬂectional morphol-
ogy in English. In addition to their uninﬂected base form (= the citation form
under which they are listed in dictionaries), verbs typically have up to four differ-
ent inﬂected forms, formed by adding one of four inﬂections to the appropriate
stem form: the relevant inﬂections are the perfect/passive participle sufﬁx -n,
the past-tense sufﬁx -d, the third-person-singular present-tense sufﬁx -s, and the
progressive participle/gerund sufﬁx -ing. Like most morphological criteria, how-
ever, this one is complicated by the irregular and impoverished nature of English
inﬂectional morphology; for example, many verbs have irregular past or perfect
forms, and in some cases either or both of these forms may not in fact be distinct
from the (uninﬂected) base form, so that a single form may serve two or three
functions (thereby neutralising or syncretising the relevant distinctions), as the
table (3) below illustrates:

2.2 Grammatical categories
35
(3)
Table of verb forms
Base
Perfect
Past
Present
Progressive
show
shown
showed
shows
showing
go
gone
went
goes
going
speak
spoken
spoke
speaks
speaking
see
seen
saw
sees
seeing
come
came
comes
coming
wait
waited
waits
waiting
meet
met
meets
meeting
cut
cuts
cutting
(The largest class of verbs in English are regular verbs which have the morpho-
logical characteristics of wait, and so have past, perfect and passive forms ending
in the sufﬁx -d.) The picture becomes even more complicated if we take into
account the verb be, which has eight distinct forms (viz. the base form be, the
perfect form been, the progressive form being, the past forms was/were, and the
present forms am/are/is). The most regular verb sufﬁx in English is -ing, which
can be attached to the base form of almost any verb (though a handful of defective
verbs like beware are exceptions).
The obvious implication of our discussion of nouns and verbs here is that it
would not be possible to provide a systematic account of English inﬂectional mor-
phology unless we were to posit that words belong to grammatical categories,
and that a speciﬁc type of inﬂection attaches only to a speciﬁc category of word.
The same is also true if we wish to provide an adequate account of derivational
morphology in English (i.e. the processes by which words are derived from other
words): this is because particular derivational afﬁxes can only be attached to
words belonging to particular categories. For example, the negative preﬁxes un-
and in- can be attached to adjectives to form a corresponding negative adjective
(as in pairs such as happy/unhappy and ﬂexible/inﬂexible) but not to nouns (so
that a noun like fear has no negative counterpart ∗unfear), nor to prepositions
(so that a preposition like inside has no negative antonym ∗uninside). Similarly,
the adverbialising (i.e. adverb-forming) sufﬁx -ly in English can be attached only
to adjectives (giving rise to adjective/adverb pairs such as sad/sadly) and cannot
be attached to a noun like computer, or to a verb like accept, or to a preposi-
tion like with. Likewise, the nominalising (i.e. noun-forming) sufﬁx -ness can be
attached only to adjective stems (so giving rise to adjective/noun pairs such as
coarse/coarseness),nottonouns,verbsorprepositions.(Hencewedon’tﬁnd-ness
derivatives for a noun like boy, or a verb like resemble, or a preposition like down.)
In much the same way, the comparative sufﬁx -er can be attached to adjectives
(e.g. tall/taller) and some adverbs (e.g. soon/sooner) but not to other types of
word (e.g. woman/∗womanner); and the superlative sufﬁx -est can attach to
adjectives (e.g. tall/tallest) but not other types of word (e.g. down/∗downest;
donkey/∗donkiest, enjoy/∗enjoyest). There is no point in multiplying examples

36
2 words
here: it is clear that derivational afﬁxes have categorial properties, and any
account of derivational morphology will clearly have to recognise this fact (see
e.g. Aronoff 1976 and Fabb 1988).
As we noted earlier, there is also syntactic evidence for assigning words to
categories: this essentially relates to the fact that different categories of words
have different distributions (i.e. occupy a different range of positions within
phrases or sentences). For example, if we want to complete the four-word sentence
in (4) below by inserting a single word at the end of the sentence in the —
position:
(4)
They have no —
we can use an (appropriate kind of) noun, but not a verb, preposition, adjective,
or adverb, as we see from:
(5) (a)
They have no car/conscience/friends/ideas [nouns]
(b)
∗They have no went [verb]/for [preposition]/older [adjective]/conscientiously [adverb]
So, using the relevant syntactic criterion, we can deﬁne the class of nouns as the
set of words which can terminate a sentence in the position marked — in (4).
Using the same type of syntactic evidence, we could argue that only a verb (in
its inﬁnitive/base form) can occur in the position marked — in (6) below to form
a complete (non-elliptical) sentence:
(6)
They/it can —
Support for this claim comes from the contrasts in (7) below:
(7) (a)
They can stay/leave/hide/die/starve/cry [verb]
(b)
∗They can gorgeous [adjective]/happily [adverb]/down [preposition]/door [noun]
And the only category of word which can occur after very (in the sense of
extremely) is an adjective or adverb, as we see from (8) below:
(8) (a)
He is very slow [very+adjective]
(b)
He walks very slowly [very+adverb]
(c)
∗Very fools waste time [very+noun]
(d)
∗He very adores her [very+verb]
(e)
∗It happened very after the party [very+preposition]
(But note that very can only be used to modify adjectives/adverbs which by
virtue of their meaning are gradable and so can be qualiﬁed by words like
very/rather/somewhat etc; adjectives/adverbs which denote an absolute state are
ungradable by virtue of their meaning, and so cannot be qualiﬁed in the same
way – hence the oddity of !Fifteen students were very present, and ﬁve were very
absent, where ! marks semantic anomaly.)
Moreover, we can differentiate adjectives from adverbs in syntactic terms. For
example, only adverbs can be used to end sentences such as He treats her —, She
behaved —, He worded the statement —:

2.2 Grammatical categories
37
(9) (a)
He treats her badly [adverb]/∗kind [adjective]/∗shame [noun]/∗under [preposition]
(b)
She behaved abominably [adverb]/∗appalling [adjective]/∗disgrace [noun]/∗down
[preposition]
(c)
He worded the statement carefully [adverb]/∗good [adjective]/∗tact [noun]/∗in
[preposition]
And since adjectives (but not adverbs) can serve as the complement of the verb
be (i.e. can be used after be), we can delimit the class of (gradable) adjectives
uniquely by saying that only adjectives can be used to complete a four-word
sentence of the form They are very —:
(10) (a)
They are very tall/pretty/kind/nice [adjective]
(b)
∗They are very slowly [adverb]/gentlemen [noun]/astonish [verb]/outside [preposition]
Another way of differentiating between an adjective like real and an adverb like
really is that adjectives are used to modify nouns, whereas adverbs are used to
modify other types of expression:
(11) (a)
There is a real crisis [real+noun]
(b)
He is really nice [really+adjective]
(c)
He walks really slowly [really+adverb]
(d)
He is really down [really+preposition]
(e)
He must really squirm [really+verb]
Adjectives used to modify a following noun (like real in There is a real crisis)
are traditionally said to be attributive in function, whereas those which do not
modify a following noun (like real in The crisis is real) are said to be predicative
in function.
As for the syntactic properties of prepositions, they alone can be intensiﬁed by
right in the sense of ‘completely’, or by straight in the sense of ‘directly’:
(12) (a)
Go right up the ladder
(b)
He went right inside
(c)
He walked straight into a wall
(d)
He fell straight down
By contrast, other categories cannot be intensiﬁed by right/straight (in Standard
English):
(13) (a)
∗He right/straight despaired [right/straight+verb]
(b)
∗She is right/straight pretty [right/straight+adjective]
(c)
∗She looked at him right/straight strangely [right/straight+adverb]
(d)
∗They are right/straight fools [right/straight+noun]
It should be noted, however, that since right/straight serve to intensify the meaning
of a preposition, they can only be combined with those (uses of) prepositions
which express the kind of meaning which can be intensiﬁed in the appropriate
way (so that He made right/straight for the exit is OK, but ∗He bought a present
right/straight for Mary is not).

38
2 words
A further syntactic property of some prepositions (namely those which take a
following noun or pronoun expression as their complement – traditionally called
transitive prepositions) which they share in common with (transitive) verbs is
the fact that they permit an immediately following accusative pronoun as their
complement (i.e. a pronoun in its accusative form, like me/us/him/them):
(14) (a)
She was against him [transitive preposition+accusative pronoun]
(b)
She was watching him [transitive verb+accusative pronoun]
(c)
∗She is fond him [adjective+accusative pronoun]
(d)
∗She works independently him [adverb+accusative pronoun]
(e)
∗She showed me a photo him [noun+accusative pronoun]
Even though a preposition like with does not express the kind of meaning which
allows it to be intensiﬁed by right or straight, we know it is a (transitive) preposi-
tion because it is invariable (so not e.g. a verb) and permits an accusative pronoun
as its complement, e.g. in sentences such as He argued with me/us/him/them.
(For obvious reasons, this test can’t be applied to prepositions used intransitively
without any complement, like those in 12b,d above.)
2.3
Categorising words
Given that different categories have different morphological and syn-
tactic properties, it follows that we can use the morphological and syntactic prop-
erties of a word to determine its categorisation (i.e. what category it belongs to).
The morphological properties of a given word provide an initial rough guide to its
categorial status: in order to determine the categorial status of an individual word,
we can ask whether it has the inﬂectional and derivational properties of a particu-
lar category of word. For example, we can tell that happy is an adjective by virtue
of the fact that it has the derivational properties of typical adjectives: it can take
the negative preﬁx un- (giving rise to the negative adjective unhappy), the compar-
ative/superlative sufﬁxes -er/-est (giving rise to the forms happier/happiest), the
adverbialising sufﬁx -ly (giving rise to the adverb happily) and the nominalising
sufﬁx -ness (giving rise to the noun happiness).
However, we cannot always rely entirely on morphological clues, owing to
the fact that morphology is sometimes irregular, sometimes subject to idiosyn-
cratic restrictions and sometimes of limited productivity. For example, although
regular adverbs (like quickly, slowly, painfully etc.) generally end in the deriva-
tional sufﬁx -ly, this is not true of irregular adverbs like fast (e.g. in He walks
fast); moreover, when they have the comparative sufﬁx -er added to them, reg-
ular adverbs lose their -ly sufﬁx because English is a monosufﬁxal language (in
the sense of Aronoff and Fuhrhop 2002), so that the comparative form of the
adverb quickly is quicker not ∗quicklier. What all of this means is that a word
belonging to a given class may have only some of the relevant morphological
properties, or even (in the case of a completely irregular item) none of them.

2.3 Categorising words
39
For example, although the adjective fat has comparative/superlative forms in
-er/-est (cf. fat/fatter/fattest), it has no negative un- counterpart (cf. ∗unfat) and
no adverb counterpart in -ly (cf. ∗fatly). Even more exceptional is the adjective
little, which has no negative un- derivative (cf. ∗unlittle), no adverb -ly deriva-
tive (cf. ∗littlely/∗littly), no noun derivative in -ness (at least in my variety of
English – though littleness does appear in the Oxford English Dictionary), and no
-er/-est derivatives (the forms ∗littler/∗littlest are likewise not grammatical in my
variety).
What makes morphological evidence even more problematic is the fact that
many morphemes may have more than one use. For example, -n/-d and -ing are
inﬂections which attach to verbs to give perfect or progressive forms (tradition-
ally referred to as participles). However, certain -n/-d and -ing forms seem to
function as adjectives, suggesting that -ing and -n/-d can also serve as adjec-
tivalising (i.e. adjective-forming) morphemes. So, although a word like inter-
esting can function as a verb (in sentences like Her charismatic teacher was
gradually interesting her in syntax), it can also function as an adjective (used
attributively in structures like This is an interesting book, and predicatively in
structures like This book is very interesting). In its use as an adjective, the word
interesting has the negative derivative uninteresting (as in It was a rather uninter-
esting play) and the -ly adverb derivative interestingly (though, like many other
adjectives, it has no noun derivative in -ness, and no comparative or superlative
derivatives in -er/-est). Similarly, although -n/-d can serve as a perfect partici-
ple inﬂection (in structures like We hadn’t known/expected that he would quit),
it should be noted that many words ending in -n/-d can also function as adjec-
tives. For example, the word known in an expression such as a known criminal
seems to function as an (attributive) adjective, and in this adjectival use it has a
negative un- counterpart (as in expressions like the tomb of the unknown war-
rior). Similarly, the form expected functions as a perfect participle verb form
in structures like We hadn’t expected him to complain, but seems to function
as an (attributive) adjective in structures such as He gave the expected reply;
in its adjectival (though not in its verbal) use, it has a negative un- derivative,
and the resultant negative adjective unexpected in turn has the noun derivative
unexpectedness.
So, given the potential problems which arise with morphological criteria, it
is unwise to rely solely on morphological evidence in determining categorial
status: rather, we should use morphological criteria in conjunction with syntactic
criteria (i.e. criteria relating to the range of positions that words can occupy within
phrases and sentences). One syntactic test which can be used to determine the
category that a particular word belongs to is that of substitution – i.e. seeing
whether (in a given sentence) the word in question can be substituted by a regular
noun, verb, preposition, adjective, or adverb etc. We can use the substitution
technique to differentiate between comparative adjectives and adverbs ending
in -er, since they have identical forms. For example, in the case of sentences
like:

40
2 words
(15) (a)
He is better at French than you
(b)
He speaks French better than you
we ﬁnd that better can be replaced by a more+adjective expression like more
ﬂuent in (15a) but not (15b), and conversely that better can be replaced by a
more+adverb expression like more ﬂuently in (15b) but not in (15a):
(16) (a)
He is more ﬂuent/∗more ﬂuently at French than you
(b)
He speaks French more ﬂuently/∗more ﬂuent than you
Thus, the substitution test provides us with syntactic evidence that better is an
adjective in (15a), but an adverb in (15b).
The overall conclusion to be drawn from our discussion is that morphological
evidence may sometimes be inconclusive, and has to be checked against syntactic
evidence. A useful syntactic test which can be employed is that of substitution:
for example, if a morphologically indeterminate word can be substituted by a
regular noun wherever it occurs, then the relevant word has the same categorial
status as the substitute word which can replace it, and so is a noun.
2.4
Functional categories
Thus far, we have looked at the ﬁve major grammatical categories of
English (i.e. the ﬁve categories with the largest membership), viz. noun, verb,
preposition, adjective and adverb. For typographical convenience, it is stan-
dard practice to use capital-letter abbreviations for categories, thus N for noun,
V for verb, P for preposition, A for adjective and ADV for adverb. The words
which belong to these ﬁve categories are traditionally said to be contentives (or
content words), in that they have substantive descriptive content. However, in
addition to content words languages also contain functors (or function words) –
i.e. words which serve primarily to carry information about the grammatical
function of particular types of expression within the sentence (e.g. information
about grammatical properties such as person, number, gender, case etc.). The
differences between contentives and functors can be illustrated by comparing a
(contentive) noun like car with a (functional) pronoun like they. A noun like
car has obvious descriptive content in that it denotes an object which typically
has four wheels and an engine, and it would be easy enough to draw a picture
of a typical car; by contrast, a pronoun such as they has no descriptive con-
tent (e.g. you can’t draw a picture of they), but rather is a functor which (as we
shall see shortly) simply encodes a set of grammatical (more speciﬁcally, per-
son, number and case) properties in that it is a third-person-plural nominative
pronoun.
One test of whether words have descriptive content is to see whether they have
antonyms (i.e. opposites): if a word has an antonym, it is a contentive (though if
it has no antonym, you can’t be sure whether it is a functor or a contentive). For

2.5 Determiners and quantiﬁers
41
example, a noun/N such as loss has the antonym gain; a verb/V such as rise has the
antonym fall; an adjective/A such as tall has the antonym short; an adverb/ADV
such as early (as in He arrived early) has the antonym late; and a preposition/P
such as inside has the antonym outside. This reﬂects the fact that nouns, verbs,
adjectives, adverbs and prepositions typically have substantive descriptive con-
tent, and so are contentives. By contrast, a particle like inﬁnitival to, or an auxiliary
like do (e.g. ‘Do you want to smoke?’), or a determiner like the, or a pronoun like
they, or a complementiser (i.e. complement-clause-introducing particle) like that
(as used in a sentence like ‘I said that I was tired’) have no obvious antonyms, and
thus can be said to lack descriptive content, and so to be functors. Using rather
different (but equivalent) terminology, we can say that contentives have substan-
tive lexical content (i.e. idiosyncratic descriptive content which varies from one
lexical item/word to another), whereas functors have functional content. We can
then conclude that nouns, verbs, adjectives, adverbs and prepositions are lexical
or substantive categories (because the words belonging to these categories have
substantive lexical/descriptive content) whereas particles, auxiliaries, determin-
ers, pronouns and complementisers are functional categories (because words
belonging to these categories have an essentially grammatical function). In the
sections that follow, we take a closer look at the main functional categories found
in English.
2.5
Determiners and quantiﬁers
The ﬁrst type of functional category which we shall deal with is the
category of determiner (abbreviated to D, or sometimes DET). Items such as those
bold-printed in (17) below (as used there) are traditionally said to be (referential)
determiners (because they determine the referential properties of the italicised
noun expression which follows them):
(17) (a)
The village store is closed
(b)
This appalling behaviour has got to stop
(c)
That dog of yours is crazy
Referential determiners are used to introduce referring expressions: an expression
like the car in a sentence such as Shall we take the car? is a referring expression
in the sense that it is typically used to refer to a speciﬁc car which is assumed to
be familiar to the hearer/addressee.
A related class of words are those which belong to the category quantiﬁer
(abbreviated to Q), and this is traditionally said to include items like those bold-
printed below:
(18) (a)
Most good comedians tell some bad jokes
(b)
Many students have no money
(c)
Every true Scotsman hates all Englishmen
(d)
Each exercise contains several examples

42
2 words
Suchitemsaretermedquantiﬁersbecausetheyservetoquantifytheitalicisednoun
expression which follows them. Since determiners and quantiﬁers are positioned
in front of nouns (cf. the boys and many boys), and adjectives can similarly be
positioned in front of nouns (cf. tall boys), an obvious question to ask at this
point is why we couldn’t just say that the determiners/quantiﬁers in (17) and (18)
have the categorial status of adjectives. The answer is that any attempt to analyse
determiners or quantiﬁers as adjectives in English runs up against a number of
serious descriptive problems. Let’s see why.
One reason for not subsuming determiners/quantiﬁers within the category of
adjectives is that they are syntactically distinct from adjectives in a variety of
ways. For example, adjectives can be iteratively (i.e. repeatedly) stacked in front
of a noun they modify, in the sense that you can go on putting more and more
adjectives in front of a given noun (as in handsome strangers, dark handsome
strangers, tall dark handsome strangers, sensitive tall handsome strangers etc.).
By contrast, neither determiners nor quantiﬁers can be stacked in this way (so
that although we can have a quantiﬁer+determiner+noun expression like both the
twins, we cannot have a multiple determiner expression like ∗the these books or
a multiple quantiﬁer expression such as ∗all both twins). Moreover, determiners,
quantiﬁers and adjectives can be used together to modify a noun, but when they do
so,anydeterminerorquantiﬁermodifyingthenounhastoprecedeanyadjective(s)
modifying the noun:
(19) (a)
the same old excuses [determiner+adjective+adjective+noun]
(b)
∗same the old excuses [adjective+determiner+adjective+noun]
(c)
∗same old the excuses [adjective+adjective+determiner+noun]
Thus, determiners and quantiﬁers seem to have a different distribution (and hence
to be categorially distinct) from adjectives.
A further difference between determiners/quantiﬁers and adjectives can be
illustrated in relation to what speaker B can – and cannot – reply in the following
dialogue:
(20)
speaker a: What are you looking for?
speaker b: ∗Chair/∗Comfortable chair/A chair/Another chair/The chair/That chair
As noted earlier, nouns like chair have the property that they are countable (in
the sense that we can say one chair, two chairs etc.), and in this respect they
differ from mass nouns like furniture which are uncountable (hence we can’t
say ∗one furniture, ∗two furnitures etc). We see from (20) that a singular count
noun like chair cannot stand on its own as a complete noun expression, nor
indeed can it function as such even if modiﬁed by an adjective like comfortable;
rather, a singular count noun requires a modifying determiner or quantiﬁer like
a/another/the/that etc. This provides us with clear evidence that determiners and
quantiﬁers in English have a different categorial status from adjectives.
Indeed, a more general property which differentiates determiners/quantiﬁers
from adjectives is that determiners/quantiﬁers tend to be restricted to modifying

2.5 Determiners and quantiﬁers
43
nouns which have speciﬁc number (or countability) properties. For example, a
modiﬁes a singular count noun, much modiﬁes a (singular) mass noun, several
modiﬁes a plural count noun, more modiﬁes either a plural count or a (singular)
mass noun:
(21) (a)
Can you pass me a chair/∗a chairs/∗a furniture?
(b)
He doesn’t have much furniture/∗much chair/∗much chairs of his own
(c)
He bought several chairs/∗several chair/∗several furniture in the sale
(d)
Do we need more furniture/more chairs/∗more chair?
By contrast, typical adjectives like nice, simple, comfortable, modern etc. can
generally be used to modify all three types of noun:
(22) (a)
We need a nice, simple, comfortable, modern chair
(b)
We need some nice, simple, comfortable, modern chairs
(c)
We need some nice, simple, comfortable, modern furniture
(It should be noted, however, that a determiner like the can also be used to modify
singular/plural count and non-count nouns alike.)
It seems reasonable to suppose that determiners and quantiﬁers are functional
categories whereas adjectives are a lexical/substantive category. After all, there is
an obvious sense in which adjectives (e.g. thoughtful) have descriptive content but
determiners and quantiﬁers do not – as we can illustrate in terms of the following
contrast (? and ! are used to denote increasing degrees of semantic/pragmatic
anomaly):
(23) (a)
a thoughtful friend/?cat/??ﬁsh/?!pan/!problem
(b)
a/another/every/the/this friend/cat/ﬁsh/pan/problem
As (23a) illustrates, an adjective like thoughtful can only be used to modify
certain types of noun; this is because its descriptive content is such that it is only
compatible with (e.g.) an expression denoting a rational (mind-possessing) entity.
By contrast, determiners/quantiﬁers like those bold-printed in (23b) lack speciﬁc
descriptive content, and hence can be used to modify any semantic class of noun
(the only restrictions being grammatical in nature – e.g. a(n)/another can only be
used to modify a singular count noun expression). Thus, it seems appropriate to
conclude that determiners and quantiﬁers are functional categories, and adjectives
a lexical category.
Some linguists (e.g. Lyons 1999 and Adger 2003) treat quantiﬁers as a subtype
of determiner and hence assign them to the category D: one possibility along these
lines is to suppose that items like the/this/that are deﬁnite determiners, and those
like a/some/many are indeﬁnite determiners (and such a categorisation could
be said to be implicit in the traditional claim that the is a ‘deﬁnite article’ and a
an ‘indeﬁnite article’). However, the fact that a determiner like the can combine
with a quantiﬁer like all/every in a sentence like:
(24)
All the servile courtiers pandered to the every witless whim of King Kostas of Kostalotte

44
2 words
provides some syntactic evidence that the two have different distributions and
hence may belong to different categories. Moreover, quantiﬁers and determiners
exhibit different syntactic behaviour in respect of questions such as:
(25) (a)
Who didn’t he want [any pictures of ]?
(b)
??Who didn’t he want [the pictures of ]?
In both cases, who is the complement of the word of and is moved to the front of the
sentence from its original position after of. But whereas fronting who when it is the
complement of the quantiﬁer expression any pictures of results in a grammatical
sentence, fronting who when it is the complement of a determiner expression
like the pictures of generally leads to a sentence of rather more questionable
grammaticality (the relevant phenomenon being known as the deﬁniteness effect.
It should be noted, however, that there is quite a bit of variation between speakers
as to how good or bad they judge sentences like (25b) to be). So, sentences like
(24) and (25) could be said to provide evidence that quantiﬁers and determiners
are syntactically distinct and so belong to different categories (though there is no
general agreement on this).
2.6
Pronouns
Traditional grammars posit a category of pronoun (which we can
abbreviate as PRN) to denote a class of words which are said to ‘stand in place
of’ (the meaning of the preﬁx pro-) or ‘refer back to’ noun expressions. However,
there are reasons to think that there are a number of different types of pronoun
found in English and other languages (see D´echaine and Wiltschko 2002). One
such type is represented by the word one in the use illustrated below:
(26) (a)
John has a red car and Jim has a blue one
(b)
I’ll take the green apples if you haven’t got any red ones
From a grammatical perspective, one behaves like a regular count noun here in
that it has the s-plural form ones and occurs in a position (after an adjective like
blue/red) in which a count noun could occur. However, it is a pronoun in the sense
that it has no descriptive content of its own, but rather takes its descriptive content
from its antecedent (e.g. one in (26a) refers back to the noun car and so one is
interpreted as meaning ‘car’). Let’s refer to this kind of pronoun as an N-pronoun
(or pronominal noun).
By contrast, in the examples in (27) below, the bold-printed pronoun seems to
serve as a pronominal quantiﬁer. In the ﬁrst (italicised) occurrence in each pair of
examples,itisaprenominal(i.e.noun-preceding)quantiﬁerwhichmodiﬁesafol-
lowing noun expression (viz. guests/miners/protesters/son/cigarettes/bananas);
in the second (bold-printed) occurrence it has no noun expression following it
and so functions as a pronominal quantiﬁer:

2.6 Pronouns
45
(27) (a)
All guests are welcome/All are welcome
(b)
Many miners died in the accident/Many died in the accident
(c)
Several protesters were arrested/Several were arrested
(d)
Each son was envious of the other/Each was envious of the other
(e)
I don’t have any cigarettes/I don’t have any
(f)
We have no bananas/We have none
We might therefore refer to pronouns like those bold-printed in (27) as Q-
pronouns (or pronominal quantiﬁers). If (as will be suggested in chapter 6)
question words like which?/what? in expressions like which books?/what idea?
are interrogative quantiﬁers, it follows that interrogative pronouns like those ital-
icised in the examples below:
(28) (a)
What have you been doing?
(b)
Which did you choose?
(c)
Who is she talking to?
are also Q-pronouns.
A third type of pronoun are those bold-printed in the examples below:
(29) (a)
I prefer this tie/I prefer this
(b)
I haven’t read that book/I haven’t read that
(c)
I don’t particularly like these hats/I don’t particularly like these
(d)
Have you already paid for those items/Have you already paid for those?
Since the relevant words can also serve (in the italicised use) as prenominal
determiners which modify a following noun, we can refer to them as D-pronouns
(i.e. as pronominal determiners).
A further type of pronoun posited in traditional grammar are so-called personal
pronouns like I/me/we/us/you/he/him/she/her/it/they/them. These are called per-
sonal pronouns not because they denote people (the pronoun it is not normally
used to denote a person), but rather because they encode the grammatical property
of person. In the relevant technical sense, I/me/my/we/us/our are said to be ﬁrst-
person pronouns, in that they are expressions whose reference includes the
person/s speaking; you/your are second-person pronouns, in that their reference
includes the addressee/s (viz. the person/s being spoken to), but excludes the
speaker/s; he/him/his/she/her/it/its/they/them/their are third-person pronouns
in the sense that they refer to entities other than the speaker/s and addressee/s.
Personal pronouns differ morphologically from nouns and other pronouns in
modern English in that they generally have (partially) distinct nominative,
accusative and genitive case forms, whereas nouns have a common nomina-
tive/accusative form and a distinct genitive ’s form – as we see from the contrasts
below:
(30) (a)
John snores/He snores
(b)
Find John!/Find him!
(c)
Look at John’s trousers!/Look at his trousers!

46
2 words
Personal pronouns like he/him/his and nouns like John/John’s change their mor-
phological form according to the position which they occupy within the sentence,
so that the nominative forms he/John are required as the subject of a ﬁnite verb
like snores, whereas the accusative forms him/John are required when used as the
complement of a transitive verb like ﬁnd (or when used as the complement of a
transitive preposition), and the genitive forms his/John’s are required (inter alia)
when used to express possession: these variations reﬂect different case forms of
the relevant items.
Personal pronouns are functors by virtue of lacking descriptive content:
whereas a noun like dogs denotes a speciﬁc type of animal, a personal pronoun
like they denotes no speciﬁc type of entity, but has to have its reference determined
from the linguistic or non-linguistic context. Personal pronouns encode the gram-
matical properties of (ﬁrst, second or third) person, (singular or plural) number,
(masculine, feminine or neuter/inanimate) gender and (nominative, accusative or
genitive) case, as shown in the table in (31) below:
(31)
Table of personal pronoun forms
Person
Number
Gender
Nominative
Accusative
Genitive
1
SG
M/F
I
me
my/mine
1
PL
M/F
we
us
our/ours
2
SG/PL
M/F
you
you
your/yours
3
SG
M
he
him
his
3
SG
F
she
her
her/hers
3
SG
N
it
it
its
3
PL
M/F/N
they
them
their/theirs
(SG = singular; PL = plural; M = masculine; F = feminine; N = neuter. Note that
some genitive pronouns have separate weak and strong forms, the weak form being
used prenominally to modify a following noun expression – as in ‘Take my car’ –
and the strong form being used pronominally – as in ‘Take mine’.) On the nature of
gender features in English, see Namai (2000).
But what grammatical category do personal pronouns belong to? Studies by
Postal (1966), Abney (1987), Longobardi (1994) and Lyons (1999) suggest that
they are D-pronouns. This assumption would provide us with a unitary analysis
of the syntax of the bold-printed items in the bracketed expressions in sentences
such as (32a,b) below:
(32) (a)
[We republicans] don’t trust [you democrats]
(b)
[We] don’t trust [you]
Since we and you in (32a) modify the nouns republicans/democrats and since
determiners like the are typically used to modify nouns, it seems reasonable to
suppose that we/you function as prenominal determiners in (32a). But if this is
so, it is plausible to suppose that we and you also have the categorial status of

2.7 Auxiliaries
47
determiners (i.e. D-pronouns) in sentences like (32b). It would then follow that
we/you have the categorial status of determiners in both (32a) and (32b), but
differ in that they are used prenominally (i.e. with a following noun expression)
in (32a), but pronominally (i.e. without any following noun expression) in (32b).
Note, however, that third-person pronouns like he/she/it/they are typically used
only pronominally – hence the ungrammaticality of expressions such as ∗they
boys in standard varieties of English (though this is grammatical in some non-
standard varieties of English – e.g. that spoken in Bristol in South-West England).
Whether or not such items are used prenominally, pronominally or in both ways is
a lexical property of particular items (i.e. an idiosyncratic property of individual
words).
Although the D-pronoun analysis has become the ‘standard’ analysis of per-
sonal pronouns over the past three decades, it is not entirely without posing
problems. For example, a typical D-pronoun like these/those can be premodiﬁed
by the universal quantiﬁer all, but a personal pronoun like they cannot:
(33) (a)
All these are broken
(b)
All those are broken
(c)
∗All they are broken
Such a contrast is unexpected if personal pronouns like they are D-pronouns like
those/these, and clearly raises questions about the true status of personal pronouns
(an issue which we leave open here).
Because a number of aspects of the syntax of pronouns remain to be clar-
iﬁed and because the category pronoun is familiar from centuries of gram-
matical tradition, the label PRN/pronoun will be used throughout the rest of
this book to designate pronouns. It should, however, be borne in mind that
there are a number of different types of pronoun (including N-pronouns, Q-
pronouns and D-pronouns), so that the term pronoun does not designate a uni-
tary category. Some linguists prefer the alternative term proform (so that, for
example, when used pronominally, one could be described as an N-proform or
pro-N).
2.7
Auxiliaries
Having looked at the nominal functional category pronoun, we now
turn to look at the verbal functional category auxiliary. Traditional grammarians
use this term to denote a special class of items which once functioned simply as
verbs, but in the course of the evolution of the English language have become
sufﬁciently distinct from main verbs that they are now regarded as belonging to
a different category of auxiliary (conventionally abbreviated to AUX).
Auxiliaries differ from main verbs in a number of ways. Whereas a typical main
verblikewantmaytakearangeofdifferenttypesofcomplement(e.g.aninﬁnitival
to-complement as in I want [(you) to go home], or a noun expression as in I want

48
2 words
[lots of money]), by contrast auxiliaries typically allow only a verb expression
as their complement, and have the semantic function of marking grammatical
properties associated with the relevant verb, such as tense, aspect, voice, or mood.
The items italicised in (34) below (in the use illustrated there) are traditionally
categorised as auxiliaries taking a [bracketed] complement containing a bold-
printed non-ﬁnite verb:
(34) (a)
He has/had [gone]
(b)
She is/was [staying at home]
(c)
They are/were [taken away for questioning]
(d)
He really does/did [say a lot]
(e)
You can/could [help us]
(f)
They may/might [come back]
(g)
He will/would [get upset]
(h)
I shall/should [return]
(i)
You must [ﬁnish your assignment]
(j)
You ought [to apologise]
In the uses illustrated here, have/be in (34a,b) are (perfect/progressive) aspect
auxiliaries, be in (34c) is a (passive) voice auxiliary, do in (34d) a (present/past)
tense auxiliary, and can/could/may/might/will/would/shall/should/must/ought in
(34e–j) modal auxiliaries. As will be apparent, ought differs from other modal
auxiliaries like should which take an inﬁnitive complement in requiring use of
inﬁnitival to.
Thereareclearsyntacticdifferencesbetweenauxiliariesandverbs.Forexample
(as we saw in §1.5), auxiliaries can undergo inversion (and thereby be moved into
pre-subject position) in questions such as (35) below, where the inverted auxiliary
is italicised and the subject is bold-printed:
(35) (a)
Can you speak Japanese?
(b)
Does he smoke?
(c)
Is it raining?
By contrast, typical verbs do not themselves permit inversion, but rather require
what is traditionally called do-support (i.e. they have inverted forms which
require the use of the auxiliary do):
(36) (a)
∗Intends he to come?
(b) Does he intend to come?
(c)
∗Saw you the mayor?
(d) Did you see the mayor?
(e)
∗Plays he the piano?
(f) Does he play the piano?
A second difference between auxiliaries and verbs is that auxiliaries can generally
be directly negated by a following not (which can usually attach to the auxiliary
in the guise of its contracted form n’t):
(37) (a)
John could not/couldn’t come to the party
(b)
I do not/don’t like her much
(c)
He is not/isn’t working very hard
(d)
They have not/haven’t ﬁnished

2.8 Inﬁnitival to
49
By contrast, verbs cannot themselves be directly negated by not/n’t, but require
indirect negation through the use of do-support:
(38) (a)
∗They like not/liken’t me
(b) They do not/don’t like me
(c)
∗I see not/seen’t the point
(d) I do not/don’t see the point
(e)
∗You came not/camen’t
(f) You did not/didn’t come
(Note that in structures such as John decided not to stay the negative particle not
negates the inﬁnitive complement to stay rather than the verb decided, as we see
from the fact that the sentence can be paraphrased as ‘John decided that he would
not stay’, not as ‘John did not decide that he would stay.’) And thirdly, auxiliaries
can appear in sentence-ﬁnal tags, as illustrated by the examples below (where the
part of the sentence following the comma is traditionally referred to as a tag):
(39) (a)
You don’t like her, do you?
(b)
He won’t win, will he?
(c)
She isn’t working, is she?
(d)
He can’t drive, can he?
In contrast, verbs can’t themselves be used in tags, but rather require the use of
do-tags:
(40) (a)
You like her, do/∗like you?
(b)
They want one, do/∗want they?
So, on the basis of these (and other) syntactic properties, we can conclude that
auxiliaries constitute a different category from verbs.
2.8
Inﬁnitival to
A fourth type of functor found in English is the inﬁnitive particle to –
so called because the only kind of complement it allows is one containing a verb
in the inﬁnitive form (the inﬁnitive form of the verb is its uninﬂected base form,
i.e. the citation form found in dictionary entries). Typical uses of inﬁnitival to are
illustrated in (41) below:
(41) (a)
I wonder whether to [go home]
(b)
Many people want the government to [change course]
(c)
We don’t intend to [surrender]
In each example in (41), the [bracketed] complement of to is an expression con-
taining a (bold-printed) verb in the inﬁnitive form. But what is the categorial
status of inﬁnitival to?
We are already familiar with an alternative use of to as a preposition, e.g. in
sentences such as:
(42) (a)
He stayed to [the end of the ﬁlm]
(b)
He went to [the police]

50
2 words
In (42), to behaves like a typical (transitive) preposition in taking a [bracketed]
the-phrase (i.e. determiner phrase) as its complement (viz. the end of the ﬁlm
and the police). It might therefore seem that to is a preposition in both uses –
one which takes a following determiner phrase complement (i.e. has a determiner
expression as its complement) in (42) and a following verbal complement in
(41).
However, inﬁnitival to is very different in its behaviour from prepositional to
in English: whereas prepositional to is a contentive with intrinsic lexical seman-
tic content (e.g. it means something like ‘as far as’), inﬁnitival to seems to be
a functor with no lexical semantic content. Because of its intrinsic lexical con-
tent, the preposition to can often be modiﬁed by intensiﬁers like right/straight
(a characteristic property of prepositions), as in:
(43) (a)
He stayed right to the end of the ﬁlm
(b)
He went straight to the police
By contrast, inﬁnitival to (because of its lack of lexical content) cannot be inten-
siﬁed by right/straight:
(44) (a)
∗I wonder whether right/straight to go home
(b)
∗Many people want the government right/straight to change course
(c)
∗We don’t intend right/straight to surrender
Moreover, what makes the prepositional analysis of inﬁnitival to even more prob-
lematic is that it takes a different range of complements from prepositional to (and
indeed different from the range of complements found with other prepositions).
For example, prepositional to (like other prepositions) can have a noun expression
as its complement, whereas inﬁnitival to requires a verbal complement:
(45) (a)
I intend to resign [= to+verb]/∗I intend to resignation [= to+noun]
(b)
She waited for John to arrive [= to+verb]/She waited for John ∗to arrival [= to+noun]
(c)
Try to decide [= to+verb]/∗Try to decision [= to+noun]
Signiﬁcantly, genuine prepositions in English (such as those bold-printed in the
examples below) only permit a following verbal complement when the verb is
in the -ing form (known as the gerund form in this particular use), not when the
verb is in the uninﬂected base/inﬁnitive form:
(46) (a)
I am against capitulating/∗capitulate
(b)
Try and do it without complaining/∗complain
(c)
Think carefully before deciding/∗decide
By contrast, inﬁnitival to can only take a verbal complement when the verb is in
the inﬁnitive form, never when it is in the gerund form:
(47) (a)
I want to go/∗going there
(b)
You must try to work/∗working harder
(c)
You managed to upset/∗upsetting them

2.8 Inﬁnitival to
51
A further difference between inﬁnitival and prepositional to (illustrated in (48)
below) is that inﬁnitival to permits ellipsis (i.e. omission) of its complement,
whereas prepositional to does not:
(48)
speaker a: Do you want to go to the cinema?
speaker b: No, I don’t really want to (ellipsis of complement of inﬁnitival to)
∗No, I don’t really want to go to (ellipsis of complement of prepositional to)
Thus, there are compelling reasons for assuming that inﬁnitival to is a differ-
ent lexical item (i.e. a different word) belonging to a different category from
prepositional to. So what category does inﬁnitival to belong to?
In the late 1970s, Chomsky suggested that there are signiﬁcant similarities
between inﬁnitival to and a typical auxiliary like should. For example, they occupy
a similar position within the clause:
(49) (a)
It’s vital [that John should show an interest]
(b)
It’s vital [for John to show an interest]
We see from (49) that to and should are both positioned between the subject John
and the verb show. Moreover, just as should requires after it a verb in the inﬁnitive
form (cf. ‘You should show/∗showing/∗shown more interest in syntax’), so too
does inﬁnitival to (cf. ‘Try to show/∗showing/∗shown more interest in syntax’).
Furthermore, inﬁnitival to behaves like typical auxiliaries (e.g. should) but unlike
typical non-auxiliary verbs (e.g. want) in allowing ellipsis of its complement:
(50) (a)
I don’t really want to go to the dentist’s, but I know I should
(b)
I know I should go to the dentist’s, but I just don’t want to
(c)
∗I know I should go to the dentist’s, but I just don’t want
The fact that to patterns like the auxiliary should in several respects strengthens the
case for regarding inﬁnitival to and auxiliaries as belonging to the same category.
But what category?
Chomsky (1981, p. 18) suggested that the resulting category (comprising
ﬁnite auxiliaries and inﬁnitival to) be labelled INFL or Inﬂection, though
(in accordance with the standard practice of using single-letter symbols to des-
ignate word categories) in later work (1986b, p. 3) he replaced INFL by the
single-letter symbol I. The general idea behind this label is that ﬁnite auxiliaries
are inﬂected forms (e.g. in ‘He doesn’t know’, the auxiliary doesn’t carries the
third-person-singular present-tense inﬂection -s), and inﬁnitival to serves much
thesamefunctioninEnglishasinﬁnitiveinﬂectionsinlanguageslikeItalianwhich
have overtly inﬂected inﬁnitives (so that Italian canta-re = English to sing). Under
the INFL analysis, an auxiliary like should is a ﬁnite I/INFL, whereas the particle
to is an inﬁnitival I/INFL.
However, in work since the mid 1990s, a somewhat different categorisation of
auxiliaries and inﬁnitival to has been adopted. As the pairs of examples in (34a–h)
show, ﬁnite auxiliaries typically have two distinct forms – a present-tense form

52
2 words
and a corresponding past-tense form (cf. pairs such as does/did, is/was, has/had,
can/could etc.). Thus, a common property shared by all ﬁnite auxiliaries is that
they mark (present/past) Tense. In much the same way, it might be argued that
inﬁnitival to has Tense properties, as we can see from the contrast below:
(51) (a)
We believe [the President may have been lying]
(b)
We believe [the President to have been lying]
In(51a),thebracketedcomplementclausehasapresent-tenseinterpretation(para-
phraseable as ‘We believe it is possible that the President has been lying’): this
is because it contains the present-tense auxiliary may. However, the bracketed
inﬁnitive complement clause in (51b) can also have a present-tense interpreta-
tion, paraphraseable as ‘We believe the President has been lying.’ Why should
this be? A plausible answer is that inﬁnitival to carries Tense in much the same
way as an auxiliary like may does. In a sentence like (51b), to is most likely to
be assigned a present-tense interpretation. However, in a sentence such as (52)
below:
(52)
The Feds believed [the junkies to have already stashed the hash in the
trash-can by the time they were caught]
inﬁnitival to seems to have a past-tense interpretation, so that (52) is para-
phraseable as ‘The Federal Agents believed the junkies had already stashed the
hash in the trash-can by the time they were caught.’ What this suggests is that
to has abstract (i.e. invisible) tense properties, and has a present-tense interpre-
tation in structures like (51b) when the bracketed to-clause is the complement
of a present-tense verb like believe, and a past-tense interpretation in structures
like (52) when the bracketed to-clause is the complement of a past-tense verb
like believed. If ﬁnite auxiliaries and inﬁnitival to both have (visible or invisible)
tense properties, we can assign the two of them to the same category of T/Tense-
marker – as is done in much contemporary work. The difference between them
is sometimes said to be that auxiliaries carry ﬁnite tense (i.e. they are overtly
speciﬁed for tense, in the sense that e.g. does is overtly marked as a present-tense
form and did as a past-tense form) whereas inﬁnitival to carries non-ﬁnite tense
(i.e. it has an unspeciﬁed tense value which has to be determined from the context.
For a more technical discussion of tense, see Julien 2001.)
2.9
Complementisers
The last type of functional category which we shall look at in this
chapter is that of complementiser (abbreviated to COMP in earlier work and to
C in more recent work): this is a term employed to describe the kind of (italicised)
word which is used to introduce complement clauses such as those bracketed
below:

2.9 Complementisers
53
(53) (a)
I think [that you may be right]
(b)
I doubt [if you can help me]
(c)
I’m anxious [for you to receive the best treatment possible]
Each of the bracketed clauses in (53) is a complement clause, in that it functions
as the complement of the word immediately preceding it (think/doubt/anxious);
the italicised word which introduces each clause is known in work since 1970 as
a complementiser (but was known in more traditional work as a particular type
of subordinating conjunction).
Complementisers are functors in the sense that they encode particular sets of
grammatical properties. For example, complementisers encode (non-)ﬁniteness
by virtue of the fact that they are intrinsically ﬁnite or non-ﬁnite. More speciﬁcally,
the complementisers that and if are inherently ﬁnite in the sense that they can
only be used to introduce a ﬁnite clause (i.e. a clause containing a present- or
past-tense auxiliary or verb), and not e.g. an inﬁnitival to-clause; by contrast,
for is an inherently inﬁnitival complementiser, and so can be used to introduce a
clause containing inﬁnitival to, but not a ﬁnite clause containing a tensed auxiliary
like (past-tense) should; compare the examples in (53) above with those in (54)
below:
(54) (a)
∗I think [that you to be right]
(b)
∗I doubt [if you to help me]
(c)
∗I’m anxious [for you should receive the best treatment possible]
(54a,b) are ungrammatical because that/if are ﬁnite complementisers and so can-
not introduce an inﬁnitival to clause; (54c) is ungrammatical because for is an
inﬁnitival complementiser and so cannot introduce a ﬁnite clause containing a
past-tense auxiliary like should.
Complementisers in structures like (53) serve three grammatical functions.
Firstly, they mark the fact that the clause they introduce is an embedded clause
(i.e. a clause which is contained within another expression – in this case, within
a main clause containing think/doubt/anxious). Secondly, they serve to indicate
whether the clause they introduce is ﬁnite or non-ﬁnite (i.e. denotes an event
taking place at a speciﬁed or unspeciﬁed time): that and if serve to introduce ﬁnite
clauses, while for introduces non-ﬁnite (more speciﬁcally, inﬁnitival) clauses.
Thirdly, complementisers mark the force of the clause they introduce: typically,
if introduces an interrogative (i.e. question-asking) clause, that introduces a
declarative (statement-making) clause and for introduces an irrealis clause (i.e.
a clause denoting an ‘unreal’ or hypothetical event which hasn’t yet happened
and may never happen).
However, an important question to ask is whether we really need to assign
words such as for/that/if (in the relevant function) to a new category of
C/complementiser, or whether we couldn’t simply treat (e.g.) for as a prepo-
sition, that as a determiner and if as an adverb. The answer is ‘No’, because
there are signiﬁcant differences between complementisers and other apparently

54
2 words
similar words. For example, one difference between the complementiser for and
the preposition for is that the preposition for has substantive lexical semantic
content and so (in some but not all of its uses) can be intensiﬁed by straight/right,
whereas the complementiser for is a functor and can never be so intensiﬁed:
(55) (a)
He headed straight/right for the pub [ for = preposition]
(b)
The dog went straight/right for her throat [ for = preposition]
(c)
∗He was anxious straight/right for nobody to leave [ for = complementiser]
(d)
∗It is vital straight/right for there to be peace [ for = complementiser]
Moreover, the preposition for and the complementiser for also differ in their
syntactic behaviour. For example, a clause introduced by the complementiser for
can be the subject of an expression like would cause chaos, whereas a phrase
introduced by the preposition for cannot:
(56) (a)
For him to resign would cause chaos [= for-clause]
(b)
∗For him would cause chaos [= for-phrase]
What makes it even more implausible to analyse inﬁnitival for as a preposition is
the fact that (bold-printed) prepositions in English aren’t generally followed by a
[bracketed] inﬁnitive complement, as we see from the ungrammaticality of:
(57) (a)
∗She was surprised at [there to be nobody to meet her]
(b)
∗I’m not sure about [you to be there]
(c)
∗I have decided against [us to go there]
On the contrary, as examples such as (46) above illustrate, the only verbal com-
plements which can be used after prepositions are gerund structures containing a
verb in the -ing form.
A further difference between the complementiser for and the preposition for is
that the noun or pronoun expression following the preposition for (or a substitute
interrogative expression like who?/what?/which one?) can be preposed to the
front of the sentence (with or without for) if for is a preposition, but not if for is
a complementiser. For example, in (58) below, for functions as a preposition and
the (distinguished) nominal Senator Megabucks functions as its complement, so
that if we replace Senator Megabucks by which senator? the wh-expression can
be preposed either on its own (in informal styles of English) or together with the
preposition for (in formal styles):
(58) (a)
I will vote for Senator Megabucks in the primaries
(b)
Which senator will you vote for in the primaries? [= informal style]
(c)
For which senator will you vote in the primaries? [= formal style]
However, in (59a) below, the italicised expression is not the complement of the
complementiserfor(thecomplementofforin(59a)istheinﬁnitivalclauseSenator
Megabucks to keep his cool), but rather is the subject of the expression to keep his
cool; hence, even if we replace Senator Megabucks by the interrogative wh-phrase
which senator, the wh-expression can’t be preposed (with or without for):

2.9 Complementisers
55
(59) (a)
They were anxious for Senator Megabucks to keep his cool
(b)
∗Which senator were they anxious for to keep his cool?
(c)
∗For which senator were they anxious to keep his cool?
Furthermore, when for functions as a complementiser, the whole for-clause which
it introduces can often (though not always) be substituted by a clause introduced
by another complementiser; for example, the italicised for-clause in (60a) below
can be replaced by the italicised that-clause in (60b):
(60) (a)
Is it really necessary for there to be a showdown?
(b)
Is it really necessary that there (should) be a showdown?
By contrast, the italicised for-phrase in (61a) below cannot be replaced by a
that-clause, as we see from the ungrammaticality of (61b):
(61) (a)
We are heading for a general strike
(b)
∗We are heading that there (will) be a general strike
So, there is considerable evidence in favour of drawing a categorial distinction
between the preposition for and the complementiser for: they are different lexical
items (i.e. words) belonging to different categories.
Consider now the question of whether the complementiser that could be anal-
ysed as a determiner. At ﬁrst sight, it might seem as if such an analysis could
provide a straightforward way of capturing the apparent parallelism between the
two uses of that in sentences such as the following:
(62) (a)
I refuse to believe that [rumour]
(b)
I refuse to believe that [Randy Rabbit runs Benny’s Bunny Bar]
Given that the word that has the status of a prenominal determiner in sentences
such as (62a), we might suppose that it has the function of a preclausal determiner
(i.e. a determiner introducing the following italicised clause Randy Rabbit runs
Benny’s Bunny Bar) in sentences such as (62b).
However, there is evidence against a determiner analysis of the complementiser
that. Part of this is phonological in nature. In its use as a complementiser (in
sentences such as (62b) above), that typically has the reduced form /ðət/, whereas
in its use as a determiner (e.g. in sentences such as (62a) above), that invariably
has the unreduced form /ðæt/: the phonological differences between the two
suggest that we are dealing with two different lexical items here (i.e. two different
words), one of which functions as a complementiser and typically has a reduced
vowel, the other of which functions as a determiner and always has an unreduced
vowel.
Moreover, that in its use as a determiner (though not in its use as a comple-
mentiser) can be substituted by another determiner (such as this/the):
(63) (a)
Nobody else knows about that incident/this incident/the incident (= determiner that)
(b)
I’m sure that it’s true/∗this it’s true/∗the it’s true (= complementiser that)

56
2 words
Similarly, the determiner that can be used pronominally (without any comple-
ment), whereas the complementiser that cannot:
(64) (a)
Nobody can blame you for that mistake (prenominal determiner)
(b)
Nobody can blame you for that (pronominal determiner)
(65) (a)
I’m sure that you are right (preclausal complementiser)
(b)
∗I’m sure that (pronominal complementiser)
The clear phonological and syntactic differences between the two argue that
the word that which serves to introduce complement clauses is a different item
(belonging to the category C/complementiser) from the determiner/D that which
modiﬁes noun expressions.
The third item which we earlier suggested might function as a complemen-
tiser in English is interrogative if. However, at ﬁrst sight, it might seem as
if there is a potential parallelism between if and interrogative wh-adverbs like
when/where/whether, since they appear to occupy the same position in sentences
like:
(66)
I don’t know [where/when/whether/if he will go]
Hence we might be tempted to analyse if as an interrogative adverb.
However, there are a number of reasons for rejecting this possibility. For one
thing, if differs from interrogative adverbs like where/when/whether not only in
its form (it isn’t a wh-word, as we can see from the fact that it doesn’t begin
with wh), but also in the range of syntactic positions it can occupy. For example,
whereas typical wh-adverbs can occur in ﬁnite and inﬁnitive clauses alike, the
complementiser if is restricted to introducing ﬁnite clauses:
(67) (a)
I wonder [when/where/whether/if I should go] [= ﬁnite clause]
(b)
I wonder [when/where/whether/∗if to go] [= inﬁnitive clause]
Moreover, if is different from interrogative wh-adverbs (but similar to other com-
plementisers) in that it cannot be used to introduce a clause which serves as the
complement of a (bold-printed) preposition:
(68) (a)
I’m not certain about [whether/when/where he’ll go]
(b)
∗I’m concerned over [if taxes are going to be increased]
(c)
∗I’m puzzled at [that he should have resigned]
(d)
∗I’m not very keen on [for you to go there]
Finally, whereas a wh-adverb can typically be coordinated with (e.g. joined by a
coordinating conjunction like and/or to) the adverb not, this is not true of if:
(69) (a)
I don’t know [whether or not he’ll turn up]
(b)
∗I don’t know [if or not he’ll turn up]
For reasons such as these, it seems more appropriate to categorise if as an inter-
rogativecomplementiser,andwhether/where/whenasinterrogativeadverbs.More

2.10 Labelled bracketing
57
generally, our discussion in this section highlights the need to posit a category
C of complementiser, to designate clause-introducing items such as if/that/for
which serve the function of introducing speciﬁc types of ﬁnite or inﬁnitival
clause.
2.10
Labelled bracketing
Having looked at the characteristics of the major substantive/lexical
and functional categories found in English, we are now in a position where we
can start to analyse the grammatical structure of expressions. An important part
of doing this is to categorise each of the words in the expression. A conventional
way of doing so is to use the traditional system of labelled bracketing: each word
is enclosed in a pair of square brackets, and the lefthand member of each pair of
brackets is given an appropriate subscript category label to indicate what category
the word belongs to. To save space (and printer’s ink), it is conventional to use
the following capital-letter abbreviations:
(70)
N = noun
V = verb
A = adjective
ADV = adverb
P = preposition
D/DET = determiner
Q = quantiﬁer
T = Tense-marker (e.g. auxiliary/inﬁnitival to)
C/COMP = complementiser
PRN = pronoun
Adopting the abbreviations in (70), we can represent the categorial status of each
of the words in a sentence such as:
(71)
Any experienced journalist knows that he can sometimes manage to lure the
unsuspecting politician into making unguarded comments
as in (72) below:
(72)
[Q Any] [A experienced] [N journalist] [V knows] [C that] [PRN he] [T can]
[ADV sometimes] [V manage] [T to] [V lure] [D the] [A unsuspecting]
[N politician] [P into] [V making] [A unguarded] [N comments]
What (72) tells us is that the words journalist/politician/comments belong to
the category N/noun, the to the category D/determiner, he to the category
PRN/pronoun (though if personal pronouns like he are analysed as D-pronouns,
he would be assigned to the category D), any to the category Q/quantiﬁer, experi-
enced/unsuspecting/unguarded to the category A/adjective, sometimes to the cate-
gory ADV/adverb, into to the category P/preposition, knows/manage/lure/making
to the category V/verb, can/to to the category T/Tense-marker and that to the cat-
egory C/complementiser. It is important to note, however, that the category labels
used in (72) tell us only how the relevant words are being used in this particular
sentence. For example, the N label on comments in (72) tells us that the item in

58
2 words
question functions as a noun in this particular position in this particular sentence,
but tells us nothing about the function it may have in other sentences. So, for
example, in a sentence such as:
(73)
The president never comments on hypothetical situations
the word comments is a verb – as shown in (74) below:
(74)
[D The] [N president] [ADV never] [V comments] [P on] [A hypothetical] [N situations]
Thus,alabelledbracketroundaparticularwordisusedtoindicatethegrammatical
category which the word belongs to in the particular position which it occupies
in the phrase or sentence in question, so allowing for the possibility that (what
appears to be) the same word may have a different categorial status in other
positions in other structures.
2.11
Grammatical features
In the previous section, we suggested that we can assign words in
sentences to categories on the basis of their grammatical properties. However,
it should be pointed out that simply specifying what category a particular word
in a particular sentence belongs to does not provide a full description of the
grammatical properties of the relevant word. For example, categorising he as a
pronoun in (72) doesn’t tell us in what ways he differs from other pronouns like
e.g. I/us/you/her/it/them – i.e. it doesn’t tell us about the (third) person, (singular)
number, (masculine) gender and (nominative) case properties of he. In other
words, there is a great deal of additional grammatical information about words
which is not represented by simply attaching a category label to the word –
information which provides a ﬁner level of detail than relatively coarse cate-
gorial descriptions. This information is generally described in terms of sets of
grammatical features; by convention, features are enclosed in square brack-
ets and often abbreviated (to save space). Using grammatical features, we can
describe the person/number/gender/case properties of the pronoun he in terms
of the features [3-Pers, Sg-Num, Masc-Gen, Nom-Case] i.e. ‘Third-Person,
Singular-Number, Masculine-Gender, Nominative-Case’. Each of these features
comprises an attribute (i.e. a property like person, number, gender or case) and
a value (which can be ﬁrst/second/third for person, singular/plural for number,
masculine/feminine/neuter for gender, and nominative/accusative/genitive for
case).
An adequate description of syntax also requires us to specify the selec-
tional properties of individual words (e.g. what kinds of complement they can
take). We can illustrate the importance of selectional information by consider-
ing what kinds of word can occupy the position marked by — in the sentences
below:

2.11 Grammatical features
59
(75) (a)
He might — to Paris
(b) He is — to Paris
(c) He has — to Paris
A categorial answer would be ‘A verb’. However, we can’t just use any verb:
for example, it’s OK to use verbs like go/ﬂy, but not verbs like ﬁnd/stay. This
is because different verbs select (i.e. ‘take’) different types of complement, and
verbs like go/ﬂy select a to-expression as their complement but verbs like ﬁnd/stay
do not. But the story doesn’t end there, since each of the structures in (75)
requires a different form of the verb: in (75a) we can use the inﬁnitive form
go, but not other forms of the verb (cf. He might go/∗going/∗gone/∗goes/∗went
to Paris); in (75b) we can only use the progressive participle form going (cf.
He is going/∗go/∗gone/∗goes/∗went to Paris); and in (75c) we can only use the
perfect participle form gone (cf. He has gone/∗go/∗going/∗goes/∗went to Paris).
This in turn is because the auxiliary might selects (i.e. ‘takes’) an inﬁnitive
complement, the progressive auxiliary is selects a progressive participle com-
plement, and the perfect auxiliary has selects a perfect participle complement. In
other words, a full description of the grammatical properties of words requires
us to specify not only their categorial and subcategorial properties, but also
their selectional properties. It is widely assumed that the selectional proper-
ties of words can be described in terms of selectional features. For example,
the fact that progressive be selects a progressive participle complement might
be described by saying that it has the selectional feature [V-ing] – a notation
intended to signify that it selects a complement headed by a verb carrying the -ing
sufﬁx.
As far back as his 1965 book Aspects of the Theory of Syntax, Chomsky
argued that all the grammatical properties of a word (including its categorial
properties) can be described in terms of a set of grammatical features. In work
in the 1970s, he argued that the categorial distinction between nouns, verbs,
adjectives and prepositions can be handled in terms of two sets of categorial
features, namely [±V] ‘verbal/non-verbal’ and [±N] ‘nominal/non-nominal’.
More speciﬁcally, he suggested that the categorial properties of nouns, verbs
adjectives and prepositions could be described in terms of the sets of features in
(76) below:
(76)
verb = [+V, –N]
adjective = [+V, +N]
noun = [–V, +N]
preposition = [–V, –N]
What (76) claims is that verbs have verbal but not nominal properties, adjectives
have both nominal and verbal properties, nouns have nominal but not verbal
properties, and prepositions have neither nominal nor verbal properties. This
analysis was designed to capture the fact that some grammatical properties extend
across more than one category and so can be said to be cross-categorial. For
example, Stowell (1981, p. 57 fn. 17) notes that verbs and adjectives in English
share the morphological property that they alone permit un-preﬁxation (hence we
ﬁnd verbs like undo and adjectives like unkind, but not nouns like ∗unfriend or
prepositions like ∗uninside): in terms of the set of categorial features in (76), we

60
2 words
can account for this by positing that un- can only be preﬁxed to words which have
the categorial feature [+V]. Likewise, as the following example kindly provided
for me by Andrew Spencer shows, in Russian nouns and adjectives inﬂect for
case, but not verbs or prepositions:
(77)
Krasivaya dyevushka vsunula chornuyu koshku v pustuyu korobku
Beautiful girl
put
black
cat
in empty
box
‘The beautiful girl put the black cat in the empty box’
Thus, the nouns and adjectives in (77) carry (italicised) case endings (-a is a
nominative sufﬁx and -u an accusative sufﬁx), but not the verb or preposition. In
terms of the set of categorial features in (76) we can account for this by positing
that case is a property of items which carry the categorial feature [+N].
An obvious drawback to the system of categorial features in (76) above is that it
describes the categorial properties of a number of substantive/lexical categories,
but not those of functional categories. Each functional category seems to be
closely related to a corresponding lexical category: for example, auxiliaries appear
to be related to verbs, determiners to adjectives, and the complementiser for to
the preposition for. One way of handling both the similarities and differences
between substantive categories and their functional counterparts is in terms of a
functionality feature [±F], with functional categories carrying the feature [+F],
and substantive categories carrying the feature [−F]. On this view, main verbs
would have the feature speciﬁcation [−N, +V, −F] whereas auxiliaries would
have the feature speciﬁcation [−N, +V, +F]; likewise, the complementiser for
would have the feature speciﬁcation [−N, −V, +F], and the preposition for would
bespeciﬁedas[−N,−V,−F].Weshallnotspeculateanyfurtheronthispossibility
here: for an attempt to motivate such an analysis, see Radford (1997a, pp. 65–68
and p. 84).
Although many details remain to be worked out, it seems clear that in principle,
all grammatical properties of words (including their categorial properties) can be
described in terms of sets of grammatical features. (See Ramat 1999 on categories
and features.) However, in order to simplify our exposition, we shall continue to
make use of traditional category labels throughout much of the book, gradually
introducing speciﬁc features in later chapters where some descriptive purpose is
served by doing so.
2.12
Summary
In this chapter, we have looked at the role played by categories in
characterising the grammatical properties of words. In §2.2, we looked at the
criteria used for categorising words, noting that semantic criteria have to be used
with care, and that morphological criteria (relating to the inﬂectional and deriva-
tional properties of words) and syntactic criteria (relating to the range of positions

2.12 Summary
61
which words can occupy within phrases and sentences) tend to be more reliable.
In §2.3 we suggested that we can determine the categorial status of a word from
its morphological and syntactic properties, with substitution being used as a test
in problematic cases. In §2.4 we went on to draw a distinction between substan-
tive/lexical categories (whose members have substantive lexical content) and
functional categories (whose members have no substantive lexical content and
serve only to mark grammatical properties such as number, person, case etc.). We
then looked at a number of different types of functional category found in English.
We began in §2.5 with determiners (= D) and quantiﬁers (= Q), arguing that they
are categorially distinct from adjectives since they precede (but don’t follow)
adjectives, they can’t be stacked, and they impose grammatical restrictions on
the types of expression they can modify (e.g. a can only modify a singular count
noun expression). In §2.6, we looked at pronouns and argued that English has at
least three distinct types of pronoun, namely N-pronouns (like one), Q-pronouns
(like several) and D-pronouns (like this). We went on to note that recent research
has suggested that personal pronouns like he are also D-pronouns, but that this
categorisation is not entirely unproblematic. In §2.7 we looked at the functional
counterparts of verbs, namely auxiliaries: we argued that these are functors in
that (unlike lexical verbs) they describe no speciﬁc action or event, but rather
encodeverb-relatedgrammaticalpropertiessuchastense,mood,voiceandaspect;
we noted that auxiliaries are syntactically distinct from verbs in that (e.g.) they
undergo inversion. In §2.8 we discussed the nature of inﬁnitival to: we showed
that it is distinct from the preposition to, and shares a number of properties in
common with ﬁnite auxiliaries (e.g. auxiliaries and inﬁnitival to allow ellipsis of
their complements, but prepositional to does not). We noted the assumption made
in much research over the past three decades that ﬁnite auxiliaries and inﬁnitival
to are different exponents of the same category (labelled I/INFL/Inﬂection in
earlier work and T/Tense-marker in more recent work), with an auxiliary like
will marking ﬁnite tense, and inﬁnitival to marking non-ﬁnite tense. In §2.9 we
argued that complementisers (= C or COMP) like that/if/for are a further category
of functors, and that they mark the force of a complement clause (e.g. indicate
whether it is interrogative, declarative or irrealis), and that (e.g.) if is distinct
from interrogative adverbs like how/when/whether in that it can only introduce a
ﬁnite clause, and cannot introduce a clause which is used as the complement of
a preposition. In §2.10, we showed how the labelled bracketing technique can be
used to categorise words in particular phrases and sentences. Finally, in §2.11 we
noted that assigning words to grammatical categories provides a description of
only some of their grammatical properties, and that a fuller description requires
the use of grammatical features to describe their other grammatical properties.
We went on to note Chomsky’s claim that the categorial properties of words can
also be described in terms of a set of grammatical features – bringing us to the
conclusion that all grammatical properties of words can be characterised in terms
of sets of features.

62
2 words
Workbook section
Exercise 2.1
Discuss the grammatical and categorial properties of the highlighted words in each of the
following examples, giving arguments in support of your analysis:
1a
Nobody need/dare say anything
b
Nobody needs/dares to ask questions
c
John is working hard
d
John may stay at home
e
John has done it
f
John has to go there
g
John used to go there quite often
2a
Executives like to drive to work
b
I look forward to learning to drive
c
It’s difﬁcult to get him to work
d
I’ve never felt tempted to turn to taking drugs
e
Better to yield to temptation than to submit to deprivation!
f
Failure to achieve sometimes drives people to drink
g
Try to go to sleep.
3a
It is important for parents to spend time with their children
b
It would be disastrous for me for my driving-licence to be withdrawn
c
He was arrested for being drunk
d
We are hoping for a peace agreement to be signed
e
Ships head for the nearest port in a storm
f
Congress voted for the treaty to be ratiﬁed
g
It would be unfortunate for the students to fail their exams
Helpful hints
A particular problem arises (in the case of some of the examples in 3) in relation to words which
allow a prepositional phrase complement (comprising a preposition and a noun or pronoun
expression) in one use, and a for-inﬁnitive clause in another – as with arrange in the examples
below
(i) (a)
I can arrange for immediate closure of the account
(b)
I can arrange for the account to be closed immediately
In (ia) for is used with the noun expression immediate closure of the account as its complement,
and is clearly a preposition – as we can see from the fact that (like the complement of a typical
preposition) the relevant noun expression can be moved to the front of the sentence to highlight it:
(ii)
Immediate closure of the account, I can certainly arrange for
By contrast, for in (ib) seems to be a complementiser rather than a preposition. For one thing,
prepositions don’t allow an inﬁnitival complement, as we see from examples like (57) in the main
text. Moreover, the complement of for in (ib) cannot be preposed – as we see from the
ungrammaticality of:

Workbook section
63
(iii)
∗The account to be closed immediately, I can certainly arrange for
What we might have expected to ﬁnd is two occurrences of for, one serving as an (italicised)
preposition introducing the complement of arrange, and the other serving as a (bold-printed)
complementiser introducing the inﬁnitive complement – much as we ﬁnd in:
(iv)
What I can certainly arrange for is for the account to be closed immediately
But the expected for for sequence isn’t grammatical in sentences like:
(v)
∗I can certainly arrange for for the account to be closed immediately
The reason seems to be that words which take a prepositional complement generally drop the
preposition when the (italicised) preposition has a complement introduced by a (bold-printed)
complementiser:
(vi) (a)
What you can’t be sure of is that he is telling the truth
(b)
∗You can’t be sure of that he is telling the truth
(c)
You can’t be sure that he is telling the truth
Hence, although we might in principle expect to ﬁnd a preposition+complementiser structure in
(v), what seems to happen in practice is that the preposition is dropped in such structures – hence
in (ib) the for which we ﬁnd is the complementiser for rather than the (dropped) preposition
for.
Model answer for sentences 1a, 2a and 3a
The main problem raised by the examples in 1 is whether the highlighted items have the categorial
status of verbs or auxiliaries as they are used in each example – or indeed whether some of the
items in some of their uses have a dual verb/auxiliary status (and so can function either as verbs or
as auxiliaries). The words need/dare in 1a resemble modal auxiliaries like will/shall/can/may/must
in that they lack the third-person-singular -s inﬂection, and take a bare inﬁnitive complement (i.e.
a complement containing the inﬁnitive verb-form say but lacking the inﬁnitive particle to). They
behave like auxiliaries (in Standard English) in that they undergo inversion in questions, can
appear in tags, and can be negated by not/n’t:
(i) (a)
Need/Dare anyone say anything?
(b)
He needn’t/daren’t say anything, need/dare he?
Conversely, they are not used with do-support in any of these three constructions in Standard
English:
(ii) (a)
∗Does anyone need/dare say anything?
(b)
∗He doesn’t need/dare say anything, does he?
Thus, need/dare when followed by a bare inﬁnitive complement seem to have the status of
(modal) auxiliaries. In 1a, need/dare are third-person-singular present-tense ﬁnite verb forms, as
we see from the fact that the subject of need is the nominative pronoun they in (iii) below:

64
2 words
(iii)
Nobody need say anything, need they?
(Recall that ﬁnite verbs require nominative subjects.)
In 2a, the ﬁrst to is an inﬁnitive particle, and the second to is a preposition. Thus, the second to
(but not the ﬁrst) can be modiﬁed by the prepositional intensiﬁer straight (cf. Executives like to
drive straight to work, but not ∗Executives like straight to drive to work). Moreover, the second to
is a contentive preposition which has the antonym from (cf. Executives like to drive from work),
whereas the ﬁrst has no obvious antonym since it is an inﬁnitive particle (cf. ∗Executives like from
drive/driving to work). In addition, like a typical transitive preposition, the second to (but not the
ﬁrst) can be followed by an accusative pronoun complement like them (cf. Executives think the
only way of getting to their ofﬁces is to drive to them). Conversely, the ﬁrst (inﬁnitival) to allows
ellipsis of its complement (cf. Executives like to), whereas the second (prepositional) to does not
(cf. ∗Executives like to drive to). Thus, in all relevant respects the ﬁrst to behaves like an inﬁnitive
particle, whereas the second to behaves like a preposition.
In 3a, for could be either a complementiser (introducing the inﬁnitival clause parents to spend
time with their children), or a preposition (whose complement is the noun parents). The
possibility that for might be used here as a preposition is suggested by the fact that the string for
parents (or an interrogative counterpart like for how many parents?) could be preposed to the
front of its containing sentence, as in:
(iv) (a)
For parents, it is important to spend time with their children
(b)
For how many parents is it important to spend time with their children?
The alternative possibility that for might be used as a complementiser (with the inﬁnitival clause
parents to spend time with their children serving as its complement) is suggested by the fact that
the for-clause here could be substituted by a that-clause, as in:
(v)
It is important that parents should spend time with their children
Thus, 3a is structurally ambiguous between one analysis on which for functions as a transitive
preposition, and a second on which for functions as an inﬁnitival complementiser which is irrealis
in force.
Exercise 2.2
Use the labelled bracketing technique to assign each word in each of the sentences below to a
grammatical category which represents how it is being used in the position in which it occurs in
the sentence concerned. Give reasons in support of your proposed categorisation, highlight any
analytic problems which arise, and comment on any interesting properties of the relevant words.
1
He was feeling disappointed at only obtaining average grades in the morphology
exercises
2
Student counsellors know that money troubles can cause considerable stress
3
Opposition politicians are pressing for election debates to receive better television
coverage
4
Seasoned press commentators doubt if the workers will ever fully accept that
substantial pay rises lead to runaway inﬂation
5
Students often complain to their high school teachers that the state education system
promotes universal mediocrity

Workbook section
65
6
Some scientists believe that climatic changes result from ozone depletion due to
excessive carbon dioxide emission
7
Linguists have long suspected that peer group pressure shapes linguistic behaviour
patterns in very young children
8
You don’t seem to be too worried about the possibility that many of the shareholders
may now vote against your revised takeover bid
Model answer for sentence 1
(i)
[PRN He] [T was] [V feeling] [A disappointed] [P at] [ADV only] [V obtaining]
[A average] [N grades] [P in] [D the] [N morphology] [N exercises]
An issue of particular interest which arises in (i) relates to the status of the words average and
morphology. Are these nouns or adjectives – and how can we tell? Since nouns used to modify
other nouns are invariable in English (e.g. we say skate boards, not ∗skates boards), we can’t
rely on morphological clues here. However, we can use syntactic evidence. If (as assumed here)
the word average functions as an adjective in 1, we should expect to ﬁnd that it can be modiﬁed
by the kind of adverb like relatively which can be used to modify adjectives (e.g. relatively good);
by contrast, if morphology serves as a noun in 1, we should expect to ﬁnd that it can be modiﬁed
by the kind of adjective (e.g. inﬂectional) which can be used to modify such a noun. In the event,
both predictions are correct:
(ii)
He was feeling disappointed at only obtaining relatively average grades in
the inﬂectional morphology exercises
Some additional evidence that average can function as an adjective comes from the fact that it has
the -ly adverb derivative averagely, and (for some speakers at least) the noun derivative
averageness – e.g. The very averageness of his intellect made him the CIA’s choice for president.
Moreover (like most adjectives), it can be used predicatively in sentences like His performance
was average. (Note, however, that in structures such as morphology exercises, you will not always
ﬁnd it easy to determine whether the ﬁrst word is a noun or adjective. Unless there is evidence to
the contrary – as with average in (ii) above – assume that the relevant item is a noun if it clearly
functions as a noun in other uses.)

3
Structure
3.1
Overview
Inthischapter,weintroducethenotionofsyntacticstructure,looking
at how words are combined together to form phrases and sentences. We shall argue
that phrases and sentences are built up by a series of merger operations, each of
which combines a pair of constituents together to form a larger constituent. We
show how the resulting structure can be represented in terms of a tree diagram,
and we look at ways of testing the structure of phrases and sentences.
3.2
Phrases
To put our discussion on a concrete footing, let’s consider how an
elementary two-word phrase such as that produced by speaker B in the following
mini-dialogue is formed:
(1)
speaker a: What are you trying to do?
speaker b: Help you
As speaker B’s utterance illustrates, the simplest way of forming a phrase is
by merging (a technical term meaning ‘combining’) two words together: for
example, by merging the word help with the word you in (1), we form the phrase
help you. The resulting phrase help you seems to have verb-like rather than noun-
like properties, as we see from the fact that it can occupy much the same range of
positions as the simple verb help, and hence e.g. occur after the inﬁnitive particle
to:
(2) (a)
We are trying to help
(b) We are trying to help you
By contrast, the phrase help you cannot occupy the kind of position occupied by
a pronoun such as you, as we see from (3) below:
(3) (a)
You are very difﬁcult
(b) ∗Help you are very difﬁcult
So, it seems clear that the grammatical properties of a phrase like help you are
determined by the verb help, and not by the pronoun you. Much the same can be
said about the semantic properties of the expression, since the phrase help you
66

3.2 Phrases
67
describes an act of help, not a kind of person. Using the appropriate technical
terminology, we can say that the verb help is the head of the phrase help you,
and hence that help you is a verb phrase: and in the same way as we abbreviate
category labels like verb to V, so too we can abbreviate the category label verb
phrase to VP. If we use the traditional labelled bracketing technique to represent
the category of the overall verb phrase help you and of its constituent words (the
verb help and the pronoun you), we can represent the structure of the resulting
phrase as in (4) below:
(4)
[VP [V help] [PRN you]]
An alternative (equivalent) way of representing the structure of phrases like help
you is via a labelled tree diagram such as (5) below (which is a bit like a family
tree diagram – albeit for a small family):
(5)
VP
V
PRN
help
you
What the tree diagram in (5) tells us is that the overall phrase help you is a
verb phrase (VP), and that its two constituents are the verb (V) help and the
pronoun (PRN) you. The verb help is the head of the overall phrase (and so is
the key word which determines the grammatical and semantic properties of the
phrase help you); introducing another technical term at this point, we can say
that conversely, the VP help you is a projection of the verb help – i.e. it is a
larger expression formed by merging the head verb help with another constituent
of an appropriate kind. In this case, the constituent which is merged with the
verb help is the pronoun you, which has the grammatical function of being the
complement (or direct object) of the verb help. The head of a projection/phrase
determines the grammatical properties of its complement: in this case, since help
is a transitive verb, it requires a complement with accusative case (e.g. a pronoun
like me/us/him/them), and this requirement is satisﬁed here since you can function
as an accusative form (as you can see from the table of pronoun forms given in
(31) in §2.6).
The tree diagram in (5) is entirely equivalent to the labelled bracketing in (4),
in the sense that the two provide us with precisely the same information about the
structure of the phrase help you. The differences between a labelled bracketing like
(4) and a tree diagram like (5) are purely notational: each category is represented
by a single labelled node in a tree diagram (i.e. by a point in the tree which carries
a category label like VP, V or PRN), but by a pair of labelled brackets in a labelled
bracketing. In each case, category labels like V/verb and PRN/pronoun should be
thought of as shorthand abbreviations for the set of grammatical features which
characterise the overall grammatical properties of the relevant words (e.g. the
pronoun you as used in (5) carries a set of features including [second-person]
and [accusative-case], though these features are not shown by the category label
PRN).

68
3 structure
Since our goal in developing a theory of Universal Grammar is to uncover
general structural principles governing the formation of phrases and sentences,
let’s generalise our discussion of (5) at this point and hypothesise that all phrases
are formed in essentially the same way as the phrase in (5), namely by a binary
(i.e. pairwise) merger operation which combines two constituents together to form
a larger constituent. In the case of (5), the resulting phrase help you is formed by
merging two words. However, not all phrases contain only two words – as we see
if we look at the structure of the phrase produced by speaker B in (6) below:
(6)
speaker a: What was your intention?
speaker b: To help you
The phrase in (6B) is formed by merging the inﬁnitive particle to with the verb
phrase help you. What’s the head of the resulting phrase to help you? A reasonable
guess would be that the head is the inﬁnitival tense particle/T to, so that the result-
ing expression to help you is an inﬁnitival TP (= inﬁnitival tense projection =
inﬁnitival tense phrase). This being so, we’d expect to ﬁnd that TPs containing
inﬁnitival to have a different distribution (and so occur in a different range of
positions) from VPs/verb phrases – and this is indeed the case, as we see from
the contrast below:
(7) (a)
They ought to help you (= ought + TP to help you)
(b)
∗They ought help you (= ought + VP help you)
(8) (a)
They should help you (= should + VP help you)
(b)
∗They should to help you (= should + TP to help you)
If we assume that help you is a VP whereas to help you is a TP, we can account
for the contrasts in (7) and (8) by saying that ought is the kind of word which
selects (i.e. ‘takes’) an inﬁnitival TP as its complement, whereas should is the
kind of word which selects an inﬁnitival VP as its complement. Implicit in this
claim is the assumption that different words like ought and should have different
selectional properties which determine the range of complements they permit
(as we saw in §2.11).
The inﬁnitive phrase to help you is formed by merging the inﬁnitive particle to
with the verb phrase help you. If (as we argued in the previous chapter) inﬁnitival
to is a non-ﬁnite tense particle (belonging to the category T) and if to is the head
of the phrase to help you, the structure formed by merging the inﬁnitival T-particle
to with the verb phrase/VP help you in (5) will be the TP (i.e. non-ﬁnite/inﬁnitival
tense projection/phrase) in (9) below:
(9)
TP
T
 to 
VP
V
help
PRN
you

3.2 Phrases
69
The head of the resulting inﬁnitival tense projection to help you is the inﬁnitive
particle to, and the verb phrase help you is the complement of to; conversely,
to help you is a projection of to. In keeping with our earlier observation that
‘The head of a projection/phrase determines grammatical properties of its com-
plement’, the non-ﬁnite tense particle to requires an inﬁnitival complement: more
speciﬁcally, to requires the head V of its VP complement to be a verb in its inﬁni-
tive form, so that we require the inﬁnitive form help after inﬁnitival to (and not a
form like helping/helped/helps). Reﬁning our earlier observation somewhat, we
can therefore say that ‘The head of a projection/phrase determines grammatical
properties of the head word of its complement’. In (9), to is the head of the TP
to help you, and the complement of to is the VP help you; the head of this VP is
the V help, so that to determines the form of the V help (requiring it to be in the
inﬁnitive form help).
More generally, our discussion here suggests that we can build up phrases by a
series of binary merger operations which combine successive pairs of constituents
to form ever larger structures. For example, by merging the inﬁnitive phrase to
help you with the verb trying, we can form the even larger phrase trying to help
you produced by speaker B in (10) below:
(10)
speaker a: What are you doing?
speaker b: Trying to help you
The resulting phrase trying to help you is headed by the verb trying, as we see
from the fact that it can be used after words like be, start or keep which select a
complement headed by a verb in the -ing form (cf. They were/started/kept trying
to help you). This being so, the italicised phrase produced by speaker B in (10) is
a VP (= verb phrase) which has the structure (11) below:
(11)
VP
V
trying
TP
T
to
VP
V
help
PRN
you
(11) tells us (amongst other things) that the overall expression trying to help you
is a verb phrase/VP; its head is the verb/V trying, and the complement of trying
is the TP/inﬁnitival tense phrase to help you: conversely, the VP trying to help
you is a projection of the V trying. An interesting property of syntactic structures
illustrated in (11) is that of recursion – that is, the property of allowing a given
structure to contain more than one instance of a given category (in this case, more
than one verb phrase/VP – one headed by the verb help and the other headed by
the verb trying).
Since our goal in developing a theory of Universal Grammar/UG is to attempt
to establish universal principles governing the nature of linguistic structure, an

70
3 structure
important question to ask is whether there are any general principles of constituent
structure which we can abstract from structures like (5), (9) and (11). If we look
closely at the relevant structures, we can see that they obey the following two
(putatively universal) constituent structure principles:
(12)
Headedness Principle
Every syntactic structure is a projection of a head word
(13)
Binarity Principle
Every syntactic structure is binary-branching
(The term syntactic structure is used here as an informal way of denoting an
expression which contains two or more constituents.) For example, the structure
(11) obeys the Headedness Principle (12) in that the VP help you is headed by the
V help, the TP to help you is headed by the T to, and the VP trying to help you is
headed by the V trying. Likewise, (11) obeys the Binarity Principle (13) in that the
VP help you branches into two immediate constituents (in the sense that it has
two constituents immediately beneath it, namely the V help and the PRN you),
the TP to help you branches into two immediate constituents (the non-ﬁnite tense
particle T to and the VP help you), and the VP trying to help you likewise branches
into two immediate constituents (the V trying and the TP to help you). Our
discussion thus leads us towards a principled account of constituent structure –
i.e. one based on a set of principles of Universal Grammar.
There are several reasons for trying to uncover constituent structure princi-
ples like (12) and (13). From a learnability perspective, such principles reduce
the range of alternatives which children have to choose between when trying
to determine the structure of a given kind of expression: they therefore help us
develop a more constrained theory of syntax. Moreover, additional support for
the Binarity Principle comes from evidence that phonological structure is also
binary, in that (e.g.) a syllable like bat has a binary structure, consisting of the
onset |b| and the rhyme |at|, and the rhyme in turn has a binary structure, con-
sisting of the nucleus |a| and the coda|t| (see Radford et al. 1999, pp. 88ff. for
an outline of syllable structure). Likewise, there is evidence that morphological
structure is also binary: for example (under the analysis proposed in Radford et al.
1999, p. 164), the noun indecipherability is formed by adding the preﬁx de- to
the noun cipher to form the verb decipher; then adding the sufﬁx -able to this
verb to form the adjective decipherable; then adding the preﬁx in- to this adjec-
tive to form the adjective indecipherable; and then adding the sufﬁx -ity to the
resulting adjective to form the noun indecipherability. It would therefore seem
that binarity is an inherent characteristic of the phonological, morphological
and syntactic structure of natural languages. There is also a considerable body of
empirical evidence in support of a binary-branching analysis of a range of syntac-
tic structures in a range of languages (see e.g. Kayne 1984a) – though much of this
work is highly technical and it would therefore not be appropriate to consider it
here.

3.3 Clauses
71
3.3
Clauses
Having considered how phrases are formed, let’s now turn to look
at how clauses and sentences are formed. By way of illustration, suppose that
speaker B had used the simple (single-clause) sentence italicised in (14) below
to reply to speaker A, rather than the phrase used by speaker B in (10):
(14)
speaker a: What are you doing?
speaker b: We are trying to help you
What’s the structure of the italicised clause produced by speaker B in (14)?
In work in the 1960s, clauses were generally taken to belong to the category
S (Sentence/Clause), and the sentence produced by B in (14) would have been
taken to have a structure along the following lines:
(15)
S 
PRN
We 
T
are
VP
V
trying
TP
T
to
VP  
V
help
PRN
 you
However, a structure such as (15) violates the two constituent structure principles
which we posited in (12) and (13) above. More particularly, the S analysis of
clauses in (15) violates the Headedness Principle (12) in that the S we are trying
to help you is a structure which has no head of any kind. Likewise, the S analysis
in (15) also violates the Binarity Principle (13) in that the S constituent We are
trying to help you is not binary-branching but rather ternary-branching, because
it branches into three immediate constituents, namely the PRN we, the T are, and
the VP trying to help you. If our theory of Universal Grammar requires every
syntactic structure to be a binary-branching projection of a head word, it is clear
that we have to reject the S-analysis of clause structure in (15) as one which is
not in keeping with UG principles.
Let’s therefore explore an alternative analysis of the structure of clauses which
is consistent with the headedness and binarity requirements in (12) and (13).
More speciﬁcally, let’s make the unifying assumption that clauses are formed
by the same binary merger operation as phrases, and accordingly suppose that
the italicised clause in (14B) is formed by merging the (present) tense auxiliary
are with the verb phrase trying to help you, and then subsequently merging the
resulting expression are trying to help you with the pronoun we. Since are belongs
to the category T of tense auxiliary, it might at ﬁrst sight seem as if merging

72
3 structure
are with the verb phrase trying to help you will derive (i.e. form) the tense
projection/tense phrase/TP are trying to help you. But this can’t be right, since
it would provide us with no obvious account of why speaker B’s reply in (16)
below is ungrammatical:
(16)
speaker a: What are you doing?
speaker b: ∗Are trying to help you
If are trying to help you is a TP (i.e. a complete tense projection), how come it
can’t be used to answer speaker A’s question in (16), since we see from sentences
like (6B) that TP constituents like to help you can be used to answer questions.
An informal answer we can give is to say that the expression are trying to help
you is somehow ‘incomplete’, and that only ‘complete’ expressions can be used to
answer questions. In what sense is Are trying to help you incomplete? The answer
is that ﬁnite T constituents require a subject, and the ﬁnite auxiliary are doesn’t
have a subject in (16). More speciﬁcally, let’s assume that when we merge a tense
auxiliary (= T) with a verb phrase (= VP), we form an intermediate projection
which we shall here denote as T′ (pronounced ‘tee-bar’); and that only when we
merge the relevant T-bar constituent with a subject like we do we form a maximal
projection – or, more informally a ‘complete TP’. Given these assumptions, the
italicised clause in (14B) will have the structure (17) below:
(17)
TP
PRN 
T'
We
T  
VP
are 
V
trying
TP
T
to
VP 
V
help
PRN
you
What this means is that a tense auxiliary like are has two projections: a smaller
intermediate projection (T′) formed by merging are with its complement trying
to help you to form the T-bar (intermediate tense projection) are trying to help
you; and a larger maximal projection (TP) formed by merging the resulting T′
are trying to help you with its subject we to form the TP We are trying to help
you. Saying that TP is the maximal projection of are in (17) means that it is the
largest constituent headed by the tense auxiliary are.
Why should tense auxiliaries require two different projections, one in which
they merge with a following complement to form a T-bar, and another in which
the resulting T-bar merges with a preceding subject to form a TP? Following a
suggestion made by Chomsky (1982, p. 10), the requirement for auxiliaries to

3.3 Clauses
73
have two projections (as in (17) above) was taken in earlier work to be a conse-
quence of a principle of Universal Grammar known as the Extended Projection
Principle (conventionally abbreviated to EPP), which can be outlined informally
as follows:
(18)
Extended Projection Principle/EPP
A ﬁnite tense constituent T must be extended into a TP projection containing a subject
Given that (as we noted at the end of the previous chapter) the grammatical
properties of words are described in terms of sets of grammatical features, we
can say that tense auxiliaries like are carry an [epp] feature which requires them
to have an extended projection into a TP which has a subject. If we posit that
all tense auxiliaries carry an [epp] feature, it follows that any structure (like that
produced by speaker B in (16) above) containing a tense auxiliary which does
not have a subject will be ungrammatical by virtue of violating the Extended
Projection Principle (18).
The EPP requirement (for a ﬁnite auxiliary to have a subject) would seem
to be essentially syntactic (rather than semantic) in nature, as we can see from
sentences such as (19) below:
(19) (a)
It was alleged that he lied under oath
(b)
There has been no trouble
In structures like (19), the italicised subject pronouns it/there seem to have no
semantic content (in particular, no referential properties) of their own, as we
see from the fact that neither can be questioned by the corresponding interrog-
ative words what?/where? (cf. the ungrammaticality of ∗What was alleged that
he lied under oath? and ∗Where has been no trouble?), and neither can receive
contrastive focus (hence it/there cannot be contrastively stressed in sentences like
(19) above). Rather, they function as expletive pronouns – i.e. pronouns with
no intrinsic meaning which are used in order to satisfy the syntactic Projection
Principle/EPP. For example, the expletive subject it in (19a) might be argued to
serve the syntactic function of providing a subject for the auxiliary was to agree
with in person and number. (We deal with agreement in chapter 8 and so will have
nothing more to say about it for the time being.)
It is interesting to note that theoretical considerations also favour a binary-
branching TP analysis of clause structure like (17) over a ternary-branching S
analysis like (15). The essential spirit of Minimalism is to reduce the theoretical
apparatuswhichweusetodescribesyntacticstructuretoaminimum.Forexample,
it has been suggested (e.g. by Kayne 1994, Yang 1999 and Chomsky 2001) that
tree diagrams should only contain information about hierarchical structure (i.e.
containment/constituent structure relations), not about linear structure (i.e. left-
to-right word order), because linear information is redundant (in the sense that
it can be predicted from hierarchical structure by simple word-order rules) if
we use binary-branching trees. Suppose for example that we have a word-order
rule for English to the effect that ‘Any constituent of a phrase HP which is the

74
3 structure
sister of the head H is positioned to the right of H, but any other constituent
of HP is positioned to the left of H.’ This word-order rule will correctly predict
(inter alia) that the VP trying to help you in (17) must be positioned to the right
of the tense auxiliary/T are (because the relevant VP is the sister of are), and
that the pronoun we must be positioned to the left of are (because we is not the
sister of are). As you can see for yourself, it’s not clear how we can achieve the
same result (of eliminating redundant word-order information from trees) under
a ternary-branching analysis like (15), since both the pronoun we and the verb
phrase trying to help you are sisters of are in (15). It should be noted in passing that
an important consequence of assuming that linear order is not a syntactic relation
is that it entails that syntactic operations cannot be sensitive to word order (e.g. we
can’t handle subject–auxiliary agreement by saying that a ﬁnite auxiliary agrees
with a preceding noun or pronoun expression): rather, all syntactic operations
must be sensitive to hierarchical rather than linear structure. How this works in
practice will become clearer as our exposition unfolds.
A question which we have not so far asked about the structure of clauses
concerns what role is played by complementisers like that, for and if, e.g. in
speaker B’s reply in (20) below:
(20)
speaker a: What are you saying?
speaker b: That we are trying to help you
Where does the C/complementiser that ﬁt into the structure of the sentence? The
answer suggested in work in the 1970s was that a complementiser merges with an
S constituent like that in (15) above to form an S′/S-bar (pronounced ‘ess-bar’)
constituent like that shown below (simpliﬁed by not showing the internal structure
of the VP trying to help you, which is as in (11) above):
(21)
S'
C 
That
S 
PRN
we
T
are
VP
trying to help you
However, the claim that a clause introduced by a complementiser has the status of
an S-bar constituent falls foul of the Headedness Principle (12), which requires
that every syntactic structure be a projection of a head word. The principle is
violated because S-bar in (21) is analysed as a projection of the S constituent
we are trying to help you, and S is clearly not a word (but rather a string of
words).
An interesting way round the headedness problem is to suppose that the head of
a clausal structure introduced by a complementiser is the complementiser itself:
since this is a single word, there would then be no violation of the Headedness
Principle (12) requiring every syntactic structure to be a projection of a head

3.3 Clauses
75
word. Let’s therefore assume that the complementiser that merges with the TP
we are trying to help you (whose structure is shown in (17) above) to form the
CP/complementiser projection/complementiser phrase in (22) below:
(22)
CP
C
That
 TP
PRN
we
T'
T
are
VP
V
trying
TP
T
to
VP
V
help
PRN
you
(22) tells us that the complementiser that is the head of the overall clause that
we are trying to help you (and conversely, the overall clause is a projection of
that) – and indeed this is implicit in the traditional description of such structures
as that-clauses. (22) also tells us that the complement of that is the TP/tense
phrase we are trying to help you. Clauses introduced by complementisers have
been taken to have the status of CP/complementiser phrase constituents since the
pioneering work of Stowell (1981) and Chomsky (1986b).
An interesting aspect of the analyses in (17) and (22) above is that clauses and
sentences are analysed as headed structures – i.e. as projections of head words
(in conformity with the Headedness Principle). In other words, just as phrases are
projections of a head word (e.g. a verb phrase like help you is a projection of the
verb help), so too a sentence like We will help you is a projection of the auxiliary
will, and a complement clause like the bracketed that-clause in I can’t promise
[that we will help you] is a projection of the complementiser that. This enables us
to arrive at a unitary analysis of the structure of phrases, clauses and sentences,
in that clauses and sentences (like phrases) are projections of head words. More
generally, it leads us to the conclusion that clauses/sentences are simply particular
kinds of phrases (e.g. a that-clause is a complementiser phrase).
An assumption which is implicit in the analyses which we have presented here
is that phrases and sentences are derived (i.e. formed) in a bottom-up fashion
(i.e. they are built up from bottom to top). For example, the clause in (22) involves
the following sequence of merger operations: (i) the verb help is merged with
the pronoun you to form the VP help you; (ii) the resulting VP is merged with the
non-ﬁnite T/tense particle to to form the TP to help you; (iii) this TP is in turn
merged with the verb trying to form the VP trying to help you; (iv) the resulting
VP is merged with the T/tense auxiliary are to form the T-bar are trying to help

76
3 structure
you; (v) this T-bar is merged with its subject we to form the TP we are trying to
help you; and (vi) the resulting TP is in turn merged with the C/complementiser
that to form the CP structure (22) that we are trying to help you. By saying that
the structure (22) is derived in a bottom-up fashion, we mean that lower parts of
the structure nearer the bottom of the tree are formed before higher parts of the
structure nearer the top of the tree. (An alternative top-down model is presented
in Phillips 2003.)
3.4
Speciﬁers
A question which arises from our analysis of tense auxiliaries in
(17/22) above as having an immediate projection into T-bar and an extended
projection into TP is whether there are other constituents which can have both an
intermediate and an extended projection. The answer is ‘Yes’, as we can see by
comparing the alternative answers (23i/ii) given by speaker B below:
(23)
speaker a: Where did she hit him?
speaker b: (i) On the nose
(ii) Right on the nose
Let’s ﬁrst look at the structure of reply (i) On the nose in (23B), before turning
to consider the structure of reply (ii) Right on the nose. On the nose in (23Bi) is
a prepositional phrase/PP derived in the following fashion. The determiner the
is merged with the noun nose to form the DP/determiner phrase the nose in (24)
below:
(24)
DP
D
the
N
nose
(In work in the 1960s and 1970s, expressions like the nose were taken to have
the categorial status of a NP/noun phrase; but here we follow more recent work
dating from Abney 1987 which takes them to have the status of a DP/determiner
phrase.) The preposition on is then merged with the resulting DP the nose to form
the prepositional phrase/PP on the nose, which has the structure (25) below:
(25)
PP
DP
P
on
D
the
N
nose
The overall expression on the nose is a projection of the preposition on and so
has the status of a prepositional phrase: the head of the PP on the nose is the
preposition on and the complement of the preposition on is the DP the nose.

3.4 Speciﬁers
77
Given the traditional assumption that a verb or preposition which takes a noun or
pronoun expression as its complement is transitive, on is a transitive preposition
in this use, and the nose is its complement.
Now consider the structure of reply (ii) Right on the nose in (23B). This dif-
fers from the PP on the nose in that it also contains the adverb right. It seems
implausible to suppose that the adverb right is the head of the overall expression,
since this would mean that right on the nose was an adverbial phrase/ADVP:
on the contrary, it seems more plausible to suppose that right on the nose is a
prepositional phrase/PP in which the adverb right is a modiﬁer of some kind
which serves to extend the prepositional expression on the nose into the even
larger prepositional expression right on the nose (so that the head of the structure
is once again the preposition on). Some evidence that right on the nose is a PP
(and not an ADVP) comes from cleft sentences (i.e. structures of the form ‘It
was a car that John bought’, where the italicised constituent a car is said to be
focused, and hence to occupy focus position in the cleft sentence structure). As
we see from (26) below:
(26) (a)
It was with great sadness that he announced the resignation of the chairman
(b)
∗It was very sadly that he announced the resignation of the chairman
a prepositional phrase/PP like with great sadness can be focused in a cleft sen-
tence, but not an adverbial phrase/ADVP like very sadly. In the light of this
observation, consider the sentences below:
(27) (a)
It was on the nose that she hit him
(b)
It was right on the nose that she hit him
The fact that both on the nose and right on the nose can occupy focus position in
a cleft sentence suggests that both are PP/prepositional phrase constituents: right
on the nose cannot be an ADVP/adverbial phrase since we see from (26b) above
that adverbial expressions cannot be focused in cleft sentences.
The conclusion we reach from the data in (26)–(27) above is that the adverb
right in right on the nose serves to extend the prepositional expression on the
nose into the even larger prepositional expression right on the nose. Using the
bar notation introduced in (17) above, we can analyse right on the nose in
the following terms. The preposition on merges with its DP complement the
nose to form the intermediate prepositional projection on the nose which has the
categorial status of P′ (or P-bar, pronounced ‘pee-bar’); the resulting P-bar on
the nose is then merged with the adverb right to form the PP below:
(28)
PP
ADV
right
P'
P
DP
on
D
the
N
nose

78
3 structure
In other words, just as a tense auxiliary like are can be projected into a T′ like are
trying to help you by merger with a following VP complement and then further
projected into TP by merger with a preceding pronoun subject such as we, so too
a preposition like on can be projected into a P′ like on the nose by merger with a
following DP complement and then further projected into a PP like right on the
nose by merger with a preceding adverbial modiﬁer such as right.
Although we in (17) serves a different grammatical function from right in (28)
(in that we is the subject of are trying to help you, whereas right is a modiﬁer of
on the nose), there is a sense in which the two occupy parallel positions within
the overall structure containing them: just as we merges with a T′ to form a TP,
so too right merges with a P′ to form a PP. Introducing a new technical term at
this point, let’s say that we serves as the speciﬁer of the T are, of the T-bar are
trying to help you and of the TP we are trying to help you in (17), and that right
likewise serves as the speciﬁer of the P on, of the P-bar on the nose and of the
PP right on the nose in (28). More generally, we can say that a speciﬁer is an
expression which merges with an intermediate projection H-bar (where H-bar is
a projection of some head word H) to project it into a maximal projection HP in
the manner shown in (29) below:
(29)
HP
specifier
H'
H
complement 
Given the informal word-order rule we suggested earlier (‘Any constituent of a
phrase HP which is the sister of the head H is positioned to the right of H, but
any other constituent of HP is positioned to the left of H’), it follows that heads
precede complements but speciﬁers precede heads in English: in other words,
English is a language with complement-last and speciﬁer-ﬁrst word order.
The assumption that determiners can head projections of their own also has
interesting theoretical implications. We see from (29) above that syntactic heads
can typically be merged with both a complement and a speciﬁer. If determiners
function as heads, we should expect that they too will allow an appropriate kind
of expression to function as their speciﬁer (in an appropriate kind of structure).
In this connection, consider the following contrast:
(30) (a)
I have never known a patient make a quite so rapid recovery
(b)
I have never known a patient make quite so rapid a recovery
Modiﬁers in English are typically positioned between a determiner like a and
a noun like recovery – and indeed this is the case with the modifying expres-
sion quite so rapid in (30a). However, in expressions like quite so rapid
which contain a degree word like so/too/how, the whole degree expression can
instead be positioned in front of a determiner like a – as in (30b). What syn-
tactic position does the degree expression occupy in such cases? We can give a

3.4 Speciﬁers
79
principled answer to this question if we assume that determiners can project into
determiner phrases, since we can then say that a degree expression positioned
in front of a determiner occupies spec-DP – i.e. the speciﬁer position within
the determiner phrase. On this view, (30b) would have the skeletal structure
shown below (where we follow Abney 1987 in taking an expression like quite so
rapid to be a projection of the DEG/degree word so, and hence to be a DEGP
constituent):
(31)
DP
DEGP
quite so rapid
D'
D
a
N
recovery
An analysis like (31) would mean that there is symmetry between the structure
of determiner phrases and other types of phrase, in that (like other phrases),
DPs allow a speciﬁer of an appropriate kind. Indeed, although its internal struc-
ture is not shown in (31), the DEGP quite so rapid could be argued to have a
similar speciﬁer+head+complement structure, with the degree word so serving
as its head, the adjective rapid as its complement, and the adverb quite as its
speciﬁer.
As those of you familiar with earlier work will have noticed, the kind of
structures we are proposing here are very different from those assumed in tradi-
tional grammar and in work in linguistics in the 1960s and 1970s. Earlier work
implicitly assumed that only items belonging to substantive/lexical categories
could project into phrases, not words belonging to functional categories. More
speciﬁcally, earlier work assumed that there were noun phrases headed by nouns,
verb phrases headed by verbs, adjectival phrases headed by adjectives, adverbial
phrases headed by adverbs and prepositional phrases headed by prepositions.
However, more recent work has argued that not only content words but also func-
tion words can project into phrases, so that we have tense phrases headed by a
tense-marker, complementiser phrases headed by a complementiser, determiner
phrases headed by a determiner – and so on. More generally, the assumption
made in work over the last twenty years or so is that in principle all word-level
categories can project into phrases. This means that some of the structures we
make use of here may seem (at best) rather strange to those of you with a more
traditional background, or (at worst) just plain wrong. However, the structure of
a given phrase or sentence cannot be determined on the basis of personal pre-
judice or pedagogical precepts inculcated into you at secondary school, but rather
has to be determined on the basis of syntactic evidence of the kind discussed
in §3.6 below. I would therefore ask traditionalists to be prepared to be open to
new ideas and new analyses (a necessary prerequisite for understanding in any
discipline).

80
3 structure
3.5
Intermediate and maximal projections
One aspect of our analysis of prepositional phrases which might at
ﬁrst sight seem puzzling is that the same expression on the nose is analysed as a
PP in (23Bi/25), but as a P-bar in (23Bii/28). Why should this be? The answer is
that the label PP denotes the maximal projection of (i.e. the largest expression
headed by) the relevant preposition in a given structure. In (23Bi), speaker B
replies On the nose: since the largest expression headed by on in (23Bi) is On
the nose, it follows that On the nose has the status of a PP here. By contrast, in
(23Bii) speaker B replies Right on the nose: here, on the nose is not the largest
expression headed by on, and hence is not a PP but rather a P-bar; on the contrary,
the largest expression headed by on in (23Bii) is Right on the nose, so it is this
larger expression which has the status of PP.
Interestingly, there is some empirical evidence in support of the claim that on
the nose is not a PP in (23Bii/28). As we see from examples like (32) below, a PP
(like that italicised below) can generally be preposed/fronted (i.e. moved to the
front of the sentence) in order to highlight it:
(32) (a)
They found a safe under the ﬂoorboards
(b)
Under the ﬂoorboards, they found a safe
In the light of this observation, consider the following examples (where right in
each case is to be interpreted as a modiﬁer of on the nose):
(33) (a)
She hit him right on the nose
(b)
Right on the nose, she hit him
(c)
∗On the nose, she hit him right
The fact that right on the nose can be preposed in (33b) but not on the nose in
(33c) provides evidence in support of the claim in (28) that right on the nose is a
PP in (33a) but on the nose is not. If we assume that only maximal projections
can be preposed, it follows that right on the nose can be preposed in (33) because
it is the maximal projection of the preposition on (hence a PP), whereas on the
nose cannot because it is an intermediate projection of the preposition on (hence
a P-bar).
Although we have pointed out similarities between the structure of a PP like
that in (28) and the structure of a TP like that in (17), there is a very important
difference between the two. As we saw earlier from the grammaticality of We
are trying to help you and the ungrammaticality of ∗Are trying to help you as
replies to the question What are you doing?, tense auxiliaries like are obligat-
orily require an appropriate speciﬁer (e.g. a subject pronoun like we). By con-
trast, the fact that we can reply either On the nose or Right on the nose to a
question like Where did she hit him? tells us that prepositions can be used either
with or without an appropriate kind of speciﬁer (e.g. an adverbial modiﬁer like
right). So, a signiﬁcant difference between auxiliaries and prepositions is that it is

3.5 Intermediate and maximal projections
81
obligatory for an auxiliary to have a speciﬁer but optional for a preposition to
have a speciﬁer.
Just as prepositional phrases can have an (optional) adverbial modiﬁer as their
speciﬁer, so too can adjectival phrases – as we see from the alternative replies
given by speaker B in (34) below:
(34)
speaker a: How does your mother feel about your brother’s success?
speaker b: (i) Proud of him (ii) Very proud of him
Reply(i)Proudofhimin(34B)isanadjectivalphrase/APderivedasfollows.The
preposition of merges with the pronoun him to form the PP/prepositional phrase
of him. This is then merged with the adjective proud to form the AP/adjectival
phrase proud of him, which has the structure (35) below:
(35)
AP
A
proud
PP
P
of
PRN
him
But what is the structure of reply (ii) Very proud of him in (34B)? This differs
from Proud of him in that it contains the adverb very. It seems implausible that
the adverb very could be the head of the overall expression Very proud of him
since this would mean that very proud of him was an ADVP (adverbial phrase);
but an ADVP analysis would be problematic because a question like How does
she feel? can have an adjectival expression like Happy as an appropriate reply
but not an adverbial expression like Happily. Since Very proud of him can be
used to reply to the how-question asked by speaker A in (34), very proud of him
must be an adjectival expression headed by the adjective proud. Using the bar
notation introduced earlier, we can say that the A/adjective proud merges with
its PP/prepositional phrase complement of him to form the A-bar (intermediate
adjectival projection) proud of him, and that the resulting A-bar in turn merges
with the adverbial speciﬁer very to form the full AP/adjectival phrase in (36)
below:
(36)
AP
ADV
very
A'
A
PP
proud
P
of
PRN
him
Evidence in support of the analysis in (36) comes from data relating to the prepos-
ing of adjectival expressions in sentences such as (37) below:

82
3 structure
(37) (a)
She certainly seems to be very proud of him
(b)
Very proud of him, she certainly seems to be
(c)
∗Proud of him, she certainly seems to be very
If we assume (as we did in our earlier discussion of (33) above) that only maximal
projections can be preposed in this way (not intermediate projections), we can
provide a straightforward account of the data in (37) in terms of the analysis in
(36). The structure in (36) tells us that very proud of him is the maximal projection
of the adjective proud, and so is an AP/adjectival phrase constituent; hence it can
be preposed in (37a) by virtue of its status as a maximal projection. By contrast,
(36) tells us that proud of him is an intermediate projection of the adjective proud
and hence an A-bar constituent: because only maximal projections like AP can
be preposed, and because proud of him is only an intermediate A-bar projection,
it cannot be preposed – hence the ungrammaticality of (37c).
A variety of other types of expression can also have extended projections via
merger with an optional speciﬁer of an appropriate kind. One such are adverbial
expressions like those italicised in (38) below:
(38) (a)
She made up her mind independently of me
(b)
She made up her mind quite independently of me
The adverb independently can be merged with a PP/prepositional phrase comple-
ment like of me to form the adverbial expression independently of me: this can
serve either as a ADVP/adverbial phrase on its own – as in (38a) – or as an inter-
mediate ADV-bar projection which can be extended into an ADVP by merger
with an appropriate speciﬁer (like the adverb quite) as in (38b).
Much the same might be said about the italicised noun phrases in (39) below
(if the analysis of these structures in Radford 1993 is along the right lines):
(39) (a)
The opposition will oppose the/any ban on imports
(b)
The opposition will oppose the/any government ban on imports
The noun ban can be merged with a following prepositional phrase complement
like on imports to form the nominal expression ban on imports: this can either
serve as a complete noun phrase/NP on its own, or can serve as an intermediate
N-bar projection which is subsequently merged with an appropriate speciﬁer
(like the noun government) to form the larger noun phrase/NP government ban
on imports. Because a noun expression headed by a singular count noun (like
ban) must be modiﬁed by a determiner or quantiﬁer, the resulting NP in either
case must subsequently be merged with a determiner like the or a quantiﬁer like
any, so deriving a DP/determiner phrase like the (government) ban on imports or
a QP/quantiﬁer phrase like any (government) ban on imports.
In all of the structures which we have looked at so far which contain a speciﬁer
(i.e. in (17), (22), (28), (36), (38b) and (39b) above), the speciﬁer has been a single
word. However, this is by no means always the case, as we can see by comparing
the two clauses in (40) below:

3.5 Intermediate and maximal projections
83
(40) (a)
He has resigned
(b)
The chairman has resigned
(40a) is derived by merging the T/tense auxiliary has with its verb complement
resigned to form the intermediate T-bar projection has resigned, and then merging
the resulting T-bar with the pronoun he which serves as its speciﬁer/subject to
derive the extended TP projection in (41) below:
(41)
TP
PRN
He
T
has
V
resigned
T'
Now consider how we derive (40b) The chairman has resigned. As before, the
tense auxiliary has merges with its verb complement resigned to form the T-
bar has resigned; and as before, the resulting T-bar then merges with its subject
speciﬁer. However, this time the subject is not the single word he but rather a
determiner phrase/DP the chairman which has itself been formed by merging
the determiner the with the noun chairman. The result of merging the DP the
chairman with the T-bar has resigned is to derive the TP (42) below:
(42)
TP
DP
T'
D
The
N
chairman
T
has
V
resigned
Evidence that the chairman is indeed the subject (and speciﬁer) of has in (42)
comes from auxiliary inversion facts in relation to sentences such as:
(43) (a)
Has he resigned?
(b)
Has the chairman resigned?
As we see by comparing the statement (40a) He has resigned with the corre-
sponding question (43a) Has he resigned? a question like (43a) is formed by
moving a ﬁnite auxiliary (has) in front of its subject (he). Hence, the fact that the
auxiliary has in (40b) moves in front of the chairman in (43b) Has the chairman
resigned? suggests that the chairman is the subject of has in (40b) The chairman
has resigned – precisely as is claimed in (42).
If we compare (41) with (42), we can see that a speciﬁer can be either a single
word like he in (41) or a phrase like the DP the chairman in (42). In much the
same way, a complement can be either a single word or a phrase. For example, in
(42), the complement of has is the verb resigned; but in a more complex structure
like (44) below:

84
3 structure
(44)
TP
DP
T'
D
The
N
chairman
T
has
VP
V
resigned
PP
P
from
DP
D
the
N
board
the complement of has is the verb phrase resigned from the board, which is formed
by merging the verb resigned with its PP/prepositional phrase complement from
the board.
3.6
Testing structure
Thus far, we have argued that phrases and sentences are built up by
merging successive pairs of constituents into larger and larger structures, and that
the resulting structure can be represented in terms of a labelled tree diagram. The
tree diagrams which we use to represent syntactic structure make speciﬁc claims
about how sentences are built up out of various different kinds of constituent
(i.e. syntactic unit): hence, trees can be said to represent the constituent struc-
ture of sentences. But this raises the question of how we know (and how we can
test) whether the claims made about syntactic structure in tree diagrams are true.
So far, we have relied mainly on intuition in analysing the structure of sentences –
we have in effect guessed at the structure. However, it is unwise to rely on intu-
ition in attempting to determine the structure of a given expression in a given
language. For, while experienced linguists over a period of years tend to acquire
fairly strong intuitions about structure, novices by contrast tend to have relatively
weak, uncertain and unreliable intuitions; moreover, even the intuitions of sup-
posed experts may ultimately turn out to be based on little more than personal
preference.
For this reason, it is more satisfactory (and more accurate) to regard constituent
structure as having the status of a theoretical construct. That is to say, it is part
of the theoretical apparatus which linguists ﬁnd they need to make use of in
order to explain certain data about language (just as molecules, atoms and sub-
atomic particles are constructs which physicists ﬁnd they need to make use of in
order to explain the nature of matter in the universe). It is no more reasonable
to rely wholly on intuition to determine syntactic structure than it would be to
rely on intuition to determine molecular structure. Inevitably, then, much of the

3.6 Testing structure
85
evidence for syntactic structure is of an essentially empirical character, based on
the observed grammatical properties of particular types of expression. The evi-
dence typically takes the form ‘Unless we posit that such-and-such an expression
has such-and-such a constituent structure, we shall be unable to provide a prin-
cipled account of the observed grammatical properties of the expression.’ Thus,
structural representations ultimately have to be justiﬁed in empirical terms, i.e.
in terms of whether or not they provide a principled account of the grammatical
properties of phrases and sentences.
So, a tree diagram like (44) has the status of a hypothesis (i.e. untested and
unproven assumption) about the structure of the corresponding sentence The
chairman has resigned from the board. How can we test our hypothesis and
determine whether (44) is or isn’t an appropriate representation of the structure
of the sentence? The answer is that there are a number of standard heuristics
(i.e. ‘tests’) which we can use to determine structure. One such test relates to
the phenomenon of coordination. English and other languages have a variety
of coordinating conjunctions (which we might designate by the category label
CONJ – or perhaps just J) like and/but/or which can be used to coordinate
(= conjoin = join together) expressions such as those bracketed below:
(45) (a)
[fond of cats] and [afraid of dogs]
(b)
[slowly] but [surely]
(c)
[to go] or [to stay]
In each of the expressions in (45), an italicised coordinating conjunction has been
used to conjoin the bracketed pairs of expressions. Clearly, any adequate grammar
of English will have to provide a principled answer to the question: ‘What kinds
of strings (i.e. sequences of words) can and cannot be coordinated?’
Now, it turns out that we can’t just coordinate any random set of strings, as we
see by comparing the grammatical reply produced by speaker B in (46) below:
(46)
speaker a: What does he do to keep ﬁt?
speaker b: Run up the hill and up the mountain
with the ungrammatical reply produced by speaker B in (47) below:
(47)
speaker a: What did he do about his bills?
speaker b: ∗Ring up the phone company and up the electricity company
Why should it be possible to coordinate the string up the hill with the string
up the mountain in (46), but not possible to coordinate the string up the phone
company with the string up the electricity company in (47)? We can provide a
principled answer to this question in terms of constituent structure: the italicised
string up the hill in (46) is a constituent of the phrase run up the hill (up the hill
is a prepositional phrase, in fact), and so can be coordinated with another similar
type of prepositional phrase (e.g. a PP such as up the mountain, or down the hill,
or along the path, etc.). Conversely, however, the string up the phone company
in (47) is not a constituent of the phrase ring up the phone company, and so

86
3 structure
cannot be coordinated with another similar string like up the electricity company.
(Traditional grammarians say that up is associated with ring in expressions like
ring up someone, and that the expression ring up forms a kind of complex verb
which carries the sense of ‘telephone’.) On the basis of contrasts such as these,
we can formulate the following generalisation:
(48)
Only constituents of the same type can be coordinated
A constraint (i.e. principle imposing restrictions on certain types of grammatical
operation) along the lines of (48) is assumed in much work in traditional grammar.
Having established the constraint (48), we can now make use of it as a way
of testing the tree diagram in (44) above. In this connection, consider the data in
(49) below (in which the bracketed strings have been coordinated by and):
(49) (a)
The chairman has resigned from [the board] and [the company]
(b)
The chairman has resigned [from the board] and [from the company]
(c)
The chairman has [resigned from the board] and [gone abroad]
(d)
The chairman [has resigned from the board] and [is living in Utopia]
(e)
∗The [chairman has resigned from the board] and [company has replaced him]
(f)
[The chairman has resigned from the board] and [the company has replaced him]
(49a) provides us with evidence in support of the claim in (44) that the board is
a determiner phrase constituent, since it can be coordinated with another DP like
the company; similarly, (49b) provides us with evidence that from the board is a
prepositional phrase constituent, since it can be coordinated with another PP like
from the company; likewise, (49c) provides evidence that resigned from the board
is a verb phrase constituent, since it can be coordinated with another VP like gone
abroad; in much the same way, (49d) provides evidence that has resigned from
the board is a T-bar constituent, since it can be coordinated with another T′ like is
livinginUtopia(therebyprovidinginterestingempiricalevidenceinsupportofthe
binary-branching structure assumed in the TP analysis of clauses, and against the
ternary-branching analysis assumed in the S analysis of clauses); and in addition,
(49f) provides evidence that the chairman has resigned from the board is a TP
constituent, since it can be coordinated with another TP like the company has
replaced him. Conversely, however, the fact that (49e) is ungrammatical suggests
that (precisely as (44) claims) the string chairman has resigned from the board
is not a constituent, since it cannot be coordinated with a parallel string like
company has replaced him (and the constraint in (48) tells us that two strings of
words can only be coordinated if both are constituents – and more precisely, if
both are constituents of the same type). Overall, then, the coordination data in
(49) provide empirical evidence in support of the analysis in (44). (It should be
noted, however, that the coordination test is not always straightforward to apply,
in part because there is more than one type of coordination – see e.g. Radford
1997a, pp. 104–7. Apparent complications arise in relation to sentences like ‘He
is cross with her and in a ﬁlthy mood’, where the AP/adjectival phrase cross with

3.6 Testing structure
87
her has been coordinated with the PP/prepositional phrase in a ﬁlthy mood: to
say that these seemingly different AP and PP constituents are ‘of the same type’
requires a more abstract analysis than is implied by category labels like AP and
PP, perhaps taking them to share in common the property of being predicative
expressions. See Phillips 2003 for an alternative approach to coordination, and
Johnson 2002 for problematic cases in German.)
There are a variety of other ways of testing structure, but we will not attempt to
cover them all here (see Radford 1997a, pp. 102–16 for more detailed discussion).
However, we will brieﬂy mention two which are already familiar from earlier
discussion. In §2.3, we noted that substitution is a useful tool for determining
the categorial status of words. We can also use substitution as a way of testing
whether a given string of words is a constituent or not, by seeing whether the
relevant string can be replaced by (or serve as the antecedent of) a single word.
In this connection, consider:
(50) (a)
The chairman has resigned from the board, and he is now living in Utopia
(b)
The press say that the chairman has resigned from the board, and so he has
(c)
If the Managing Director says the chairman has resigned from the board, he
must have done
(d)
If the chairman has resigned from the board (which you say he has), how
come his car is still in the company car park?
The fact that the expression the chairman in (50a) can be substituted (or referred
back to) by a single word (in this case, the pronoun he) provides evidence in sup-
port of the claim in (44) that the chairman is a single constituent (a DP/determiner
phrase, to be precise). Likewise, the fact that the expression resigned from the
board in (50b,c,d) can serve as the antecedent of so/done/which provides evidence
in support of the claim in (44) that resigned from the board is a constituent (more
precisely, a VP/verb phrase).
A further kind of constituent structure test which we made use of in §3.5
above relates to the possibility of preposing a constituent in order to highlight
it in some way (i.e. in order to mark it out as a topic containing familiar/old
information, or a focused constituent containing unfamiliar/new information).
In our earlier discussion of (32), (33) and (37) above, we concluded that only
a maximal projection can be highlighted in this way. This being so, one way
we can test whether a given expression is a maximal projection or not is by
seeing whether it can be preposed. In this connection, consider the following
sentence:
(51)
The press said that the chairman would resign from the board, and resigned
from the board he has
The fact that the italicised expression resigned from the board can be preposed
in (51) indicates that it must be a maximal projection: this is consistent with the

88
3 structure
analysis in (44) which tells us that resigned from the board is a verb phrase which
is the maximal projection of the verb resigned.
However,animportantcaveatwhichshouldbenotedinrelationtothepreposing
test is that particular expressions can sometimes be difﬁcult (or even impossible)
to prepose even though they are maximal projections. This is because there are
constraints (i.e. restrictions) on such movement operations. One such constraint
can be illustrated by the following contrast:
(52) (a)
I will certainly try to give up smoking
(b)
Give up smoking, I will certainly try to
(c)
∗To give up smoking, I will certainly try
Here, the VP/verb phrase give up smoking can be highlighted by being preposed,
but the TP/inﬁnitival tense phrase to give up smoking cannot – even though it is a
maximal projection (by virtue of being the largest expression headed by inﬁnitival
to). What is the nature of the restriction on preposing to+inﬁnitive expressions
illustrated by the ungrammaticality of (52c)? The answer is not clear, but may be
semantic in nature. When an expression is preposed, this is in order to highlight
its semantic content in some way (e.g. for purposes of contrast – as in ‘Syntax, I
don’t like but phonology I do’). It may be that its lack of intrinsic lexical content
makes inﬁnitival to an unsuitable candidate for highlighting, and this may in turn
be reﬂected in the fact that inﬁnitival to cannot carry contrastive stress – as we see
from the ungrammaticality of ∗‘I don’t want to’, where capitals mark contrastive
stress. What this suggests is that:
(53)
The smallest possible maximal projection is moved which contains the
highlighted material
So, if we want to highlight the semantic content of the VP give up smoking, we
prepose the VP give up smoking rather than the TP to give up smoking because
the VP is smaller than the TP containing it.
However, this is by no means the only constraint on preposing, as we see from
(54) below (where FBA is an abbreviation for the Federal Bureau of Assassina-
tions – a purely ﬁctitious body, of course):
(54) (a)
Nobody had expected that the FBA would assassinate the king of Ruritania
(b)
∗King of Ruritania, nobody had expected that the FBA would assassinate the
(c)
The king of Ruritania, nobody had expected that the FBA would assassinate
(d)
∗The FBA would assassinate the king of Ruritania, nobody had expected that
(nb. that = ðət)
(e)
That the FBA would assassinate the king of Ruritania, nobody had expected
The ungrammaticality of (54b,d) tells us that we can’t prepose the NP king of
Ruritania or the TP the FBA would assassinate the king of Ruritania. Why should
this be? One possibility (brieﬂy hinted at in Chomsky 1999) is that there may be
a constraint on movement operations to the effect that a DP can be preposed but
not an NP which is contained within a DP, and likewise that a CP can be preposed

3.6 Testing structure
89
but not a TP which is contained within a CP. One implementation of this idea
would be to posit a constraint like (55) below:
(55)
Functional Head Constraint/FHC
The complement of a certain type of functional head F (e.g. a determiner or
complementiser) cannot be moved on its own (without also moving F)
Suppose, then, that we want to highlight the NP king of Ruritania in (54) by
preposing. (53) tells us to move the smallest possible maximal projection con-
taining the highlighted material, and hence we ﬁrst try to move this NP on its own:
but the Functional Head Constraint tells us that it is not possible to prepose this
NP on its own, because it is the complement of the determiner the. We therefore
prepose the next smallest maximal projection containing the highlighted NP king
of Ruritania – namely the DP the king of Ruritania; and as the grammaticality of
(54c) shows, the resulting sentence is grammatical.
Now suppose that we want to highlight the TP the FBA would assassinate
the king of Ruritania. (53) tells us to move the smallest maximal projection
containing the highlighted material – but FHC (55) tells us that we cannot prepose
a constituent which is the complement of a complementiser. Hence, we prepose
the next smallest maximal projection containing the TP we want to highlight,
namely the CP that the FBA would assassinate the king of Ruritania – as in
(54e).
However, an apparent problem for the Functional Head Constraint (55) is
posed by examples like:
(56) (a)
Surrender to the enemy, I never will
(b)
Surrender to the enemy, he resolutely refused to
The preposed verb phrase surrender to the enemy is the complement of will in
(56a), and the complement of to in (56b). Given the analysis in §2.7 and §2.8, will
is a ﬁnite T/tense constituent and to is a non-ﬁnite T/tense particle. If (as we have
assumed so far) T is a functional category, we would expect the Functional Head
Constraint (55) to block preposing of the VP surrender to the enemy because this
VP is the complement of the functional T constituent will/to. The fact that the
resulting sentences (56a,b) are grammatical might lead us to follow Chomsky
(1999) in concluding that T is a substantive category rather than a functional
category, and hence does not block preposing of its complement. Alternatively,
it may be that the constraint only applies to certain types of functional category
(as hinted at in (55)) – e.g. D and C but not T (perhaps because D and C are the
‘highest’ heads within nominal and clausal structures respectively – and indeed
in chapter 10 we shall reformulate this constraint along such lines).
It is interesting to note that alongside sentences like (56) above in which a
phrase has been highlighted by being preposed, we also ﬁnd sentences like (57)
below in which a single word has been preposed:
(57) (a)
Surrender, I never will
(b)
Surrender, he resolutely refused to

90
3 structure
In (57) the verb surrender has been preposed on its own. At ﬁrst sight, this
might seem to contradict our earlier statement that only maximal projections
can undergo preposing. However, more careful reﬂection shows that there is no
contradiction here: after all, the maximal projection of a head H is the largest
expression headed by H; and in a sentence like I never will surrender, the largest
expression headed by the verb surrender is the verb surrender itself – hence,
surrender in (57) is indeed a maximal projection. More generally, this tells us
that an individual word can itself be a maximal projection, if it has no complement
or speciﬁer of its own.
The overall conclusion to be drawn from our discussion here is that the prepos-
ing test has to be used with care. If an expression can be preposed in order to
highlight it, it is a maximal projection; if it cannot, this may either be because it
is not a maximal projection, or because (even though it is a maximal projection)
a syntactic constraint of some kind prevents it from being preposed, or because
its head word has insufﬁcient semantic content to make it a suitable candidate for
highlighting.
3.7
Syntactic relations
Throughout this chapter, we have argued that phrases and sentences
are formed by a series of binary merger operations, and that the resulting structures
can be represented in the form of tree diagrams. Because they mark the way that
words are combined together to form phrases of various types, tree diagrams are
referred to in the relevant technical literature as phrase-markers (abbreviated to
P-markers). They show us how a phrase or sentence is built up out of constituents
of various types: hence, a tree diagram provides a visual representation of the
constituent structure of the corresponding expression. Each node in the tree
(i.e. each point in the tree which carries a category label like N, V, A′, T′, PP, CP
etc.) represents a different constituent of the sentence; hence, there are as many
different constituents in any given phrase-marker as there are nodes carrying
category labels. Nodes at the very bottom of the tree are called terminal nodes,
and other nodes are non-terminal nodes: so, for example, all the D, N, T, V and
P nodes in (44) are terminal nodes, and all the DP, PP, VP, T′ and TP nodes are
non-terminal nodes. The topmost node in any tree structure (i.e. TP in the case of
(44) above) is said to be its root. Each terminal node in the tree carries a single
lexical item (i.e. an item from the lexicon/dictionary, like dog or go etc.): lexical
items are sets of phonological, semantic and grammatical features (with category
labels like N, V, T, C etc. being used as shorthand abbreviations for the set of
grammatical features carried by the relevant items).
It is useful to develop some terminology to describe the syntactic relations
between constituents, since these relations turn out to be central to syntac-
tic description. Essentially, a P-marker is a graph comprising a set of points

3.7 Syntactic relations
91
(= labelled nodes), connected by branches (= solid lines) representing contain-
ment relations (i.e. telling us which constituents contain or are contained within
which other constituents). We can illustrate what this means in terms of the fol-
lowing abstract tree structure (where A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H and J are different
nodes in the tree, representing different constituents):
(58)
A
B
E
C
D
F
G
H
J
In (58), G immediately contains H and J (and conversely H and J are the two
constituents immediately contained within G, and hence are the two immediate
constituents of G): this is shown by the fact that H and J are the two nodes imme-
diately beneath G which are connected to G by a branch (solid line). Likewise,
E immediately contains F and G; B immediately contains C and D; and A imme-
diately contains B and E. We can also say that E contains F, G, H and J; and that
A contains B, C, D, E, F, G, H and J (and likewise that G contains H and J; and
B contains C and D). Using equivalent kinship terminology, we can say that A is
the mother of B and E (and conversely B and E are the two daughters of A); B
is the mother of C and D; E is the mother of F and G; and G is the mother of H
and J. Likewise, B and E are sisters (by virtue of both being daughters of A) – as
are C and D; F and G; and H and J.
A particularly important syntactic relation is c-command (a conventional
abbreviation of constituent-command), which provides us with a useful way
of determining the relative position of two different constituents within the same
tree (in particular, whether one is lower in the tree than the other or not). We can
deﬁne this relation informally as follows (where X, Y and Z are three different
nodes):
(59)
C-command
A constituent X c-commands its sister constituent Y and any constituent Z
which is contained within Y
Amoreconcretewayofvisualisingthisistothinkofatreediagramasrepresenting
a network of train stations, with each of the labelled nodes representing the name
of a different station in the network, and the branches representing the rail tracks
linking the stations. We can then say that one node X c-commands another node
Y if you can get from X to Y on the network by taking a northbound train, getting
off at the ﬁrst station, changing trains there and then travelling one or more stops
south on a different line.
In the light of the deﬁnition of c-command given above, let’s consider which
constituents each of the nodes in (58) c-commands. A doesn’t c-command any of

92
3 structure
the other nodes, since A has no sister. B c-commands E, F, G, H and J because
B’s sister is E, and E contains F, G, H and J. C c-commands only D, because C’s
sister is D, and D does not contain any other constituent; likewise, D c-commands
only C. E c-commands B, C and D because B is the sister of E and B contains C
and D. F c-commands G, H and J, because G is the sister of F and G contains H
and J. G c-commands only F, because G’s sister is F, and F does not contain any
other constituents. H and J likewise c-command only each other because they are
sisters which have no daughters of their own.
We can illustrate the importance of the c-command relation in syntactic
description by looking at the distribution of a class of expressions which
are known as anaphors. These include reﬂexives (i.e. self/selves forms like
myself/yourself/themselves etc.) and reciprocals like each other and one another.
Such anaphors have the property that they cannot be used to refer directly to an
entity in the outside world, but rather must be bound by (i.e. take their reference
from) an antecedent elsewhere in the same phrase or sentence. Where an anaphor
has no (suitable) antecedent to bind it, the resulting structure is ungrammatical –
as we see from contrasts such as those in (60) below:
(60) (a)
He must feel proud of himself
(b)
∗She must feel proud of himself
(c)
∗Himself must feel proud of you
In (60a), the third-person-masculine-singular anaphor himself is bound by a suit-
able third-person-masculine-singular antecedent (he), with the result that (60a)
is grammatical. But in (60b), himself has no suitable antecedent (the feminine
pronoun she is not a suitable antecedent for the masculine anaphor himself), and
so is unbound (with the result that (60b) is ill-formed). In (60c), there is no
antecedent of any kind for the anaphor himself, with the result that the anaphor
is again unbound and the sentence ill-formed.
There are structural restrictions on the binding of anaphors by their antecedents,
as we see from:
(61) (a)
The president may blame himself
(b)
∗Supporters of the president may blame himself
(62) (a)
They may implicate each other
(b)
∗The evidence against them may implicate each other
As a third-person-masculine-singular anaphor, himself must be bound by a third-
person-masculine-singular antecedent like the president; similarly, as a plural
anaphor,eachothermustbeboundbyapluralantecedentlikethey/them.However,
it would seem from the contrasts above that the antecedent must occupy the
right kind of position within the structure in order to bind the anaphor or else
the resulting sentence will be ungrammatical. The question of what is the right
position for the antecedent can be deﬁned in terms of the following structural
condition:

3.7 Syntactic relations
93
(63)
C-command condition on binding
A bound constituent must be c-commanded by an appropriate antecedent
The relevant bound constituent is the reﬂexive anaphor himself in (61), and its
antecedent is the president; the bound constituent in (62) is the reciprocal anaphor
each other, and its antecedent is they/them. Sentence (61a) has the structure (64)
below:
(64)
TP
DP
T'
D
The
N
president
T
may
VP
V
blame
PRN
himself
The reﬂexive pronoun himself can be bound by the DP the president in (64)
because the sister of the DP node is the T-bar node, and the pronoun himself is
contained within the relevant T-bar node (by virtue of being one of the grand-
children of T-bar): consequently, the DP the president c-commands the anaphor
himself and the binding condition (63) is satisﬁed. We therefore correctly specify
that (61a) The president may blame himself is grammatical, with the president
interpreted as the antecedent of himself.
But now consider why a structure like (65) below is ungrammatical (cf. (61b)
above):
(65)
TP
NP
T'
N
Supporters
PP
T
may
VP
P
of
DP
V
blame
PRN
himself
D
the
N
president
The answer is that the DP node containing the president doesn’t c-command the
PRN node containing himself, because the sister of the DP node is the P node
of, and himself is not contained within (i.e. not a daughter, granddaughter, or
great-granddaughter etc. of) the preposition of. Since there is no other appropri-
ate antecedent for himself within the sentence (e.g. although the NP supporters
of the president c-commands himself, it is not a suitable antecedent because it
is a plural expression, and himself requires a singular antecedent), the anaphor
himself remains unbound – in violation of the binding requirement on anaphors.

94
3 structure
This is the reason why (61b) ∗Supporters of the president may blame himself is
ungrammatical.
Our brief discussion of anaphor binding here highlights the fact that the relation
c-command has a central role to play in syntax. It also provides further evidence
for positing that sentences have a hierarchical constituent structure, in that the
relevant restriction on the binding of anaphors in (63) is characterised in structural
terms. There’s much more to be said about binding, though we shan’t pursue the
relevant issues here: for technical discussion, see Reuland (2001a) and Reuland
and Everaert (2001).
3.8
Bare phrase structure
In this chapter, we have used a system of category labels based on
the bar notation which has been widely adopted since the 1970s. Within this
framework, a sentence like (the title of Gloria Gaynor’s immortal song) I will
survive has the structure (66) below:
(66)
TP
PRN
I
T'
T
will
V
survive
Thebarnotationusedin(66)positsthattherearethreedifferentlevelsofprojection
(i.e. types of expression): (i) heads (also called minimal projections) like the
T/tense auxiliary will; (ii) intermediate projections like the T-bar will survive;
and (iii) maximal projections like the TP I will survive. However, Chomsky
(1999, p. 2) argues that a system of category labels which posits three different
types of category label for projections of a given head H (viz. H, H-bar and HP)
violates a UG principle which he terms the Inclusiveness Condition – outlined
informally below:
(67)
Inclusiveness Condition
No new information can be introduced in the course of the syntactic computation
The reason why the bar notation used in trees like (66) violates inclusiveness is as
follows. When the word will is taken out of the lexicon, its lexical entry speciﬁes
that it has a set of properties which include the grammatical properties represented
by the category label T in (66). But the tree in (66) tells us that when will is
merged with its complement survive, the resulting string will survive belongs to
the category T-bar – in other words, it is an intermediate projection of will.
Likewise, the tree in (66) also tells us that the larger string I will survive is a TP –
in other words, it is the maximal projection of will. But this information about
intermediate and maximal projections is not part of the lexical entry for will, and

3.8 Bare phrase structure
95
hence must be added in the course of the syntactic computation. However, adding
such information about projection levels violates the Inclusiveness Condition
(67).
One way of avoiding violation of inclusiveness is to remove all information
about projection levels from trees, and hence replace a tree like (66) above by
one like (68) below:
(68)
T
PRN
I
T
T
will
V
survive
What our revised tree (68) says is that will, will survive and I will survive are
all projections of the tense auxiliary will and hence are all tense expressions.
Moreover, information about projection levels turns out to be entirely redundant,
since it is predictable from looking at the relative positions of constituents within
a given structure. Simply by looking at the positions they occupy in the tree (68)
we can tell that will is the minimal projection of will (i.e. it is the smallest expres-
sion headed by will), that will survive is an intermediate projection of will (by
virtue of being neither the smallest nor the largest expression headed by will)
and that I will survive is the maximal projection of will (by virtue of being the
largest expression headed by will). Similarly, we can tell that the V survive is
both a minimal and a maximal projection, in that it is both the smallest and the
largest expression headed by survive: hence (e.g.) it can behave like a maximal
projection and undergo preposing (as in Survive, I will). In much the same way,
we know from looking at the structure in (68) that the pronoun I is likewise both
a minimal and a maximal projection: given their status as maximal projections,
it follows that pronouns can undergo preposing (as with the pronoun him in Him,
I would never trust). Since the information about projection levels in the bar
notation is redundant, Chomsky reasons, such information should not be repre-
sented in the system of category labels used in tree diagrams: after all, the goal of
Minimalism is to reduce theoretical apparatus to the minimum which is concep-
tually necessary.
Given the possibility (mentioned in §2.11) that categorial information (i.e.
information about the category that an item belongs to) can be represented in
terms of grammatical features (and hence subsumed within the set of features
which characterise the idiosyncratic properties of individual words), a further
possibility is that category labels like those in (68) can be entirely replaced by
sets of features, so opening up the possibility of developing a theory of bare
phrase structure – i.e. a theory in which there are no category labels in syntactic
trees. An even more radical possibility along these lines would be for the structure
of I will survive to be represented in terms of an unlabelled tree diagram like
(69) below:

96
3 structure
(69)
I
will
survive
An unlabelled tree diagram like (69) tells us that the constituents of (69) are I,
will, survive, will survive and I will survive. The lexical entries for the items I,
will and survive comprise sets of features which include information about their
grammatical and selectional properties: for example, the entry for will tells us
that it is a ﬁnite auxiliary which selects an inﬁnitival complement. The fact that
will selects an inﬁnitive complement (and that survive is an inﬁnitive form and is
the sister of will) means that survive must be the complement of will and hence
that will survive is a projection of will. Likewise, the fact that will has an [epp]
feature requiring it to project a subject means that the nominative pronoun I must
be the subject of will, and hence that I will survive is an extended projection of
will. As before, the relative position of the relevant constituents within the overall
structure tells us that will is a minimal projection (of itself), will survive is an
intermediate projection of will, and I will survive is the maximal projection of
will. The overall conclusion we arrive at is that the information about category
labels and projection levels in a conventional labelled tree diagram like (66) above
may well be redundant.
If the kind of reasoning outlined here is along the right lines, it opens up the
possibility of developing a theory of bare phrase structure such as that outlined
in a skeletal form in Chomsky (1995) and Uriagereka (1998) – though it should be
noted that the relevant discussion in these two works is highly technical and not
suitable for those who don’t have some mathematical background in set theory.
However, we shall continue to use traditional labelled trees and the bar notation
to represent structure, category membership and projection levels throughout the
rest of this book, since this remains the notation most widely used in contemporary
work in syntax.
3.9
Summary
In this chapter, we have looked at how words are combined together
to form phrases and sentences. In §3.2 we showed how more and more complex
phrases can be built up by successive binary merger operations, each of which
combines a pair of constituents to form a larger constituent. In §3.3 we argued
that clauses containing a ﬁnite tense auxiliary are formed by merging the tense
auxiliary with a verbal complement to form an intermediate T-bar projection
which is then merged with a subject to form an extended TP/tense phrase projec-
tion. On this view, a sentence like It may rain would be formed by merging the
present-tense auxiliary may with the verb rain to form the T-bar constituent may
rain, and then merging the resulting T-bar with the pronoun it to derive the TP

3.9 Summary
97
It may rain. We also noted the claim made by Chomsky in earlier work that the
requirement for tense auxiliaries to have a subject is a consequence of a principle
of Universal Grammar called the Extended Projection Principle/EPP, which
requires a ﬁnite T to have an extended projection into a TP containing a subject;
and we noted that in more recent work this subject-requirement is described by
saying that a ﬁnite T has an [epp] feature requiring it to have an extended projec-
tion into a TP containing a subject. We went on to suggest that clauses introduced
by a complementiser/C are formed by merging C with a TP complement to form
a CP/complementiser phrase. In §3.4 we argued that a prepositional phrase like
right on the nose has a similar internal structure to a TP like He has resigned,
and that in both cases the head P/T on/has merges with a following complement
to form the intermediate P-bar/T-bar projection on the nose/has resigned which
in turn is merged with a preceding speciﬁer to form the extended PP/TP projec-
tion right on the nose/he has resigned. In §3.5 we went on to argue that other
types of head (e.g. adjectives, adverbs, and nouns) can likewise project both into
an intermediate projection via merger with a following complement, and into an
extended projection via merger with a preceding speciﬁer. We introduced the term
maximal projection to denote the largest expression headed by a particular word
in a given structure. In §3.6, we looked at ways of testing constituent structure,
outlining tests relating to coordination, substitution, and preposing. We noted that
a variety of factors can sometimes prevent constituents from being preposed in
order to highlight them; for example, items with little or no substantive lexical
content generally cannot be preposed, and there are also syntactic restrictions on
preposing – e.g. such movement operations are subject to a Functional Head
Constraint which bars the complement of a certain type of functional head (e.g.
determiner or complementiser) from being moved on its own. In §3.7, we looked
at the syntactic relations between constituents within tree diagrams, noting that
the relation c-command plays a central role in syntax, e.g. in relation to anaphor
binding. In §3.8 we discussed the potential redundancy in the system of labels
used to represent categories and projection levels in traditional phrase structure
trees, and noted that Chomsky has been seeking to develop a theory of bare
phrase structure in recent work.
For those of you familiar with work in traditional grammar, it will be clear
that the assumptions made about syntactic structure within the Minimalist frame-
work are somewhat different from those made in traditional grammar. Of course,
there are some similarities: within both types of framework, it is assumed that
lexical categories project into phrases, so that by combining a noun with one or
more other constituents we can form a noun phrase, and likewise by combin-
ing a verb/preposition/adjective/adverb with one or more other constituents we
can form a verb phrase/prepositional phrase/adjectival phrase/adverbial phrase.
But there are two major differences between the two types of framework. One is
that Minimalism (unlike traditional grammar) assumes that function words also
project into phrases (so that by combining a determiner with a noun expression we
form a determiner phrase, by combining a (present- or past-tense) auxiliary/T with
a complement and a subject we form a Tense Projection/TP, and by combining

98
3 structure
a complementiser with a TP we form a complementiser projection/CP). This in
some cases results in an analysis which is rather different from that found in
traditional grammar (e.g. in that the nose would be considered a noun phrase
in traditional grammar, but is taken to be a determiner phrase within the frame-
work adopted here). A further difference between the two frameworks is that
Minimalism assumes that all syntactic structure is binary-branching, whereas
traditional grammar (implicitly) does not.
Workbook section
Exercise 3.1
Discuss the derivation of the following sentences, showing how their structure is built up in a
pairwise fashion by successive binary merger operations.
1
He has become very fond of Mary
2
She must be quite pleased to see you
3
He may need to ask for help
4
They are expecting to hear from you
5
You should try to talk to the president
6
Inﬂation is threatening to undermine the growth of the economy
7
Nobody could believe that Sam was working for the government
8
He may refuse to admit that he was defrauding the company
Show how evidence from coordination and pronoun substitution can be used in support of your
analysis. In addition, say which constituents can (and cannot) be preposed – and why.
Helpful hints
Assume that the sentences are derived in a bottom-up fashion by ﬁrst merging the last two words
in the sentence to form a constituent, then merging the constituent thereby formed with the
third-from-last word to form an even larger constituent, then merging this even larger constituent
with the fourth-from-last word . . . and so on. (It should be noted, however, that while this simple
procedure will work for most of the sentences in the two exercises in this chapter, it requires
modiﬁcation to handle more complex sentences – e.g. those with phrasal speciﬁers like sentences
1, 2, 5, 16 and 18 in exercise 3.2.)
Model answer for sentence 1
Merging the preposition of with the noun Mary which serves as its complement derives the PP
(prepositional phrase) in (i) below:
(i)
PP
P
of
N
Mary
Merging the adjective fond with the resulting PP (which is the complement of fond) forms the
intermediate adjectival projection (A-bar) fond of Mary in (ii) below:

Workbook section
99
(ii)
A'
A
fond
PP
P
of
N
Mary
Merging the A-bar in (ii) with the adverb very which serves as its speciﬁer (in that it modiﬁes fond
of Mary) forms the AP/adjectival phrase in (iii) below:
(iii)
AP
ADV
very
A'
A
fond
PP
P
of
N
Mary
Merging the verb become with the AP very fond of Mary which serves as the complement of
become forms the VP/verb phrase in (iv) below:
(iv)
VP
V
become
AP
ADV
very
A'
A
fond
PP
P
of
N
Mary
Merging the tense auxiliary (T constituent) has with its verb phrase complement become very fond
of Mary forms the intermediate T-bar projection (v) below:
(v)
T'
T
has
VP
V
become
AP
ADV
very
A'
A
fond
PP
P
of
N
Mary

100
3 structure
Merging the T-bar in (v) with the pronoun he which serves as its subject/speciﬁer will derive the
TP:
(vi)
TP
PRN
He
T'
T
has
VP
V
become
AP
ADV
very
A'
A
fond
PP
P
of
N
Mary
Evidence in support of the analysis in (vi) comes from coordination data in relation to sentences
such as:
(vii) (a)
He has become very fond [of Mary] and [of her sister]
(b)
He has become very [fond of Mary] and [proud of her achievements]
(c)
He has become [very fond of Mary] but [less fond of her sister]
(d)
He has [become very fond of Mary] and [grown used to her mother]
(e)
He [has become very fond of Mary] and [is hoping to marry her]
The fact that each of the italicised strings can be coordinated with another similar (bold-printed)
string is consistent with the claim made in (vi) that of Mary is a PP, fond of Mary is an A-bar, very
fond of Mary is an AP, become very fond of Mary is a VP and has become very fond of Mary is a
T-bar.
Additional evidence in support of the analysis in (vi) comes from the use of the proforms
so/which in:
(viii) (a)
He is apparently very fond of Mary, though nobody expected him to
become so
(b)
If he has become very fond of Mary (which he has), why doesn’t he ask her
out?
The fact that very fond of Mary is the antecedent of so in (viiia) is consistent with the claim made
in (vi) that very fond of Mary is an AP; likewise, the fact that become very fond of Mary is the
antecedent of which in (viiib) is consistent with the claim made in (vi) that become very fond of
Mary is a VP.
If we look at the question of which expressions in the sentence can and cannot be preposed in
order to highlight them, we ﬁnd the following picture (? indicates questionable
grammaticality):

Workbook section
101
(ix) (a)
Mary, he (certainly) has become very fond of
(b)
?Of Mary, he (certainly) has become very fond
(c)
∗Fond of Mary, he (certainly) has become very
(d)
Very fond of Mary, he (certainly) has become
(e)
Become very fond of Mary, he (certainly) has
(f)
∗Has become very fond of Mary, he (certainly)
(Adding the adverb certainly improves the acceptability of some of the relevant sentences, for
discourse reasons which need not concern us.) In (53) in the main text, we suggested that
highlighting involves preposing the smallest possible maximal projection containing the focused
material. Suppose that we want to highlight Mary via preposing. Since Mary is a maximal
projection in (vi) by virtue of being the largest expression headed by the word Mary, preposing
Mary in (ixa) yields a grammatical outcome, as expected. By contrast, preposing the prepositional
phrase of Mary yields a somewhat degraded sentence, as we see from (ixb): this may be because if
we want to highlight Mary alone, we prepose the smallest maximal projection containing Mary,
and this is clearly the N Mary not the PP of Mary. There would only be some point in preposing of
Mary if we wanted to highlight of as well as Mary; but since the preposition of (rather like
inﬁnitival to) has little or no semantic content (some linguists suggesting that it is a genitive case
particle in this kind of use and hence a functor), an of-phrase is not a good candidate for
highlighting. The string fond of Mary cannot be preposed in (ixc) because it is an intermediate
(A-bar) projection of the adjective fond, not its maximal projection (the maximal projection of the
adjective fond being the AP very fond of Mary). By contrast, the string very fond of Mary can be
preposed in (ixd) by virtue of its status as the maximal projection of fond (i.e. the largest
expression headed by fond). In (ixe) we see that become very fond of Mary can also be preposed
by virtue of being the maximal projection of the verb become – even though it is the complement
of the T constituent has; hence, either T is not a functional category (as suggested in Chomsky
1999), or else the Functional Head Constraint applies only to some functional categories (e.g.
those like D and C which are the highest heads in nominal/clausal structures respectively). By
contrast, the string has become very fond of Mary cannot be preposed in (ixf) because of its status
as an intermediate (T-bar) projection of has – the corresponding maximal projection of has being
the TP He has become very fond of Mary.
Exercise 3.2
In §3.7, we showed how the relation c-command plays an important role in accounting for the use
of reﬂexive and reciprocal anaphors. The same can be argued to be true of two other types of
expression, namely non-anaphoric pronominals like he/him/her/it/them etc. and referential noun
expressions like John or the president. Chomsky (1981) developed a Theory of Binding which
incorporated the three binding principles outlined in a slightly revised form below:
(i)
Binding Principles
Principle A: an anaphor must be bound within its local domain
Principle B: a (non-anaphoric) pronominal (expression) must be free within its local
domain
Principle C: an R-expression (i.e. referring noun expression) must be free within the
overall structure containing it
Although there is controversy about how best to deﬁne the notion of local domain in relation to
binding, for present purposes assume that this corresponds to the notion of TP, and that the three

102
3 structure
binding principles in (i) thus amount to the following:
(ii)
A: An anaphor (like himself) must be bound by (i.e. must refer to) a c-commanding
constituent within the closest TP immediately containing it
B: A pronominal (like him) must not be bound by (i.e. must not refer to) any
c-commanding constituent within the closest TP immediately containing it
C: An R-expression (i.e. a referring noun expression like John/the president) must
not be coreferential to (i.e. must not refer to the same entity as) any c-commanding
expression within the overall tree structure containing it
In the light of the Binding Principles outlined informally in (ii), discuss the binding properties of
the expressions Fred, John, he/him and himself in sentences 1–6 below, drawing trees to represent
the structure of the sentences.
1a
The rumours about Fred have upset him
b
∗The rumours about Fred have upset himself
2a
The rumours about him have upset Fred
b
∗The rumours about himself have upset Fred
3a
John must feel that Fred has disgraced himself
b
∗John must feel that himself has disgraced Fred
4a
John must feel that he has disgraced Fred
b
John must feel that Fred has disgraced him
5a
John may wonder if the rumours about Fred will affect him
b
John may wonder if the rumours about him will affect Fred
6a
John may suspect that Fred has taken some pictures of him
b
John may suspect that Fred has taken some pictures of himself
In addition to its role in Binding Theory, the notion c-command has traditionally been assumed to
play an important part in accounting for the syntax of so-called (negative/interrogative) polarity
expressions – i.e. expressions which are said to be restricted to occurring in negative or
interrogative contexts. One way of characterising this restriction is to suppose that the relevant
expressions are restricted to occurring in a position where they are c-commanded by what Klima
(1964) termed an affective constituent (e.g. a negative, interrogative or conditional expression –
conditional expressions including if/unless in structures like ‘I will shut him up if he tries to say
anything’). Polarity expressions include the partitive quantiﬁer any (and related compounds
like anyone/anything), the items need and dare when serving as auxiliaries which don’t take
third-person singular -s in the present tense and which have a bare (to-less) inﬁnitive complement,
and idioms like lift a ﬁnger. Show how the c-command condition accounts for the
(un)grammaticality of the following:
7
You mustn’t talk to anyone
8
Nobody need do anything
9
Who dare blame anyone?
10
She has refused to sign anything
11
She should know if anyone has made any changes
12
I don’t think that anyone dare lift a ﬁnger

Workbook section
103
13
He may have no desire to change anything
14
Nobody will think that anything has changed
15
He may feel unable to do anything
16
No politician dare offend anyone
17
∗Anyone isn’t helping me
18
∗The fact that nothing has happened will change anything
19
John will deny that anything has happened
20
∗John has denied anything
21
John has denied any involvement
22
John has denied involvement in any fraud
In relation to 17 (intended to be synonymous with There isn’t anyone helping me) show how the
traditional ternary-branching analysis of clauses as S-constituents (whereby 17 would be analysed
as an S constituent comprising the pronoun/PRN anyone, the present-tense auxiliary/T isn’t and
the verb phrase/VP helping me) would be unable to provide a principled account of the
ungrammaticality of 17 in terms of the c-command condition on polarity items. In relation to 19
and 20, consider why some linguists (e.g. Landau 2002) have claimed that it is not the verb deny
which is negative, but rather the complementiser that, and say why sentences like 21 and 22 cast
doubt on this. Consider an alternative account of data like 19–22 under which we assume that a
polarity item must be asymmetrically c-commanded by an affective item, and we deﬁne
asymmetric c-command as follows:
(iii)
X asymmetrically c-commands Y if X c-commands Y but Y does not c-command X
(A different approach to polarity items can be found in Acquaviva 2002.)
Helpful hints
Assume that need/dare (when they take a bare to-less inﬁnitive complement) are modal auxiliaries
which occupy the head T position of TP, and that they take a VP complement: assume also that
they are polarity items in this use. Assume that no in 13 and 16 is a quantiﬁer (= Q) which heads
a quantiﬁer phrase (= QP) constituent and has a noun phrase as its complement: assume that when
the head Q of QP is negative, the overall QP is negative as well (because a phrase carries
the same features as its head by virtue of being a projection of the relevant head). In addition,
assume that mustn’t/don’t/isn’t are (inherently negative) T/tense auxiliaries. Finally, assume that
anyone/anything/nobody/nothing are pronouns (more speciﬁcally, they are Q-pronouns, i.e.
pronominal quantiﬁers). [A descriptive detail which you might care to note is that the quantiﬁer
any has two uses. It can serve as a universal (or ‘free choice’) quantiﬁer with a meaning similar
to every (as in He’ll do anything for a laugh): in this use, the initial a- of any is stressed, and the
relevant word is not a polarity item – i.e. is not restricted to occurring in affective contexts. The
second use of any is as a partitive (or existential) quantiﬁer: in this use, it has a meaning similar
to some and can be unstressed (with its initial vowel reduced to schwa or even being truncated in
rapid colloquial speech styles – e.g. He wouldn’t do ’nything), and is indeed a polarity item
restricted to occurring in affective contexts. Assume that in the examples in 7–22 above, you are
dealing with partitive any, and that this is a polarity item.]
Model answer for sentence 1a
Although we will not attempt to argue this here, there are good reasons for thinking that sentence
1a has the structure (i) below:

104
3 structure
(i)
TP
DP
T'
D
The
NP
T
have
VP
N
rumours
V
upset
PP
PRN
him
P
about
N
Fred
Him is a pronominal (i.e. a non-anaphoric pronoun), and hence subject to Principle B of Binding
Theory. This speciﬁes that a pronominal like him cannot refer to any expression c-commanding it
within the closest TP containing it; and from this it follows that such a pronominal can (a) refer to
an expression contained in a different TP within the same sentence, or (b) refer to an expression
within the same TP as long as that expression does not c-command him, or (c) refer to some entity
in the domain of discourse (e.g. some person not mentioned in the relevant sentence, but present in
the discourse context). The second of these possibilities (b) allows for him to refer to Fred in (i),
since although him and Fred are contained within the same TP, Fred does not c-command him (the
only constituent which Fred c-commands being the preposition about) so that principle B is
satisﬁed if him refers to Fred (or if indeed him refers to some other person not mentioned in the
sentence).
The noun Fred is an R-expression by virtue of being a referring noun expression, and hence is
subject to Principle C of Binding Theory. This speciﬁes that an R-expression like Fred cannot be
coreferential to any expression which c-commands it anywhere within the overall structure
containing it. However, there is no violation of Principle C in (i) if Fred and him are coreferential,
since Fred is not c-commanded by him. (The only constituent which him c-commands is the V
upset). There is likewise no violation of Principle C if Fred refers to some person not mentioned
within the sentence. Overall, then, principles B and C allow for the twin possibilities that him can
either refer to Fred or refer to someone other than Fred who is not directly mentioned in the
sentence.
Model answer for sentence 7
Given the assumptions made in the text, sentence 7 will have the structure (ii) below:
(ii)
TP
PRN
You
T'
T
mustn’t
VP
V
talk
PP
P
to
PRN
anyone

Workbook section
105
The T node containing the negative auxiliary mustn’t here c-commands the PRN node containing
the polarity item anyone because the sister of [T mustn’t] is [VP talk to anyone], and anyone is
contained within this VP, since the PRN node is one of the grandchildren of the VP node. If you
prefer to use the alternative train metaphor suggested in §3.7 (under which X c-commands Y if
you can get from X to Y on a train by going one stop north, then taking a southbound train on a
different line and travelling as many stops south as you choose), you can say that [T mustn’t]
c-commands [PRN anyone] because if you travel one stop north from the T station you arrive at the
T-bar station, and if you then change trains at the T-bar station you can get a southbound train on
a different line which will take you to the PRN station containing anyone (at the end of the line)
via the VP and PP stations. Since the polarity item anyone is c-commanded by the negative
auxiliary mustn’t, the c-command condition on the use of polarity items is satisﬁed, and sentence
7 is therefore grammatical.

4
Null constituents
4.1
Overview
So far, our discussion of syntactic structure has tacitly assumed that
all constituents in a given structure are overt (in the sense that they have overt
phonetic features, as well as grammatical and semantic features). However, in
this chapter we argue that syntactic structures may also contain null constituents
(also known as empty categories) – i.e. constituents which have grammatical and
semantic features but lack phonetic features (and so are ‘silent’ or ‘inaudible’).
4.2
Null subjects
We are already familiar with one kind of null constituent from the
discussion of the Null-Subject Parameter in §1.6. There, we saw that alongside
ﬁnite clauses like that produced by speaker A in the dialogue in (1) below with
an overt subject like Maria, Italian also has ﬁnite clauses like that produced by
speaker B, with a null subject pronoun conventionally designated as pro (and
referred to affectionately as ‘little pro’):
(1)
speaker a: Maria `e tornata?
Maria is returned?
‘Has Maria returned?’
speaker b: S`ı,
pro `e tornata
Yes, pro is returned
‘Yes, she has returned’
One reason for positing that the sentence in (1B) has a null pro subject is that
tornare ‘return’ (in the use illustrated here) is a one-place predicate which requires
a subject: this requirement is satisﬁed by the overt subject Maria in (1A), and by
the null pro subject in (1B). A second reason relates to the agreement morphology
carried by the auxiliary `e ‘is’ and the participle tornata ‘returned’ in (1). Just as the
form of the (third-person-singular) auxiliary `e ‘is’ and the (feminine-singular) par-
ticiple tornata is determined via agreement with the overt (third-person-feminine-
singular) subject Maria in (1A), so too the auxiliary and participle agree in exactly
the same way with the null pro subject in (1B), which (as used here) is third person
106

4.2 Null subjects
107
feminine singular by virtue of referring to Maria. If the sentence in (1B) were
subjectless, it is not obvious how we would account for the relevant agreement
facts. Since all ﬁnite clauses in Italian allow a null pro subject, we can refer to
pro as a null ﬁnite subject.
Although English is not an Italian-style null-subject language (in the sense that
it is not a language which allows any and every kind of ﬁnite clause to have a null
pro subject), it does have three different types of null subject (brieﬂy discussed
in exercise 1.1). One of these are imperative null subjects. As the examples in
(2) below illustrate, an imperative sentence in English can have an overt subject
which is either a second-person expression like you, or a third-person expression
like anyone:
(2) (a)
Don’t you dare lose your nerve!
(b)
Don’t anyone dare lose their nerve!
However, imperative null subjects are intrinsically second person, as the contrast
in (3) below shows:
(3) (a)
Don’t lose your nerve!
(b)
∗Don’t lose their nerve!
In other words, imperative null subjects seem to be a silent counterpart of you.
One way of describing this is to say that the pronoun you can have a null spellout
(and thereby have its phonetic features not spelled out – i.e. deleted/omitted) when
it is the subject of an imperative sentence.
A second type of null subject found in English are truncated null subjects.
In cryptic styles of colloquial spoken English (and also in diary styles of written
English) a sentence can be truncated (i.e. shortened) by giving a subject pronoun
like I/you/he/we/they a null spellout if it is the ﬁrst word in a sentence. So, in
sentences like those in (4) below:
(4) (a)
I can’t ﬁnd my pen
(b)
I think I left it at home
(c)
Why do I always lose things?
the two italicised occurrences of the subject pronoun I can be given a null spellout
because in each case I is the ﬁrst word in the sentence, but not other occurrences
of I – as we see from (5) below:
(5) (a)
Can’t ﬁnd my pen
(b)
Think I left it at home/∗Think left it at home
(c)
∗Why do always lose things?
However, not all sentence-initial subjects can be truncated (e.g. we can’t truncate
He in a sentence like He is tired, giving ∗Is tired): the precise nature of the
constraints on truncation is unclear.
A third type of null subject found in English are non-ﬁnite null subjects,
found in non-ﬁnite clauses which don’t have an overt subject. In this connection,

108
4 null constituents
compare the structure of the bracketed inﬁnitive clauses in the (a) and (b) examples
below:
(6) (a)
We would like [you to stay]
(b)
We would like [to stay]
(7) (a)
We don’t want [anyone to upset them]
(b)
We don’t want [to upset them]
Each of the bracketed inﬁnitive complement clauses in the (a) examples in (6) and
(7) contains an overt (italicised) subject. By contrast, the bracketed complement
clauses in the (b) examples appear to be subjectless. However, we shall argue that
apparently subjectless inﬁnitive clauses contain a null subject. The particular
kind of null subject found in the bracketed clauses in the (b) examples has the
same grammatical and referential properties as a pronoun, and hence appears to
be a null pronoun. In order to differentiate it from the null (‘little pro’) subject
found in ﬁnite clauses in null-subject languages like Italian, it is conventionally
designatedas PROand referredtoas ‘bigPRO’.Giventhisassumption,asentence
such as (6b) will have a parallel structure to (6a), except that the bracketed TP has
an overt pronoun you as its subject in (6a), but a null pronoun PRO as its subject
in (6b) – as shown below:
(8)
TP
PRN
We
T'
T
would
VP
V
like
TP
PRN
you/PRO
T'
T
to
V
stay
Using the relevant technical terminology, we can say that the null PRO subject
in (8) is controlled by (i.e. refers back to) the subject we of the matrix (= con-
taining = next highest) clause – or, equivalently, that we is the controller or
antecedent of PRO: hence, a structure like ‘We would like PRO to stay’ has an
interpretation akin to that of ‘We would like ourselves to stay’. Verbs (such as
like) which allow an inﬁnitive complement with a PRO subject are said to function
(in the relevant use) as control verbs; likewise, a complement clause with a null
PRO subject is known as a control clause.
An obvious question to ask at this juncture is why we should posit that appar-
ently subjectless inﬁnitive complements like those bracketed in (6b) and (7b)
above have a null PRO subject. Part of the motivation for PRO comes from con-
siderations relating to argument structure. The verb stay (as used in (6b) above)

4.2 Null subjects
109
is a one-place predicate which requires a subject argument – and positing a PRO
subject for the stay clause satisﬁes the requirement for stay to have a subject. The
null PRO subject of a control inﬁnitive becomes overt if the inﬁnitive clause is
substituted by a ﬁnite clause, as we see from the paraphrases for the (a) examples
given in the (b) examples below:
(9) (a)
I am sorry [PRO to have kept you waiting]
(b)
I am sorry [I have kept you waiting]
(10) (a)
Jim promised [PRO to come to my party]
(b)
Jim promised [he would come to my party]
The fact that the bracketed clauses in the (b) examples contain an overt (italicised)
subject makes it plausible to suppose that the bracketed clauses in the synonymous
(a) examples have a null PRO subject. (Note, however, that only verbs which select
both an inﬁnitive complement and a ﬁnite complement allow a control clause to be
substituted by a ﬁnite clause with an overt subject – hence, not a control verb like
want in I want to go home because want does not allow a that-clause complement,
as we see from the ungrammaticality of ∗I want that I should leave. Interestingly,
Xu 2003 claims that all control verbs in Chinese allow an overt subject pronoun
in place of PRO in control clauses.)
Further evidence in support of positing a null PRO subject in such clauses
comes from the syntax of reﬂexive anaphors (i.e. self/selves forms such as
myself/yourself/himself/themselves etc.). As examples such as the following indi-
cate, reﬂexives generally require a local antecedent (the reﬂexive being italicised
and its antecedent bold-printed):
(11) (a)
They want [John to help himself]
(b)
∗They want [John to help themselves]
In the case of structures like (11), a local antecedent means ‘an antecedent con-
tained within the same [bracketed] clause/TP as the reﬂexive’. (11a) is grammat-
ical because it satisﬁes this locality requirement: the antecedent of the reﬂexive
himself is the noun John, and John is contained within the same (bracketed)
help-clause as himself. By contrast, (11b) is ungrammatical because the reﬂexive
themselves does not have a local antecedent (i.e. it does not have an antecedent
within the bracketed clause containing it); its antecedent is the pronoun they, and
they is contained within the want clause, not within the [bracketed] help clause.
In the light of the requirement for reﬂexives to have a local antecedent, consider
now how we account for the grammaticality of the following:
(12)
John wants [PRO to prove himself]
Given the requirement for reﬂexives to have a local antecedent, it follows that
the reﬂexive himself must have an antecedent within its own [bracketed] clause.
This requirement is satisﬁed in (12) if we assume that the bracketed complement
clause has a PRO subject, and that PRO is the antecedent of himself. Since PRO

110
4 null constituents
in turn is controlled by John (i.e. John is the antecedent of PRO), this means that
himself is coreferential to (i.e. refers to the same individual as) John.
We can formulate a further argument in support of positing a PRO subject
in apparently subjectless inﬁnitive clauses in relation to the syntax of predi-
cate nominals: these are nominal (i.e. noun-containing) expressions used as the
complement of a copular (i.e. linking) verb such as be, become, remain (etc.) in
expressions such as John was/became/remained my best friend, where the predi-
cate nominal is my best friend, and the property of being/becoming/remaining my
best friend is predicated of John. Predicate nominals of the relevant type have to
agree in number with the subject of their own clause in copular constructions, as
we see from examples such as the following:
(13) (a)
They want [their son to become a millionaire/∗millionaires]
(b)
He wants [his sons to become millionaires/∗a millionaire]
The italicised predicate nominal has to agree with the (bold-printed) subject of
its own [bracketed] become clause, and cannot agree with the subject of the want
clause. In the light of this local (clause-internal) agreement requirement, consider
now how we account for the agreement pattern in (14) below:
(14) (a)
They want [PRO to become millionaires/∗a millionaire]
(b)
He wants [PRO to become a millionaire/∗millionaires]
If we posit that the become clause has a PRO subject which is controlled by
(i.e. refers back to) the subject of the want clause, the relevant agreement facts
can be accounted for straightforwardly: we simply posit that the predicate nom-
inal (a) millionaire(s) agrees with PRO (since PRO is the subject of the become
clause), and that PRO in (14a) is plural because its controller/antecedent is the
plural pronoun they, and conversely that PRO in (14b) is singular because its
antecedent/controller is the singular pronoun he.
A further argument in support of positing that control clauses have a silent
PRO subject can be formulated in theoretical terms. In the previous chapter, we
noted that ﬁnite auxiliaries have an [epp] feature which requires them to have a
subject speciﬁer. Since ﬁnite auxiliaries belong to the category T of tense-marker,
we can generalise this conclusion by positing that all ﬁnite T constituents have
an [epp] feature requiring them to have a subject. However, since we argued in
chapter 2 that inﬁnitival to also belongs to the category T (by virtue of its status
as a non-ﬁnite tense-marker), we can suggest the broader generalisation that not
only a ﬁnite T but also a non-ﬁnite T containing the inﬁnitive particle to has an
[epp] feature and hence must likewise project a subject. The analysis in (8) above
is consistent with this generalisation, since it posits that the stay clause either has
an overt you subject or a null PRO subject, with either type of subject satisfying
the [epp] feature of to.
The overall conclusion which our discussion here leads us to is that just as
inﬁnitive complements like you to stay in (6a) have an overt subject (you), so
too seemingly subjectless inﬁnitive complements like to stay in (6b) have a null

4.3 Null auxiliaries
111
PRO subject – as shown in (8) above. In structures like (8), PRO has an explicit
controller, which is the subject of the matrix clause (i.e. of the clause which
immediately contains the control verb). However, this is not always the case, as
we can see from structures like (15) below:
(15) (a)
It is important [PRO to take regular exercise]
(b)
It’s difﬁcult [PRO to learn a foreign language]
(c)
It’s unwise [PRO to mix business with pleasure]
It is clear from examples like (16) below that apparently subjectless clauses like
those bracketed in (15) and (16) must have a null PRO subject:
(16) (a)
It’s important [PRO to prepare myself properly for the exam]
(b)
It’s important [PRO not to take oneself too seriously]
since the reﬂexives myself/oneself require a local antecedent within the bracketed
clause containing them, and PRO serves the function of being the antecedent of
the reﬂexive. However, PRO itself has no explicit antecedent in structures like
(15) and (16). In such cases (where PRO lacks an explicit controller), PRO can
either refer to some individual outside the sentence (e.g. the speaker in (16a)) or
can have arbitrary reference (as in (16b)) and refer to ‘any arbitrary person you
care to mention’ and hence have much the same interpretation as arbitrary one in
sentences like ‘One can’t be too careful these days’. (See Landau 1999, 2001 for
further discussion of control structures.)
4.3
Null auxiliaries
So far, all the clauses we have looked at in this chapter and the last
have contained a TP projection headed by a ﬁnite auxiliary or inﬁnitival to.
The obvious generalisation suggested by this is that all clauses contain TP. An
important question begged by this assumption, however, is how we are to analyse
ﬁnite clauses which contain no overt auxiliary. In this connection, consider the
construction illustrated in (17) below:
(17)
He could have helped her, or [she have helped him]
Both clauses here (viz. the he clause and the bracketed she clause) appear to be
ﬁnite, since both have nominative subjects (he/she). If all ﬁnite clauses contain
a TP projection headed by a ﬁnite T constituent, it follows that both clauses in
(17) must be TPs containing a ﬁnite T. This is clearly true of the he clause, since
this contains the ﬁnite modal auxiliary could; however, the she clause doesn’t
seem to contain any ﬁnite auxiliary constituent, since have is an inﬁnitive form in
(17) (the corresponding ﬁnite form which would be required with a third-person
subject like she being has). How can we analyse ﬁnite clauses as projections of
a ﬁnite T constituent when clauses like that bracketed in (17) contain no ﬁnite
auxiliary?

112
4 null constituents
An intuitively plausible answer is to suppose that the string she have helped
him in (17) is an elliptical (i.e. abbreviated) variant of she could have helped
him, and that the T constituent could in the second clause undergoes a particular
form of ellipsis called gapping. (Gapping is a grammatical operation by which
the head of a phrase is given a null spellout – and so has its phonetic features
deleted – when the same item occurs elsewhere within the sentence, and is so
called because it leaves an apparent ‘gap’ in the phrase where the head would
otherwise have been.) If so, the second clause will have the structure (18) below
(where could marks an ellipsed counterpart of could, and have is treated as a
non-ﬁnite AUX/Auxiliary heading an AUXP/Auxiliary Phrase – the rationale for
AUXP will be discussed in §5.7):
(18)
TP
PRN
'
she
T
AUXP
could
AUX
VP
have
V
PRN
helped
him
have
T
The head T position of TP in a structure like (18) is ﬁlled by the ellipsed aux-
iliary could. Although an ellipsed item loses its phonetic features, it retains its
grammatical and semantic features, so that could in (18) is a silent counterpart
of could. The null T analysis in (18) provides a principled account of three
observations. Firstly, the bracketed clause in (17) is interpreted as an elliptical
form of she could have helped him: this can be straightforwardly accounted for
under the analysis in (18) since T contains a null counterpart of could. Secondly,
the subject is in the nominative case form she: this can be attributed to the fact
that the T position in (18) is ﬁlled by a ‘silent’ counterpart of the ﬁnite auxil-
iary could, so that (like other ﬁnite auxiliaries) it requires a nominative subject.
Thirdly, the perfect auxiliary have is in the inﬁnitive form: this is because could
(being a null copy of could) has the same grammatical properties as could, and so
(like could) requires a complement headed by a word (like have) in the inﬁnitive
form.
A further argument in support of the null T analysis in (18) comes from facts
relating to cliticisation (a process by which one word attaches itself in a leech-like
fashion to another). The perfect auxiliary have has a range of variant forms in
the spoken language. When unstressed, it can lose its initial /h/ segment and have
its vowel reduced to schwa /ə/, and so be pronounced as /əv/ e.g. in sentences
such as You should have been there. (Because of is also pronounced /əv/ when
unstressed, some people mistakenly write this as You should of been there – not

4.3 Null auxiliaries
113
you, of course!) However, when have is used with a pronominal subject ending
in a vowel or diphthong (e.g. a pronoun like I/we/you/they), it can lose its vowel
entirely and be contracted down to /v/; in this weak form, it is phonetically too
insubstantial to survive as an independent word and encliticises onto (i.e. attaches
to the end of) its subject, resulting in structures such as:
(19) (a)
You’ve done your duty
(b)
They’ve retired General Gaga
(c)
I’ve forgotten to lock the door
(d)
We’ve saved you a place
However, note that have cannot cliticise onto she in (20) below:
(20)
∗He could have helped her or she’ve helped him
so that she’ve is not homophonous with the invented word sheeve. Why should
cliticisationofhaveontoshebeblockedhere?Let’ssupposethathave-cliticisation
is subject to the following structural conditions:
(21)
Have can encliticise onto a pronoun ending in a vowel or diphthong
provided that
(i) the pronoun asymmetrically c-commands have (i.e. the pronoun
c-commands have but is not itself c-commanded by have)
(ii) the two are immediately adjacent, in the sense that there is no constituent
intervening between the two (i.e. no constituent which c-commands have
and which is in turn c-commanded by the pronoun)
The asymmetric c-command condition (21i) in effect requires the pronoun
to be ‘higher up’ in the structure than have. (In the relevant technical sense,
one constituent X asymmetrically c-commands another constituent Y if X
c-commands Y, but Y does not c-command X.) The adjacency condition (21ii)
requires have to be immediately adjacent to the pronoun which it cliticises to.
(A descriptive detail which we set aside here is that (21) applies speciﬁcally to
encliticisation of have: encliticisation of the ’s variant of has is subject to far less
restrictive conditions on its use – but this will not be pursued here.)
To see how (21) works, consider the structure below:
(22)
TP
PRN
They
T'
T
have
V
left
Here, the pronoun they ends in a diphthong and so is the kind of pronoun that have
can cliticise onto. The asymmetric c-command condition (21i) is met in that they
c-commands have, but have does not c-command they. The adjacency condition

114
4 null constituents
(21ii) is also met in that there is no constituent intervening between they and have.
Since both its structural conditions are met, (21) correctly predicts that have can
encliticise onto they, so deriving They’ve left. The kind of cliticisation involved
here is essentially phonological (rather than syntactic), so that they and have
remain separate words in the syntax, but are fused together in the PF component
(i.e. the component responsible for determining Phonetic Form) once the structure
generated (i.e. formed) by the syntax has been handed over to the PF component
for morphological and phonological processing.
In the light of our discussion of have cliticisation, now consider why cliti-
cisation of have onto she is not possible in (20) ∗He could have helped her or
she’ve helped him. Under the null T analysis suggested above, the second clause
in (20) contains a null variant of could and has the structure shown in (18) above,
repeated as (23) below:
(23)
TP
PRN
she
T
AUXP
could
AUX
have
VP
V
helped
T'
PRN
him
Although the asymmetric c-command condition (21i) is met in (23) in that she
c-commands but is not c-commanded by have, the adjacency condition (21ii) is
not met in that she is not immediately adjacent to have because the null auxiliary
could intervenes between the two (in the sense that could c-commands have, and
could is in turn c-commanded by she). Thus, the presence of the intervening null
auxiliary could blocks cliticisation of have onto she in (23), thereby accounting
for the ungrammaticality of (20) ∗He could have helped her or she’ve helped him.
Turning this conclusion on its head, we can say that the ungrammaticality of (20)
provides us with empirical evidence that the bracketed clause in (17) contains a
null counterpart of could intervening between she and have – as is claimed in the
analysis in (23) above.
Our discussion so far in this section has suggested that some seemingly auxil-
iariless clauses are TPs headed by a T containing an auxiliary which (via ellipsis)
is given a null phonetic spellout. A rather different kind of null-auxiliary structure
is found in African American English (AAE), in sentences such as the following
(from Labov 1969, p. 717):
(24)
He just feel like he gettin’ cripple up from arthritis

4.4 Null T in auxiliariless ﬁnite clauses
115
In AAE, speciﬁc forms of the auxiliary be have null variants, so that we ﬁnd null
forms of are and is in contexts where Standard English (SE) would require the
contracted forms ’s and ’re. Hence, in place of SE he’s getting crippled we ﬁnd
AAE he gettin cripple (with a null counterpart of ’s). Evidence in support of the
assumption that AAE sentences like (24) incorporate a null variant of is comes
from the fact that the missing auxiliary is may surface in a tag, as in sentences
such as the following (where the sequence following the comma is the tag) (from
Fasold 1980, p. 29):
(25)
He gonna be there, I know he is
In tag sentences, the auxiliary found in the tag is a copy of the auxiliary used
in the main clause. This being so, it follows that the main gonna clause in (25)
must contain a null variant of the progressive auxiliary is. In other words, the
main clause in (25) must be a TP with the structure shown in skeletal form in (26)
below (strikethrough indicating that the phonetic features of the auxiliary are not
spelled out):
(26)
[TPHe [T is] gonna be there]
Interestingly, the form am (contracted to ’m) has no null counterpart in AAE, nor
do the past-tense forms was/were. It would seem, therefore, that the only ﬁnite
forms of be which have a null counterpart in AAE are the speciﬁc auxiliary forms
are and is. No less interestingly, Wolfram (1971, p. 149) reports that in non-
standard Southern White American English the use of null auxiliaries is even
more restricted, and that the only form of be with a null counterpart is are; cf. the
parallel observation by Fasold (1980: 30) that ‘There are many southern whites
who delete only are.’
4.4
Null T in auxiliariless ﬁnite clauses
Our analysis of the kind of auxiliariless clauses discussed in §4.3 as
TPs headed by a T which has a null phonetic spellout suggests the more general
hypothesis that:
(27)
All ﬁnite clauses are TPs headed by an (overt or null) T constituent
Such a hypothesis has interesting implications for ﬁnite clauses such as the fol-
lowing which contain a ﬁnite verb but no auxiliary:
(28) (a)
He enjoys syntax
(b)
He enjoyed syntax
It implies that we should analyse auxiliariless ﬁnite clauses like those in (28a,b)
above as TP constituents which have the respective structures shown in (29a,b)
below:

116
4 null constituents
(29)
TP
(b)
TP
PRN
T'
PRN
He
T'
He
T
VP
T
VP
V
enjoys
V
enjoyed
(a)
N
syntax
N
syntax
Structures like those in (29) would differ from null-auxiliary structures like (23)
He could have helped her or she could have helped him and (26) He is gonna
be there in that they don’t contain a silent counterpart of a speciﬁc auxiliary like
could or is, but rather simply don’t contain any auxiliary at all.
However, there’s clearly something very odd about a null T analysis like (29)
if we say that the relevant clauses are TPs which are headed by a T constituent
which contains absolutely nothing. For one thing, a category label like T is an
abbreviation for a set of features carried by a lexical item – hence, if we posit
that structures like (29) are TPs, the head T position of TP has to be occupied by
some kind of lexical item. Moreover, the structures which are generated by the
syntactic component of the grammar are eventually handed over to the semantic
component to be assigned a semantic interpretation, and it seems reasonable to
follow Chomsky (1995) in requiring all constituents in a syntactic structure to
play a role in determining the meaning of the overall structure. If so, it clearly
has to be the case that the head T of TP contains some item which contributes in
some way to the semantic interpretation of the sentence. But what kind of item
could T contain?
In order to try and answer this question, it’s instructive to contrast auxiliariless
structures like those in (29) above with auxiliary-containing structures like those
in (30) below:
(30)
(b)
(a)
TP
TP
PRN
He
T'
PRN
He
T'
T
does
VP
T
did
VP
V
enjoy
V
enjoy
N
syntax
N
syntax
The head T position in TP is occupied by the present-tense auxiliary does in
(30a), and by the past-tense auxiliary did in (30b). If we examine the internal
morphological structure of these two words, we see that does contains the present-
tense afﬁx -s, and that did contains the past-tense afﬁx -d (each of these afﬁxes
being attached to an irregular stem form of the auxiliary do). In schematic terms,
then, we can say that the head T constituent of TP in structures like (30) is of the
form auxiliary+tense afﬁx.

4.4 Null T in auxiliariless ﬁnite clauses
117
If we now look back at the auxiliariless structures in (29), we see that the
head V position of VP in these structures is occupied by the verbs enjoys and
enjoyed, and that these have a parallel morphological structure, in that they are
of the form verb+tense afﬁx. So, what ﬁnite clauses like (29) and (30) share in
common is that in both cases they contain an (auxiliary or main) verb carrying
a tense afﬁx. In structures like (30) which contain an auxiliary like do, the tense
afﬁx is attached to the auxiliary; in structures like (29) which contain no auxiliary,
the tense afﬁx attaches instead to the main verb enjoy. If we make the reasonable
assumption that (as its label suggests) T is the locus of the tense properties of a
ﬁnite clause (in the sense that T is the constituent which carries its tense features),
an interesting possibility to consider is that the relevant tense afﬁx (in both types
of clause structure) originates in the head T position of TP. Since tensed verbs
agree with their subjects in person and number, let us suppose that the tense afﬁx
(below abbreviated to Tns) also carries person and number properties. On this
view, sentences like He does enjoy syntax and He enjoys syntax would have the
respective syntactic structures indicated in (31a,b) below, where [3SgPr] is an
abbreviation for the features [third-person, singular-number, present-tense]:
(31)
(a)
TP
(b)
TP
PRN
He
T'
PRN
He
T'
T
DO+Tns3SgPr
VP
T
Tns3SgPr
VP
V
enjoy
V
enjoy
N
syntax
N
syntax
The two structures share in common the fact that they both contain a tense afﬁx
(Tns) in T; they differ in that the tense afﬁx is attached to the auxiliary do in
(31a), but is unattached in (31b) because there is no auxiliary in T for the afﬁx to
attach to.
Under the analysis in (31), it is clear that T in auxiliariless clauses like (31b)
would not be empty, but rather would contain a tense/agreement afﬁx whose
semantic contribution to the meaning of the overall sentence is that it marks
tense. But what about the phonetic spellout of the tense afﬁx? In a structure
like (31a), it is easy to see why the (third-person-singular-present) tense afﬁx is
ultimately spelled out as an s-inﬂection on the end of the auxiliary does, because
the afﬁx is directly attached to the auxiliary do in T. But how come the afﬁx
ends up spelled out as an s-inﬂection on the main verb enjoys in a structure like
(31b)? We can answer this question in the following terms. Once the syntax has
formed a clause structure like (31), the relevant syntactic structure is then sent to
the semantic component to be assigned a semantic interpretation, and to the PF
component to be assigned a phonetic form. In the PF component, a number of
morphological and phonological operations apply. One of these morphological

118
4 null constituents
operations is traditionally referred to as Afﬁx Hopping, and can be characterised
informally as follows:
(32)
Afﬁx Hopping
In the PF component, an unattached tense afﬁx is lowered onto the closest
head c-commanded by the afﬁx (provided that the lower head is a verb,
since tense afﬁxes require a verbal host to attach to)
Because the closest head c-commanded by T in (31b) is the verb enjoy (which is
the head V of VP), it follows that (in the PF component) the unattached afﬁx in
T will be lowered onto the verb enjoy via the morphological operation of Afﬁx
Hopping, in the manner shown by the arrow in (33) below:
(33)
TP
PRN
He
T'
T
Tns3SgPr
VP
V
enjoy
N
syntax
Since inﬂections in English are sufﬁxes, we can assume that the tense afﬁx will be
lowered onto the end of the verb enjoy, to derive the structure [enjoy+Tns3SgPr].
Since enjoy is a regular verb, the resulting structure will ultimately be spelled out
in the phonology as the form enjoys.
What we have done so far in this section is sketch out an analysis of auxiliariless
ﬁnite clauses as TPs headed by a T constituent containing an abstract tense afﬁx
which is subsequently lowered onto the verb by an Afﬁx Hopping operation in
the PF component (so resulting in a clause structure which looks as if it contains
no T constituent). However, an important question to ask at this juncture is why
we should claim that auxiliariless clauses contain an abstract T constituent. From
a theoretical point of view, one advantage of the abstract T analysis is that it
provides a unitary characterisation of the syntax of clauses, since it allows us to
say that all clauses contain a TP projection, that the subject of a clause is always
in spec-TP (i.e. always occupies the speciﬁer position within TP), that a ﬁnite
clause always contains an (auxiliary or main) verb carrying a tense afﬁx, and so
on. Lending further weight to theory-internal considerations such as these is a
substantial body of empirical evidence, as we shall see.
One argument in support of the tense afﬁx analysis comes from coordination
facts in relation to sentences such as:
(34) (a)
He enjoys syntax, and has learned a lot
(b)
He enjoyed syntax, and is taking a follow-up course
In both sentences, the italicised string enjoys syntax/enjoyed syntax has been coor-
dinated with a bold-printed constituent which is clearly a T-bar in that it comprises

4.4 Null T in auxiliariless ﬁnite clauses
119
a present-tense auxiliary (has/is) with a verb phrase complement (learned a
lot/taking a follow-up course). On the assumption that only the same kinds of
constituent can be conjoined by and, it follows that the italicised (seemingly
T-less) strings enjoys syntax/enjoyed syntax must also be T-bar constituents;
and since they contain no overt auxiliary, this means they must contain an
abstract T constituent of some kind – precisely as the tense afﬁx analysis in (33)
claims.
A direct consequence of the tense afﬁx analysis (33) of auxiliariless ﬁnite
clauses is that ﬁnite auxiliaries and ﬁnite main verbs occupy different positions
within the clause: ﬁnite auxiliaries occupy the head T position of TP, whereas
ﬁnite main verbs occupy the head V position of VP. An interesting way of testing
this hypothesis is in relation to the behaviour of items which have the status of
auxiliaries in some uses, but of verbs in others. One such word is have. In the
kind of uses illustrated in (35) below, have is a perfect auxiliary (and so requires
the main verb to be in the perfect participle form seen/been):
(35) (a)
They have seen the ghost
(b)
They had been warned about the ghost
However, in the uses illustrated in (36) below, have is causative or experiential
in sense (and so has much the same meaning as cause or experience):
(36) (a)
The doctor had an eye-specialist examine the patient
(b)
The doctor had the patient examined by an eye-specialist
(c)
The teacher had three students walk out on her
(d)
I’ve never had anyone send me ﬂowers
By traditional tests of auxiliarihood, perfect have is an auxiliary, and
causative/experiential have is a main verb: e.g. perfect have can undergo inversion
(Has she gone to Paris?) whereas causative/experiential have cannot (∗Had the
doctor an eye specialist examine the patient?). In terms of the assumptions we
are making here, this means that ﬁnite forms of have are positioned in the head
T position of TP in their perfect use, but in the head V position of VP in their
causative or experiential use.
Evidence in support of this claim comes from facts about cliticisation. We noted
earlier in (21) above that the form have can cliticise onto an immediately adjacent
pronoun ending in a vowel/diphthong which asymmetrically c-commands have.
In the light of this, consider contrasts such as the following:
(37) (a)
They’ve seen a ghost (= perfect have)
(b)
∗They’ve their car serviced regularly (= causative have)
(c)
∗They’ve students walk out on them sometimes (= experiential have)
How can we account for this contrast? If we assume that perfect have in (37a) is a
ﬁnite (present-tense) auxiliary which occupies the head T position of TP, but that
causative have in (37b) and experiential have in (37c) are main verbs occupying
the head V position of a VP complement of a null T, then prior to cliticisation
the three clauses will have the respective simpliﬁed structures indicated by the

120
4 null constituents
partial labelled bracketings in (38a–c) below (where Tns is an abstract tense
afﬁx):
(38) (a)
[TP They [T have+Tns] [VP [V seen] a ghost]]
(b)
[TP They [T Tns] [VP [V have] their car serviced regularly]]
(c)
[TP They [T Tns] [VP [V have] students walk out on them sometimes]]
(Here and throughout the rest of the book, partial labelled bracketings are used to
show those parts of the structure most relevant to the discussion at hand, omitting
other parts. In such cases, we generally show relevant heads and their maximal
projections but omit intermediate projections, as in (38) above where we show T
and TP but not T-bar.) Since we claimed in (21) above that cliticisation of have
onto a pronoun is blocked by the presence of an intervening constituent, it should
be obvious why have can cliticise onto they in (38a) but not in (38b,c): after all,
there is no intervening constituent separating the pronoun they from have in (38a),
but they is separated from the verb have in (38b,c) by an intervening T constituent
containing a tense afﬁx (Tns), so blocking contraction. It goes without saying
that a crucial premise of this account is the assumption that (in its ﬁnite forms)
have is positioned in the head T position of TP in its use as a perfect auxiliary,
but in the head V position of VP in its use as a causative or experiential verb.
In other words, have cliticisation facts suggest that ﬁnite clauses which lack a
ﬁnite auxiliary are TPs headed by an abstract T constituent containing a tense
afﬁx.
A further piece of empirical evidence in support of the TP analysis comes from
tag questions. As we see from the examples below, sentences containing (a ﬁnite
form of) perfect have are tagged by have, whereas sentences containing (a ﬁnite
form of) causative have are tagged by do:
(39) (a)
Mary has gone to Paris, has/∗does she?
(b)
Jules has his hair styled by Quentin Quiff, does/∗has he?
Given the T-analysis of perfect have and the V-analysis of causative have and the
assumption that all clauses contain a TP constituent, the main clauses in (39a,b)
will have the respective (simpliﬁed) structures indicated in (40a,b) below:
(40) (a)
[TP Mary [T has] [VP [V gone] to Paris]]
(b)
[TP Jules [T Tns] [VP [V has] his hair styled by Quentin Quiff]]
(A complication which we overlook here and throughout is that have will only be
spelled out as the form has in the PF component, and hence should more properly
be represented as the abstract item have in the syntax.) If we assume that the
T constituent which appears in the tag must be a copy of the T constituent in the
main clause, the contrast in (39) can be accounted for in a principled fashion.
In (39a), the head T position of TP is ﬁlled by the auxiliary has, and so the tag
contains a copy of has. In (39b), however, T contains only an abstract tense afﬁx,
hence we would expect the tag to contain a copy of this afﬁx. Now, in the main

4.5 Null T in bare inﬁnitive clauses
121
clause, the afﬁx can be lowered from T onto the verb have in the head V position
of VP, with the resulting verb eventually being spelled out as has. But in the tag,
there is no verb for the afﬁx to be lowered onto. Accordingly, do-support is used:
in other words, the (meaningless) dummy auxiliary stem do is attached to the
afﬁx in order to provide an overt verbal stem for the afﬁx to attach to. The lexical
entry for the irregular verb do speciﬁes that the string [do+Tns] is spelled out
as does when the tense afﬁx carries the features [third-person, singular-number,
present-tense].
In this section, we have argued that a ﬁnite T always contains a tense afﬁx.
In clauses containing an auxiliary, the auxiliary is directly merged with the tense
afﬁx to form an auxiliary+afﬁx structure; in auxiliariless clauses, the tense afﬁx is
lowered onto the main verb by an Afﬁx Hopping operation in the PF component,
so forming a verb+afﬁx structure. However, in order to avoid our exposition
becoming too abstract, we will generally show auxiliaries and verbs in their
orthographic form – as indeed we did in (40) above, where the relevant form of
the word have was represented as has rather than as [have+Afﬁx3SgPr].
4.5
Null T in bare inﬁnitive clauses
In the previous section, we argued that auxiliariless ﬁnite clauses are
TP constituents headed by an abstract T containing a tense afﬁx. Given that clauses
containing a ﬁnite auxiliary are also TPs, a plausible conclusion to draw is that
all ﬁnite clauses are TPs. Since to inﬁnitive clauses are also TPs (with to serving
as a non-ﬁnite tense particle) we can generalise still further and say that all ﬁnite
and inﬁnitival clauses are TPs. This in turn has implications for how we analyse
bare (i.e. to-less) inﬁnitive complement clauses such as those bracketed below
(where the italicised verb is inﬁnitival in form):
(41) (a)
I have never known [Tom criticise anyone]
(b)
A reporter saw [Senator Sleaze leave Benny’s Bunny Bar]
(c)
You mustn’t let [the pressure get to you]
If (as we are suggesting) all ﬁnite and inﬁnitival clauses are indeed TPs, bare
inﬁnitive clauses like those bracketed in (41) will be TPs headed by a null T con-
stituent. Since the relevant null T constituent resembles inﬁnitival to in requiring
the (italicised) verb in the bracketed complement clause to be in the inﬁnitive
form, we can take it to be a null counterpart of inﬁnitival to (below symbolised
as to). This in turn will mean that the bracketed inﬁnitive clause in (41a) has the
structure (42) below:

122
4 null constituents
(42)
TP
N
Tom
T'
T
to
VP
V
criticise
PRN
anyone
We could then say that verbs like know, see and let (as used in (41) above) take
an inﬁnitival TP complement headed by an inﬁnitive particle with a null spellout,
whereas verbs like expect, judge, report, believe etc. take a TP complement headed
by an inﬁnitive particle which is overtly spelled out as to in structures like those
below:
(43) (a)
I expect [him to win]
(b)
I judged [him to be lying]
(c)
They reported [him to be missing]
(d)
I believe [him to be innocent]
This means that all inﬁnitive clauses are TPs headed by an inﬁnitival T which
is overtly spelled out as to in inﬁnitive clauses like those bracketed in (43), but
which has a null spellout in inﬁnitive clauses like those bracketed in (41).
From a historical perspective, the null inﬁnitive particle analysis is far from
implausible since many bare inﬁnitive clauses in present-day English had to
inﬁnitive counterparts in earlier varieties of English – as is illustrated by the
following Shakespearean examples:
(44) (a)
I saw [her coral lips to move] (Lucentio, The Taming of the Shrew, I.i)
(b)
My lord your son made [me to think of this] (Helena, All’s Well That Ends Well, I.iii)
(c)
What would you have [me to do]? (Lafeu, All’s Well That Ends Well, V.ii)
(d)
I had rather hear [you to solicit that] (Olivia, All’s Well That Ends Well, III.i)
Moreover, some bare inﬁnitive clauses have to inﬁnitive counterparts in present-
day English:
(45) (a)
I’ve never known [Tom (to) criticise anyone]
(b)
Tom has never been known [to criticise anyone]
(46) (a)
A reporter saw [Senator Sleaze leave Benny’s Bunny Bar]
(b)
Senator Sleaze was seen [to leave Benny’s Bunny Bar]
The inﬁnitive particle which heads the bracketed inﬁnitival TP in sentences like
(45) and (46) must be overtly spelled out as to when the relevant TP is used as the
complement of a passive participle like known in (45b) or seen in (46b), but can
have a null spellout when the relevant TP is the complement of an active transitive
verb like the perfect participle known in (45a) or the past-tense form saw in
(46a) – a key difference being that a null spellout for the inﬁnitive particle is

4.5 Null T in bare inﬁnitive clauses
123
optional in structures like (45a) but obligatory in structures like (46a). Although
data like (44)–(46) are suggestive rather than conclusive, they make it plausible to
suppose that bare inﬁnitive clauses are TPs headed by a null variant of inﬁnitival
to.
Additional support for the null inﬁnitive particle analysis of bare inﬁni-
tive clauses comes from cliticisation facts in relation to sentences such as the
following:
(47) (a)
I can’t let [you have my password]
(b)
∗I can’t let [you’ve my password]
If we suppose that the bracketed inﬁnitive complement in (47b) is a TP headed
by a null variant of inﬁnitival to as in:
(48)
I can’t let [TP you [T to] have my password]
we can account for the fact that have cannot cliticise onto you by positing that
the presence of the null inﬁnitive particle to intervening between you and have
blocks cliticisation of have onto you.
A further argument leading to the same conclusion comes from structures
like:
(49) (a)
Let [there be peace]
(b)
I’ve never known [there be complaints about syntax]
It has been argued by Saﬁr (1993) that the pronoun there (in this use as an expletive
pronoun)isrestrictedtooccurringinthespeciﬁer/subjectpositionwithinTP.Such
a restriction would account for contrasts such as:
(50) (a)
I consider [there to be an economic crisis]
(b)
∗I consider [there an economic crisis]
since the ﬁrst bracketed complement is a TP headed by inﬁnitival to, and the
second is a type of verbless clause sometimes referred to as a small clause which
appears not to be headed by T (since it contains no auxiliary or inﬁnitival to,
and no VP). If expletive there can only occur in spec-TP, it follows that the
bracketed inﬁnitive complement clauses in (49) must be TPs headed by a null
inﬁnitival T.
Our discussion here leads us to the wider conclusion that both to inﬁnitive
clauses and bare (to-less) inﬁnitive clauses are TP constituents headed by an
inﬁnitive particle which has the overt spellout to in most types of inﬁnitive clause,
but has a null spellout in bare inﬁnitive clauses. Given that we earlier argued that
all ﬁnite clauses contain a TP projection (headed by a T which contains a tense
afﬁx, and may or may not also contain an auxiliary), the overall conclusion which
we reach is that all ﬁnite and inﬁnitival clauses contain a TP, and that T is overt in
clauses containing a ﬁnite auxiliary or inﬁnitival to, but is null elsewhere (because
to in bare inﬁnitive clauses has a null spellout, and the Tns afﬁx in auxiliariless

124
4 null constituents
ﬁnite clauses is lowered onto the main verb in the PF component). One advantage
of this analysis is that it enables us to attain a uniform characterisation of the
syntax of (ﬁnite and inﬁnitival) clauses as TP structures headed by a T with a V
or VP complement. (For alternative analyses of the types of structure discussed
in this section, see Felser 1999a,b and Basilico 2003.)
4.6
Null C in ﬁnite clauses
The overall conclusion to be drawn from our discussion in §4.3–§4.5
is that all ﬁnite and inﬁnitive clauses contain an overt or null T constituent which
projects into TP (with the subject of the clause occupying the speciﬁer position
within TP). However, given that clauses can be introduced by complementisers
such as if/that/for, a natural question to ask is whether apparently complementiser-
less clauses can likewise be argued to be CPs headed by a null complementiser.
In this connection, consider the following:
(51) (a)
We didn’t know [if he had resigned]
(b)
We didn’t know [that he had resigned]
(c)
We didn’t know [he had resigned]
The bracketed complement clause is interpreted as interrogative in force in (51a)
and declarative in force in (51b), and it is plausible to suppose that the force of the
clause is determined by force features carried by the italicised complementiser
introducing the clause: in other words, the bracketed clause is interrogative in
force in (51a) because it is introduced by the interrogative complementiser if,
and is declarative in force in (51b) because it is introduced by the declarative
complementiser that.
But now consider the bare (i.e. seemingly complementiserless) clause in (51c):
this can only be interpreted as declarative in force (not as interrogative), so that
(51c) is synonymous with (51b) and not with (51a). Why should this be? One
answer is to suppose that the bracketed bare clause in (51c) is a CP headed by a
null variant of the declarative complementiser that (below symbolised as that),
and that the bracketed complement clauses in (51a–c) have the structure (52)
below:
(52)
CP
C
if/that/that
TP
PRN
he
T'
T
had
V
resigned

4.6 Null C in ﬁnite clauses
125
Given the analysis in (52), we could then say that the force of each of the bracketed
complement clauses in (51) is determined by the force features carried by the
head C of the overall CP; in (51a) the clause is a CP headed by the interrogative
complementiser if and so is interrogative in force; in (51b) it is a CP headed by
the declarative complementiser that and so is declarative in force; and in (51c) it
is a CP headed by a null variant of the declarative complementiser that and so is
likewise declarative in force. More generally, the null complementiser analysis
would enable us to arrive at a uniform characterisation of all ﬁnite clauses as CPs
in which the force of a clause is indicated by force features carried by an (overt
or null) complementiser introducing the clause.
Empirical evidence in support of the null complementiser analysis of bare
complement clauses like that bracketed in (51c) comes from coordination facts
in relation to sentences such as:
(53)
We didn’t know [he had resigned] or [that he had been accused of corruption]
In (53), the italicised bare clause has been coordinated with a bold-printed clause
which is clearly a CP since it is introduced by the overt complementiser that. If
we make the traditional assumption that only constituents of the same type can
be coordinated, it follows that the italicised clause he had resigned in (53) must
be a CP headed by a null counterpart of that because it has been coordinated
with a bold-printed clause headed by the overt complementiser that – as shown
in simpliﬁed form in (54) below:
(54)
We didn’t know [that he had resigned] or [that he had been accused of corruption]
What such an analysis implies is that the complementiser that can optionally
be given a null phonetic spellout by having its phonetic features deleted in
the PF component under certain circumstances: such an analysis dates back in
spirit more than four decades (see e.g. Stockwell, Schachter and Partee 1973,
p. 599).
There are a number of conditions governing that-deletion. Lexical factors seem
to play a part here, in that just as only some predicates which select an inﬁnitival
TP complement allow the inﬁnitive particle to have a null spellout (as we saw in
the previous section), so too only some predicates which select a that-clause com-
plement allow that to have a null spellout. Hornstein (2000) suggests that passive
participles and adjectives resist that-deletion, but the real situation seems rather
more complex. For example, the adjective clear readily allows that-deletion, but
the adjective undeniable does not:
(55) (a)
It is clear [that he was framed]
(b)
It is clear [he was framed]
(56) (a)
It is undeniable [that he was framed]
(b)
?∗It is undeniable [he was framed]

126
4 null constituents
(Irrelevantly, (56b) is grammatical if taken to be two separate sentences –
e.g. It is undeniable. He was framed.) There are also structural constraints on
that-deletion. As Hawkins (2001, p. 13) notes, there is a strong adjacency effect
insofar as that can generally only be deleted when it is asymmetrically c-
commandedbyandimmediatelyadjacenttotherelevant(bold-printed)predicate–
as can be seen by comparing the examples in (55) above with those in (57) and (58)
below:
(57) (a)
It is clear to everyone [that he was framed]
(b)
??It is clear to everyone [he was framed]
(58) (a)
[That he was framed] is clear to everyone
(b)
∗[He was framed] is clear to everyone
In (57), the adjectival predicate clear asymmetrically c-commands but is not
immediately adjacent to that (the two being separated by the intervening prepo-
sitional phrase to everyone), and so that cannot be given a null spellout. In
(58), that is neither c-commanded by nor immediately adjacent to clear, so
that once again that cannot be given a null spellout. The adjacency require-
ment might suggest that complementiser deletion involves cliticisation of the
null complementiser onto the head immediately above it – but precisely how,
when and why complementisers receive a null spellout remains shrouded in
mystery.
So far in this section, we have argued that seemingly complementiserless ﬁnite
declarative complement clauses are introduced by a null C constituent (here ana-
lysed as a null counterpart of the complementiser that). However, the null C ana-
lysis can be extended from ﬁnite embedded clauses to main (= root = principal
= independent) clauses like those produced by speakers A and B in (59) below:
(59)
speaker a: I am feeling thirsty
speaker b: Do you feel like a Coke?
The sentence produced by speaker A is declarative in force (by virtue of being
a statement). If force is marked by a force feature carried by the head C of CP,
this suggests that such declarative main clauses are CPs headed by a null comple-
mentiser carrying a declarative force feature. However, it seems unlikely that the
null complementiser introducing declarative main clauses is a null counterpart
of that, since that in English is only used to introduce embedded clauses, not
main clauses. Let’s therefore suppose that declarative main clauses in English are
introduced by an inherently null complementiser (below symbolised as ø), and
hence that the sentence produced by speaker A in (59) has the structure shown in
(60) below:

4.6 Null C in ﬁnite clauses
127
(60)
CP
C
ø
TP
PRN
I
T'
T
am
VP
V
feeling
A
thirsty
Under the CP analysis of main clauses in (60), the declarative force of the overall
sentence is attributed to the fact that the sentence is a CP headed by a null
complementiser ø which carries a declarative force feature which we can represent
as [Dec-Force]. (The purists among you may object that it’s not appropriate to
call a null declarative particle introducing a main clause a complementiser when
it doesn’t introduce a complement clause: however, in keeping with work over the
past four decades, we’ll use the term complementiser/C in a more general sense
here, to designate a category of word which can introduce both complement
clauses and other clauses, and which serves to mark properties such as force and
ﬁniteness.)
From a cross-linguistic perspective, an analysis such as (60) which posits that
main clauses are CPs headed by a force-marking complementiser is by no means
implausible in that we ﬁnd languages like Arabic in which both declarative and
interrogative main clauses can be introduced by an overt complementiser, as the
examples below illustrate (adapted from Ross 1970, p. 245):
(61) (a)
?inna lwalada taraka lbayta
That the.boy left
the.house
‘The boy left the house’ (declarative)
(b)
Hal taraka lwaladu lbayta?
If
left
the.boy the.house
‘Did the boy leave the house?’ (interrogative)
Moreover (as we will see in more detail in §5.2), there is some evidence from
sentenceslike(62)belowthatinvertedauxiliariesinmain-clauseyes–noquestions
occupy the head C position of CP in English:
(62)
speaker a: What were you going to ask me?
speaker b: (a) If you feel like a Coke
(b) Do you feel like a Coke?
(c) ∗If do you feel like a Coke?
The fact that the inverted auxiliary do in (62b) occupies the same pre-subject
position (in front of the bold-printed subject you) as the complementiser if in
(62a), and the fact that if and do are mutually exclusive (as we see from the fact

128
4 null constituents
that structures like (62c) are ungrammatical) suggests that inverted auxiliaries
(like complementisers) occupy the head C position of CP. This in turn means that
main-clause questions are CPs headed by a C which is interrogative in force by
virtue of containing an interrogative force feature which can be represented as
[Int-Force].
Interestingly, an interrogative main clause can be coordinated with a declarative
main clause, as we see from sentences like (63) below:
(63)
[I am feeling thirsty], but [should I save my last Coke till later]?
In (63) we have two (bracketed) main clauses joined together by the coordinating
conjunction but. The second (italicised) conjunct should I save my last Coke till
later? is an interrogative CP containing an inverted auxiliary in the head C position
of CP. Given the traditional assumption that only constituents which belong to the
same category can be coordinated, it follows that the ﬁrst conjunct I am feeling
thirsty must also be a CP; and since it contains no overt complementiser, it must
be headed by a null complementiser – precisely as assumed in (60) above.
The more general conclusion which our discussion in this section leads us to is
that all ﬁnite clauses have the status of CP constituents which are introduced by
a complementiser. Finite complement clauses are CPs headed either by an overt
complementiser like that or if or by a null complementiser (e.g. a null variant
of that in the case of declarative complement clauses). Finite main clauses are
likewise CPs headed by a C which contains an inverted auxiliary if the clause is
interrogative, and an inherently null complementiser otherwise.
4.7
Null C in non-ﬁnite clauses
The overall conclusion to be drawn from our discussion in §4.6 is that
all ﬁnite clauses (whether main clauses or complement clauses) are CPs headed
by an (overt or null) complementiser which marks the force of the clause. But
what about non-ﬁnite clauses? It seems clear that for-to inﬁnitive clauses such as
that bracketed in (64) below are CPs since they are introduced by the inﬁnitival
complementiser for:
(64)
I will arrange [for them to see a specialist]
But what about the type of (bracketed) inﬁnitive complement clause found after
verbs like want in sentences such as (65) below?
(65)
She wanted [him to apologise]
At ﬁrst sight, it might seem as if the bracketed complement clause in sentences
like (65) can’t be a CP, since it isn’t introduced by the inﬁnitival complementiser
for. However, it is interesting to note that the complement of want is indeed
introduced by for when the inﬁnitive complement is separated from the verb want

4.7 Null C in non-ﬁnite clauses
129
in some way – e.g. when there is an intervening adverbial expression like more
than anything as in (66a) below, or when the complement of want is in focus
position in a pseudo-cleft sentence as in (66b):
(66) (a)
She wanted more than anything for him to apologise
(b)
What she really wanted was for him to apologise
(Pseudo-cleft sentences are sentences such as ‘What John bought was a car’,
where the italicised expression is said to be focused and to occupy focus position
within the sentence.) This makes it plausible to suggest that the complement
of want in structures like (65) is a CP headed by a null variant of for (below
symbolised as for), so that (65) has the skeletal structure (67) below (simpliﬁed
by showing only those parts of the structure immediately relevant to the discussion
at hand):
(67)
She wanted [CP [C for] [TP him [T to] apologise]]
We can then say that the inﬁnitive subject him is assigned accusative case by
the complementiser for in structures like (67) in exactly the same way as the
accusative subject them is assigned accusative case by the complementiser for
in the bracketed complement clause in (64). (How case-marking works will be
discussed in §4.9.) One way of accounting for why the complementiser isn’t
overtly spelled out as for in structures like (67) is to suppose that it is given a
null spellout (and thereby has its phonetic features deleted) when introducing the
complement of a verb like want: we can accordingly refer to verbs like want as
for-deletion verbs. For speakers of varieties of English such as mine, for-deletion
is obligatory when the for-clause immediately follows a verb like want, but cannot
apply when the for-clause is separated from want in some way – as the examples
below illustrate:
(68) (a)
∗More than anything, she wanted for him to apologise
(b)
More than anything, she wanted him to apologise
(c)
She wanted more than anything for him to apologise
(d)
∗She wanted more than anything him to apologise
(69) (a)
What she wanted was for him to apologise
(b)
∗What she wanted was him to apologise
It would seem, therefore, that for-deletion is subject to much the same strict
adjacency requirement as that-deletion (discussed earlier in §4.6). Since have-
cliticisation is subject to much the same conditions, it may be that for-deletion
somehow involves the complementiser cliticising to the verb want and thereby
being given a null spellout (in much the same way as in African American
English/AAE sentences like (25) He gonna be there, I know he is, the form
is has a null spellout only in contexts where in Standard English/SE it would
cliticise to a host, so that SE He’s gonna corresponds to AAE He gonna).

130
4 null constituents
Interestingly, not all for-deletion verbs behave exactly like want: for example,
in my variety of English the verb prefer optionally (rather than obligatorily) allows
deletion of for when it immediately follows prefer – cf.:
(70) (a)
We would very much prefer for you to be there
(b)
We would very much prefer you to be there
The precise conditions on when for can or cannot be deleted are unclear: there
are complex lexical factors at work here (in that e.g. words like want and prefer
may behave differently in a particular variety of English) and also complex socio-
linguistic factors (in that there is considerable dialectal variation with respect to
the use of for in inﬁnitive complement clauses).
Having looked at for-deletion verbs which select an inﬁnitival complement
with an accusative subject, let’s now consider the syntax of control inﬁnitive
clauses with a null PRO subject like that bracketed in (71) below:
(71)
I will arrange [PRO to see a specialist]
What we shall argue here is that control clauses which have a null PRO subject
are introduced by a null inﬁnitival complementiser. However, the null comple-
mentiser introducing control clauses differs from the null complementiser found
in structures like want/prefer someone to do something in that it never surfaces
as an overt form like for, and hence is inherently null. There is, however, par-
allelism between the structure of a for inﬁnitive clause like that bracketed in
(64) above, and that of a control inﬁnitive clause like that bracketed in (71), in
that they are both CPs and have a parallel internal structure, as shown in (72a,b)
below (simpliﬁed by not showing the internal structure of the verb phrase see a
specialist):
(72)
(a)
(b)
CP
C
for
TP
C
ø
TP
PRN
them
T'
PRN
PRO
T'
T
to
VP
see a specialist
T
to
VP
see a specialist
CP
The two types of clause thus have essentially the same CP+TP+VP structure, and
differ only in that a for inﬁnitive clause like (72a) has an overt for complementiser
and an overt accusative subject like them, whereas a control inﬁnitive clause like
(72b) has a null ø complementiser and a null PRO subject.
Some evidence in support of claiming that a control clause with a null PRO
subject is introduced by a null complementiser comes from coordination facts in
relation to sentences such as the following:
(73)
I will arrange [to see a specialist] and [for my wife to see one at the same time]

4.8 Defective clauses
131
The fact that the italicised control inﬁnitive can be conjoined with the bold-printed
CP headed by for suggests that control inﬁnitives must be CPs (if only the same
types of constituent can be conjoined).
Further evidence in support of the CP status of control inﬁnitives comes from
the fact that they can be focused in pseudo-cleft sentences. In this connection,
consider the contrast below:
(74) (a)
What I’ll try and arrange is [for you to see a specialist]
(b)
∗What I’ll try and arrange for is [you to see a specialist]
(c)
What I’ll try and arrange is [PRO to see a specialist]
The grammaticality of (74a) suggests that a CP like for you to see a specialist
can occupy focus position in a pseudo-cleft sentence, whereas conversely the
ungrammaticality of (74b) suggests that a TP like you to see a specialist cannot.
If CP can be focused in pseudo-clefts but TP cannot, then the fact that a control
inﬁnitive like PRO to see a specialist can be focused in a pseudo-cleft like (74c)
suggests that it must have the same CP status as (74a) – precisely as the analysis
in (74b) above claims.
Overall, the conclusion which our analysis in this section leads us to is that
inﬁnitive complements containing the complementiser for (or its null counterpart
for) are CPs, and so are control inﬁnitives (which contain a null complementiser
ø as well as a null PRO subject).
4.8
Defective clauses
In §4.6, we argued that all ﬁnite clauses are CPs, and in §4.7 we went
on to argue that for inﬁnitives with accusative subjects and control inﬁnitives with
null PRO subjects are likewise CPs. These two assumptions lead us to the more
general conclusion that:
(75)
All canonical (i.e. ‘normal’) clauses are CPs
And indeed this is an assumption made by Chomsky in recent work. How-
ever, there is one particular type of clause which is exceptional in that it
lacks the CP layer found in canonical clauses – namely inﬁnitival complement
clauses like those bracketed in (76) below which have (italicised) accusative
subjects:
(76) (a)
They believe [him to be innocent]
(b)
We didn’t intend [you to get hurt]
Complement clauses like those bracketed in (76) are exceptional in that their sub-
jects are assigned accusative case by the transitive verb (believe/intend) immedi-
ately preceding them: what’s exceptional about this is that the verb is in a different
clause from the subject which it assigns accusative case to. For this reason, such
clauses are known as exceptional case-marking clauses (or ECM clauses); and

132
4 null constituents
verbs (like believe) when used with an ECM clause as their complement are
known as ECM verbs.
ECM complement clauses seem to be TPs which lack the CP layer found
in canonical clauses, and for this reason Chomsky (1999) terms them defective
clauses. One reason for thinking that the bracketed ECM clauses in sentences like
(76) are not full CPs is that they cannot readily be coordinated with for-inﬁnitives,
as we see from the ungrammaticality of (77) below:
(77)
∗We didn’t intend [you to hurt him] or [for him to hurt you]
Although (for speakers like me) the verb intend can take either a bare ECM
inﬁnitive complement or a for inﬁnitive complement, the fact that the two cannot
be conjoined suggests that the bare ECM inﬁnitive clauses have the status of TPs
while for-to inﬁnitive clauses have the status of CPs. By contrast, coordination is
indeed possible in sentences like:
(78)
We didn’t intend [you to hurt him] or [him to hurt you]
and this is because both bracketed clauses in (78) are inﬁnitival TPs.
Further evidence that ECM inﬁnitive clauses like those bracketed in (76) are
TPs rather than CPs comes from the fact that they cannot occur in focus posi-
tion in pseudo-clefts, as we see from the ungrammaticality of the sentences
below:
(79) (a)
∗What they believe is [him to be innocent]
(b)
∗What we hadn’t intended was [you to get hurt]
If ECM clauses are TPs, this follows from the restriction noted in (75) that only
CPs (not TPs) can occur in focus position in a pseudo-cleft sentence. Moreover,
a further property of sentences like (76) which would be difﬁcult to account for if
the bracketed complement clause were a CP is the fact that its (italicised) subject
can be passivised and thereby made into the subject of the main clause, as in (80)
below:
(80) (a)
He is believed to be innocent
(b)
You weren’t intended to get hurt
This is because it is a property of the subject of an inﬁnitival CP complement
clause like that bracketed in (81a) below that its subject cannot be passivised –
as we see from the ungrammaticality of (81b):
(81) (a)
We didn’t intend [for you to get hurt]
(b)
∗You weren’t intended [for to get hurt]
Likewise, the subject of the inﬁnitival CP complement of a for-deletion verb like
want cannot be passivised either:
(82) (a)
She wanted [John to apologise]
(b)
∗John was wanted [to apologise]

4.8 Defective clauses
133
– and indeed this is precisely what we expect if the subjects of CPs cannot
passivise,andifthebracketedcomplementclausesin(82)areCPsheadedbyanull
counterpart of for, as claimed in §4.7. However, the fact that the passive sentences
in (80) are grammatical suggests that the bracketed complement clauses in (76)
are TPs rather than CPs (since the subject of an inﬁnitival TP can be passivised,
but not the subject of an inﬁnitival CP). Hence, complement clauses like those
bracketed in (76) above are defective clauses which have no CP layer, and (76a)
They believe him to be innocent accordingly has the structure (83) below:
(83)
CP
C
ø
TP
PRN
They
T'
T
Tns
VP
V
believe
TP
PRN
him
T'
T
to
VP
V
be
A
innocent
The particular aspect of the analysis in (83) most relevant to our discussion in this
section is the claim that the complement clause him to be innocent is an inﬁnitival
TP headed by to, and its subject him is assigned accusative case by the transitive
verb believe: how this happens, we shall look at in the next section.
We can extend the analysis of ECM predicates like believe proposed in this sec-
tiontoverbslikethosediscussedin§4.5whichselectabareinﬁnitivecomplement.
On this view, a sentence like I have never known him be rude to anyone would be
analysed as containing a transitive perfect participle known which selects a TP
complement headed by a null counterpart of inﬁnitival to – as shown in skeletal
form in (84) below:
(84)
I have never known [TP him [T to] be rude to anyone]
Since the subject of a TP complement can passivise, the analysis in (84) predicts
that the subject of the bracketed inﬁnitive complement in (84) can passivise, and
this is indeed the case as we see from examples like (85) below:
(85)
He has never been known to be rude to anyone
Because inﬁnitival to can only have a null spellout when the TP complement
it heads is the complement of an active transitive verb-form like the perfect

134
4 null constituents
participle known in (84) and not when the relevant TP is the complement of
a passive participle like known in (85), it follows that inﬁnitival to must be given
an overt spellout in sentences like (85).
Under the analysis proposed here, verbs which take a bare inﬁnitive comple-
ment with an accusative subject are analysed as ECM predicates which select a TP
complement headed by an inﬁnitival T which has an overt spellout as to in passive
structures like (85) and a null spellout in active structures such as (84). However,
one predicate which is problematic to classify in such terms is let, since it allows a
bare inﬁnitive complement in active structures like (86a) below but doesn’t allow
the subject of the inﬁnitive to passivise, as we see from the ungrammaticality of
sentences like (86b):
(86) (a)
You shouldn’t let [him upset you]
(b)
∗He shouldn’t be let [(to) upset you]
We can’t describe the relevant facts by saying that let is a defective verb which
has no passive participle form, since let is used as a passive participle in sentences
like The prisoners were let out of jail. An alternative analysis is to suppose that
whereas typical ECM predicates select an inﬁnitival TP complement in both
active and passive uses, let is irregular in that it only selects an inﬁnitival TP
complement in active uses, not when used as a passive participle. Similar lexical
idiosyncrasies are found with a number of other verbs: for example, know only
allows a bare inﬁnitival complement with an accusative subject when used as a
perfect participle in structures like (84) above. (An alternative way of accounting
for the impossibility of passivisation in sentences like (86b) which we won’t adopt
here is to take let to be a verb selecting a CP complement headed by an inherently
null complementiser which in turn selects an inﬁnitival TP complement headed
by a null counterpart of inﬁnitival to: the ungrammaticality of (86b) then follows
from the impossibility of passivising the subject of a CP complement.)
4.9
Case properties of subjects
A question which we haven’t addressed so far is how subjects are case-
marked. In this connection, consider how the italicised subject of the bracketed
inﬁnitive complement clause in (87) below is assigned accusative case:
(87)
She must be keen [for him to meet them]
Since for is a transitive complementiser, it seems plausible to suppose that the
inﬁnitive subject him is assigned accusative case by the transitive complementiser
for – but how? We’ve already seen that the relation c-command plays a central
role in our characterisation of a wide range of disparate phenomena, including the
binding of anaphors, morphological operations like Afﬁx Hopping, phonological
operations like have-cliticisation, and so on. Let’s therefore explore the possibility

4.9 Case properties of subjects
135
that c-command is also central to case assignment. More particularly, let’s suppose
that:
(88)
A transitive head assigns accusative case to a noun or pronoun expression
which it c-commands
In addition, let’s follow Pesetsky (1995) in positing the following UG principle
governing the application of grammatical (and other kinds of linguistic) opera-
tions:
(89)
Earliness Principle
Operations apply as early in a derivation as possible
In the light of (88) and (89), let’s look at the derivation of the bracketed com-
plement clause in (87). The ﬁrst step is for the verb meet to be merged with its
pronoun complement them to form the VP shown in (90) below:
(90)
VP
V
meet
PRN
them
Meet is a transitive verb which c-commands the pronoun them. Since (88) speciﬁes
that a transitive head assigns accusative case to a pronoun which it c-commands,
and since the Earliness Principle speciﬁes that operations like case assignment
must apply as early as possible in a derivation, it follows that the pronoun them will
be assigned accusative case by the transitive verb meet at the stage of derivation
shown in (90).
The derivation then continues by merging the inﬁnitive particle to with the VP
in (90), so forming the T-bar to meet them. The resulting T-bar is merged with its
subject him to form the TP him to meet them. This TP in turn is merged with the
complementiser for to form the CP shown in (91) below:
(91)
CP
C
for
TP
PRN
him
T'
T
to
VP
V
meet
PRN
them
For is a transitive complementiser and c-commands the inﬁnitive subject him.
Since (88) speciﬁes that a transitive head assigns accusative case to a pronoun
which it c-commands, and since the Earliness Principle speciﬁes that operations
like case assignment must apply as early as possible in a derivation, it follows that

136
4 null constituents
the pronoun him will be assigned accusative case by the transitive complementiser
for at the stage of derivation shown in (91). This account of the case-marking of
inﬁnitive subjects can be extended from accusative subjects of for inﬁnitives in
structures like (91) to accusative subjects of ECM inﬁnitives in structures like (83)
They believe [him to be innocent], since the transitive verb believe c-commands
the inﬁnitive subject him in (83). (As we shall see in chapter 8, a tacit assumption
underlying the case assignment analysis is that noun and pronoun expressions
enter the derivation carrying a case feature which is initially unvalued, and which
is then valued as nominative, accusative or genitive by a c-commanding head of
an appropriate kind.)
Having looked at how accusative subjects are case-marked, let’s now turn to
look at the case-marking of nominative subjects. In this connection, consider the
case-marking of the italicised subjects in (92) below:
(92)
He may suspect [that she is lying]
Consider ﬁrst how the complement clause subject she is assigned case. The brack-
eted complement clause in (92) has the structure (93) below:
(93)
CP
C
that
TP
PRN
she
T'
T
is
V
lying
If we are to develop a unitary theory of case-marking, it seems plausible to suppose
that nominative subjects (just like accusative subjects) are assigned case under
c-command by an appropriate kind of head. Since the ﬁnite complementiser that
in (93) c-commands the subject she, let’s suppose that she is assigned nominative
case by the complementiser that (in much the same way as the inﬁnitive subject
him in (91) is assigned accusative case by the transitive complementiser for).
More speciﬁcally, let’s assume that
(94)
A ﬁnite complementiser assigns nominative case to a noun or pronoun
expression which it c-commands
In (93), the only noun or pronoun expression c-commanded by the ﬁnite com-
plementiser that is the clause subject she, which is therefore assigned nominative
case in accordance with (94).
But how can we account for the fact that the main-clause subject he in (92)
is also assigned nominative case? The answer is that (as we argued in §4.6)
all canonical clauses – including all main clauses – are CPs introduced by a
complementiser, and that if the clause contains no overt complementiser, it is

4.9 Case properties of subjects
137
headed by a null complementiser. This being so, the main clause in (92) will have
the structure (95) below:
(95)
CP
C
ø
TP
PRN
He
T'
T
may
VP
V
suspect
CP
that she is lying
Thus, the overall clause is headed by a null ﬁnite declarative complementiser
[C ø] in much the same way as the Arabic main clauses in (61) are headed by
an overt complementiser, and it is this null ﬁnite complementiser which assigns
nominative case to the subject he in (95) in accordance with (94) above, since the
complementiser ø c-commands the pronoun he. (On the possibility of a ﬁnite C
being a nominative case assigner, see Chomsky 1999, p. 35, fn.17.)
However, an interesting complication arises in relation to the Arabic data in
(61) above. Sentence (61a) is introduced by the transitive ﬁnite complementiser
?inna ‘that’ and the subject lwalada ‘the boy’ is assigned accusative case in
accordance with (88). By contrast, sentence (61b) is introduced by the ﬁnite
complementiser hal ‘if’: this is not transitive and assigns nominative case to the
subject lwaladu (which therefore carries the nominative ending -u rather than the
accusative ending -a). Such considerations suggest that we need to revise (94) by
adding the italicised condition shown in (96) below:
(96)
An intransitive ﬁnite complementiser assigns nominative case to a noun or
pronoun expression which it c-commands
Since none of the English ﬁnite complementisers (e.g. if, that, that and the null
ﬁnite complementiser found in main clauses) are transitive, all ﬁnite clauses in
English will have nominative subjects.
Having looked at accusative and nominative subjects, let’s now turn to consider
the null PRO subjects found in control clauses. If we suppose that it is a deﬁning
characteristic of all pronouns that they carry case, then PRO too must carry case –
and indeed there is some evidence that this is so. Part of the relevant evidence
comes from structures like (97) below which contain a (bold-printed) ﬂoating
quantiﬁer which modiﬁes the (italicised) subject of its clause, but is separated
from (and positioned lower than) the subject:
(97)
They have all gone home
In a language like Icelandic which has a richer morphology than English, ﬂoat-
ing quantiﬁers agree in case with their antecedent (i.e. with the expression

138
4 null constituents
which they modify). In a structure like (98) below (from Sigurðsson 1991,
p. 331) the verb leiðist ‘got bored’ requires a subject with dative (= dat)
case, and hence a ﬂoating quantiﬁer modifying the subject also has dative
case:
(98)
Str´akarnir
leiðist ¨ollum ´ı
sk´ola
the.boys.dat bored all.dat in school
‘The boys all got bored in school’
Interestingly, when the relevant verb is used in a control clause, a ﬂoating quan-
tiﬁer modifying the subject of the control clause has dative case, as the following
example (from Sigurðsson ibid.) shows:
(99)
Str´akarnir
vonast til [að PRO leiðast ekki ¨ollum ´ı sk´ola]
The.boys.nom hoped for [to PRO bore
not all.dat at school]
‘The boys hoped to not all get bored at school’
Why should the ﬂoating quantiﬁer in (99) be dative? It doesn’t carry the same case
as the main-clause subject str´akarnir ‘the boys’, since the latter has nominative
(= nom) case. On the contrary, the ﬂoating quantiﬁer carries the same case as
(and is construed as quantifying) the null PRO subject of its clause, and PRO has
dative case because it is an idiosyncratic property of the relevant verb in Icelandic
that it requires a dative subject. (Icelandic is said to be a language with quirky-
case subjects in that some verbs require dative subjects, others require accusative
subjects and so on. On dative and quirky subjects, see Moore and Perlmutter 2000,
and Sigurðsson 2002.)
In short, the syntax of ﬂoating quantiﬁers in Icelandic makes it clear that PRO
has case properties of its own. But what case does PRO carry in a morphologically
impoverished language like English? Chomsky and Lasnik (1995, pp. 119–20)
suggest that the subject of a control clause carries what they call null case. The
morphological effect of null case is to ensure that a pronoun is unpronounced –
just as the morphological effect of nominative case is to ensure that (e.g.) a third-
person-masculine-singularpronounispronouncedashe.ButhowisPROassigned
null case? If we are to attain a unitary account of case-marking under which a
noun or pronoun expression is case-marked by a head which c-commands it, a
plausible answer is the following:
(100)
A null intransitive non-ﬁnite complementiser assigns null case to a noun or
pronoun expression which it c-commands
It follows from (100) that PRO in a structure like (72b) above will be assigned
null case by the null (non-ﬁnite, intransitive) complementiser which c-commands
PRO.
We can conﬂate the various claims made about case-marking above into (101)
below:

4.9 Case properties of subjects
139
(101)
Case Assignment Conditions
A noun or pronoun expression is assigned case by the closest case-assigner which
c-commands it (in consequence of the Earliness Principle) and is assigned
(i) accusative case if c-commanded by a transitive head (e.g a transitive verb like meet,
or a transitive preposition like with or a transitive complementiser like for or for)
(ii) nominative case if c-commanded by an intransitive ﬁnite complementiser (like that,
that, if or the null declarative main-clause complementiser ø)
(iii) null case if c-commanded by a null intransitive non-ﬁnite complementiser ø
If we assume that PRO is the only exponent of null case in English, it follows
from (101iii) that control inﬁnitive clauses (which are headed by a null-case-
assigning complementiser under the analysis in §4.7) will always require a PRO
subject.
What is particularly interesting about our discussion of case-marking here from
a theoretical point of view is that it provides yet more evidence for the centrality
of the relation c-command in syntax. (See Frank and Vijay-Shanker 2001 for a
technical defense of the primitive nature of c-command.) An important theoretical
question to ask at this juncture is why c-command should be such a fundamental
relation in syntax. From a Minimalist perspective (since the goal of Minimalism
is to utilise only theoretical apparatus which is conceptually necessary), the most
principled answer would be one along the following lines. It is clear that the
operationMerge(whichbuildsphrasesoutofwords,andsentencesoutofphrases)
is conceptually necessary, in that (e.g.) to form a prepositional phrase like to Paris
out of the preposition to and the noun Paris, we need some operation like Merge
which combines the two together. In order to achieve the Minimalist goal of
developing a constrained theory of Universal Grammar/UG which makes use only
of concepts and constructs which are conceptually necessary, we can suppose
that the only kind of syntactic relations which UG permits us to make use of are
those created by the operation Merge. Now, two structural relations created by
the operation Merge are contain(ment) and c-command in that if we merge a
head X with a complement YP to form an XP projection, XP contains X, YP and
all the constituents of YP, and X c-commands YP and all the constituents of YP.
Minimalist considerations therefore lead us to hypothesise that the containment
and c-command relations created by merger are the only primitive relations in
syntax.
Our discussion in this section shows that case-marking phenomena can be
accounted for in a principled fashion within a highly constrained Minimalist
framework which makes use of the c-command relation which is created by
the operation Merge. Note that a number of other grammatical relations which
traditional grammars make use of (e.g. relations like subjecthood and object-
hood) are not relations which can be used within the Minimalist framework. For
example, a typical characterisation of accusative case assignment in traditional
grammar is that a transitive verb or preposition assigns accusative case to its

140
4 null constituents
object. There are two problems with carrying over such a generalisation into the
framework we are using here. The ﬁrst is that Minimalism is a constrained theory
which does not allow us to appeal to the relation objecthood, only to the relations
contain and c-command; the second is that the traditional objecthood account of
accusative case assignment is empirically inadequate, in that it fails to account for
the accusative case-marking of an inﬁnitive subject by a transitive complemen-
tiser in structures like (91), because him is not the object of the complementiser
for but rather the subject of to meet them (and the same holds for accusative
subjects of ECM inﬁnitive structures like (83) above). As our discussion in later
chapters unfolds, it will become clear that there are a number of other syntactic
phenomena which can be given a principled description in terms of the relations
contain and c-command.
4.10
Null determiners
Thus far, we have argued that empty categories play an important
role in the syntax of clauses in that clauses may contain a null subject, a null T
constituent and a null C constituent. We now turn to argue that the same is true of
the syntax of nominals (i.e. noun expressions), and that many bare nominals (i.e.
noun expressions which contain no overt determiner or quantiﬁer) are headed by
a null determiner or null quantiﬁer. The assumption that bare nominals contain
a null determiner/quantiﬁer has a long history – for example, Chomsky (1965,
p. 108) suggests that the noun sincerity in a sentence such as Sincerity may frighten
the boy is modiﬁed by a null determiner. Chomsky’s suggestion was taken up and
extended in later work by Abney (1987), Longobardi (1994, 1996, 2001) and
Bernstein (2001).
In this connection, consider the syntax of the italicised bare nominals in (102)
below:
(102)
Italians love opera
As we see from (103a) below, the French counterpart of the bare nominals in (102)
are DPs headed by the determiner les/l’ (‘the’) – and indeed as (103b) shows, this
type of structure is also possible in English:
(103) (a)
Les Italiens adorent l’op´era
The Italians adore
th’opera
‘Italians love opera’
(b)
The Italians love the opera
This suggests that bare nominals like those italicised in (102) above are DPs
headed by a null determiner, so that the overall sentence in (102) has the structure
(104) below:

4.10 Null determiners
141
(104)
CP
C
ø
TP
DP
T'
D
ø
N
Italians
T
ø
VP
V
love
DP
D
ø
N
opera
Given the analysis in (104), there would be an obvious parallelism between the
syntax of clauses and nominals, in that just as canonical clauses are CPs headed
by an overt or null C constituent, so too canonical nominals are DPs headed by
an overt or null D constituent.
One piece of empirical evidence in support of analysing bare nouns as DPs
comes from sentences like:
(105) (a)
Italians and [the majority of Mediterraneans] love opera
(b)
Italians love [opera] and [the ﬁner things in life]
The fact that the bare nouns Italians and opera can be coordinated with determiner
phrases/DPs like the majority of Mediterraneans/the ﬁner things in life (both
headed by the determiner the) provides us with empirical evidence that bare
nouns must be DPs, if only similar kinds of categories can be coordinated.
If (as we are suggesting here) there are indeed a class of null determiners,
we should expect these to have speciﬁc grammatical, selectional and semantic
properties of their own: and, as we shall see, there is indeed evidence that this is
so. For one thing, the null determiner carries person properties – in particular, it
is a third-person determiner. In this respect, consider sentences such as:
(106) (a)
We linguists take ourselves/∗yourselves/∗themselves too seriously, don’t
we/∗you/∗they?
(b)
You linguists take yourselves/∗ourselves/∗themselves too seriously, don’t
you/∗we/∗they?
(c)
Linguists take themselves/∗ourselves/∗yourselves too seriously, don’t
they/∗we/∗you?
(106a) shows that a ﬁrst-person expression such as we linguists can only bind
(i.e. serve as the antecedent of) a ﬁrst-person reﬂexive like ourselves, and can
only be tagged by a ﬁrst-person pronoun like we. (106b) shows that a second-
person expression like you linguists can only bind a second-person reﬂexive like
yourselves, and can only be tagged by a second-person pronoun like you. (106c)
shows that a bare nominal like linguists can only bind a third-person reﬂexive like
themselves and can only be tagged by a third-person pronoun like they. One way of

142
4 null constituents
accounting for the relevant facts is to suppose that the nominals we linguists/you
linguists/linguists in (106a–c) are DPs with the respective structures shown in
(107a–c):
(107)
(a)
DP
(b)
DP
(c)
DP
D
we
N
linguists
D
you
N
linguists
D
ø
N
linguists
andthatthepersonpropertiesofaDParedeterminedbythepersonfeaturescarried
by its head determiner. If we is a ﬁrst-person determiner, you is a second-person
determiner and ø is a third-person determiner, the grammaticality judgments in
(106a–c) above are precisely as the analysis in (107a–c) would lead us to expect.
In addition to having speciﬁc person properties, the null determiner ø also
has speciﬁc selectional properties – as can be illustrated by the following set of
examples:
(108)(a)
I wrote poems
(b)
I wrote poetry
(c)
∗I wrote poem
If each of the italicised bare nouns in (108) is the complement of a null (quantify-
ing) determiner ø, the relevant examples show that ø can select as its complement
an expression headed by a plural count noun like poems, or by a singular mass
noun like poetry – but not by a singular count noun like poem. The complement-
selection properties of the null determiner ø mirror those of the overt quantiﬁer
enough:
(109)(a)
I’ve read enough poetry
(b)
I’ve read enough poems
(c)
∗I’ve read enough poem
The fact that ø has much the same selectional properties as a typical overt (quan-
tifying) determiner such as enough strengthens the case for positing the existence
of a null determiner ø, and for analysing bare nominals as DPs headed by a null
determiner (or QPs headed by a null quantiﬁer).
Moreover, there is evidence that the null determiner ø has speciﬁc semantic
properties of its own – as we can illustrate in relation to the interpretation of the
italicised nominals in the sentences below:
(110)(a)
Eggs are fattening
(b)
Bacon is fattening
(c)
I had eggs for breakfast
(d)
I had bacon for breakfast
The nouns eggs and bacon in (110a/b) have a generic interpretation, para-
phraseable as ‘eggs/bacon in general’. In (110c,d) eggs and bacon have a partitive
interpretation, paraphraseable as ‘some eggs/bacon’. If we say that the italicised

4.10 Null determiners
143
bare nominals are DPs/determiner phrases headed by a null determiner, as shown
below:
(111)
DP
D
ø
N
eggs/bacon
we can say that the null determiner has the semantic property of being a generic
or partitive quantiﬁer, so that bare nominals are interpreted as generic or partitive
expressions.
The claim that null determiners have speciﬁc semantic properties is an impor-
tant one from a theoretical perspective in the light of the principle suggested by
Chomsky (1995) that all constituents (or at any rate, all heads and maximal pro-
jections) must be interpretable at the semantics interface (i.e. must be able to
be assigned a semantic interpretation by the semantic component of the grammar,
and hence must contribute something to the meaning of the sentence containing
them). This principle holds for null constituents as well as overt constituents,
so that e.g. a seemingly null T constituent contains an abstract afﬁx carrying an
interpretable tense feature, and a null C constituent contains an abstract mor-
pheme carrying an interpretable force feature. If the null D constituent found in
structures like (110) and (111) is interpreted as a (generic or partitive) quantiﬁer,
the null D analysis will satisfy the relevant requirement.
The assumption that bare nominals are headed by a null determiner allows us to
arrive at a unitary characterisation of the syntax of nominals. We can then say that
nominals like the president which are modiﬁed by an overt determiner are DPs,
bare nominals like Italians are DPs headed by a null determiner, and personal
pronouns like they (if analysed as D-pronouns, as in §2.6) are determiners used
without a complement – as shown below:
(112)
(a)
DP
(b)
DP
(c)
D
D
the
N
president
D
ø
N
linguists
they
This means that all nominal and pronominal expressions are D-expressions – i.e.
projections of an (overt or null) D constituent – an assumption widely referred
to as the DP hypothesis. Indeed, the DP hypothesis can be further extended if
we follow Freidin and Vergnaud (2001) in supposing that a pronoun like they
(if used to refer to linguists) in a sentence such as:
(113)
Linguists think they are undervalued
is a DP comprising a head determiner they with a noun complement linguists
which is given a null spellout in the PF component, as shown in (114) below:

144
4 null constituents
(114)
DP
D
they
N
linguists
However, Radford (1993) argued that while a phrasal analysis along the lines
of (114) may be appropriate for some pronouns (e.g. which?), other pronouns
(e.g. who?) seem to be simple heads. This difference of status is reﬂected in
syntactic differences between the two: e.g. who can be modiﬁed by else but which
and overtly phrasal expressions cannot (cf. Who else? ∗Which else? ∗How many
people else?), and who can be positioned immediately in front of a preposition,
but which and phrases cannot (cf. Who to? ∗Which to? ∗How many people to?).
While an analysis like (114) may be appropriate for some types of pronoun in
some languages (see Wiltschko 2002), it does not seem appropriate for English
personal pronouns.
We have argued in this section that canonical nominal expressions are DPs
headed by an (overt or null) determiner. However, there is evidence that this is true
only of nominal expressions used as arguments (i.e. nominals used as the subject
or complement of a predicate), not of non-argument nominals (e.g. nominals
which have a vocative, predicative or exclamative use). More speciﬁcally (as
Longobardi 1994 argues), non-argument nominals such as those italicised in (115)
below can be N-projections lacking a determiner:
(115) (a)
Do all syntacticians suffer from asteriskitis, doctor?
(b)
Dr DoLittle is head of department
(c)
Poor fool! He thought he’d passed the syntax exam
Theitalicisednominalexpressionservesavocativefunction(i.e.isusedtoaddress
someone) in (115a), a predicative function in (115b) (in that the property of
being head of department is predicated of the unfortunate Dr DoLittle), and
an exclamative function in (115c). Each of the italicised nominals in (115) is
headed by a singular count noun (doctor/head/fool): in spite of the fact that such
nouns require an overt determiner when used as arguments, here they function
as non-arguments and are used without any determiner. This suggests that non-
argument nominals can be N-expressions, whereas argument nominals are always
D-expressions.
Chomsky (1999, fn. 10) maintains that only referential nominal arguments
(i.e. nominal arguments which are referring expressions) have the status of true
DPs, not ‘nonspeciﬁcs, quantiﬁed and predicate nominals, etc.’ If so, bare nomi-
nals with a quantiﬁcational interpretation would more appropriately be analysed
as QPs headed by a null quantiﬁer: on this view, the noun eggs in (110c) I had
eggs for breakfast would be a QP headed by a null partitive quantiﬁer (rather than
a DP headed by a null determiner).

4.11 Summary
145
4.11
Summary
In this chapter, we have seen that null constituents (i.e. constituents
which have no overt phonetic form but have speciﬁc grammatical and semantic
properties) play a central role in syntax. We began by looking at null (ﬁnite,
imperative, truncated and non-ﬁnite) subjects in §4.2, arguing in particular that
control inﬁnitive clauses have a null PRO subject which can refer to some
expression within a higher clause, or refer to some entity in the domain of dis-
course, or have arbitrary reference. In §4.3 we showed that elliptical clauses
like that bracketed in He could have helped her or [she have helped him] are
TPs headed by a null (ellipsed) tense auxiliary. In §4.4 we extended this null T
analysis to auxiliariless ﬁnite clauses like He enjoys syntax, arguing that they
contain a TP headed by an abstract tense afﬁx which is lowered onto the main
verb by the morphological operation of Afﬁx Hopping in the PF component. In
§4.5 we argued that bare (to-less) inﬁnitive clauses like that bracketed in I have
never known [him tell a lie] are TPs headed by a null variant of inﬁnitival to. We
concluded that all ﬁnite and inﬁnitive clauses contain a TP headed by an overt
or null T constituent carrying ﬁnite or non-ﬁnite tense. In §4.6, we argued that
all ﬁnite clauses are CPs, and that those which are not introduced by an overt
complementiser are CPs headed by a null complementiser which encodes the
force of the clause (so that a sentence like He enjoys syntax is declarative in
force by virtue of being a CP headed by a null declarative C). In §4.7 we saw
that for inﬁnitives, the inﬁnitive complements of want-class verbs and control
inﬁnitives are also CPs, and went on to posit that all canonical clauses are CPs.
However, in §4.8 we argued that ECM (Exceptional Case-Marking) clauses with
accusative subjects like that bracketed in I believe [him to be innocent] are defec-
tive clauses which have the status of TPs rather than CPs. In §4.9 we examined
case-marking, arguing that a transitive head assigns accusative case to a noun or
pronoun expression which it c-commands, an intransitive ﬁnite complementiser
assigns nominative case to a noun or pronoun expression which it c-commands,
and a null intransitive non-ﬁnite complementiser assigns null case to a pronoun
expression which it c-commands. We also noted that in consequence of Pesetsky’s
Earliness Principle, noun and pronoun expressions are case-marked by the closest
case-assigner which c-commands them. In §4.10, we looked brieﬂy at the syntax
of nominals, arguing that bare nominal arguments (like Italians and opera in Ital-
ians love opera) are DPs headed by a null determiner which has the grammatical
property of being a third-person determiner, the selectional property of requiring
as its complement a nominal headed by a singular mass noun or plural count
noun, and the semantic property that it has a generic or partitive interpretation.
We concluded that canonical nominals (more particularly, nominal arguments)
are D-expressions, comprising either an overt or null D-pronoun (like he or PRO)
used without a complement, or an overt or null determiner (like the or ø) used with
a noun expression as its complement; however, we noted the claims by Chomsky

146
4 null constituents
and Longobardi that only referential nominal arguments are DPs, not quantiﬁed
nominals, vocatives, exclamatives or predicate nominals.
Workbook section
Exercise 4.1
Draw tree diagrams to represent the structure of the following sentences, presenting arguments in
support of your analysis and commenting on any null constituents they contain and the reasons for
positing them. In addition, say how each of the noun or pronoun expressions is case-marked.
1
Students enjoy the classes
2
We have fun
3
Voters know politicians lie
4
John promised to behave himself
5
She sees no need for him to apologise
6
They would prefer students to do exams
7
Economists expect salaries to rise
8
He might like you to talk to her
9
I have known you have a tantrum
10
John wanted to help him
In addition, say why have-cliticisation is or is not permitted in 11b,12b,13b,14B and 15b below:
11a
They have suffered hardship
b
They’ve suffered hardship
12a
The Sioux have suffered hardship
b
∗The Sioux’ve suffered hardship
13a
Sioux have suffered hardship
b
∗Sioux’ve suffered hardship
14
speaker a: How are students coping with your Fantasy Syntax course?
speaker b: ∗Two’ve given up
15a
They may have left
b
∗They may’ve left
Helpful hints
Bear in mind that in the main text we argued that all clauses other than non-ﬁnite clauses used as
the complement of an ECM verb are CPs, and that bare nominal arguments are DP or QP
constituents headed by a null determiner or quantiﬁer. For the purposes of this exercise, assume
the following:
(i)
Have can cliticise onto a word W provided that
– W is a noun or pronoun ending in a vowel or diphthong
– W asymmetrically c-commands have
– there is no intervening constituent c-commanded by W and
c-commanding have
In relation to 3, consider what case politicians has, and how you can use this to determine whether
the complement of know is a TP or a CP. In 4, use Binding Principle A from exercise 3.2 to help
you account for why himself is coreferential to John. In 5, assume that no is a negative quantiﬁer

Workbook section
147
which has a noun phrase complement. In 10, use Binding Principle B from exercise 3.2 to help
you account for why him cannot be coreferential to John. In relation to the (b,B) examples in
11–15, draw trees to represent the structure of the sentences immediately prior to cliticisation, and
then show whether or not the analysis of have-cliticisation given in (i) above predicts that
cliticisation is possible; note that the noun Sioux is pronounced |su:|. Show how the
ungrammaticality of 13b can be used to evaluate the hypothesis that a bare noun like Sioux in 13 is
a DP headed by a null determiner. In addition, say how sentences like 11b can be used to evaluate
the plausibility of analyses (such as that proposed by Freidin and Vergnaud 2001) which take
pronouns like they to be determiners which have a nominal complement whose phonetic features
are given a null spellout in the PF component, so that e.g. if they refers to Sioux, the pronoun they
would be a DP with the structure shown in (ii) below:
(ii)
DP
D
they
N
Sioux
Would it be any more or less plausible to suppose that the (numeral) quantiﬁer two in sentences
like that produced by speaker B in 14 has an N complement containing a null copy of the noun
students? In relation to 15, assume that have left is an AUXP comprising the AUX have and the
V left.
Model answer for sentence 1
Given the arguments in the main text that all ﬁnite clauses contain a TP headed by a T constituent
containing an afﬁx which encodes tense and (person and number) agreement features, the
sentence Students enjoy the classes will contain a TP headed by a tense afﬁx which carries the
features [third-person, plural-number, present-tense], which we can abbreviate to Tns3PlPr.
Likewise, given the arguments in the main text that ordinary ﬁnite clauses are CPs headed by an
(overt or null) complementiser which marks the force of the clause, the overall sentence will be a
CP headed by a null ﬁnite declarative complementiser [C ø]. Finally, in accordance with the DP
hypothesis, both nominal arguments containing an overt determiner (like the classes) and bare
nominal arguments like students will be determiner phrases, differing only in whether they are
headed by the overt third-person determiner the or the null third-person determiner [D ø]. Given
these assumptions, sentence 1 will have the structure below:
(i)
CP
C
ø
TP
DP
T'
D
ø
N
Students
T
Tns3PLPR
VP
V
enjoy
DP
D
the
N
classes

148
4 null constituents
Because there is no auxiliary in T for it to attach to, the Tns afﬁx in T is lowered onto the verb enjoy
by the morphological operation of Afﬁx Hopping in the PF component, forming enjoy+Tns3PlPr
(which is ultimately spelled out as the third-person-plural present-tense form enjoy).
Evidence that the overall clause Students enjoy the classes is a CP headed by a null
complementiser comes from coordination facts in relation to sentences such as:
(ii)
[Students enjoy the classes] but [do they like the lectures]?
In (ii) the declarative clause Students enjoy the classes has been coordinated with the interrogative
clause do they like the lectures? which contains the inverted auxiliary do. If (as claimed in the
main text) inverted auxiliaries occupy the head C position of CP, it follows that the second of the
two coordinate clauses in (ii) must be a CP; and if only constituents of the same type can be
coordinated, it follows that the ﬁrst clause must also be a CP – as in (i) above. Evidence in support
of positing a null present-tense T constituent in (i) comes from the fact that the T-bar ø enjoy the
classes can be coordinated with another T-bar like don’t like the lectures, as we see from (iii)
below:
(iii)
Students enjoy the classes, but don’t like the lectures
Evidence that the bare nominal students is a DP headed by a null third-person determiner [D ø]
comes from the fact that sentence 1 can only be tagged by a third-person pronoun like they:
(iv)
Students enjoy the lectures, don’t they/∗we/∗you?
The null determiner is interpreted as a generic quantiﬁer in (i).
The DP the classes in (i) is assigned accusative case by virtue of being c-commanded by the
transitive verb enjoy (and enjoy is the closest case-assigner c-commanding the classes).
Accordingly, the DP the classes can be substituted by an accusative pronoun, as in:
(v)
Students enjoy them
By contrast, the DP ø students is assigned nominative case by virtue of being c-commanded by
the intransitive ﬁnite complementiser ø (which is the closest – and indeed only – case-assigner
c-commanding the DP ø students). We therefore correctly predict that this DP can be substituted
by a nominative pronoun, as in:
(vi)
They enjoy the classes
Exercise 4.2
Account for the (un)grammaticality of the bracketed inﬁnitive complement clause structures in the
following sentences in standard varieties of English:
1 a
They were planning [to escape]
b
∗They were planning [him to escape]
2 a
We consider [him to be unsuitable]
b
∗It is considered [him to be unsuitable]
3 a
He would like [me to leave]
b
He would like [to leave]
4 a
She seems keen [for them to participate]
b
∗She seems keen [for to participate]

Workbook section
149
5 a
I received a request [to resign]
b
∗I received a request [him to resign]
6 a
It was agreed [to review the policy]
b
∗It was agreed [us to review the policy]
7 a
Congress decided [to ratify the treaty]
b
∗Congress decided [for him to ratify the treaty]
8 a
She expected [to win the nomination]
b
She expected [him/∗he to win the nomination]
9 a
He should let [you have a break]
b
∗He should let [have a break]
10 a
∗He said [her to like oysters]
b
∗He said [to like oysters]
In addition, say how you would analyse structures like (4b) in varieties of English (like Belfast
English) in which they are grammatical and have a meaning roughly paraphraseable as ‘She
seems keen for herself to participate.’ What if for-to can serve as a compound T constituent in
such sentences in the relevant varieties (and likewise in sentences such as I wanted Jimmy for to
come with me, from Henry 1995, p. 85)?
Helpful hints
Note that (1b) is intended to have an interpretation paraphraseable as ‘They were planning for him
to escape’, (9b) to have an interpretation paraphraseable as ‘He should let himself have a break’,
(10a) to have an interpretation paraphraseable as ‘He said she liked oysters’, and (10b) to have an
interpretation paraphraseable as ‘He said he liked oysters’ (where the two occurrences of he refer
to the same individual). Assume that each of the italicised words in the above examples has its
own idiosyncratic selectional properties, and that the selectional properties of any word W are
described by saying: ‘W selects as its complement an expression headed by . . .’ (where in place
of the dots you insert the features characterising the relevant head). So, you might say e.g. that a
verb like arrange can select a complement headed by an inﬁnitival complementiser (either the
transitive inﬁnitival complementiser for or the null intransitive inﬁnitival complementiser ø),
whereas an ECM verb like believe selects a complement headed by the inﬁnitival T to. By
contrast, other verbs (it might turn out) don’t select a particular kind of inﬁnitive complement – or
indeed any kind of inﬁnitive complement. Assume that the seemingly subjectless clauses in 1–10
(whether grammatical or not) have a null PRO subject. Pay attention (i) to the selectional
properties of the italicised words and (ii) to the case properties of the subjects of the bracketed
complement clauses. In the case of the ungrammatical examples, consider whether the
ungrammaticality is attributable to a selectional error (in that the italicised word is used with a
kind of complement which it does not select/allow) or a case error (in that the subject of the
bracketed complement clause has a case which it cannot be assigned in accordance with the case
assignment conditions given in (101) in the main text) – or both.
Model answer for sentences 1a and b
Given the CP analysis of ﬁnite clauses and control clauses in the text, 1a will have the structure (i)
below:

150
4 null constituents
(i)
CP
C
ø
TP
PRN
They
T'
T
were
VP
V
planning
CP
C
ø
TP
PRN
PRO
T'
T
to
V
escape
The null complementiser introducing the CP complement of the verb planning is intransitive and
non-ﬁnite, and accordingly assigns null case to the PRO subject which it c-commands. Support for
the CP analysis of the bracketed complement clause to escape in 1a comes from the fact that (like
other CPs, but unlike TPs) it can serve as the focused constituent in pseudo-cleft sentences like:
(ii)
What they were planning (to do) was to escape
The fact that it is also possible to say:
(iii)
They were planning for him to escape
suggests that plan can also select a complement headed by the transitive inﬁnitival
complementiser for. This leads to the greater generalisation that plan can select a CP complement
headed by an inﬁnitival complementiser (either the transitive inﬁnitival complementiser for or the
null intransitive inﬁnitival complementiser ø). The ungrammaticality of 1b ∗They were planning
him to escape could be attributable to a case error (if the null complementiser heading the
complement clause is intransitive and so assigns null case to the inﬁnitive subject), or to a spellout
error (if the complementiser heading the complement clause is the kind of for complementiser
which can never be given a null spellout – unlike the for introducing an inﬁnitival complement of
a verb like want).

5
Head movement
5.1
Overview
So far, we have examined a range of syntactic structures which are
derived by a series of merger operations. We now go on to look at structures
whose derivation involves not only merger but also a movement operation called
head movement. In this chapter, we focus mainly on two speciﬁc types of head
movement operation, one which affects auxiliaries in present-day English, and
another which affected main verbs in earlier stages of English; we also look brieﬂy
at how head movement can apply to nouns.
5.2
T-to-C movement
In chapters 3 and 4, we saw that complementisers are positioned in
front of subjects in the clauses they introduce. More speciﬁcally, we suggested
that complementisers head a separate projection in clauses which we termed a
complementiser phrase/CP, with the head C position of CP being ﬁlled by
a complementiser like that/for/if. However, complementisers are not the only
kind of word which can precede subjects in clauses. As we saw in our brief
discussion of questions in §4.6, auxiliaries can also precede subjects in yes–no
questions such as Do you feel like a Coke? In this respect, inverted auxiliaries seem
to resemble complementisers – as the following (love-struck, soap-operesque)
dialogue illustrates:
(1)
speaker a: Honey-buns, there’s something I wanted to ask you
speaker b: What, sweetie-pie?
speaker a: If you will marry me
speaker b (pretending not to hear): What d’you say, darlin’?
speaker a: Will you marry me?
What’s the structure of the two bold(-printed) proposals which speaker A makes
in (1)? The answer is straightforward enough in the case of If you will marry
me: it’s a clause introduced by the interrogative complementiser/C if, and so is a
complementiser phrase/CP constituent with the structure (2) below:
151

152
5 head movement
(2)
CP
C
If 
PRN
you  
T' 
T
will 
VP
V
marry
PRN
me
TP
But now consider the structure of the second proposal Will you marry me? What
positionisoccupiedbytheinvertedauxiliarywill?Sincewillappearstooccupythe
same pre-subject position that the complementiser if occupies in (2), a plausible
suggestion to make is that the inverted auxiliary actually occupies the head C
position of CP. If this is so, we’d expect will and if to be mutually exclusive (on
the assumption that we can only insert one word in a given head position like C,
not two words): in other words, if both complementisers and inverted auxiliaries
occupy the head C position of CP, we’d expect to ﬁnd that a question can be
introduced either by a complementiser or by a preposed auxiliary – but not by
the two together. This is indeed the case, as we see from the ungrammaticality of
speaker B’s reply in (3) below:
(3)
speaker a: What d’you want to ask me?
speaker b: ∗If will you marry me
The fact that questions can’t contain both a complementiser and an inverted
auxiliary provides us with empirical evidence that inverted auxiliaries occupy
the same structural position as complementisers – i.e. that both occupy the head
C position of CP.
But how can a ﬁnite auxiliary (which normally occupies the head T position of
TP) come to be positioned in the head C position of CP? The conventional answer
is that auxiliaries in questions move out of their normal post-subject position into
pre-subject position by a movement operation which in chapter 1 we referred to as
auxiliary inversion. Given our assumption that an inverted auxiliary occupies the
head C position of CP, this means that the auxiliary moves from the head T posi-
tion in TP into the head C position in CP, as shown by the arrow in (4) below:
(4)
CP
C 
TP
PRN
you
T' 
T
will
VP 
V
marry
PRN
me
Hence, auxiliary inversion in questions involves T-to-C movement.

5.2 T-to-C movement
153
An important question which is begged by the T-to-C movement analysis is why
auxiliaries should move from T to C in questions. Using a metaphor adopted by
Chomsky(1995),wecansaythatCisastrongheadinquestionsinEnglishandthat
a strong head position has to be ﬁlled (i.e. occupied) by an overt constituent of an
appropriate kind. In a complement-clause yes–no question like that bracketed in:
(5)
He asked [if I would marry him]
C is ﬁlled by the complementiser if – and indeed speaker A’s ﬁrst proposal in (1)
might be regarded as an elliptical form of I wanted to ask you [if you will marry
me], with if introducing the bracketed complement clause, and constituents other
than those of the bracketed clause undergoing ellipsis. However, complementisers
like if can’t be used to introduce main clauses in English, so some other way has
to be found of ﬁlling the strong C position in main-clause questions. Adapting an
analysis dating back to Baker (1970), let’s suppose that in main clauses, an inter-
rogative C is ﬁlled by a null question particle Q, and that Q attracts an auxiliary
like will to move from T to C to attach to it, so ﬁlling the strong C position.
But why should the null interrogative complementiser Q attract an auxiliary
to move from T to C? One possibility is to follow Chomsky (1995) in supposing
that Q is afﬁxal in nature, and attracts an overt head to attach to it. Since afﬁxes
generally only attach to a particular kind of word (e.g. the past-tense-d afﬁx can
attach to verbs but not nouns, prepositions or adjectives), and since only tensed
(i.e. present- or past-tense) auxiliaries move to C, one implementation of this idea
(suggested in Chomsky 1993) is to suppose that Q carries a strong tense feature,
and hence attracts the head T constituent of TP to move from T to C. On this view,
the tensed auxiliary will in (4) moves from T to attach to the invisible Q afﬁx in
C – as shown in (6) below:
(6)
CP
C
Will+Q
PRN
you
T'
T
VP
V
marry
PRN
me
TP
The auxiliary will moves from T to C in order to satisfy the requirement for
the null question afﬁx Q to have an appropriate kind of item (i.e. a present- or
past-tense T constituent) afﬁxed to it. The Q-afﬁx analysis is far from implau-
sible from a cross-linguistic point of view: for example, yes–no questions in
Latin could be formed using the overt question sufﬁx -ne. If we adopt the
question-afﬁx analysis, we can say that it is the afﬁxal status of an interrogative C
(viz. the fact that C in main-clause questions contains a null afﬁx Q) which trig-
gers T-to-C movement. Given that English is a largely sufﬁxal language (in that it

154
5 head movement
mainly utilises derivational and inﬂectional sufﬁxes), we can take Q to be sufﬁxal
in nature, so that the attracted auxiliary will end up positioned to the left of Q.
5.3
Movement as copying and deletion
An interesting question which arises from the T-to-C movement ana-
lysis is what it means for the auxiliary to move out of T. If movement of an auxiliary
from T to C were to result in the head T position of TP vanishing without trace,
a sentence such as Will you marry me? would have the structure below:
(7)
CP
C
Will+Q
PRN
you
T' 
VP
V
marry
PRN
me
TP
Butastructuresuchas(7)isproblematicinthatitviolatestwoconstituentstructure
principles which we posited in §3.2, namely:
(8)
Headedness Principle
Every syntactic structure is a projection of a head word
(9)
Binarity Principle
Every (non-terminal node in a) syntactic structure is binary-branching
A tree such as (7) would violate the headedness requirement (8) in that neither TP
nor T-bar has a head T constituent; (7) would also violate the binarity requirement
(9) in that T-bar is a non-terminal node in the tree (by virtue of not being one of
the nodes at the very bottom of the tree) yet is not binary-branching (since T-bar
does not have two daughters) but rather unary-branching (since T-bar has only
one daughter).
It seems clear, then, that movement of an auxiliary from T to C cannot result
in the loss of the original T constituent which heads TP: so, T must remain in
place in the form of a null constituent of some kind as shown in (10) below (with
? indicating that the identity of the null constituent is yet to be determined):
(10)
CP
C
Will+Q 
TP
PRN
you
T'
T
?
VP
marry me 

5.3 Movement as copying and deletion
155
(The internal structure of the VP marry me is as in (6) above, but is not shown
here in order to save space, and because it is not relevant to the point at hand.) The
structure in (10) satisﬁes both the headedness requirement (in that TP and T-bar
are headed by a null T), and the binarity requirement (in that T-bar is a binary-
branching constituent whose two daughters are a null T and its VP complement).
However, the question posed by the analysis in (10) is: ‘What is the nature of
the mysterious T constituent (= ?) which heads TP and T-bar after will moves
to C?’
Our discussion of gapping (i.e. head ellipsis) in the previous chapter suggests
a possible answer. In §4.3 we suggested that ellipsis of the second (italicised)
occurrence of could in a sentence such as (11a) below results in a structure such
as (11b) containing a null occurrence of could (designated as could):
(11) (a)
He could have helped her, or she could have helped him
(b)
He could have helped her, or she could have helped him
This raises the possibility that T-to-C movement could be a composite opera-
tion by which a copy of an auxiliary in T is ﬁrst moved into C, and then the
original occurrence of the auxiliary in T is deleted (by which we mean that its
phonetic features are given a null spellout and so are unpronounced), leaving a
null copy of the auxiliary in T. The assumption that movement is a composite
operation involving two suboperations of copying and deletion is the cornerstone
of Chomsky’s copy theory of movement.
If we consider the copying component of movement more carefully, we see that
it involves a form of merger operation by which a copy of a constituent which has
already been merged in one position is subsequently merged in another position.
To see what this means, let’s look rather more closely at the derivation of Will you
marry me? The ﬁrst stage of derivation involves merging the verb marry with the
pronoun me to form the VP marry me; the tense auxiliary will then merges with
this VP to form the T-bar will marry me; this in turn merges with the subject you
to form the TP you will marry me; the resulting TP merges with a C constituent
containing the null question sufﬁx Q, so that at this stage of derivation we have
the simpliﬁed structure (12) below:
(12)
CP
C
Q 
TP
PRN
you
T'
T
will
VP
marry me
A copy of the T constituent will is then merged with the interrogative comple-
mentiser, so forming a complex C constituent which comprises both the original
C constituent (containing Q) and the T constituent containing will. Subsequent

156
5 head movement
deletion of the phonetic features of the original occurrence of will in T derives
the structure (13) below:
(13)
CP
C
T
Will
C
Q 
PRN
you
 T
will
VP
marry me
TP
T'
On this view, the inverted auxiliary will undergoes two separate merger operations
in (13): ﬁrst of all it is merged in T with its VP complement marry me, forming
the T-bar will marry me; then (a copy of) will is merged with the null question
particle Q in C, deriving Will+Q you will marry me; subsequent deletion of the
phonetic features of the original occurrence of will in T in turn derives Will+Q
you will marry me.
An interesting source of evidence in support of the copy theory of movement
comes from the study of language acquisition. Young children sometimes produce
auxiliary copying structures like the following (produced by a boy called Sam
at age 2 years and 9 months: thanks to Ian Crookston for the data):
(14) (a)
Can its wheels can spin?
(b)
Did the kitchen light did ﬂash?
(c)
Is the steam is hot?
(d)
Was that was Anna?
What is Sam doing here? The answer seems to be that he has mastered the copy-
merge component of auxiliary inversion and so is able to merge a copy of will
in C: but he has not yet mastered the copy-deletion component of auxiliary
inversion and so fails to delete the phonetic features of the original occurrence
of the auxiliary in T. Accordingly, (14a) above has the simpliﬁed structure (15)
below for Sam (in which the structure of the DP its wheels is not shown because
it is irrelevant to the point at hand):
(15)
CP
C
Can+Q 
 TP
DP
its wheels
T'
T
can
V
spin
The fact that Sam seems to have mastered the merger operation involved in
auxiliary inversion (i.e. merging an auxiliary in T and then merging a copy of the
auxiliary in C) but not the copy-deletion operation (in that he fails to delete the

5.3 Movement as copying and deletion
157
original occurrence of the auxiliary in T) suggests that it is plausible to analyse a
movement operation like auxiliary inversion as a composite operation involving
the two separate operations of copy-merge (i.e. merging a copy of a T-auxiliary
in C) and copy-deletion.
In addition to evidence from child grammars we also have evidence from adult
grammars in support of the claim that a moved auxiliary leaves behind a null copy
of itself. Part of this evidence comes from the phenomenon of have-cliticisation
which we touched on in §4.4 and in exercise 4.1. In this connection, note that have
cannot cliticise onto the pronoun I/we/you/they in inversion structures such as:
(16) (a)
Should they have/∗they’ve called the police?
(b)
Will we have/∗we’ve ﬁnished the rehearsal by 9pm?
(c)
Would you have/∗you’ve come with me?
(d)
Could I have/∗I’ve done something to help?
(’ve represents the vowel-less clitic form /v/ here.) The sequence they’ve in (16a)
does not rhyme with grave in careful speech styles, since it is pronounced /ðeiəv/
not /ðeiv/. Likewise, the sequence we’ve in (16b) is not homophonous with weave
in careful speech styles, since we have in (16b) can be reduced to /wiəv/ but not
/wi:v/. Similarly, you’ve doesn’t rhyme with groove in (16c), nor I’ve with hive
in (16d). Why should cliticisation of have onto the pronoun be blocked here?
We can give a straightforward answer to this question if we posit that when an
inverted auxiliary moves from T to C, it leaves behind a null copy of itself in the
T position out of which it moves. Given this assumption, a sentence such as (16a)
will have the simpliﬁed structure shown below (if we assume that have is an AUX
heading AUXP – see §5.6):
(17)
CP
C
Should+Q
TP
PRN
they
T'
T
should 
AUXP
AUX
have
VP
called the police
In the previous chapter, we characterised have-cliticisation along the following
lines:
(18)
Have can encliticise onto a pronoun which asymmetrically c-commands
have if the pronoun ends in a vowel or diphthong, and if there is no
intervening constituent separating the two (i.e. if there is no intervening
constituent c-commanding have and c-commanded by the pronoun).

158
5 head movement
Although in (17) the pronoun they ends in a diphthong and asymmetrically c-
commands have (in the sense that they c-commands have but have does not
c-command they), the two are separated by the intervening null auxiliary should
which occupies the head T position of TP: since should c-commands have and
is in turn c-commanded by they, it intervenes between the two in the relevant
technical sense and hence blocks have-cliticisation, thereby accounting for the
ungrammaticality of (16a) ∗Should they’ve called the police? Note that a crucial
plank in the argumentation here is the assumption that T-to-C movement leaves
behind a null copy of the moved auxiliary in the head T position of TP, and this
null auxiliary serves to block cliticisation of have onto a c-commanding pronoun.
Our discussion of auxiliary inversion here has interesting implications for the
derivation of sentences. In this connection, consider how we derive a sentence
such as:
(19)
Can you swim?
The ﬁrst stage is to go to the lexicon (= dictionary) and choose a lexical array (i.e.
a selection of lexical items out of which the sentence is going to be built). In the
case of (19), the lexical array will consist of the verb swim, the pronoun you, the
auxiliary can, and the null interrogative complementiser Q. The next stage is for
the auxiliary can and the verb swim to be taken out of the lexical array and merged,
so deriving the T-bar can swim. The pronoun you is then taken from the lexical
array, and merged with the T-bar can swim to form the TP you can swim. The null
interrogative complementiser Q is then taken from the lexical array and merged
with the TP you can swim to form the CP Q you can swim. Since Q is afﬁxal and
has a tense feature attracting a tensed head, Q triggers merger of a copy of the
present-tense auxiliary can with Q, forming Can+Q you can swim. Subsequent
deletion of the original occurrence of can in T derives Can+Q you can swim.
5.4
V-to-T movement
HavinglookedatT-to-CmovementinEnglish,wenowturntolookata
rather different kind of movement operation, which involves V-to-T movement –
more speciﬁcally, movement of a ﬁnite main verb from the head V position of
VP into the head T position of TP. We shall see that this kind of verb movement
operation was productive in Elizabethan English (i.e. the English used during the
reign of Queen Elizabeth I, when Shakespeare was writing), but is no longer pro-
ductive in present-day English. Since part of the evidence for V-to-T movement
involves negative sentences, we begin by looking at the syntax of negation.
In Elizabethan English, clauses containing a ﬁnite auxiliary are typically
negated by positioning not between the auxiliary and the verb:
(20) (a)
She shall not see me (Falstaff, The Merry Wives of Windsor, III.iii)
(b)
I will not think it (Don Pedro, Much Ado About Nothing, III.ii)
(c)
Thou hast not left the value of a cord (Gratiano, The Merchant of Venice,
IV.i)

5.4 V-to-T movement
159
Let’s suppose (for the time being, pending a reanalysis of negation in §5.7) that
not in Elizabethan English is an adverb which functions as the speciﬁer of the
verbal expression following it (so that e.g. not is the speciﬁer of see me in (20a)
above, and hence modiﬁes see me). If so, (20a) will have a structure along the
lines of (21) below (where ø is a null complementiser marking the declarative
force of the sentence):
(21)
CP
C
ø
 TP
PRN
She
T'
T
shall
VP
ADV
not
V'
V
see
PRN
me
An analysis such as (21) provides a straightforward account of the position which
not occupies in front of the verb see.
In negative questions, the auxiliary moves from T to C (as in present-day
English), leaving not in front of the verb:
(22) (a)
Have I not heard the sea rage like an angry boar? (Petruchio, The Taming of
the Shrew, I.ii)
(b)
Didst thou not hear somebody? (Borachio, Much Ado About Nothing, III.iii)
(c)
Will you not dance? (King, Love’s Labour’s Lost, V.ii)
If questions involve movement of a ﬁnite auxiliary from T to C, then a sentence
such as (22a) will involve the T-to-C movement operation shown in (23) below
(where we take the string the sea rage like an angry boar to be an ECM clause
headed by a null counterpart of inﬁnitival to, symbolised as to):
(23)
CP
C
Have+Q
TP
PRN
I
T' 
T
have
VP
ADV
not
V'
V
heard
 TP
the sea to rage like an angry boar 
The auxiliary have is ﬁrst merged in T and then moved to C (i.e. a copy of the
auxiliary is merged with the question sufﬁx Q in C), leaving behind a copy of

160
5 head movement
have in T which is ultimately deleted. The assumption that not is a VP-speciﬁer
provides a straightforward account of the fact that not remains positioned in front
of the verb heard after have moves to C.
However, an interesting aspect of negative sentences in Shakespearean English
is that in auxiliariless ﬁnite clauses like those in (24) below, the (bold-printed)
main verb is positioned in front of not:
(24) (a)
I care not for her (Thurio, The Two Gentlemen of Verona, V.iv)
(b)
He heard not that (Julia, The Two Gentlemen of Verona, IV.ii)
(c)
My master seeks not me (Speed, The Two Gentlemen of Verona, I.i)
(d)
I know not where to hide my head (Trinculo, The Tempest, II.ii)
If not in Elizabethan English is a VP-speciﬁer which is positioned at the leftmost
edge of the verb phrase, how can we account for the fact that the verb (which would
otherwise be expected to follow the negative particle not) ends up positioned in
front of not in sentences like (24)? The answer we shall give here is that when a
ﬁnite T in Elizabethan English contains no auxiliary, the verb moves out of the
head V position of VP into the head T position of TP in order to ﬁll T. If so, a
sentence like (24a) I care not for her will involve the V-to-T movement operation
represented by the dotted arrow in (25) below:
(25)
CP
C
ø
TP
PRN
I
T'
T
care
VP
ADV
not
V'
V
care
PP
P
for
PRN
her
Thus, the verb care is ﬁrst merged in the head V position within VP, and then
moves into the head T position in TP, thereby ending up positioned in front of
not (with the original occurrence of care in V being given a null spellout).
An important theoretical question to ask at this juncture is why the verb care
should move from V to T. Using Chomsky’s strength metaphor, we can suppose
that a ﬁnite T is strong in Elizabethan English and so must be ﬁlled: this means
that in a sentence in which the T position is not ﬁlled by an auxiliary, the verb
moves from V to T in order to ﬁll the strong T position. One way of characterising
what it means for T to be strong is to suppose that T contains a Tns afﬁx with
a strong V-feature which requires it to have an (auxiliary or non-auxiliary) verb
attached to it as its host. Let’s suppose that a strong afﬁx is one which can ﬁnd a

5.4 V-to-T movement
161
host either by merger, or by attracting an appropriate item to attach to the afﬁx.
So, in a structure like (21), the strong (second-person-singular present-tense) Tns
afﬁx in T is provided with a host by directly merging the auxiliary may with
the Tns afﬁx in T, forming may+Tns (although the Tns afﬁx is not shown in the
simpliﬁed structure in (21) above); but in a structure like (25), the strong Tns
afﬁx in T attracts the closest verb which it c-commands (namely the verb care)
to move to T and attach to the Tns afﬁx, so that the afﬁx is provided with a verbal
host via movement – as shown in (26) below:
(26)
CP
C
ø 
TP
PRN
I
T'
T
care+Tns1SgPr  
VP
ADV
not
V'
V
PP
care
P
for
PRN
her
By contrast, T in present-day English contains a weak Tns afﬁx (more speciﬁcally,
an afﬁx with a weak V-feature), and a weak Tns afﬁx cannot attract a verb to move
from V to T, but rather can only be attached to a verbal host either by merger of
an auxiliary like may directly with the null Tns afﬁx in T, or by lowering of the
Tns afﬁx onto the main verb, e.g. in auxiliariless ﬁnite clauses such as He enjoys
the classes. In such auxiliariless clauses, the weak Tns afﬁx in T undergoes the
morphological operation of Afﬁx Hopping in the PF component, lowering the
afﬁx onto the main verb in the manner shown by the arrow in (27) below:
(27)
CP
C
ø
TP
PRN
He
T' 
T
Tns3SgPr
VP
V
enjoy
  DP
the classes
On this view, both strong and weak Tns afﬁxes can be directly merged with an
auxiliary in T; the two differ in how the afﬁx comes to be attached to a main verb;

162
5 head movement
a strong Tns afﬁx (like that found in Elizabethan English) triggers movement of
the verb from V to T in structures like (26) above; a weak Tns afﬁx (like that
found in present-day English) is lowered onto the main verb in the PF component
by Afﬁx Hopping in structures like (27) above.
5.5
Head movement
There seem to be signiﬁcant parallels between the kind of movement
operation involved in T-to-C movement in (23) on the one hand, and V-to-T
movement in (25) on the other. Both operations involve movement of a word
from the head position in one phrase into the head position in a higher phrase.
Accordingly, in (23) the auxiliary have moves from the head T position of TP into
theheadCpositionofCP;andin(25)theverbcaremovesfromtheheadVposition
of VP into the head T position of TP. This suggests that T-to-C movement and
V-to-T movement are two different instances of a more general head movement
operation by which an item occupying the head position in a lower phrase is
moved into the head position in a higher phrase.
As we see from (23) above, questions in Elizabethan English involved the
same inversion operation as in present-day English. Given our assumption that
inversion involves movement from T to C, an obvious prediction made by the
assumption that verbs move from V to T in Elizabethan English is that they can
subsequently move from T to C in interrogatives – and this is indeed the case, as
we see from the fact that the (italicised) moved verb ends up positioned in front
of its (bold-printed) subject in questions like:
(28) (a)
Saw you my master? (Speed, The Two Gentlemen of Verona, I.i)
(b)
Speakest thou in sober meanings? (Orlando, As you Like It, V.ii)
(c)
Know you not the cause? (Tranio, The Taming of the Shrew, IV.ii)
(d)
Spake you not these words plain? (Grumio, The Taming of the Shrew, I.ii)
On the account given here, the derivation of a negative question such as (28c)
Know you not the cause? will involve the two head movement operations shown
in simpliﬁed form in (29) below:
(29)
CP
C
Know
PRN
you
T'
T
know
VP
(2)
ADV
not
V'
V
know
DP
the cause
(1)
TP

5.5 Head movement
163
(The structure in (29) is simpliﬁed for expository purposes by not showing the
verb know attaching to a strong Tns afﬁx in T, and by not showing movement of
the resulting know+Tns structure to attach to a strong Q afﬁx in C, forming the
structure know+Tns+Q.) The verb know moves from V to T because a ﬁnite T
is strong in Elizabethan English, by virtue of containing a Tns afﬁx with a strong
V-feature; and know subsequently moves from T to C because an interrogative
C is likewise strong by virtue of containing a question particle Q with a strong
T-feature. Consequently, know moves through T into C by two successive appli-
cations of head movement (numbered (1) and (2) above): know is ﬁrst merged
in V, then moved to T and from there moved to C. In structures like (29), head
movement is said to apply in a successive-cyclic fashion, moving the verb know
(in successive cycles or steps) ﬁrst from V to T, and then from T to C. Each time
the verb moves, it leaves behind a copy of itself which is eventually deleted.
A key assumption made in (29) is that the verb know moves to C via the
intermediate step of moving to T. This raises the question of why know can’t
move directly from V to C in the manner shown in simpliﬁed form in (30) below:
(30)
[CP [C Know] [TP you [T ø] [VP not [V know] the cause]]] 
One way of ruling out the kind of long-distance head movement operation illus-
trated in (30) is in terms of a locality principle suggested by Travis (1984), which
we can outline in the following terms:
(31)
Head Movement Constraint/HMC
Movement from one head position to another is only possible between a
given head and the closest head which asymmetrically c-commands it (i.e.
between a given head and the next highest head in the structure containing it)
If we look at the two movement operations in (29), we see that both obey HMC:
operation (1) involves local movement of the verb know from the head V position
of VP into the next highest head position in the structure, namely the head T
position of TP; and operation (2) involves local movement of know from the head
T position of TP into the next highest head position in the structure, namely the
head C position of CP. Since both head movement operations are strictly local,
there is no violation of HMC. By contrast, direct movement of know from V to
C in (30) is non-local and violates HMC in that the verb know moves from the
head V position of VP directly into the head C position of CP, in spite of the
fact that C is not the next highest head above V. (On the contrary, T is the next
highest head above V.) HMC therefore provides a principled account of why (28c)
Know you not the cause? is ungrammatical in present-day English: the verb know
cannot move directly to C (because this would violate the HMC requirement for
movement to be local), and cannot move through T into C (because verbs can no
longer move from V to T in present-day English).
However, such an analysis raises the question of why ﬁnite verbs should be
able to move from V to T in Elizabethan English, but not in present-day English.
Using Chomsky’s strength metaphor, we can say that the Tns afﬁx carried by a

164
5 head movement
ﬁnite T was strong in Elizabethan English, but is weak in present-day English.
Because the afﬁx was strong in ﬁnite clauses in Elizabethan English, it could
attract a verb to move from V to T; but because the afﬁx is weak in present-day
English, T can only be ﬁlled by an auxiliary which is directly merged in T, not by a
verb moving from V to T. More generally, we can suppose that there is parametric
variation with respect to the relative strength of a given type of head, so that (e.g.)
a ﬁnite T was strong in Elizabethan English but is weak in present-day English.
We can refer to the relevant parameter as the Head-Strength Parameter. Note
that the parameter may have different settings for different types of head in a
given language: e.g. a ﬁnite T is weak in present-day English, but a ﬁnite C is
strong in interrogative main clauses.
But why should a ﬁnite Tns afﬁx be strong in Elizabethan English and weak
in present-day English? A suggestion which has been made by a number of
linguists (e.g. Platzack and Holmberg 1989, Roberts 1993, Rohrbacher 1999,
Vikner 1997 and Koeneman 2000) is that the relative strength or weakness of
a tense afﬁx in a language is correlated with the relative richness of the system
of subject-agreement inﬂections which it encodes, in the sense that a tense afﬁx
is strong in languages in which ﬁnite auxiliaries and verbs carry rich subject-
agreement inﬂections (i.e. in which they carry a wide range of different agree-
ment afﬁxes) and weak in languages in which ﬁnite auxiliaries and verbs carry
impoverished subject-agreement inﬂections. In this connection, it is interesting to
note that whereas third-person-singular -s is the only regular agreement inﬂection
found on (present-tense) verbs in present-day Standard English, in Shakespearean
English we ﬁnd four present-tense inﬂections, viz. second-person-singular -st,
third-person-singular -th or -s (the two being dialectal variants) and third-person-
plural -n:
(32) (a)
Thou sayst true (Petruchio, The Taming of the Shrew, IV.iii)
(b)
The sight of love feedeth those in love (Rosalind, As You Like It, III.v)
(c)
It looks ill, it eats drily (Parolles, All’s Well That Ends Well, I.i)
(d)
And then the whole quire hold their lips and laugh, and waxen in their mirth
(Puck, A Midsummer Night’s Dream, II.i)
If a Tns afﬁx is strong in rich agreement languages and weak in poor agreement
languages, we can correlate the strength of T in Elizabethan English with the
relative richness of its subject-agreement morphology; and conversely, we can
correlate the weakness of T in present-day English with the impoverished nature
of its subject-agreement morphology. (See Vikner 1995 and Rohrbacher 1999 for
attempts to do this, and Bobaljik 2000 for a dissenting view.)
The relative richness of the agreement features carried by ﬁnite verbs in Eliza-
bethantimes,ascomparedtopresent-dayEnglish,isreﬂectedinafurthersyntactic
difference between them. Elizabethan English was a null-subject language, and
hence allowed ﬁnite verbs and ﬁnite auxiliaries (like those italicised below) to
have null subjects (whether in root/main clauses or not, and whether the subject
is sentence-initial or not):

5.5 Head movement
165
(33) (a)
Sufﬁceth, I am come to keep my word (Petruchio, The Taming of the Shrew, III.ii)
(b)
Would you would bear your fortunes like a man (Iago, Othello, IV.i)
(c)
Lives, sir (Iago, Othello, IV.i, in reply to ‘How does Lieutenant Cassio?’)
(d)
Hast any more of this? (Trinculo, The Tempest, II.ii)
(e)
After some question with him, was converted (Jacques de Boys, As You Like It, V.iii)
(f)
Had it stretched so far, would have made nature immortal (Countess of Rousillon, All’s
Well That Ends Well, I.i)
(g)
You must be so too, if heed me (Antonio, The Tempest, II.i)
Since the null subject in sentences like (33) occurs in a nominative position
(by virtue of being the subject of a ﬁnite clause), it has nominative case and so
is different from the ‘big PRO’ subject of inﬁnitives (which has null case), and
hence seems to be an instance of the ﬁnite ‘little pro’ subject found in null-subject
languages like Italian – recall our brief discussion of null subjects in §4.2. By
contrast, present-day English is a non-null-subject (i.e. pro-less) language, so that
the present-day counterparts of (33) generally require (italicised) overt subjects:
(34) (a)
It is enough that I have come to keep my word
(b)
I wish you would bear your fortunes like a man
(c)
He is alive, sir
(d)
Have you any more of this?
(e)
After some discussion with him, he was converted
(f)
Had it stretched so far, it would have made nature immortal
(g)
You ought to be like that as well, if you ask me
It would seem, therefore, that a ﬁnite T can have a null nominative pro subject
in a language like Elizabethan English where ﬁnite verbs carry rich agreement
morphology (and raise to T), but not in a language like present-day English where
ﬁnite verbs have impoverished agreement morphology (and remain in situ – i.e. in
the position in which they were originally merged, hence in the head V position
of VP). Why should this be? One possibility is that in a language with a rich
system of agreement inﬂections, the agreement inﬂections on the verb serve to
identify the null subject (e.g. the -st inﬂection on hast in (33d) is a second-
person-singular inﬂection, and hence allows us to identify the null pro subject
as a second-person-singular subject with the same properties as thou). But in a
weak-agreement language like contemporary English, agreement morphology is
too impoverished to allow identiﬁcation of a null pro subject (e.g. if we asked
∗Can help? we’d have no way of telling from the agreementless form can whether
the missing subject is I, you, he, they or whatever).
Our discussion here suggests the possibility that there is parametric variation
across languages in respect of whether ﬁnite verbs carry rich or impoverished
subject-agreement morphology, and that the relative richness of agreement mor-
phology correlates with whether the Tns afﬁx in T in ﬁnite clauses is strong (and
can trigger V-to-T raising) or weak, and with whether a ﬁnite T can have a null
nominative pro subject or not. In rich-agreement languages, a ﬁnite T contains
a strong Tns afﬁx and the main verb raises to T if there is no auxiliary to host

166
5 head movement
the afﬁx in T; in poor agreement languages, T contains a weak Tns afﬁx which
is lowered onto the main verb by Afﬁx Hopping if there is no auxiliary in T. (A
minor complication is that poor-agreement languages may have other kinds of
null subject: e.g. Japanese and Korean have no agreement morphology except in
so-called ‘honoriﬁc’ constructions, but allow subjects and objects to be null if
they can be discourse-identiﬁed – i.e. if their reference can be determined from
the discourse context.)
5.6
Auxiliary raising
Although we assumed in the previous section that no verbs in present-
day English can move from V to T, the picture is complicated by the behaviour
of be in examples like (35) below:
(35) (a)
She may not be suitable
(b) She is not suitable
In (35a) the copular verb be seems to occupy the head V position in VP, and
so follows not: but in (35b) is precedes not and so seems to occupy the head T
position of TP. This suggests that the copula be originates as a main verb (in the
head V position of VP) and remains in situ when non-ﬁnite as shown in simpliﬁed
form in (36a) below, but moves into the head T position of TP when ﬁnite as shown
in (36b):
(36) (a)
[CP [C ø] [TP she [T may] [VP not [V be] suitable]]]
(b)
[CP [C ø] [TP she [T is] [VP  not [V is] suitable]]]
A similar conclusion is suggested by examples such as the following:
(37) (a)
She may not be enjoying syntax
(b) She is not enjoying syntax
In (37a), the head T position of TP is occupied by the modal auxiliary may, and
the head V position of VP is occupied by the verb enjoying; be therefore seems
to occupy some intermediate position between the two. Since be (in this use) is
an aspectual auxiliary (marking progressive aspect), let’s suppose that be in (37)
occupies the head AUX/Auxiliary position of an AUXP (i.e. Auxiliary Phrase).
However, in (37b) progressive is occupies the head T position of TP and hence
precedes not. One analysis of the relevant data is to suppose that aspectual be
originates as the head AUX constituent of AUXP and remains in situ when non-
ﬁnite as shown in (38a) below, but moves from AUX to T when ﬁnite – as shown
in (38b) (where not is taken to occupy a position to the left of AUXP – see the
discussion in the next section):
(38) (a)
[CP [C ø] [TP she [T may] not [AUXP [AUX be] [VP [V enjoying] syntax]]]]
(b)
[CP [C ø] [TP she [T is] not [AUXP [AUX is] [VP [V enjoying] syntax]]]]

5.6 Auxiliary raising
167
On this view, present-day English would have a be-raising operation moving ﬁnite
forms of be from the head V position in VP (or the head AUX position in AUXP)
into the head T position in TP (an idea which dates back to Klima 1964). This
would mean that present-day English retains a last vestige of raising-to-T.
The different positions occupied by ﬁnite and non-ﬁnite forms of be are mir-
rored by the perfect auxiliary have – as the examples below illustrate:
(39) (a)
He may not have done it
(b) He has not done it
The head T position of TP in (39a) is occupied by may and the head V position of
VP by done; hence the inﬁnitive form have must occupy some position interme-
diate between the two, e.g. the head AUX position of an AUXP/Auxiliary Phrase,
as in (40a) below. However the fact that the ﬁnite form has in (39b) is positioned
in front of not suggests that ﬁnite forms of the perfect auxiliary have raise from
AUX to T in the manner shown informally in (40b) below:
(40) (a)
[CP [C ø] [TP He [T may] not [AUXP [AUX have] [VP [V done] it]]]]
(b)
[CP [C    ] [TP He [T has] not [AUXP [AUX has] [VP [V done] it]]]]
 ø
So far, we have suggested that the auxiliaries be and have may raise to T from
a lower AUX/V position within the clause in present-day English. Roberts (1998)
argues that the same is true of some modal auxiliaries as well. In this connection,
consider the interpretation of the following negative sentences:
(41) (a)
You must not do that (= ‘It is necessary for you not to do that’)
(b)
You need not do that (= ‘It is not necessary for you to do that’)
In (41a) the modal must has wide scope with respect to negation (i.e. must has
semantic scope over not) whereas in (41b) the modal need has narrow scope with
respect to negation (i.e. need falls within the semantic scope of not). Roberts sug-
gests that in sentences like (41) above, wide-scope modals like must are directly
generated in T (as in (42a) below) whereas narrow-scope modals like need are
initially generated in some position below T (perhaps the head AUX position of
an AUXP) and from there move to T (as in (42b) below):
(42) (a)
[CP [C ø] [TP you [T must] not [VP [V do] that]]]
(b)
[CP [C   ] [TP you [T need] not [AUXP [AUX need] [VP [V do] that]]]]
 ø
Roberts’s analysis implies that present-day English has an operation by which
narrow-scope auxiliaries raise from AUX to T. An interesting aspect of (42b)
is that the polarity item need originates in a position where it is c-commanded
by not (so satisfying the c-command requirement on polarity items discussed in
exercise 3.2, if we assume that the relevant requirement is that a polarity item must
be c-commanded by a negative/interrogative item at some stage of derivation).
The two different T/AUX positions for auxiliaries can be occupied by different

168
5 head movement
modals in Scots English structures such as He must no can do it (= ‘It must be
the case that he does not have the capability to do it’, from Brown 1991, p. 98),
with must located in T and having scope over not and can located in AUX and
falling within the scope of not.
If ﬁnite forms of be (in all uses) and have (in its use as a perfect auxiliary) and
narrow-scope modals like need all raise to T, it is clear that the suggestion made in
the previous section that T in present-day English is a weak head which does not
trigger any form of V-raising is untenable. Rather, the appropriate generalisation
would appear to be that in present-day English, only a highly restricted set of
verbs can raise to T. In traditional grammars, the items which can raise to T are
all said to function as auxiliaries in the relevant use. Adopting this intuition,
we can say that a ﬁnite T in present-day English can trigger movement of an
auxiliary verb to T (but not movement of a main verb to T). One mechanism
by which we can describe the relevant phenomenon is to suppose that whereas
a ﬁnite V in Elizabethan English had a strong V-feature enabling it to attract a
ﬁnite auxiliary or non-auxiliary verb, a ﬁnite T in present-day English has a strong
AUX-feature which enables it to attract an auxiliary verb to raise to T, but not a
main verb. Of course, this raises the question of how precisely we characterise
auxiliaries: one possibility is that we can deﬁne auxiliaries as verbs which do not
function as predicates. Bearing in mind that canonical predicates have nominal,
prepositional or clausal (CP/TP) arguments, we can suppose that be is not a
predicate in structures like (36), since its complement is the adjective suitable,
and adjectival expressions are not arguments – suggesting in turn that be in this use
is not a predicate. (Indeed, one view of be in such structures is that it is a dummy
or expletive verb used simply in order to satisfy the grammatical requirement
that may requires a complement headed by a verb in the inﬁnitive form, and an
adjective like suitable is therefore not an appropriate kind of complement for
may.) Likewise, the fact that be in (38), have in (40) and need in (42b) all have
a VP complement may suggest that they are not predicates, if predicates require
a nominal, prepositional or clausal complement. Clearly, careful consideration
needs to be given to the question of what are the deﬁning characteristics of an
auxiliary – but we shall not pursue this issue here. (See Ackema 2001 for an
alternative account of auxiliary raising in a different framework.)
On the analysis suggested here, a ﬁnite T in present-day English contains a
Tns afﬁx with a strong AUX feature. If the closest verbal head c-commanded by
T is an auxiliary (as in (36b, 38b, 40b, 42b) above), the afﬁx attracts it; but if the
closest verbal head c-commanded by T is a main verb (as in (27) above), the afﬁx
is instead lowered onto the main verb in the PF component by Afﬁx Hopping.
The assumption that auxiliaries may originate in a position lower than negation
raises interesting questions about the syntax of inﬁnitival to, given the similarities
between auxiliaries and inﬁnitival to. In this connection, it is interesting to note
that although auxiliaries are positioned above not in ﬁnite clauses, inﬁnitival to
is generally positioned below not – as we see from sentences like (43) below:
(43)
John ought not to say anything

5.6 Auxiliary raising
169
Here, ought is a modal auxiliary which occupies the head T position of TP; we
can see that it is an auxiliary from the fact that like typical auxiliaries, it allows
negative cliticisation (giving rise to oughtn’t). However, if (43) is a single clause
and no clause can contain more than one T constituent, and if ought occupies
the head T position of TP, it follows that inﬁnitival to cannot occupy the head
T position of TP but rather must occupy some lower position. One possibility is
that to originates in the same AUX position as narrow-scope modals, so that (43)
has the structure shown in skeletal form in (44) below:
(44)
[CP [C ø] [TP John [T ought] not [AUXP [AUX to] say anything]]]
However, although not to is the normal word order in negative inﬁnitives, the
alternative order to not is also found, as the examples below illustrate:
(45) (a)
He decided [not to co-operate with the police]
(b)
He decided [to not co-operate with the police]
It seems reasonable to suppose that the two different word orders in the brack-
eted complement clauses in (45a,b) reﬂect two different positions occupied by
inﬁnitival to, as suggested in (46a,b) below:
(46) (a)
[CP [C ø] [TP PRO [T ø] not [AUXP [AUX to] co-operate with the police]]]
(b)
[CP [C ø] [TP PRO [T to] not co-operate with the police]]
There is a subtle meaning difference between the two examples: (45b) implies
a much more deliberate act of deﬁance than (45a). Given the analysis suggested
in (46), this meaning difference can be attributed to a scope difference, with not
c-commanding and so having scope over to in (46a), and to c-commanding and
having scope over not in (46b). A similar scope difference is found between will
and not in sentences like:
(47) (a)
He almost certainly won’t co-operate with the police
(b)
He will almost certainly not co-operate with the police
In (47a), not has semantic scope over will and the sentence is paraphraseable as ‘It
is almost certainly not the case that he will co-operate with the police’, whereas in
(47b) will has scope over not and the sentence is paraphraseable as ‘It will almost
certainly be the case that he does not co-operate with the police.’
Although there are in principle two distinct positions which auxiliaries and
inﬁnitival to can occupy within clauses (viz. the head AUX position of AUXP,
and the head T position of TP), if these two positions correlate directly with scope,
it is plausible to assume that a given lexical item L (where L is a ﬁnite auxiliary
or inﬁnitival to) is only projected in the head AUX position of AUXP if L falls
within the scope of an element like not which has scope over L but not over T,
and that otherwise L is directly projected in the head T position of TP (and the
sentence then contains no AUXP projection associated with L). In other words,
in negative clauses like (42b) and (46b) in which the negative adverb not has
scope over a narrow-scope auxiliary like need or inﬁnitival to, the relevant item

170
5 head movement
is generated in the head AUX position of AUXP; but in non-negative structures
like (48) below:
(48)
[He may decide [to quit his job]]
the auxiliary may and the inﬁnitival particle to are directly generated in the head
T position of TP of the bracketed clause containing them, and neither clause
contains an AUXP constituent (if AUX is only projected where required for
scope purposes). One way of thinking of this is to suppose that AUX and T are
syncretised (i.e. collapsed into a single T head) in structures in which there is no
constituent intervening between the two. By contrast, non-ﬁnite auxiliaries (e.g.
like be in He may be lying or He seems to be lying) always occupy the head AUX
position of AUXP and never move into T.
5.7
Another look at negation
In §5.4 and §5.5 we assumed that the negative particle not is a VP-
speciﬁer which occupies initial position within VP. However, this assumption is
problematic in a number of respects, as should be apparent if you look back at
(38), (40), (42), (44) and (46b) in §5.6. For example, in a sentence such as (37a)
She may not be enjoying syntax, it is clear that not does not occupy a VP-initial
position immediately in front of the verb enjoying: on the contrary, not appears
to occupy some position between the modal auxiliary may and the aspectual
auxiliary be – as shown in (38a). Moreover, we shall argue in chapter 7 that only
an argument of a verb can occupy the speciﬁer position within VP – and not
in a negative sentence like She may not sell it is not an argument of the verb
sell (because not isn’t one of the participants in the act of selling). It is clear,
therefore, that we need to rethink our earlier analysis of negation. One alternative
analysis which has been proposed in work dating back to Pollock (1989) is that
not is contained within a separate NEGP/Negation Phrase projection, and that
not serves as the speciﬁer of NEGP (and hence is positioned in spec-NEGP):
this has subsequently become a standard analysis of negation. (See Ingham 2000
for evidence of a NEGP constituent in Late Middle English; and see Haegeman
1995 for a wide-ranging account of the syntax of negation.)
Such an analysis is far from implausible from a historical perspective: in earlier
varieties of English, sentences containing not also contained the negative particle
ne (with ne arguably serving as the head NEG constituent of NEGP and not as its
speciﬁer). This can be illustrated by the following Middle English example taken
from Chaucer’s Wife of Bath’s Tale:
(49)
A lord in his houshold ne hath nat every vessel al of gold (lines 99–100)
‘A lord in his household does not have all his vessels made entirely of gold’
A plausible analysis of a sentence like (49) is to suppose that ne originates as the
head NEG constituent of NEGP, with nat (= ‘not’) as its speciﬁer: the verb hath
originates in the head V position of VP and from there moves to the head NEG

5.7 Another look at negation
171
position of NEGP, attaching to the negative preﬁx ne to form the complex head
ne+hath as shown in simpliﬁed form in (50) below:
(50)
[NEGP nat [NEG ne+hath] [VP [V hath] every vessel al of gold]]
The resulting complex head ne+hath then attaches to a present-tense afﬁx Tns in
T, as shown in simpliﬁed (and abbreviated) form in (51) below:
(51)
[TP A lord . . . [T ne+hath+Tns] [NEGP nat [NEG ne+hath] [VP [V hath] every
vessel al of gold]]]
Merger of the TP in (51) with a null declarative complementiser will derive the
CP structure associated with (49) A lord in his houshold ne hath nat every vessel
al of gold.
By Shakespeare’s time, ne had dropped out of use, leaving the head NEG
position of NEGP null (just as in ne . . . pas ‘not . . . . at.all’ negatives in present-
day French, ne has dropped out of use in colloquial styles). Positing that not in
Elizabethan English is the speciﬁer of a NEGP headed by a null NEG constituent
opens up the possibility that V moves through NEG into T, so that (24a) I care
not for her has the derivation shown (in simpliﬁed form) in (52) below:
(52)
CP
C
ø
TP
PRN
I
T'
 T
care
NEGP
ADV
not 
NEG'
NEG
care 
VP
V
care
PP
for her
This would mean that head movement applies in a successive-cyclic (two-step)
fashion. Each of the two head movement operations in (52) – viz. movement of
care from V to NEG, and then from NEG to T – is local in the sense that it
satisﬁes the Head Movement Constraint (31), since in each case movement is
from one head position into the next highest head position in the structure. If head
movement is driven by afﬁxal properties of heads, and if both T and NEG contain
an afﬁx with a strong V-feature which can trigger movement of a main verb, the
verb care will ﬁrst move from V to NEG in order to attach to a null negative afﬁx
(in much the same way as the verb hath in (50) moves from V to Neg to attach to
the overt negative afﬁx ne), and the resulting complex NEG head (comprising a
null negative afﬁx with a verb attached to it) in turn will move from NEG to T in
order to attach to a strong tense afﬁx in T.

172
5 head movement
An important question posed by the analysis in (52) is why sentences like (24a)
I care not for her are ungrammatical in present-day English. The answer is that
neither T nor NEG has a strong V-feature in present-day English, and so they are
unable to attract a main verb like care to move through NEG into T. Still, this
assumption in turn raises the question of why we can’t simply leave the present-
tense verb care in situ (in the head V position of VP) in present-day English – as
in (53) below:
(53)
[CP [C ø] [TP I [T Tns] [NEGP not [NEG ø] [VP [V care] for her]]]]
One answer is the following. Let’s suppose that (just like syntactic operations),
morphological and phonological operations in the PF component apply in a
bottom-up fashion, and process structures in a cyclic fashion (i.e. in a step-
wise fashion, one projection at a time). What this means is that when the syntax
hands over the structure in (53) to the PF component, the lowest maximal pro-
jection in the structure (the VP care for her) will be processed ﬁrst, then the next
lowest maximal projection (the NEGP not ø care for her), then the next lowest
maximal projection (the TP I Tns not ø care for her) and ﬁnally the overall CP
(ø I Tns not ø care for her). Let’s also posit that all operations (whether syntac-
tic, morphological, or phonological) are subject to Pesetsky’s (1995) Earliness
Principle, which we outlined informally in §4.9 as follows:
(54)
Earliness Principle
Operations must apply as early as possible in a derivation
All of this means that Afﬁx Hopping will apply to the Tns afﬁx in (53) on the TP
cycle – i.e. at the point where we have already processed VP and NEGP, and are
now beginning to process TP. The structure which the PF component can ‘see’
on the TP cycle is (55) below:
(55)
[TP I [T Tns] [NEGP not [NEG ø] [VP [V care] for her]]]
At this point, we might expect Afﬁx Hopping to apply to lower the Tns afﬁx in
T onto the verb care. There are two possible ways in which we might seek to
achieve this. One is by lowering the afﬁx directly from T onto V as in (56a) below,
and the other is to lower the afﬁx ﬁrst onto null NEG head and then onto V in the
manner shown in (56b):
(56) (a)
[TP I [T Tns] [NEGP not [NEG ø] [VP [V care] for her]]]
(b)
[TP I [T Tns] [NEGP not [NEG ø] [VP [V care] for her]]]
However, a movement operation like (56a) which lowers the afﬁx directly from
T onto V would violate the Head Movement Constraint (31), since it involves
lowering the head T of TP onto the head V of VP; and yet V is not the next lowest
head in the structure (rather, NEG is), and HMC only allows a head to be lowered

5.7 DO–support
173
onto the head immediately beneath it in the structure. Accordingly, we might
suppose that Afﬁx Hopping applies in a successive cyclic fashion, lowering the
afﬁx ﬁrst from T onto NEG, and then from NEG onto V – as in (56b). However,
there are two problems posed by any such successive-cyclic lowering operation.
The ﬁrst is that NEG doesn’t seem to be the kind of head which is an appropriate
host for a Tns afﬁx (at least, if we assume that a tense afﬁx attaches to an overt
verb, since NEG is neither overt nor a verb): hence, the ﬁrst step of the two-step
movement arrowed in (56b) – namely lowering the afﬁx onto NEG – may perhaps
be ruled out for this reason. To make matters worse, the second step of lowering
the Tns afﬁx from NEG onto V in (56b) is also ruled out, because it violates a
UG principle traditionally referred to as the Strict Cyclicity Principle, outlined
informally below:
(57)
Strict Cyclicity Principle/SCP
At a stage of derivation where a given projection HP is being cycled/processed, only
operations affecting the head H of HP and some other constituent of HP can apply
Lowering the Tns afﬁx from T onto NEG in (56a) does not violate SCP, since T-
to-NEG lowering clearly affects T (by moving the Tns afﬁx in T) and also affects
a NEG constituent which is contained within TP (since this ends up having a Tns
afﬁx attached to it). But the subsequent operation of lowering the afﬁx from NEG
onto V is anticyclic, since NEG-to-V lowering does not affect T (in violation
of SCP), but rather affects only NEG and V. We therefore correctly predict that
sentences like ∗I not care for her are ungrammatical in present-day English. (See
also Lasnik 1995, 2000 and Ochi 1999.)
A ﬁnal point to be made here is that we have excluded from our discussion
negativeinterrogativeslikeShouldn’tyoubeatwork?CormackandSmith(2000a)
argue that in such sentences the negative particle n’t has scope over the modal
(so that the sentence has a meaning paraphraseable as ‘Is it not the case that you
should be at work?’) and hence originates in a position above TP. One proposal
along these lines would be to suppose that NEGP in such sentences is positioned
between CP and TP, and that the auxiliary should raises from T through NEG
into C, with n’t cliticising onto the auxiliary. This would allow for the possibility
of two types of negation occurring in a sentence such as Mightn’t he not have
seen her? where not originates within a NEGP immediately above VP, and n’t
within a NEGP immediately above TP.
5.8
DO-support
In present-day English, the negative counterpart of a sentence like
I care for her requires do-support, as we see from (58) below:
(58)
I do not care for her

174
5 head movement
But how does do come to be introduced into the derivation – and why? In order to
answer this question, let’s look rather more closely at the derivation of sentence
(58). Suppose that (as before) the syntactic component of our grammar gener-
ates the structure (53) above. Suppose (again as before) that this structure is then
handed over to the PF component (where morphological and phonological oper-
ations apply in a bottom-up, cyclic fashion) and that we reach the point where
the TP shown in (55) above (and repeated as (59) below) is being cycled in the
PF component:
(59)
[TP I [T Tns] [NEGP not [NEG ø] [VP [V care] for her]]]
Since T contains an unattached Tns afﬁx with a weak V-feature, we would expect
the afﬁx to be lowered onto an overt verbal stem by Afﬁx Hopping. But if Afﬁx
Hopping is a purely local operation which lowers an unattached Tns afﬁx onto
the closest head c-commanded by T (hence onto the head word of the expression
which is the complement of T), then it follows that all Afﬁx Hopping can do is
lower the afﬁx onto the head NEG constituent of NEGP. But, as we have already
seen, NEG is arguably not an appropriate host for the afﬁx, since it is neither overt
nor verbal. In order to avoid the derivation crashing, the ‘dummy’ auxiliary do is
merged with the unattached afﬁx in T, forming the structure:
(60)
[TP I [T do+Tns] [NEGP not [NEG ø] [VP [V care] for her]]]
If (as here) the Tns afﬁx carries the features [ﬁrst-person, singular-number,
present-tense], the string do+Tns will eventually be spelled out as do.
What is implicitly being assumed here is that Afﬁx Hopping and do-Support
are complementary PF operations which provide two different ways of ensuring
that an afﬁx attaches to an appropriate host. We can therefore see them as two
types of Afﬁx Attachment operation, as in (61) below:
(61)
Afﬁx Attachment
When the PF component processes a structure whose head H contains an (undeleted)
Tense afﬁx which is not attached to a verb:
(i) H is attached to the head immediately below it if that is an overt verb – i.e. if H has a
complement headed by an overt verb [= Afﬁx Hopping]
(ii) if not (i.e. if H does not have a complement headed by an overt verb), the expletive
(i.e. semantically contentless) stem do is attached to the Tense afﬁx
[= do-Support]
We can illustrate how (61) works in terms of the italicised structures below:
(62) (a)
He won the race
(b)
He said he would win the race, and he did
(c)
He said he would win the race, and win the race, he did
(d)
Did he win the race?
(e)
Didn’t he win the race?
(f)
Some people don’t believe he won the race, but he did win it

5.8 DO–support
175
Consider ﬁrst (62a), which is derived as follows. The determiner the merges with
the noun race to form the DP the race; the verb win merges with this DP to
form the VP win the race. This VP is merged with a T constituent containing
a (past-tense) afﬁx Tns to form the T-bar Tns win the race. This T-bar merges
with the pronoun he to form the TP he Tns win the race; and the resulting TP in
turn is merged with a null declarative complementiser ø to form the CP shown
in skeletal form in (63) below:
(63)
[CP [C ø] [TP He [T Tns] [VP [V win] the race]]]
The syntactic structure (63) is then sent to the PF component (and the semantic
component) to be processed. PF operations apply in a bottom-up, cyclic fashion.
On the TP cycle, the Tns afﬁx in T is lowered onto the verb win in accordance
with (61i), so that the verb has the form win+Tns: since the lexical entry for the
irregular verb win speciﬁes that it is spelled out as won when it has a past-tense
afﬁx attached to it, the overall structure is eventually spelled out as (62a) He won
the race.
Now consider why do is used in the elliptical clause he did in (62b). This would
appear to have the syntactic structure shown in (64) below, with the italicised
material undergoing ellipsis:
(64)
[CP [C ø] [TP he [T Tns] [VP [V win] the race]]]
The Tns afﬁx in T cannot subsequently be lowered onto the verb win in the PF
component via the Afﬁx Hopping operation (61i) because the verb is not overt (by
virtue of having undergone ellipsis); hence the do-support operation in (61ii) has
to apply, attaching do to the Tns afﬁx, with the resulting do+Tns string eventually
being spelled out as did.
Now consider the clause Win the race, he did in (62c). Let’s suppose that (in
the syntax) the VP win the race undergoes preposing in order to highlight it, and
is thereby moved to the front of the overall clause (to become the speciﬁer of the
null complementiser), and that the phonetic features of the original occurrence of
the VP win the race are given a null spellout, as shown informally in (65) below:
(65)
[CP [VP win the race] [C ø] [TP he [T Tns] [VP win the race]]]
Once again, in the PF component the Tns afﬁx cannot be lowered onto the verb
win because the complement of T is a VP which contains a null copy of the verb
win (the overall VP having moved to the front of the sentence, leaving a null copy
behind). Accordingly, do-support (61ii) applies once again, and T is eventually
spelled out as did.
Let’s turn now to look at the derivation of the yes–no question (62d) Did he win
the race? Let’s suppose that a series of syntactic merger operations have applied
to generate the structure (66) below:
(66)
[CP [C Q] [TP he [T Tns] [VP [V win] the race]]]

176
5 head movement
Let’s further suppose that the Q morpheme/question particle which occupies the
head C position of CP has a strong T-feature and hence attracts whatever is
contained within T to adjoin to Q. Since T in (66) contains only a Tns afﬁx, this
afﬁx will adjoin to Q (and the original occurrence of the afﬁx in T will be deleted),
so deriving the structure (67) below:
(67)
[CP [C Tns+Q] [TP he [T Tns] [VP [V win] the race]]]
The resulting syntactic structure is then sent to the PF component to undergo
morphological and phonological processing. Since the Tns afﬁx in T gets deleted,
it does not undergo Afﬁx Hopping. By contrast, the Tns afﬁx in C is not deleted
and is unattached (in the sense that it is not attached to an overt verbal stem), and
hence must undergo Afﬁx Attachment (61). However, since the complement of
the C constituent which contains the tense afﬁx is not a VP headed by an overt
verb (but rather is a TP headed by a null T), Afﬁx Hopping (61i) cannot apply;
consequently, do-support (61ii) must apply instead, attaching the dummy stem
do to the unattached afﬁx, to form the string do+Tns+Q, which is eventually
spelled out as did.
Now, consider the negative question (62e) Didn’t he win the race? In keeping
with the NEGP analysis of negation outlined in the previous section, let’s suppose
that after the VP win the race has been formed, it is merged with a null NEG head
ø to form a NEG-bar constituent, and that this in turn is merged with a negative
adverb n’t which serves as its speciﬁer, forming the NEGP n’t ø win the race.
This NEGP is then merged with a T containing an abstract Tns afﬁx, forming the
T-bar Tns n’t ø win the race. Suppose that the clitic negative n’t then attaches to
the end of the Tns afﬁx, with the original occurrence of n’t in spec-NEGP being
deleted, so forming the string Tns+n’t n’t ø win the race. The resulting T-bar is
in turn merged with the subject he, forming the TP He Tns+n’t n’t ø win the race.
This is then merged with an interrogative C constituent containing a Q morpheme,
forming the CP (68) below:
(68)
[CP [C Q] [TP he [T Tns+n’t] [NEGP n’t [NEG ø] [VP [V win] the race]]]]
Since Q has a strong T-feature, it attracts all the material contained in T to adjoin
to Q, so deriving:
(69)
[CP [C Tns+n’t+Q] [TP he [T Tns+n’t] [NEGP n’t [NEG ø] [VP [V win] the race]]]]
The resulting syntactic structure is then handed over to the PF component. On the
CP cycle, the Tns afﬁx in C will be subject to Afﬁx Attachment (61). However,
since the complement of C is not a VP headed by an overt verb, Afﬁx Hopping
(61i) cannot apply, and do-support (61ii) applies instead, creating the complex
head do+Tns+n’t+Q, which is ultimately spelled out as didn’t.
An interesting descriptive implication of the analysis presented in (69) is that
it is in principle possible that the interrogative form of some auxiliaries may have

5.8 DO–support
177
a different spellout from their non-interrogative counterparts. This is because in
their interrogative form they attach to a null question complementiser Q, whereas
in their non-interrogative form they do not. A case in point is be. When used with a
ﬁrst person singular subject (= I), this has the negative interrogative form aren’t –
a form which is not found with an I subject (in varieties of English like mine) in
non-interrogative uses, as the following contrast shows:
(70) (a)
Aren’t I entitled to claim Social Security beneﬁts?
(b)
∗I aren’t entitled to claim Social Security beneﬁts (= I’m not . . .)
This can be accounted for by positing that the string be+Tns1SgPr+n’t+Q found
in (70a) can be spelled out as aren’t – but not the Q-less string be+Tns1SgPr+n’t
in (70b) because this is not interrogative (by virtue of having no Q afﬁx attached
to it).
Finally, let’s turn to consider the clause He did win it in (62f), where capitals
mark contrastive stress (and the utterance is used to deny any suggestion that he
didn’t win the race). One way of handling the relevant phenomenon is to suppose
that T is the locus of contrastive stress in such structures, and hence contains
an abstract EMP(hasis) marker of some kind which is spelled out as contrastive
stress, and which must be attached to a verbal stem – so requiring do-support
in contrastive structures like (62f). Such an analysis would require us to suppose
that EMP (perhaps by virtue of having phonological but not morphological
content) is not an afﬁx and so cannot be lowered from T onto V. An alternative
possibility is that EMP is a clitic-like constituent which originates within the com-
plement of T and (rather like the negative clitic n’t) requires the use of do-support
to provide a host for the clitic EMP. We shall not speculate further on these (and
other) analyses of emphatic do here. (On do-support, see Halle and Marantz 1993,
Lasnik 1995, Bobaljik 2002; see also Embick and Noyer 2001 for a different
view.)
The analysis of do-support outlined here has interesting theoretical implica-
tions. The structures generated by the syntactic component of the grammar are
sent not only to the PF component (where they are assigned a phonetic form) but
also to the semantic component (where they are assigned a semantic interpreta-
tion). Chomsky in recent work (1995, 1998, 1999, 2001) has proposed a constraint
on grammars to the effect that syntactic structures must not contain constituents
which are not legible at the semantics interface or at the PF interface (i.e. gram-
mars must not contain constituents which do not contribute to determining the
meaning or phonetic form of expressions). Under the analysis of do-support
presented here, the dummy auxiliary do is analysed as a meaningless ‘chunk’
of morphology which is not present in the syntax, but rather is added in the PF
component in order to provide a host for an unsupported tense afﬁx. Since syntac-
tic structures which contain ‘meaningless’ constituents will cause the derivation
to crash at the semantics interface (because meaningless constituents cannot be
assigned any semantic interpretation), this is a welcome result since if the dummy

178
5 head movement
auxiliary do is not present in the syntax, it will not be processed by the semantic
component: all the semantic component ‘sees’ in do-support structures is a tense
afﬁx which is clearly interpretable by virtue of the fact that it encodes present or
past tense.
5.9
Head movement in nominals
Our discussion so far has focused entirely on head movement in
clauses. To end this chapter, we look brieﬂy at head movement in nominals –
more particularly, at N-movement (i.e. the movement of a noun out of the head
N position of NP into a higher head position within the nominal expression con-
taining it). In this connection, consider the syntax of the English nominal (71a)
below and its Italian counterpart (71b) (from Cinque 1994, p. 86):
(71) (a)
the Italian invasion of Albania
(b)
l’invasione italiana dell’Albania
the invasion Italian of.the Albania
If the adjective Italian is the speciﬁer of the noun invasion, (71a) will have the
simpliﬁed structure:
(72)
DP
D
the
NP
A
Italian
N'
N
invasion
PP
of Albania
On this view, the noun invasion merges with its PP complement of Albania to
form the N-bar (intermediate nominal projection) invasion of Albania, and this in
turn merges with the adjectival speciﬁer Italian to form the NP (maximal nominal
projection) Italian invasion of Albania; the resulting NP is then merged with the
determiner the to form the DP the Italian invasion of Albania. The adjective
Italian in (72) can be thought of as being (in an informal sense) the ‘subject’ of
invasion, since it identiﬁes the people who are doing the invading – and if subjects
are typically speciﬁers, it is appropriate to analyse the kind of adjective found in
(72) as the speciﬁer of the N invasion, of the N-bar invasion of Albania and of
the NP Italian invasion of Albania.
In the corresponding Italian structure (71b) l’invasione italiana dell’Albania,
the head noun invasione ends up occupying a position to the left of the adjective
italiana. Cinque (1994) argues that this is the result of the noun moving out of

5.9 Head movement in nominals
179
the head N position within NP into some higher head position within the nominal
(via Head Movement). At ﬁrst sight, it might seem as if the noun attaches to the
right of the head D constituent of DP: but – argues Cinque – any such assumption
is falsiﬁed by nominals like (73) below:
(73)
la grande invasione italiana dell’
Albania
the great
invasion Italian of.the Albania
‘the great Italian invasion of Albania’
The fact that the noun invasione ends up positioned after the adjective grande
‘great’ in (73) suggests that the noun cannot move to some position immediately
to the right of the determiner la ‘the’. Instead, the noun must ‘move to a head
intermediate between N and D’ (Cinque 1994, p. 87). If this intervening head
is the locus of the number properties of nominals (as suggested by Picallo 1991
and Ritter 1991), we can label this intermediate head Num (= Number). If the
adjective grande ‘great’ serves as the speciﬁer of Num, this will mean that the
derivation of (73) involves the movement operation shown in (74) below:
(74)
DP
D
la
NumP
A
grande
Num' 
Num
invasione
NP
A
italiana
N'
N
invasione
PP
dell’Albania
The noun invasione originates in the head N position of NP and then (via head
movement) moves into the head Num position of NumP, with the original occur-
rence of invasione in N being deleted. It may be that Num is a strong head in Italian
(perhaps an afﬁx with a strong N-feature triggering movement of N to Num) by
virtue of the richness of the number morphology carried by nouns and adjectives
in Italian, whereas Num is a weak head in present-day English by virtue of the
impoverished nature of number morphology in English (e.g. adjectives no longer
inﬂect for number). If Num is also the locus of gender properties in nouns, we can
further correlate the strength of Num in Italian and its weakness in English with
the fact that Italian has gender in nouns but English does not. It should also be
noted that an assumption embodied in the analysis in (74) is that adjectives serve
as speciﬁers of the expressions they modify, and that different types of adjective
serve as speciﬁers to different types of head (e.g. italiana in (74) is the speciﬁer
of N, and grande is the speciﬁer of Num): see Cinque (1994) for a more extensive

180
5 head movement
implementation of the idea that different kinds of adjectives serve as the speciﬁers
of different kinds of heads, and Cinque (1999) for an extension of the speciﬁer
analysis to clausal adverbs.
While the kind of N-movement operation found in Italian is not found in
present-day English, it did occur in earlier varieties of English. For example, in
Chaucer’s Troilus and Criseyde we ﬁnd nominals such as those in (75) below
where the italicised noun precedes the bold-printed adjective:
(75) (a)
hire own brother dere (= her own brother dear)
(b)
a thing immortal (= a thing immortal)
(c)
blosmy bowes grene (= blossomy branches green)
(d)
hire hornes pale (= her horns pale)
The italicised noun in such structures has moved from the head N position of
NP into the head Num position of NumP, so moving in front of the bold-printed
adjective. (See Kishimoto 2000 for arguments that present-day structures like
something nice are a last vestige of this once-productive N-to-Num movement
operation, deriving from some nice thing via movement of thing from N to
Num.)
Although nouns generally move only as far as Num in Italian, in some other
languages nouns can move above Num into the head D position of DP (if the
head D of DP is strong/afﬁxal in nature). Consider in this regard the following
Norwegian examples (from Taraldsen 1990):
(76) (a)
hans bøker om
syntaks
(b) bøkene
hans om
syntaks
his
books about syntax
books+the his
about syntax
Taraldsen argues that (76b) is derived via movement of the noun bøker ‘books’
from the head N position of NP to the head D position of DP, where it attaches
to the left of the afﬁxal determiner +ne ‘the’.
Longobardi (1994, p. 623) argues that proper nouns (i.e. names) in Italian can
raise from N to D across an intervening adjective (like the possessive adjective
mio) in structures like (77b) below:
(77) (a)
Il
mio Gianni ha ﬁnalmente telefonato
The my Gianni has ﬁnally
phoned
‘My Gianni has ﬁnally phoned’
(b)
Gianni mio ha ﬁnalmente telefonato
Gianni mine has ﬁnally
phoned
‘My Gianni has ﬁnally phoned’
In (77a) the head D position of DP is ﬁlled by the determiner il ‘the’, and there
is no movement of the proper noun Gianni from N to D. However, in (77b) the
head D position of DP is ﬁlled by a null afﬁxal determiner, and the proper noun
Gianni raises from N to D to attach to the null determiner, in the process crossing
the possessive adjective mio. In earlier varieties of English, a similar type of
movement operation seems to be found in vocative expressions used to address

5.10 Summary
181
someone, as the italicised vocative in (78b) below illustrates (from Chaucer’s
Troilus and Criseyde):
(78) (a)
‘Iwis, myn uncle,’ quod she
‘Certainly, my uncle,’ said she
(b)
‘And whi so, uncle myn? whi so?’ quod she
‘And why so, uncle mine, why so?’ said she
As these examples show, the noun uncle can be positioned either before or after
the possessive myn in vocative expressions. How can we account for this? One
possibility(suggestedinrelationtoItalianvocativeslikemiocaroGianni‘mydear
Gianni’ and Gianni mio caro ‘Gianni my dear’ by Longobardi 1994, p. 626) is that
vocative structures like uncle myn are DPs in which the noun uncle has raised from
N to D, whereas structures like myn uncle are ‘smaller’ nominals which lack a DP
projection and hence cannot trigger N-to-D movement. (See Longobardi 1994,
1996, 2001 for an insightful discussion of the syntax and semantics of N-to-D
movement in nominals. See also Vikner 1995 and Roberts 2001b for more general
discussion of head movement.)
The general conclusion to be drawn from this section is that we ﬁnd evidence
from languages other than present-day English (and from earlier varieties of
English) that head movement may apply in nominal as well as clausal struc-
tures. In particular, we ﬁnd evidence of two types of N-movement operation:
(i) movement of a noun to a Num position intermediate between D and N; and
(ii) movement of a noun to the head D position of DP (with the noun ﬁrst moving
to Num before moving to D, in order for movement of the noun to be successive-
cyclic and thereby satisfy the Head Movement Constraint).
5.10
Summary
In this chapter, we have been concerned with the syntax of head
movement. We began by looking at auxiliary inversion in questions in English
in §5.2, arguing that this involves a T-to-C movement operation whereby an
auxiliary moves from the head T position of TP into the head C position of CP.
We suggested that auxiliaries move to C in main clause questions because C in
such structures is strong (perhaps by virtue of containing a null question particle
Q which is afﬁxal and has a strong tense feature) and so attracts an auxiliary
in T to move to C. In §5.3 we argued that movement operations like auxiliary
inversion involve two separate copying and deletion operations: a copy of the
auxiliary in T is merged with an afﬁxal Q constituent/question particle in C, and
then the original occurrence of the auxiliary in T is deleted. In §5.4 we saw that
ﬁnite main verbs in Elizabethan English could move from V to T by an operation
of V-to-T movement (as is shown by word-order in negative sentences like I care
not for her), but that this kind of movement is no longer possible in present-day

182
5 head movement
English. We suggested that a null ﬁnite T was strong in Elizabethan English
(perhaps containing an abstract Tns afﬁx with a strong V-feature triggering the
raising of verbs to T) but that its counterpart in present-day English is weak
(so that a Tns afﬁx in T is lowered onto the main verb by the morphological
operation of Afﬁx Hopping). In §5.5 we argued that T-to-C movement and V-
to-T movement are two different reﬂexes of a more general Head Movement
operation,andthatheadmovementissubjecttoastrictlocalitycondition(imposed
by the Head Movement Constraint) which requires it to apply in a successive
cyclic (stepwise) fashion, so that movement is only possible between a given head
and the next highest head within the structure containing it. We noted that ﬁnite
verbs in Elizabethan English carried a richer system of agreement inﬂections than
their counterparts in present-day English (allowing them to be used with a null
nominative pro subject), and conjectured that T is strong in languages with rich
subject–verb agreement morphology and weak in languages with poor subject–
verb agreement morphology. In §5.6 we argued that present-day English has a last
vestige of V-to-T raising in ﬁnite clauses whereby the auxiliaries be and have and
narrow-scope modal auxiliaries raise from a lower AUX/V position into the head
T position of TP. We suggested that a ﬁnite T in present-day English contains a
Tns afﬁx which can only attract an auxiliary to move to T, not a main verb: we
noted that one possible implementation of this idea would be that a ﬁnite T has a
strong AUX-feature in present-day English. We also suggested that inﬁnitival to
occupies the head AUX position of AUXP in negative inﬁnitives of the form . . .
not to . . . but that in non-negative structures both inﬁnitival to and ﬁnite auxiliaries
are directly merged in the head T position of TP. In §5.7, we took a closer look
at negation. Revising our earlier analysis of not as a VP-speciﬁer, we outlined an
alternative analysis under which not is the speciﬁer of a NEGP constituent which
was headed by ne in Chaucerian English, but which is null in present-day English.
On this view, Shakespearean negatives like He heard not that involve movement
of the verb from V through NEG into T. Because NEG and T don’t have a strong
V-feature in present-day English, they can no longer trigger movement of a main
verb. In §5.8 we outlined a morphological account of Afﬁx Hopping and do-
Support. We suggested that once the syntactic component of the grammar has
generated a given syntactic structure (e.g. a complete CP), the relevant structure is
then sent to the PF component for morphological and phonological processing. If
a structure being processed by the PF component contains an unattached Tns afﬁx,
this is lowered onto the closest head below it by Afﬁx Hopping if this is an overt
verb; if not, the dummy item do is attached to the afﬁx by do-Support. In §5.9,
we presented evidence that head movement can also apply in nominal structures.
We argued that nouns in Italian raise to a head Num(ber) position intermediate
between D and N in structures like la grande invasione italiana dell’Albania ‘the
great invasion Italian of.the Albania’. We noted that in some languages, nouns
can raise still further to attach to D – e.g. in Norwegian nominals such as bøkene
hans ‘books.the his’.

Workbook section
183
Workbook section
Exercise 5.1
Discuss the derivation of each of the following (declarative or interrogative) sentences, drawing a
tree diagram to represent the structure of each sentence and saying why the relevant structure is
(or is not) grammatical (in the case of 4, saying why it is ungrammatical as a main clause):
1
He helps her
9 ∗He helps not her
2
∗He d’s help her
10 ∗He not helps her
3
∗Helps he her?
11
He does not help her
4
∗If he helps her?
12
He doesn’t help her
5
Does he help her?
13
Doesn’t he help her?
6
I wonder if he helps her
14
He might not help her
7
∗I wonder if does he help her
15
He dare not help her
8
∗I wonder if helps he her
(Note that d’s in 2 represents unstressed does, /dəz/.) Say what is archaic about the syntax of 16
below (the second line of the nursery rhyme Baa Baa Black Sheep) – and why such structures are
no longer grammatical in many varieties of English:
16
Have you any wool?
Then, discuss the derivation of each of the following questions produced by a number of different
children aged two to four years, and identify the nature of the child’s error in each case:
17
Is the clock is working?
18
Does it opens?
19
Don’t you don’t want one?
20
Does it doesn’t move?
Consider, also, the derivation of the following questions reported (by Akmajian and Heny 1975,
p. 17) to have been produced by an unnamed three-year-old girl:
21
Is I can do that?
22
Is you should eat the apple?
23
Is the apple juice won’t spill?
And ﬁnally, say why you think negative imperatives like 24 (which were grammatical in
Elizabethan English) are ungrammatical in present-day English, and why we ﬁnd 25 instead:
24
∗Be not afraid!
25
Don’t be afraid!
Helpful hints
In 13, account for the fact that the sentence is ambiguous between one interpretation
paraphraseable as ‘Is it the case that he doesn’t help her’ and another paraphraseable as ‘Isn’t it
the case that he helps her?’ In 14 and 15, consider the scope relations between the auxiliary and
not, and bear in mind the suggestion made in the main text that ﬁnite auxiliaries normally
originate in T, but originate in an AUX position below NEG if they fall within the scope of not.

184
5 head movement
In 17–20, consider the possibility that children sometimes fail to delete the original occurrence
of a moved T constituent. In 19 and 20, consider the possibility that attachment of the clitic
n’t to a Tns afﬁx in T may either be treated by the child as a syntactic operation, or as a
phonological operation which applies after the relevant syntactic structure has been formed. In
relation to 24, consider the possibility that although a T in ﬁnite declarative and interrogative
clauses has a strong AUX feature, T in imperatives is weak and so can attract neither main verbs
nor auxiliaries.
Model answer for sentence 1
Given the assumptions made in the text, 1 will have the simpliﬁed syntactic structure (i) below:
(i)
CP
C
ø
PRN
He
T' 
T
Tns3SgPr  
VP
V
help
PRN 
her
TP
The overall clause is a CP headed by a null declarative complementiser ø which has a TP
complement headed by a T constituent which carries a present-tense Tns afﬁx which is
third-person singular by agreement with the subject he, and which needs an overt verb stem to
attach to. Since T does not have a strong V-feature in present-day English, the verb help cannot
be raised to provide a host for the afﬁx in T. After the syntactic structure in (i) has been formed,
it is handed over to the PF component, where it is processed in a bottom-up, cyclic fashion. On the
TP cycle, the Tns afﬁx in T is lowered onto the end of the verb help by Afﬁx Hopping, which
speciﬁes that a weak afﬁx in T is lowered onto the head V of a VP complement of T. Afﬁx
Hopping results in the form [help+Tns3SgPr], which is ultimately spelled out as helps. The
complement pronoun her is assigned accusative case in the syntax by the c-commanding transitive
verb help, and the subject pronoun he is assigned nominative case by the c-commanding null
intransitive ﬁnite complementiser ø.
Exercise 5.2
Discuss the derivation of the following Shakespearean sentences:
1
Thou marvell’st at my words (Macbeth, Macbeth, III.ii)
2
Macbeth doth come (Third Witch, Macbeth, I.iii)
3
He loves not you (Lysander, A Midsummer Night’s Dream, III.ii)
4
You do not look on me (Jessica, The Merchant of Venice, II.vi)
5
Wilt thou use thy wit? (Claudio, Much Ado About Nothing, V.i)
6
Wrong I mine enemies? (Brutus, Julius Caesar, IV.ii)
7
Knows he not thy voice? (First Lord, All’s Well That Ends Well, IV.i)
8
Didst thou not say he comes? (Baptista, The Taming of the Shrew, III.ii)
9
Canst not rule her? (Leontes, The Winter’s Tale, II.iii)
10
Hath not a Jew eyes? (Shylock, The Merchant of Venice, III.i)

Workbook section
185
11
Do not you love me? (Benedick, Much Ado About Nothing, V.iv)
12
Buy thou a rope! (Antipholus, The Comedy of Errors, IV.i)
13
Fear you not him! (Tranio, The Taming of the Shrew, IV.iv)
14
Speak not you to him! (Escalus, Measure for Measure, V.i)
15
Do not you meddle! (Antonio, Much Ado About Nothing, V.i)
16
She not denies it (Leonato, Much Ado About Nothing, IV.i)
Helpful hints
Assume that 9 has a null ﬁnite pro subject. Assume also that sentences 12–15 are imperative in
force, and consider the possibility that V raises to C in imperatives in Elizabethan English (see Han
2001), perhaps attaching to a strong imperative afﬁx Imp. Consider also the possibility that not had
a dual status and could either function as an independent word (like present-day English not) or
could serve as an enclitic particle (like present-day English n’t) which attached to an immediately
adjacent ﬁnite T constituent. Finally, say in what way(s) sentence 16 proves problematic in respect
of the assumptions made in the main text (and in the model answer below), and see if you can
think of possible solutions (e.g. What if the verb raised as far as NEG but not as far as T?).
Model answer for sentences 1 and 2
Relevant aspects of the derivation of 1 (here presented in simpliﬁed form) are as follows. The
verb marvel merges with its PP complement at my words to form the VP marvel at my words.
This in turn is merged with a T constituent containing a present-tense Tns afﬁx to form the T-bar
Tns marvel at my words, which is in turn merged with its subject thou. The Tns afﬁx agrees with
thou and thus carries the features [second-person, singular-number, present-tense], below
abbreviated to 2SgPr. The resulting TP is merged with a null intransitive ﬁnite C which marks the
declarative force of the sentence and which assigns nominative case to thou by virtue of being the
closest case-assigning head c-commanding thou. 1 thus has the syntactic structure shown in
simpliﬁed form in (i) below, with the dotted arrow indicating movement of the verb marvel from
V to T:
(i)
CP
C
ø
TP
PRN
thou
T’
T
marvel+Tns2SgPr
VP
V
marvel
PP
at my words
The string marvel+Tns2SgPr is ultimately spelled out as marvell’st in the PF component.
Sentence 2 is derived as follows. The verb come merges with a weak Tns afﬁx in T, forming the
T-bar Tns come. This will in turn be merged with its subject Macbeth, which we can take to be a
DP headed by a null determiner, in accordance with the DP hypothesis (and indeed, proper names
in many languages can be premodiﬁed by an overt determiner – cf. e.g. Italian la Callas, literally

186
5 head movement
‘the Callas’). Merging the resulting TP with a null declarative complementiser will derive the
syntactic structure shown in (ii) below:
(ii)
CP
C
ø
TP
DP
T'
D
ø
N
Macbeth
T
Tns
V
come
It would seem that the Tns afﬁx undergoes do-support in the PF component, and is ultimately
spelled out as doth (which is a dialectal variant of does). What is surprising about this is that the
dummy auxiliary do is used only to support a Tns afﬁx which is unable to ﬁnd a host by any other
means. So what we’d expect to happen when the structure in (ii) is handed over to the PF
component is for the Tns afﬁx to be lowered onto the verb come in the PF component by Afﬁx
Hopping, with the resulting verb being spelled out as cometh (a dialectal variant of comes).
However, this is clearly not what happens.
One alternative possibility which this might lead us to consider is that do is not a dummy
auxiliary with a morphological support function in Elizabethan English, but rather has
independent semantic content of some kind and so is directly generated in T in the syntax, just
like (e.g.) the aspectual auxiliaries have (marking perfect aspect) and be (marking progressive
aspect). In this connection, it is interesting to note that in Caribbean Creoles (according to
Rickford 1986 and Harris 1986), do is used to mark habitual aspect in sentences such as:
(iii)
He does be sick (= ‘He is usually sick’)
Likewise, do functions as a habitual aspect marker in Irish English (see Guilfoyle 1983, Harris
1986) and in south-western varieties of British English (see Wakelin 1977, pp. 120–21). However,
sentence 2 doesn’t seem to have a habitual interpretation paraphraseable as ‘Macbeth usually
comes’ (but rather has an interpretation more akin to ‘Macbeth is coming’), so it is not clear that
this is a credible approach. Let’s therefore continue to explore the possibility outlined in (ii) that
do is not generated in the syntax, but rather serves to support an unattached afﬁx in the PF
component.
One suggestion along these lines is that the Tns afﬁx in a ﬁnite T in a structure like (ii) could be
either strong or weak in Elizabethan English. Where it is strong, the Tns afﬁx will trigger raising
of the main verb from V to T; where it is weak, the verb will remain in situ, and the Tns afﬁx will
remain unattached in the syntax. The resulting structure (ii) will then be handed over to the PF
component, where it is processed in a bottom-up fashion. Although in present-day English
do-support is only used where Afﬁx Hopping cannot apply, let’s suppose that in Shakespearean
English the two are in free variation, in the sense that either can be used as a way of providing a
host for an unattached afﬁx in T. Applying Afﬁx Hopping will lower the (third-person-singular
present-tense) afﬁx in (ii) onto the verb deriving the string come+Tns3SgPr (which is ultimately
spelled out as cometh). Applying do-support instead will result in the dummy stem do being
attached to the Tns afﬁx in T, so forming the string do+Tns3SgPr (which is ultimately spelled out
as doth). If an analysis along the lines outlined here is tenable, it implies that there was
considerably more morphosyntactic variation in Shakespearean English than we ﬁnd in

Workbook section
187
present-day varieties of Standard English – for example, in respect of a ﬁnite Tns afﬁx being either
strong or weak, and an unattached Tns afﬁx either being lowered onto the verb, or having do
attached to it. Given that Shakespeare’s writing contains a mixture of different dialect forms (as
we see from the alternation between dialectal variants like comes/cometh and does/doth), this may
not be implausible. However, as noted by Tieken-Boon van Ostade (1988), the origin of do is ‘one
of the great riddles of English linguistic history’.

6
Wh-movement
6.1
Overview
In the previous chapter, we looked at the head movement operation
by which a head can move into the next highest head position within the structure
containing it. In this chapter, we look at a very different kind of movement oper-
ation traditionally termed wh-movement, by which a wh-expression like who or
what languages moves into the speciﬁer position within CP. We begin by looking
at the syntax of wh-questions, and then go on to probe the syntax of other types
of wh-clause, including exclamative clauses and relative clauses.
6.2
Wh-questions
So far, we have implicitly assumed that CP comprises a head C con-
stituent (which can be ﬁlled by a complementiser or a preposed auxiliary) and
a TP complement. However, one question which such an analysis begs is what
position is occupied by the bold-printed constituent which precedes the itali-
cised auxiliary in root interrogatives (i.e. main-clause questions) such as (1)
below:
(1) (a)
What languages can you speak?
(b)
Which one would you like?
(c)
Who was she dating?
(d)
Where are you going?
Each of the sentences in (1) contains an italicised inverted auxiliary occupying the
head C position of CP, preceded by a bold-printed interrogative wh-expression –
i.e. an expression containing an interrogative word beginning with wh- like
what/which/who/where/when/why. (Note that how in questions like How are you?
How well did he behave? etc. is also treated as a wh-word because it exhibits the
same syntactic behaviour as interrogative words beginning with wh-.) Each of
the wh-expressions in (1) functions as the complement of the verb at the end of
the sentence – as we see from the fact that each of the examples in (1) has a
paraphrase in which the wh-expression occupies complement position after the
italicised verb:
188

6.2 Wh-questions
189
(2) (a)
You can speak what languages?
(b)
You would like which one?
(c)
She was dating who?
(d)
You are going where?
Structures like (2) are termed wh-in-situ questions, since the bold-printed wh-
expression does not get preposed, but rather remains in situ (i.e. ‘in place’) in the
canonical position associated with its grammatical function (e.g. what languages
in (2a) is the direct object complement of speak, and complements are normally
positioned after their verbs, so what languages is positioned after the verb speak).
In English, wh-in-situ questions are used primarily as echo questions, to echo
and question something previously said by someone else – as we can illustrate in
terms of the following dialogue:
(3)
speaker a: I just met Lord Lancelot Humpalot
speaker b: You just met who?
Echo questions such as that produced by speaker B in (3) suggest that the wh-
expressions in (1) originate as complements of the relevant verbs, and subse-
quently get moved to the front of the overall clause. But what position do they
get moved into?
The answer is obviously that they are moved into some position preceding the
inverted auxiliary. Since inverted auxiliaries occupy the head C position of CP,
let’s suppose that preposed wh-expressions are moved into a position preceding
the head C of CP. Given that speciﬁers are positioned before heads, a plausible
suggestion to make is that preposed wh-expressions move into the speciﬁer posi-
tion within CP (= spec-CP). If so, a sentence like (1c) Who was she dating? will
involve the arrowed movement operations shown in (4) below:
(4)
CP
PRN
Who
C'
C
was
TP
PRN
she
T'
T
was
VP
(1)
V
dating 
PRN
who
(2)
(To be more precise, interrogative pronouns like who are Q-pronouns and hence
pronominal quantiﬁers.) Two different kinds of movement operation (indicated by
the numbered arrows) are involved in (4): the movement arrowed in (1) involves
the familiar operation of head movement by which the bold-printed auxiliary

190
6 wh-movement
was moves from the head T position of TP into the head C position of CP; by
contrast, (2) involves movement of an italicised wh-expression from the comple-
ment position within VP into the speciﬁer position in CP, and this very different
kind of movement operation is known as wh-movement. Note that unlike head
movement (which, as its name suggests, moves only heads which are minimal pro-
jections), wh-movement moves maximal projections; for instance, in (1a) What
languages can you speak? wh-movement moves the quantiﬁer phrase what lan-
guages which is the maximal projection of the interrogative quantiﬁer what? by
virtue of being the largest expression headed by the word what; and in (1c) Who
was she dating? it moves the interrogative Q-pronoun who (which is a maximal
projection by virtue of being the largest expression headed by the word who).
Following Cheng (1997), we might suppose that every clause must be typed (i.e.
identiﬁed as declarative or interrogative etc. in type) in the syntax, and that a
clause is typed as interrogative if it contains an interrogative head or speciﬁer: on
this view, movement of the interrogative pronoun who to spec-CP serves to type
the CP in (4) as interrogative.
Evidence in support of the assumption that preposed wh-expressions move into
spec-CP comes from varieties of English in which a preposed wh-expression can
precede a complementiser like that. This is true, for example, of interrogative
complement clauses like those bracketed below in Belfast English (from Henry
1995, p. 107):
(5) (a)
I wonder [which dish that they picked]
(b)
They didn’t know [which model that we had discussed]
Since the complementiser that occupies the head C position in the bracketed CP,
it seems reasonable to suppose that the wh-expressions which dish/which model
in front of that occupy the speciﬁer position within CP, and this is what Alison
Henry argues. (See Sepp¨anen and Trotta 2000 and Zwicky 2002 for discussion
of the syntax of wh+that structures.)
6.3
Wh-movement as a copying operation
A tacit assumption made in our analysis of wh-movement in (4) is that
just as a moved head (e.g. an inverted auxiliary) leaves behind a null copy of itself
inthepositionoutofwhichitmoves,sotooamovedwh-expressionleavesbehinda
copy at its extraction site (i.e. in the position out of which it is extracted/moved).
In earlier work in the 1970s and 1980s, moved constituents were said to leave
behind a trace in the positions out of which they move (informally denoted as t),
and traces of moved nominal constituents were treated as being like pronouns
in certain respects. A moved constituent and its trace(s) were together said to
form a (movement) chain, with the highest member of the chain (i.e. the moved
constituent) being the head of the movement chain, and the lowest trace being the

6.3 Wh-movement as a copying operation
191
foot of the chain. Within the framework of Chomsky’s more recent copy theory
of movement, a trace is taken to be a full copy (rather than a pronominal copy)
of a moved constituent. Informally, however, we shall sometimes refer to the null
copies left behind by movement as traces or trace copies in later sections and
chapters.
The assumption that moved wh-expressions leave a copy behind can be
defended not only on theoretical grounds (in terms of our desire to develop a
uniﬁed theory of movement in which both minimal and maximal projections
leave behind copies when they move), but also on empirical grounds. One such
empirical argument comes from a phenomenon known as wanna-contraction. In
colloquial English, the sequence want to can sometimes contract to wanna, as in
(6) below:
(6) (a)
I want to go home
(b) I wanna go home
Given the claim made in §4.7 that control inﬁnitive clauses are CPs headed by a
nullcomplementiser,thecomplementclausein(6a)willhavetheskeletalstructure
shown in (7) below:
(7)
I want [CP [C ø] [TP PRO [T to] go home]]
The fact that wanna-contraction is possible in (6b) suggests that neither the inter-
vening null complementiser ø nor the intervening null subject PRO prevents to
from cliticising onto want in the phonological component, forming want+to –
which is ultimately spelled out as wanta or wanna.
What is of particular interest to us is that (in non-sloppy speech styles) the
sequence want to cannot contract to wanna in sentences like:
(8) (a)
Who don’t you want to win the game?
(b)
∗Who don’t you wanna win the game?
Why should this be? Well, let’s assume that who in (8) originates as the subject
of the inﬁnitive clause to win the game – as seems plausible in view of the fact
that (8a) has the echo-question counterpart:
(9)
You don’t want who to win the game?
Let’s also assume that (for reasons outlined in §4.7) the complement of want in
structures like (8) and (9) is a CP headed by a null complementiser (perhaps a
null variant of for). On this view, (9) will have the skeletal structure (10) below:
(10)
You don’t want [CP [C ø] [TP who [T to] win the game]]
Movement of who to the front of the overall sentence (together with auxiliary
inversion) will result in the structure shown below (simpliﬁed, inter alia, by not
showing the trace of the inverted auxiliary):
(11)
Who don’t you want [CP [C ø] [TP who [T to] win the game]]

192
6 wh-movement
However, wanna-contraction is not possible in a structure like (11) – as we see
from the ungrammaticality of (8b) ∗Who don’t you wanna win the game? Why
should this be? This is unlikely to be because of the presence of the null comple-
mentiser ø between want and to, since we see from the fact that structures like
(7) allow wanna-contraction in sentences like (6b) that wanna-contraction is not
blocked by an intervening null complementiser. So what blocks contraction in
structures like (11)? The copy theory of movement provides us with a principled
answer, if we assume that when who moves to the front of the overall sentence in
(11), it leaves behind a copy of itself (which is ultimately given a null phonetic
spellout), and it is the presence of this copy intervening between want and to
which prevents wanna-contraction in (8b).
A different kind of evidence in support of the claim that preposed wh-
expressions leave behind a null copy when they move comes from a phenomenon
which we can call preposition copying. In this connection, consider the following
Shakespearean wh-structures:
(12) (a)
In what enormity is Marcius poor in? (Menenius, Coriolanus, II.i)
(b)
To what form but that he is should wit larded with malice and malice forced with wit turn
him to? (Thersites, Troilus and Cressida, V.i)
(c)
. . . that fair [for which love groan’d for] (Prologue to Act II, Romeo and Juliet)
(12a,b) are interrogative clauses, and the bracketed structure in (12c) is a rela-
tive clause – so called because it contains a relative wh-pronoun which relating
(more speciﬁcally, referring back) to the preceding noun expression that fair. In
these examples, an italicised prepositional wh-phrase (i.e. a prepositional phrase
containing a wh-word like what/which) has been moved to the front of the rele-
vant clause by wh-movement. But a (bold-printed) copy of the preposition also
appears at the end of the clause. In case you think that this is a Shakespearean
quirk (or – Heaven forbid – a slip of the quill on the part of Will), the examples in
(13) below show much the same thing happening in (bracketed) relative clauses
in present-day English:
(13) (a)
But if this ever-changing world [in which we live in] makes you give in and
cry, say ‘Live and Let Die’ (Sir Paul McCartney, theme song from the
James Bond movie Live and Let Die)
(b)
IKEA only actually has ten stores [from which to sell from] (Economics
reporter, BBC Radio 5)
(c)
Israeli soldiers ﬁred an anti-tank missile and hit a police post [in which the
Palestinian policeman who was killed had been in] (News reporter, BBC
Radio 5)
(d)
Tiger Woods (about whom this Masters seems to be all about) is due to tee
off shortly (Sports reporter, BBC Radio 5)
(e)
The hearing mechanism is a peripheral, passive system over which we have
no control over (undergraduate exam paper)
How can we account for preposition copying in structures like (12) and (13)?

6.3 Wh-movement as a copying operation
193
The copy theory of movement enables us to provide a principled answer to this
question. Let’s suppose that wh-movement (like head movement) is a composite
operation involving two suboperations of copying and deletion: the ﬁrst stage
is for a copy of the moved wh-expression to be moved into spec-CP; the second
stage is for the original occurrence of the wh-expression to be deleted. From
this perspective, preposition copying arises when the preposition at the original
extraction site undergoes copying but not deletion. To see what this means in
more concrete terms, consider the syntax of (12a) In what enormity is Marcius
poor in? This is derived as follows. The wh-quantiﬁer what merges with the noun
enormity to derive the quantiﬁer phrase/QP what enormity. This in turn is merged
with the preposition in to form the prepositional phrase/PP in what enormity. This
PP is then merged with the adjective poor to form the adjectival phrase/AP poor
in what enormity. This AP is merged with the copular verb is to form the verb
phrase/VP is poor in what enormity. This VP is merged with a ﬁnite T constituent
which triggers raising of the verb is from V to T; the resulting T-bar constituent
is merged with its subject Marcius (which is a DP headed by a null determiner)
to form the tense phrase/TP ø Marcius is poor is in what enormity. Merging this
with a strong C into which is moves forms the C-bar Is ø Marcius is poor is
in what enormity? Moving a copy of the PP in what enormity into spec-CP in
turn derives the structure shown in simpliﬁed form in (14) below (with copies of
moved constituents shown in italics):
(14)
CP
PP
In what enormity
C'
C
is
TP
DP
ø Marcius
T'
T
is
VP
V
is
AP
A
poor
PP
in what enormity
The two italicised copies of the moved copular verb is are deleted by operation
of copy-deletion. But consider how copy-deletion affects the copy left behind by
movement of the PP in what enormity to spec-CP. If we suppose that copy-deletion
in (12a) deletes the smallest phrase containing the wh-word what, it will delete
the quantiﬁer phrase what enormity rather than the prepositional phrase in what
enormity,soderiving(12a)InwhatenormityisMarciuspoorin?Thus,preposition
copying structures like (12) and (13) provide evidence that wh-movement is a
composite operation involving wh-copying and wh-deletion.
A related piece of evidence in support of wh-movement involving a copying
operation comes from sentences such as those below:

194
6 wh-movement
(15) (a)
What hope of ﬁnding survivors could there be?
(b)
What hope could there be of ﬁnding survivors?
(16) (a)
What proof that he was implicated have you found?
(b)
What proof have you found that he was implicated?
In order to try and understand what’s going on here, let’s take a closer look at
the derivation of (15). The expression what hope of ﬁnding survivors is a QP
comprising the quantiﬁer what and an NP complement which in turn comprises
the noun hope and its PP complement of ﬁnding survivors. The overall QP what
hope of ﬁnding survivors is initially merged as the complement of the verb be, but
ultimatelymovestothefrontoftheoverallsentencein(15a):thisisunproblematic,
since it involves wh-movement of the whole QP. But in (15b), it would seem as if
only part of this QP (= the string what hope) undergoes wh-movement, leaving
behind the PP of ﬁnding survivors. The problem with this is that the string what
hope is not a constituent, only a subpart of the overall QP what hope of ﬁnding
survivors. Given the standard assumption that only complete constituents can
undergo movement, we clearly cannot maintain that the non-constituent string
what hope gets moved on its own. So how can we account for sentences like
(15b)? Copy theory provides us with an answer, if we suppose that wh-movement
places a copy of the complete QP what hope of ﬁnding survivors at the front
of the overall sentence, so deriving the structure shown in skeletal form in (17)
below:
(17)
What hope of ﬁnding survivors could there be what hope of ﬁnding survivors
If we further suppose that the PP of ﬁnding survivors is spelled out in its original
position (i.e. in the italicised position it occupied before wh-movement applied)
but the remaining constituents of the QP (the quantiﬁer what and the noun hope)
are spelled out in the superﬁcial (bold-printed) position in which they end up after
wh-movement, (15b) will have the superﬁcial structure shown in simpliﬁed form
below after copy-deletion has applied (with strikethrough indicating constituents
which receive a null spellout):
(18)
What hope of ﬁnding survivors could there be what hope of ﬁnding survivors
As should be obvious, such an analysis relies crucially on the assumption that
moved constituents leave behind full copies of themselves. It also assumes the
possibilityofsplitspellout/discontinuousspellout,inthesensethat(insentences
like (15) and (16) above) a PP or CP which is the complement of a particular type
of moved constituent can be spelled out in one position (in the position where
it originated), and the remainder of the constituent spelled out in another (in the
position where it ends up). More generally, it suggests that (in certain structures)
there is a choice regarding which part of a movement chain gets deleted (an idea
developed in Bobaljik 1995; Brody 1995; Groat and O’Neil 1996; Pesetsky 1997,
1998; Richards 1997; Roberts 1997; Runner 1998; Nunes 1999; Cormack and
Smith 1999; and Boˇskovi´c 2001). A further possibility which this opens up is
that wh-in-situ structures may involve a moved wh-expression being spelled out

6.3 Wh-movement as a copying operation
195
in its initial position (at the foot of the movement chain) rather than in its ﬁnal
position (at the head of the movement chain): see Pesetsky (2000) and Reintges,
LeSourd and Chung (2002) for analyses of this ilk, and Watanabe (2001) for a
more general discussion of wh-in-situ structures.
A further piece of evidence in support of the copy account of wh-movement
comes from the fact that an overt copy of a moved pronoun may sometimes appear
at its extraction site – as (19) below illustrates (the % sign indicating that only a
certain percentage of speakers accept such sentences):
(19) (a)
∗He is someone [who I don’t know anyone [that likes who]]
(b)
%He is someone [who I don’t know anyone [that likes him]]
The sentences in (19) contain two bracketed relative clauses, one modifying some-
one and the other modifying anyone. The word who here is a relative pronoun
which is initially merged as the complement of the verb likes, but undergoes wh-
movement and is thereby moved out of the relative clause containing likes to the
front of the relative clause containing know. What we’d expect to happen is that
the copy of who left behind at the extraction site receives a null spellout: but this
leads to ungrammaticality in (19a), for the following reason. To use a colourful
metaphor developed by Ross (1967), relative clauses are islands, in the sense
that they are structures which are impervious to certain types of grammatical
operation. Let’s suppose that islands have the property that a copy of a moved
constituent cannot be given a null spellout if the copy is inside an island and its
antecedent lies outside the island: this condition prevents the italicised copy of
who from receiving a null spellout in (19a), because it is contained within a rela-
tive clause island (namely the that-clause) and its bold-printed moved counterpart
who lies outside the island. Some speakers resolve this problem by spelling out
the copy overtly as him. Still, this raises the question of why they should spell
out a copy of who as him rather than as who. Pesetsky (1997, 1998) argues that
this is because of a principle which requires copies of moved constituents to be
as close to unpronounceable as possible. Where islandhood constraints prevent
a completely null spellout, the minimal overt spellout is simply to spell out the
person/number/gender/case properties of the expression – hence the use of the
third-person-masculine-singular accusative pronoun him in (19b).
Further evidence that wh-movement leaves behind a copy which is subse-
quently deleted comes from speech errors involving wh-copying, e.g. in relative
clauses such as that bracketed below:
(20)
It’s a world record [which many of us thought which wasn’t on the books at
all] (Athletics commentator, BBC2 TV)
What’s the nature of the speech error made by the tongue-tied (or brain-drained)
BBC reporter in (20)? The answer is that when moving the relative pronoun
which from its initial italicised position to its subsequent bold-printed position,
our intrepid reporter successfully merges a copy of which in the bold-printed
position, but fails to delete the original occurrence of which in the italicised

196
6 wh-movement
position. Such speech errors provide us with further evidence that wh-movement
is a composite operation involving both copying and deletion.
A different kind of argument in support of positing that a moved wh-expression
leaves behind a null copy comes from the semantics of wh-questions. Chomsky
(1981, p. 324) argues that a wh-question like (21a) below has a semantic represen-
tation (more precisely, a Logical Form/LF representation) which can be shown
informally as in (21b) below, with (21b) being paraphraseable as ‘Of which x
(such that x is a person) is it true that she was dating x?’:
(21) (a)
Who was she dating?
(b)
Which x (x a person), she was dating x
In the LF representation (21b), the quantiﬁer which functions as an interroga-
tive operator which serves to bind the variable x. Since a grammar must com-
pute a semantic representation for each syntactic structure which it generates/
forms, important questions arise about how syntactic representations are to be
mapped/converted into semantic representations. One such question is how a
syntactic structure like (21a) can be mapped into an LF representation like (21b)
containing an operator binding a variable. If a moved wh-expression leaves behind
a copy, (21a) will have the syntactic structure (4) above which is repeated in sim-
pliﬁed form (omitting all details not immediately relevant to the discussion at
hand) in (22) below (where who is a null trace copy of the preposed wh-word
who):
(22)
Who was she dating who?
The LF-representation for (21a) can be derived from the syntactic representa-
tion (22) in a straightforward fashion if the copy who in (22) is given an LF
interpretation as a variable bound by the quantiﬁer which.
The assumption that a wh-copy (i.e. a copy of a moved wh-expression) has the
semantic function of a variable which is bound by a wh-quantiﬁer has interesting
implications for the syntax of wh-movement. In §3.8, we noted that there is a c-
command condition on binding to the effect that one constituent X can only bind
another constituent Y if X c-commands Y. If we look at the structure produced
by wh-movement, we ﬁnd that it always results in a structure in which the moved
wh-expression c-commands (by virtue of occurring higher up in the structure
than) its copy. For example, in our earlier structure (4) above, the moved wh-
pronoun who c-commands its copy who by virtue of the fact that who is contained
within (and hence a constituent of) the C-bar was she was dating who which
is the sister of the PRN-node containing the moved wh-pronoun who. It would
therefore seem that a core syntactic property of wh-movement (namely the fact
that it always moves a wh-expression into a higher position within the structure
containing it) follows from a semantic requirement – namely the requirement that
a wh-copy (by virtue of its semantic function as a variable) must be bound by a
c-commanding wh-expression (which has the semantic function of an operator
expression). Given their semantic function as operators, wh-words are sometimes

6.4 Wh-movement, EPP and the Attract Closest Principle
197
referred to as wh-operators; likewise, wh-expressions are sometimes referred to
as operator expressions, and wh-movement as operator movement.
A related semantic argument in support of the copy theory of movement is
formulated by Chomsky (1995) in relation to the interpretation of sentences such
as:
(23)
Joe wonders which picture of himself Jim bought
In (23), the reﬂexive anaphor himself can refer either to Joe or to Jim. An obvious
problemposedbythelatterinterpretationisthatareﬂexivehastobec-commanded
by a local antecedent (one contained within the same TP, as we saw in §3.7), and
yet Jim does not c-command himself in (23). How can we account for the dual
interpretation of himself? Chomsky argues that the copy theory of movement
provides a principled answer to this question. The QP which picture of himself is
initially merged as the complement of the verb bought but is subsequently moved
to the front of the bought clause, leaving behind a copy in its original position,
so deriving the structure shown in skeletal form in (24) below:
(24)
[CP [TP Joe wonders [CP which picture of himself [TP Jim bought which
picture of himself]]]]
Although the italicised copy of the QP which picture of himself gets deleted in the
PF component, Chomsky argues that copies of moved constituents remain visible
in the semantic component, and that binding conditions apply to LF representa-
tions. If (24) is the LF representation of (23), the possibility of himself referring
to Jim can be attributed to the fact that the italicised occurrence of himself is
c-commanded by (and contained within the same TP as) Jim at LF. On the other
hand, the possibility of himself referring to Joe can be attributed to the fact that
the bold-printed occurrence of himself is c-commanded by (and occurs within
the same TP as) Joe.
In this section, we have seen that there is a range of empirical evidence which
supports the claim that a constituent which undergoes wh-movement leaves
behind a copy at its extraction site. This copy is normally given a null spell-
out in the PF component, though we have seen that copies may sometimes have
an overt spellout, or indeed part of a moved phrase may be spelled out in one posi-
tion, and part in another. We have also seen that copies of moved wh-constituents
are visible in the semantic component, and play an important role in relation to
the interpretation of anaphors.
6.4
Wh-movement, EPP and the Attract Closest Principle
An important question raised by the analysis outlined above is what
triggers wh-movement. Chomsky (1998, 1999, 2001) suggests that an [epp] fea-
ture is the mechanism which drives movement of wh-expressions to spec-CP.

198
6 wh-movement
More speciﬁcally, he maintains that just as T in ﬁnite clauses carries an [epp]
feature requiring it to be extended into a TP projection containing a subject as
its speciﬁer, so too C in wh-questions carries an [epp] feature requiring it to be
extended into a CP projection containing a wh-expression as its speciﬁer. Some
evidence that complementisers can indeed have an [epp] feature comes from
sentences like (25b) below:
(25) (a)
There has been a riot
(b)
He prevented there from being a riot
If we suppose that expletive there is inserted in a sentence like (25a) in order to
satisfy an [epp] feature carried by T, and if we further suppose (in the light of
arguments offered by Landau 2002) that from is a complementiser in structures
like (25b), it seems plausible to suppose that there is used in (25b) to satisfy
an [epp] feature carried by the complementiser from. More generally, the [epp]
feature of a head H requires H to have a speciﬁer which matches one or more of the
features carried by H: so, for example, since a ﬁnite T carries person and number
features, its [epp] feature requires it to have a subject with matching person and/or
number features; and if we assume that C in a wh-clause contains a [wh] feature,
this will mean that its [epp] feature requires it to have a wh-speciﬁer.
We can illustrate how the EPP analysis of wh-movement works by looking at
the derivation of the bracketed interrogative complement clause in (26) below:
(26)
He wants to know [where you are going]
The bracketed wh-question clause in (26) is derived as follows. The verb going
is merged with its complement where (which is a locative adverbial pronoun) to
form the VP going where. The present-tense auxiliary are is then merged with the
resulting VP to form the T-bar are going where. The pronoun you is in turn merged
with this T-bar to form the TP you are going where. A null complementiser [C ø]
is subsequently merged with the resulting TP. Since the relevant clause is a wh-
question, C contains a [wh] feature. In addition, since English (unlike Chinese) is
the kind of language which requires wh-movement in ordinary wh-questions, C
also has an [epp] feature requiring it to have a speciﬁer. Given these assumptions,
merging C with its TP complement will form the C-bar in (27) below (where
features are capitalised and enclosed within square brackets):
(27)
C'
C
[WH, EPP]
ø
TP
PRN
you
T'
T
are
VP
V
going
PRN
where

6.4 Wh-movement, EPP and the Attract Closest Principle
199
(A minor descriptive detail is that the locative adverbial pronoun where is cate-
gorisedhereasaPRN/pronoun,thoughitcouldequallybeassignedtothecategory
ADV/adverb.) The [wh] feature of C allows C to attract a wh-expression. The
[epp] feature of C requires C to project as its speciﬁer an expression which has
a feature which matches some feature of C: since C carries a [wh] feature, this
amounts to a requirement that C must project a wh-speciﬁer. On the assump-
tion that the wh-pronoun where carries a [wh] feature, this means that C will
attract the wh-pronoun where to move from the VP-complement position which
it occupies in (27) above to CP-speciﬁer position. If we suppose that the [wh]
and [epp] features carried by C are deleted (and thereby inactivated) once their
requirements are satisﬁed (deletion being indicated by strikethrough), we derive
the structure (28) below (assuming, too, that the phonological features of the trace
of the moved wh-constituent where are also deleted):
(28)
CP
PRN
where
C'
C
[WH, EPP]
ø
PRN
you
T'
T
are
VP
V
going
PRN
where
TP
There is no auxiliary inversion (hence no movement of the auxiliary are from T
to C) because (28) is a complement clause, and an interrogative C only carries a
[tns] feature triggering auxiliary inversion in main clauses.
Chomsky (2001) maintains that movement is simply another form of merger.
He refers to merger operations which involve taking an item out of the lexical
array and merging it with some other constituent as external merge, and to
movement operations by which an item contained within an existing structure is
moved to a new position as internal merge. Accordingly, the structure (27) is
created by a series of external merger operations, and is then mapped into (28)
by an internal merger operation (namely wh-movement).
The EPP analysis of wh-movement has interesting implications for the syntax
of multiple wh-questions which contain two or more separate wh-expressions.
(See Dayal 2002 for discussion of the semantic properties of such questions.)
A salient syntactic property of such questions in English is that only one of the
wh-expressions can be preposed – as we see from the fact that in the brack-
eted interrogative clauses in (29) below, only who can be preposed and not
what:

200
6 wh-movement
(29) (a)
I wonder [who he might think has done what]
(b)
∗I wonder [who what he might think has done]
(c)
∗I wonder [what who he might think has done]
(d)
∗I wonder [what might he think who has done]
In order to get a clearer picture of what is going on in the bracketed complement
clause here, let’s consider what happens when we arrive at the stage of derivation
shown in (30) below:
(30)
C'
C
[WH, EPP]
ø
TP
PRN
he
T'
T
might
VP
V
think
CP
C
ø
TP
PRN
who
T'
T
has
VP
V
done
PRN
what
By hypothesis, the null complementiser [C ø] at the root/top of the tree contains a
[wh] feature requiring the clause to contain a wh-expression, and an [epp] feature
requiring it to have a speciﬁer matching the [wh] feature carried by C (i.e. to
have a wh-speciﬁer). In order to satisfy this requirement, C searches for a wh-
expression within the C-bar structure immediately containing it in (30). Since it is
who rather than what which is preposed in (30) and since who is closer to C than
what, let’s suppose that C attracts the closest wh-expression which it c-commands.
This requirement is a consequence of a principle of Universal Grammar (adapted
from Chomsky 1995, p. 297) which we can outline informally as follows:
(31)
Attract Closest Principle/ACP
A head which attracts a given kind of constituent attracts the closest
constituent of the relevant kind
(Chomsky 1995, p. 311 proposes an analogous principle which he terms the
Minimal Link Condition and formulates it thus: ‘K attracts  only if there is
no ,  closer to K than , such that K attracts .’) It follows from ACP that a
C carrying [wh, epp] features will trigger movement of the closest constituent

6.4 Wh-movement, EPP and the Attract Closest Principle
201
carrying a wh-feature to C. So, since who appears to be closer to C than what
in (30), it is who which is attracted to move to spec-CP. Using rather different
but equivalent terminology, sentences like (29) can be said to show a superiority
effect in that C has to attract the ‘highest’ constituent of the relevant type. An
alternative to the ACP account is to suppose that the relevant effect is a conse-
quence of an Intervention Constraint to the effect that in a structure of the form
[. . . X . . . [. . . Y . . . [. . . Z . . .]]] X cannot attract Z if there is a constituent Y of
the same type as Z which intervenes between X and Z: on this view, the presence
of who intervening between C and what in (30) prevents C from attracting what
to move to spec-CP.
One question this raises, however, is how we determine whether who or what is
closer to C. At ﬁrst sight, it might seem as if there is a simple way of doing this –
namely by counting the number of nodes you have to go through if you try and
get from one constituent to the other by climbing along the branches of the tree.
In order to get from the C node containing the null complementiser to the PRN
node containing who, we have to go through six other nodes (C-bar, TP, T-bar,
VP, CP, TP), whereas in order to get from C to the PRN node containing what we
have to go through eight other nodes (C-bar, TP, T-bar, VP, CP, TP, T-bar, VP):
hence, this simple node-counting procedure tells us that who is closer to C than
what, and consequently it is who which is attracted by C in (30) and not what, in
accordance with the Attract Closest Principle.
However, the idea that grammars might employ a counting algorithm of some
kind in order to determine how syntactic operations apply is implausible, since
counting otherwise seems to play no part in syntax – for instance, we ﬁnd no
syntactic operations which target (e.g.) the fourth constituent in a sentence, or
which invert the second and third constituents. Moreover, the notion of counting is
alien to the spirit of Minimalism, which assumes that the only primitive relations
in syntax are structural relations like contain and c-command which come about
via merger. From a theoretical perspective, it is therefore preferable to deﬁne
relative closeness in terms of structural relations. There are a variety of ways
of doing this (see Fitzpatrick 2002), but for present purposes we can make the
following assumption (where X, Y and Z are three different constituents):
(32)
X is closer to Y than to Z if X c-commands both Y and Z, and Z is
contained within some maximal projection which does not contain Y.
If we take X to be the main clause C in (30), Y to be who and Z to be what, we can
see that who is closer to the main-clause C than what in terms of the deﬁnition
of closeness in (32) because C c-commands both who and what but what is con-
tained within a maximal projection (= the VP done what) which does not contain
who. In consequence, the Attract Closest Principle (31) correctly predicts that
what cannot undergo wh-movement in (30), but who can, with who thereby mov-
ing into spec-CP and deriving the structure shown below (assuming deletion of
the [wh] and [epp] features of C, and of the trace copy of the moved pronoun
who):

202
6 wh-movement
(33)
CP
PRN
who
C'
C
[WH, EPP]
ø
PRN
he
T'
T
might
VP
V
think
CP
ø who has done what
TP
In short, the assumption that C carries [wh] and [epp] features, in conjunction with
the Attract Closest Principle (31) and the ancillary assumption that the [epp]
and [wh] features of C are deleted (and thereby inactivated) once a wh-expression
has been moved to spec-CP, accounts for the pattern of grammaticality found in
multiple wh-questions like (29). (Note that our focus on English here means that
we do not deal with languages like Bulgarian which allow multiple wh-fronting:
see Grewendorf 2001 and Boˇskovi´c 2002a for alternative accounts of multiple
wh-fronting.)
6.5
Explaining what moves where
Our discussion in the previous section looked at wh-movement in
interrogative complement clauses which involve movement of a wh-word (rather
than a wh-phrase), and which don’t involve auxiliary inversion. But now consider
how we handle the syntax of main-clause wh-questions like (34) below which
involve both movement of a wh-phrase and movement of an auxiliary:
(34)
Which assignment have you done?
Let’s suppose that the derivation of (34) proceeds as follows. The quantiﬁer which
merges with the noun assignment to form the QP which assignment. This in turn
is merged with the verb done to form the VP done which assignment. The result-
ing VP is subsequently merged with the present-tense auxiliary have to form
the T-bar have done which assignment, which is itself merged with the pronoun
you to form the TP you have done which assignment. TP is then merged with
a null interrogative C. Since (34) is a wh-question, C will carry a [wh] fea-
ture and an [epp] feature. Since (34) is a main-clause question, we can assume
(as in the previous chapter) that C also carries a [tns] feature which triggers
movement of a tensed auxiliary from T to C. Given these assumptions, merg-
ing C with the TP you have done which assignment will derive the following
structure:

6.5 Explaining what moves where
203
(35)
C'
C
[TNS, WH, EPP]
ø
TP
PRN
you
T'
T
have
VP
V
done
QP
Q
which
N
assignment
At ﬁrst sight, the derivation might seem straightforward from this point on: the
[tns] feature of C attracts the present-tense auxiliary have to attach to a null
question afﬁx in C; the [wh, epp] features of C trigger movement of the wh-
expression which assignment to the speciﬁer position within CP. Assuming that
all the features of C are deleted (and thereby inactivated) once their requirements
are satisﬁed, the relevant movement operations will derive the structure shown in
simpliﬁed form below:
(36)
CP
QP
Which assignment
C'
C
[TNS, WH, EPP]
have+ø
TP
PRN
you
T'
T
have
VP
V
done
QP
which assignment
Since the resulting sentence (34) Which assignment have you done? is grammat-
ical, things appear to work out exactly as required.
But if we probe a little deeper, we’ll see that there are a number of questions
raised by the derivation outlined above. The core assumptions underlying it are
the following:
(37) (i)
The [tns] and [wh] features of C attract a constituent whose head carries a
matching [tns] and [wh] feature respectively
(ii)
The [epp] feature of C requires a constituent matching one of the features
of C to be merged in spec-CP
(iii)
Minimal and maximal projections (though not intermediate projections)
can undergo movement

204
6 wh-movement
But while the assumptions made in (37) are perfectly compatible with the deriva-
tion assumed in (36), they raise important questions about what kind of constituent
moves to what kind of position and why.
One such question is why the [tns] feature of C in (35) attracts [T have] rather
than [TP you have done which assignment]. We can offer a principled answer to
this question by supposing that a head which carries a feature [f] can freely attract
either a minimal or a maximal projection carrying [f], but that UG principles rule
out certain possibilities. From this perspective, we would expect that the [tns]
feature of C can in principle attract either T or TP (and indeed both are equally
close to C in terms of the deﬁnition of closeness in (32) above), and if in practice
C cannot attract TP, this is because some UG principle rules out this possibility.
One reason why C cannot attract its TP complement may be that movement is
an operation by which a head attracts (and is thereby merged with) a constituent
which it is not already merged with. Since TP is already merged with C by virtue
of being the complement of C, it follows that C cannot attract TP. The tacit
assumption underlying our reasoning here is that UG incorporates a principle
such as the following:
(38)
Remerger Constraint
No constituent can be merged more than once with the same head.
As we saw earlier, [TP you have done which assignment] is initially merged with
C at the stage of derivation when the structure shown in (35) above is formed. To
subsequently move TP into spec-CP would involve merging TP as the speciﬁer
of C – and this would violate the Remerger Constraint (38), since it would
mean that TP was initially merged with C as its complement, and subsequently
remerged with C as its speciﬁer. By contrast, the Remerger Constraint would not
prevent C from attracting [T have], since have is not merged with C prior to T-to-C
movement: on the contrary, have was initially merged with its VP complement
done which assignment and its pronoun speciﬁer you, so that merging (a copy
of) have with C does not violate the constraint against remerger. In short, we can
account for why C attracts T rather than TP in terms of a UG principle like (38)
barring remerger operations.
A follow-up question is why a tensed auxiliary attracted by C moves into C
rather than into spec-CP. A plausible answer to this question is that UG principles
determine the landing site of moved constituents (i.e. determine where they
end up being positioned). For concreteness, let’s assume that UG incorporates a
principle along the lines of (39) below:
(39)
Constituent Structure Constraint
(i) Only a head (i.e. minimal projection) can occupy a head position
(ii) Only a maximal projection can occupy a speciﬁer or complement position
(39i) would mean that the head T constituent of TP (by virtue of being a minimal
projection) can only move to the head C position of CP, not to the speciﬁer

6.5 Explaining what moves where
205
position within CP. (Chomsky 1995, p. 253 offers an alternative account based
on chain uniformity, and Carnie 2000 discusses attendant problems.)
Now consider the question of why the [wh] feature of C attracts the QP which
assignment rather than the Q which. Given our earlier assumptions, we’d expect
that the [wh] feature carried by C can in principle attract either a wh-word or a
wh-phrase. However, the [epp] feature carried by C requires C to project a spec-
iﬁer, and (39ii) tells us that a speciﬁer position can only be ﬁlled by a maximal
projection. Since we have already seen that the Remerger Constraint (38) pre-
vents C from attracting TP to move to spec-CP, the only way of satisfying the
[epp] requirement is for a wh-constituent to be moved into spec-CP; and since
(39ii) tells us that only a maximal projection can occupy a speciﬁer position,
it follows that the [wh] feature of C attracts a wh-marked maximal projection
like which assignment to move into spec-CP, not a wh-marked minimal projec-
tion like which. (Note, however, that the story told here for English needs to
be modiﬁed for languages which allow certain types of wh-word to move to C,
as would seem to be the case for Polish data in Borsley 2002, German data in
Kathol 2001, and North Norwegian data in Radford 1994: it may be that C in
such languages has an [edge] feature requiring a wh-expression to move to the
edge of C rather than an [epp] feature requiring a wh-expression to move to
spec-CP.)
The story told above assumes that UG principles like the Remerger Con-
straint (38) and the Constituent Structure Constraint (39) determine that the
[tns] feature of C attracts movement of a tensed auxiliary to C, and that the
[wh, epp] features of C attract movement of a whmax (i.e. a wh-marked maximal
projection) to spec-CP. However, an entirely different approach to the problem
of accounting for why the [tns] and [wh] features of C attract different types
of constituent to move to different positions in English is to posit that they are
different types of feature which trigger different types of movement operation
in different components of the grammar. For example, if the [tns] feature on
C is essentially afﬁxal in nature, we could conclude that head movement oper-
ations like T-to-C movement are intrinsically morphological in nature (in that
they are designed to provide an afﬁx with a host), and hence take place in the
PF component rather than the syntactic component – a possibility explored by
Chomsky (1999, pp. 30–1). Chomsky notes that some evidence in support of
such a hypothesis comes from the fact that head movement has rather differ-
ent properties from typical syntactic movement operations like wh-movement.
For example, head movement can attract only heads whereas wh-movement
can attract maximal projections; head movement is a strictly local operation
(whereby a head can attract the head of its complement), whereas wh-movement
can attract more distant constituents (e.g. C can attract a wh-constituent which
originates within a lower clause, as in (30) and (33) above); head movement
involves a form of afﬁxation operation by which one head is afﬁxed to another
(forming a compound head), whereas wh-movement is a merger operation by
which a moved constituent is merged as the speciﬁer of C; and conversely

206
6 wh-movement
wh-movement has an effect on semantic interpretation (in that it creates an
operator-variable conﬁguration as we noted in relation to (21) above), whereas
auxiliary inversion does not. These differences (Chomsky reasons) suggest that
features like the [wh] feature of C are syntactic features triggering movement
of a maximal projection in the syntax, whereas features like the [tns] fea-
ture of C are morphological features triggering movement of a minimal pro-
jection in the PF component. (See Boeckx and Stjepanovi´c 2001 for an addi-
tional argument for head movement being a PF operation, and Baltin 2002 for a
rebuttal.)
Perceptive though Chomsky’s observations are, they are suggestive rather than
conclusive (see Embick and Noyer 2001 for a sceptical view). For example, his
claim that head movement is a PF operation because it has no effect on semantic
interpretation has little force if we assume that the semantic component interprets
the tense properties of clauses by looking at the tense properties of the head T con-
stituent of TP – and cares little whether what is in T is an overt auxiliary or a null
copy of a moved auxiliary. Likewise, the argument that head movement is subject
to a strict locality constraint like HMC is called into question by Hagstrom’s
(1998) analysis of wh-questions in wh-in-situ languages (like Japanese,
Okinawan, Navajo and Sinhala) in which he claims that they involve long-distance
head movement of a question particle to C. Hagstrom proposes to abandon HMC,
and argues that the apparent locality of head movement is an artefact of the
Attract Closest Principle/ACP (31). On this view, local (successive-cyclic)
movement of the verb say from V to T to C in a Shakespearean sentence such
as:
(40)
What said she? (Proteus, The Two Gentlemen of Verona, I.i)
will be a consequence of ACP rather than HMC. For example, if T has a strong
V-feature and C has a strong T-feature (as we assumed in the previous chapter),
T will attract the closest verb (i.e. the head V said of the VP said what) to move
to T, and C will attract the closest tensed head (i.e. the head T constituent of TP,
with T containing the moved verb said at the relevant stage of derivation) to move
to C – thereby guaranteeing local head movement without the need for positing
HMC. In short, the question of whether head movement is a syntactic operation
(as argued by Roberts 2002) or a PF operation (as argued by Chomsky 1999)
or has facets of both (as argued by Zwart 2001) is one which remains open at
present.
6.6
Wh-subject questions
Underlying the analyses we have presented so far in this chapter is
the assumption that questions in English have the following syntactic properties:

6.6 Wh-subject questions
207
(41) (i)
Interrogative clauses are CPs headed by a C with [wh, epp] features
(ii)
C in root/main interrogative clauses also has an afﬁxal [tns] feature
The [wh, epp] features of C trigger movement of a wh-expression to spec-CP; and
the afﬁxal [tns] feature carried by C in main-clause questions triggers movement
of an auxiliary or tense afﬁx from T to C (with a moved tense afﬁx requiring
concomitant do-support, as we saw in §5.8).
However, the assumptions made in (41) raise interesting questions about how
we account for the contrast in (42) below:
(42) (a)
Who’d the police call? (’d = did)
(b) ∗Who the police called?
(c)
Who called the police?
(d) ∗Who’d call the police? (’d = did)
(42a,b) are wh-object questions, in the sense that the preposed interrogative
expression who is the direct object complement of the verb call; as would be
expected from the assumption in (41ii) that C in main-clause questions carries an
afﬁxal [tns] feature, they require T-to-C movement and concomitant do-support.
By contrast, (42c,d) are wh-subject questions, in the sense that who is the sub-
ject of the verb call; contrary to what (41ii) would lead us to expect, wh-subject
questions do not allow T-to-C movement and do-support. (More precisely, do
can be used if it is emphatic, receives contrastive stress and is spelled out as the
full form did – as in Who did call the police? with capitals marking contrastive
stress.) Why should this be?
One answer to this question (different versions of which are suggested in
Radford 1997a and Agbayani 2000) is the following. Let’s suppose that T-to-C
movement (and concomitant do-support) is only found in questions in which a
wh-expression moves to spec-CP. In wh-object questions like (42a,b) it is clear
that the wh-pronoun who moves to spec-CP, since it is the object of the verb call
and if it had not moved to spec-CP, it would have been positioned after the verb
(as in the echo question The police called who?). But in wh-subject questions
like (42c,d) it is by no means clear that the wh-pronoun who has moved into
spec-CP, since even if it remained in situ in spec-TP it would still end up as
the ﬁrst overt constituent in the sentence. Let’s therefore consider the possibility
that in sentences like (42c,d) where a wh-expression is the subject of the overall
interrogative clause, the wh-expression remains in situ in spec-TP and does not
move to spec-CP. If T-to-C movement and concomitant do-support are only
found in questions which involve movement of a wh-expression to spec-CP,
and if wh-subject questions do not involve wh-movement to spec-CP, we can
seemingly account for the absence of do-support in wh-subject questions like
(42c,d).
On this view, the derivation of (42c) would proceed as follows. The determiner
the merges with the noun police to form the DP the police. This DP is then merged
with the verb call to form the VP call the police. The resulting VP is in turn merged
with a past-tense afﬁx Tns, forming the T-bar Tns call the police. This T-bar is

208
6 wh-movement
then merged with the pronoun who, forming the TP who Tns call the police. If
we follow Agbayani (2000) in supposing that all interrogative clauses are CPs,
the resulting TP will be merged with an interrogative C to form the CP shown in
simpliﬁed form below:
(43)
CP
C
ø
TP
PRN
Who
T'
T
Tns
VP
V
call
DP
the police
The past-tense afﬁx in T will be lowered onto the main verb by Afﬁx Hopping in
the PF component, so that the verb is spelled out as called in (42c) Who called
the police?
However, the spec-TP analysis of wh-subjects outlined in (43) above raises
a number of questions. For example, why isn’t the wh-pronoun who in (43)
attracted to move to spec-CP and why isn’t there any T-to-C movement if C always
has [tns, wh, epp] features in main-clause questions as claimed in (41) above?
Maintaining the claim in (41) that C in main-clause questions always has [tns,
wh, epp] features at the same time as maintaining the wh-in-situ analysis of wh-
subject questions in (43) is going to require considerable ingenuity: for example,
we might suppose that the [tns, wh, epp] features of C only trigger wh-movement
and T-to-C movement when the relevant wh-expression is c-commanded by T.
This would mean that C triggers both wh-movement and T-to-C movement in a
structure like (35) because the closest wh-expression to C (= which assignment)
is c-commanded by T; but it would also mean that there is neither wh-movement
nor T-to-C movement in a structure like (43) because the closest wh-expression to
C (= who) is not c-commanded by T. However, even this (somewhat contrived)
analysis leaves us without a principled explanation of how the [tns, wh, epp]
featuresofCaredeletedinastructurelike(43)whichshowsneitherwh-movement
nor T-to-C movement.
Moreover, the core assumption underlying the analysis in (43) above (viz. that
the wh-subject remains in spec-TP in wh-subject questions like (42c) Who called
the police?) is called into question by the observation by Pesetsky and Torrego
(2001) that who in (42c) can be substituted by who on earth or who the hell:
(44) (a)
Who on earth called the police?
(b)
Who the hell called the police?

6.6 Wh-subject questions
209
As Pesetsky (1987) notes (and as the examples in (45) below illustrate), wh-
expressions like who on earth and who the hell have the property that they cannot
remain in situ, but rather must move to spec-CP:
(45) (a)
Who on earth/Who the hell is she going out with?
(b)
∗She is going out with who on earth/who the hell?
If wh-expressions like those italicised in (45) always move to spec-CP, it follows
that the italicised subjects in (44) must likewise have moved to spec-CP – and
hence it is plausible to suppose that the same is true of the subject who in (42c)
Who called the police? (See den Dikken and Giannakidou 2002 for more detailed
discussion of the syntax and semantics of expressions like who the hell?)
Let’s therefore follow Pesetsky and Torrego in taking all wh-questions (includ-
ing wh-subject questions) to be CPs which show movement of a wh-expression
to spec-CP. In particular, let’s suppose that after the TP who Tns call the police
has been formed, it is merged with an interrogative C constituent which car-
ries [tns, wh, epp] features, so forming the structure in (46) below (cf. (43)
above):
(46)
C'
C
[TNS, WH, EPP]
ø
TP
PRN
Who
T'
T
Tns
VP
V
call
DP
the police 
What we might expect to happen at this point is for the [wh, epp] features of C to
attract who to move to spec-CP, and for the [tns] feature of C to attract movement
of the Tns afﬁx from T to C, with the dummy auxiliary do being attached to the
afﬁx in the PF component in order to provide it with a host. But such a derivation
would wrongly predict that (42d) ∗Who’d call the police? is grammatical on the
relevant interpretation (where ’d is a contracted form of did). So it would seem
that the [tns] feature of C does not attract the head T constituent of TP. So what
does it attract?
The answer given by Pesetsky and Torrego is that the [wh] and [tns] features
of C both attract the nominative wh-pronoun who, with the [epp] feature of C
ensuring that who moves to spec-CP. A key assumption underlying Pesetsky and
Torrego’s analysis is that the word who (by virtue of being the subject of a tensed
clause) carries a tense feature as well as a wh-feature. More speciﬁcally, they
posit that agreement between T and its subject involves not only copying the

210
6 wh-movement
person/number features of the subject onto T but also (conversely) copying the
tense feature of T onto the subject. This is far from implausible from a cross-
linguistic perspective, since in languages like Chamicuro, tense is overtly marked
on subjects, as the following example (from Parker 1999, p. 552) shows:
(47)
Y-al´ıyo ka
k´e:ni
3-fall
thePAST rain
‘The rain fell’ = ‘It rained’
In (47), the head D ka ‘the’ of the subject DP ka k´e:ni ‘the rain’ is a past-tense
determiner (the corresponding non-past determiner being na), providing clear
evidence of tense-marking on the subject. If tense-marking of subjects also takes
place in English, we can assume that a tensed T will have a tensed subject, so that
who in Who called the police? will be a past-tense subject by virtue of being the
subject of a past-tense T. Now, at ﬁrst sight this might seem implausible, since
who doesn’t carry the regular past-tense sufﬁx -d: however, this is because -d is a
verbal sufﬁx which attaches only to (regular) verbs, hence not to a pronoun like
who. Pesetsky and Torrego claim that the tense feature carried by the subject of
a tensed clause in English is manifested as nominative case, so that a nominative
subject is really a subject carrying a tense feature. On this view, who in (42c) Who
called the police? will carry a tense feature which causes the subject pronoun to
be spelled out as the tensed (nominative) form who, rather than as the accusative
form whom or the genitive form whose.
In the light of these assumptions, let’s return to the stage of derivation we
reached in (46) above. As assumed in (41), C in a main-clause question carries
[tns], [wh] and [epp] features: the [tns] feature of C requires C to attract a
tensed constituent to move to the edge of CP, its [wh] feature requires the relevant
structure to contain a wh-marked constituent, and its [epp] feature requires C to
project a speciﬁer carrying a feature matching one of the features of C. One way
of satisfying these requirements would be to move who from spec-TP to spec-CP,
and move (a copy of) the tense afﬁx in T to C (using do-support to provide a host
for the afﬁx). However (as we have already seen), this would wrongly predict that
a sentence like (42d) ∗Who’d call the police? should be grammatical (where ’d
is a clitic form of did). Why should such a derivation (involving two movement
operations, wh-movement and t-to-c movement) lead to ungrammaticality?
Pesetsky and Torrego’s answer is that simply moving who from spec-TP to spec-
CP on its own (without T-to-C movement) can satisfy the requirements of all
three [tns, wh, epp] features of C, and economy considerations dictate that a
derivation involving a single movement operation O should be preferred to one
involving both O and an additional movement operation. Movement of who to
spec-CP can satisfy the [wh] and [epp] features of C because who carries a wh-
feature and moves to spec-CP, and can at the same time satisfy the [tns] feature
of C because who carries a tense feature (by virtue of being the subject of a tensed
clause). The resulting derived structure is as follows (with the arrow showing how
wh-movement applies):

6.7 Pied-piping
211
(48)
CP
PRN
Who
C'
C
[TNS, WH, EPP]
ø
TP
PRN
who
T'
T
Tns
VP
V
call
DP
the police
Since movement of the tensed wh-pronoun who to spec-CP is sufﬁcient to satisfy
the requirements of all three features carried by C, economy considerations dic-
tate that t-to-c movement is unnecessary (hence not permitted) in wh-subject
question structures, Pesetsky and Torrego reason. (An incidental detail is that the
past-tense afﬁx in T will subsequently be lowered onto the head V of VP in the
PF component, with the result that the verb call is ultimately spelled out as
the past-tense form called.)
Pesetsky and Torrego’s analysis allows us to maintain the generalisation in
(41) that all main-clause questions are CPs headed by a C constituent carry-
ing [tns, wh, epp] features. In non-subject questions, the requirements of the
[wh, epp] features of C are met by moving a wh-expression into spec-CP, and
the requirements of its [tns] feature are met by T-to-C movement. But in ques-
tions where the attracted wh-expression is the subject of the interrogative clause,
the requirements of all three features are met by moving the wh-subject who
(which carries a tense feature by virtue of being the subject of a tensed T) into
spec-CP.
6.7
Pied-piping
Our discussion of wh-movement in structures like (26/28) suggested
that a C carrying [wh, epp] features attracts a constituent headed by a wh-word
to move to spec-CP. An interesting problem posed by this assumption is how we
account for what happens in clauses like those bracketed in (49) below where an
(italicised) wh-expression is the complement of a (bold-printed) preposition:
(49) (a)
They asked [who he was referring to]
(b)
They asked [to whom he was referring]
In these examples, the wh-pronoun who(m) is the complement of the preposition
to (whom being the accusative form of the pronoun in formal styles, who in other

212
6 wh-movement
styles). In informal styles, the wh-pronoun who is preposed on its own, leaving
the preposition to stranded or orphaned at the end of the bracketed complement
clause – as in (49a). However, in formal styles, the preposition to is pied-piped
(i.e. dragged) along with the wh-pronoun whom, so that the whole PP to whom
moves to spec-CP position within the bracketed clause – as in (49b). (The pied-
piping metaphor was coined by Ross 1967, based on a traditional fairy story in
which the pied-piper in the village of Hamelin enticed a group of children to
follow him out of a rat-infested village by playing his pipe.)
Given the assumptions we have made hitherto, the bracketed interrogative
complement clause in (49a) will be derived as follows. The preposition to merges
with its pronoun complement who to form the PP to who. This in turn is merged
with the verb referring to form the VP referring to who. This VP is then merged
with the past-tense auxiliary was, forming the T-bar was referring to who which
in turn is merged with its subject he to form the TP he was referring to who.
Merging the resulting TP with a null interrogative complementiser carrying [wh,
epp] features will derive the structure shown in (50) below:
(50)
C'
C
[WH, EPP]
ø
PRN
he
T' 
T
was
VP
V
referring
PP
P
to
PRN
[WH]
who
TP
The [wh, epp] features of C attract a wh-marked maximal projection to move to
the speciﬁer position within CP. Since the only wh-marked maximal projection
in (50) is the wh-pronoun who (which is a maximal projection by virtue of being
the largest expression headed by who) it follows that who will move to spec-CP
(thereby deleting the [wh] and [epp] features of C), so deriving the CP shown in
simpliﬁed form below:
(51)
CP
PRN
[WH]
who
C' 
C
[WH, EPP]
ø
TP
he was referring to who 

6.7 Pied-piping
213
And (51) is the structure of the bracketed interrogative complement clause in
(49a).
Butwhataboutthederivationofthebracketedcomplementclauseintheformal-
style sentence (49b) They asked [to whom he was referring]? How can we account
for the fact that the whole prepositional phrase to whom is moved to the front of the
complement clause in (49b), with the preposition to being pied-piped along with
the wh-pronoun whom? One approach to preposition pied-piping is to assume that
the head P to of the PP to whom carries a wh-feature which it acquires from the
wh-word whom via some form of feature-copying: by virtue of being a projection
of to, the PP to whom will then carry the same wh-feature as its head preposition
to, and so can be attracted by the [wh] feature of C. This is a traditional idea
underlying metaphorical claims in earlier work that a wh-feature can percolate
from a complement onto a preposition, or conversely (to use the more funereal
metaphor adopted by Sag 1997) that a preposition can inherit a wh-feature from
its complement. Let’s suppose that this kind of feature-copying comes about via
merger, and that (in formal styles of English) a preposition is wh-marked when
merged with a wh-complement (in the sense that the wh-feature on the pronoun
is thereby copied onto the preposition).
In the light of this assumption, we can return to consider the derivation of the
formal-style bracketed complement clause in (49b) They asked [to whom he was
referring]. Since the complement of the preposition to in (49b) is the pronoun
whom which contains a wh-feature, to will inherit this wh-feature via merger with
whom in formal styles, and if it does, the bracketed complement clause in (49b)
will have the structure shown in (52) below at the stage of derivation when C
merges with its TP complement:
(52)
C'
C
[WH, EPP]
ø
T'
T
was
VP
V
referring
PP
P
[WH]
to
PRN
[WH]
whom
TP
PRN
he
The PP to whom will consequently carry a [wh] feature (not shown here), by
virtue of being the maximal projection of the wh-marked preposition to. Given
the Attract Closest Principle/ACP, the [wh] feature of C will attract the closest
wh-marked maximal projection c-commanded by C. Since the PP to whom is

214
6 wh-movement
closer to C than the PRN whom, this means that the wh-marked PP to whom
moves to spec-CP, so deriving the structure shown in simpliﬁed form below:
(53)
CP
PP
C'
P
[WH]
 to
PRN
[WH]
whom
C
[WH, EPP]
ø
TP
he was referring to whom
If wh-copying (between a preposition and its wh-object) and use of whom are
both associated with formal styles of English, it follows that preposition pied-
piping will occur with whom but not who. (But see Lasnik and Sobin 2000 for
fuller discussion of the use of whom in present-day English.) Some evidence
which might seem to support a feature-copying analysis of pied-piping comes
from the observation made by Kishimoto (1992) that in Sinhala, a PP comprising
a P and a wh-word has the question-particle də sufﬁxed to the (P head of the)
overall PP, even though the relevant particle normally attaches to a wh-word: if
də attaches to a wh-marked constituent, this would be consistent with the view
that the wh-feature on the wh-word percolates up to the head P of PP. (However,
see Hagstrom 1998 for an alternative account.)
The feature-copying analysis of pied-piping outlined above has interesting
ramiﬁcations for more complex cases of pied-piping, e.g. in sentences such as
(54)
In the capital of which province had the rebels hidden?
If (as we assumed in (37i) above) only a constituent with a wh-marked head can
be attracted by a C carrying [wh, epp] features, the story which we will have to
tell about how the string in the capital of comes to be pied-piped along with the
wh-QP which province will be the following. The preposition of is wh-marked
by merger with its wh-complement which province, and the PP of which province
thereby comes to carry the same wh-feature as its head. The noun capital is
in turn wh-marked by merger with its wh-complement of which province, and
the NP capital of which province carries the same wh-feature as its head. The
determiner the is then wh-marked by merger with its wh-complement capital of
which province, and the DP the capital of which province is thereby wh-marked
as well. The preposition in is subsequently wh-marked by merger with its wh-
complement the capital of which province, with the result that the whole PP in
the capital of which province is wh-marked – and hence can be attracted by a C
with a [wh] feature.
However, there are aspects of this feature-copying analysis which seem ques-
tionable. For example, the assumption that the wh-feature on the word which
(via a series of merger operations) percolates onto of, capital, the and in raises
the question of why none of these words shows any visible sign of being wh-
marked. The proliferation of wh-features entailed by the analysis seems not only

6.7 Pied-piping
215
morphologically unmotivated but also (from the Minimalist perspective of trying
to eliminate unnecessary descriptive apparatus) conceptually unattractive. More-
over, if a [wh] feature can percolate from a complement to a head via merger,
there seems nothing to prevent the [wh] feature on the preposition in spreading
onto the verb hidden in (54) and thence onto its VP projection hidden in the cap-
ital of which province, so triggering wh-movement of the VP headed by hidden
and wrongly predicting that sentences like (55) below are ungrammatical:
(55)
∗Hidden in the capital of which province had the rebels?
Clearly, constraints have to be put on wh-percolation, but the nature of these
constraints is not clear. For example, is it just nominal and prepositional heads
which can be wh-marked via merger with a wh-complement – and if so, why?
Furthermore, it is by no means clear that the core assumption underlying the
analysis (namely that a wh-marked C attracts a constituent with a wh-marked
head) can be defended in relation to sentences like:
(56) (a)
Whose car did he borrow?
(b)
How many cars do you own?
At ﬁrst sight, there might seem to be no problem here: after all, why not simply
assume that whose in (56a) is the head of whose car and that how in (56b) is the
head of how many cars and hence that wh-movement targets a maximal projection
headed by a wh-word like whose/how? However, the problem is that whose cannot
be the head of whose car because whose carries genitive case and yet whose car
is the complement of the transitive verb borrow and so must be accusative; and
likewise how cannot be the head of how many cars because how is a degree
adverb and yet how many cars is not an adverbial phrase but rather a quantiﬁer
phrase. It seems more plausible to take whose and how to be the speciﬁers of the
expressions containing them, so that the relevant expressions have the structures
shown in simpliﬁed form below:
(57)
DP
(b) 
(a) 
QP
PRN
whose
D'
ADV
how
Q'
D
ø
N
car
Q
many
N
cars
(57a) is adapted from Chomsky (1995, p. 263) and assumes that the head of the
overall DP is a null deﬁnite determiner (a null counterpart of the D constituent the),
so that (57a) has an interpretation paraphraseable as ‘the car belonging to who’.
(57b) claims that the overall structure is a plural nominal expression headed by
the quantiﬁer many, with cars serving as its complement and how as its speciﬁer.
The crucial aspect of the analyses in (57a,b) from our perspective is that
the wh-word whose/how is not the head of the overall DP/QP structure, but
rather its speciﬁer. This challenges the core assumption (37i) underlying the

216
6 wh-movement
feature-copying analysis of pied-piping – namely that a wh-marked C attracts a
constituent with a wh-marked head. Such an assumption would provide us with
no account of why the overall nominals whose car and how many cars undergo
wh-movement in (56), and not who and how on their own. Note that we cannot
simply suppose that a phrase is a projection of the features carried by its speciﬁer
as well as those carried by its head, since this would wrongly predict (e.g.) that
whose car (by virtue of having a genitive speciﬁer) should be genitive – when it
is accusative as used in (56a).
Let’s therefore explore an entirely different approach to pied-piping – one
which dispenses with the feature-copying apparatus we used above. Chomsky
(1995, pp. 262–5) offers such an approach based on a principle which we can
outline informally as follows:
(58)
Convergence Principle
A head which attracts a constituent containing a feature [F] attracts
movement of the smallest accessible constituent containing [F] which will
lead to a convergent (i.e. well-formed) derivation
This means that the [wh] feature on C attracts the smallest constituent containing
a word carrying a [wh] feature whose movement will lead to a well-formed
sentence. In the case of a sentence like (34) Which assignment have you done?
the smallest constituent carrying a wh-feature is the wh-word which that is the
head Q of the QP which assignment, and hence a minimal projection; but since the
[epp] feature of C requires C to project a speciﬁer, and the Constituent Structure
Constraint (39ii) tells us that only a maximal projection can occupy a speciﬁer
position,whichcannotmoveonitsown,sothenextsmallestconstituentcontaining
which has to move, namely the QP which assignment. Since this is a maximal
projection, it can move to spec-CP without violation of any constraints.
Now consider how the convergence account handles preposition pied-piping in
the bracketed relative clauses in (49a) They asked [who he was referring to] and
(49b) They asked [to whom he was referring]. These would both have the structure
(50) above at the point where C is merged with its TP complement, and the [wh]
feature of C would attract the smallest constituent containing a wh-word which
will ensure convergence. Since the smallest such constituent is the wh-pronoun
who, it is who which is preposed in informal-style relative-clause structures like
who he was referring to in (49a). But let’s suppose that in formal styles of English,
there is a Stranding Constraint which ‘bars preposition stranding’ (Chomsky
1995, p. 264). This means that (in formal styles) the wh-pronoun whom cannot be
preposed on its own, since this would lead to violation of the Stranding Constraint.
So, instead, the next smallest constituent containing the wh-word is preposed,
namely the PP to whom.
The assumption that pied-piping of additional material along with a wh-word
occurs only when it is forced by the need to ensure convergence offers us an
interesting account of pied-piping in sentences such as (59b–e) below, which are
wh-movement counterparts of the wh-in-situ question in (59a):

6.7 Pied-piping
217
(59) (a)
You had thought a picture of whose mother was on the mantelpiece?
(b)
∗Whose had you thought a picture of mother was on the mantelpiece?
(c)
??Whose mother had you thought a picture of was on the mantelpiece?
(d)
??Of whose mother had you thought a picture was on the mantelpiece?
(e)
∗Picture of whose mother had you thought a was on the mantelpiece?
(f)
A picture of whose mother had you thought was on the mantelpiece?
At the stage of derivation where the main-clause C is merged with its TP com-
plement, (59b–f) will have the structure shown in simpliﬁed form below (if we
take the indeﬁnite article a to be a determiner rather than a quantiﬁer):
(60)
CP
C
ø
TP
PRN
You
T'
T
had
VP
V
thought
CP
C
ø
TP
DP
T'
was on the mantelpiece
D
a
NP
N
picture
PP
P
of
DP
PRN
whose
D'
D
ø
N
mother
The main-clause C constituent at the top of the tree contains an afﬁxal [tns]
feature which attracts the tensed auxiliary had to move to C, and [wh, epp]
features which attract the smallest convergent constituent containing a wh-word
to move to spec-CP. Let’s look carefully at what happens.
Movement of the pronoun whose on its own in (59b) leads to ungrammaticality,
and the obvious question to ask is why this should be. (Part of) the answer lies
in a constraint identiﬁed by Ross (1967), termed the Left Branch Condition,
which we can paraphrase loosely as in (61) below:
(61)
Left Branch Condition/LBC
In languages like English, the leftmost constituent of a nominal, adjectival, or adverbial
expression cannot be extracted out of the expression containing it

218
6 wh-movement
(The term nominal expression can be taken to refer to DP/QP. Within an order-
free theory of syntax, the term leftmost should be reformulated in terms of some
hierarchical counterpart like daughter – but this is a detail we set aside here.)
LBC accounts for the ungrammaticality of structures such as those below in
English (where the italicised wh-word is intended to modify the bold-printed
expression):
(62) (a)
∗Whose are you dating girlfriend?
(b)
∗Which did she choose dress?
(c)
∗How are you happy with it?
(d)
∗How does she work independently of you?
(Irrelevantly,(62c,d)aregrammaticalifhowisconstruedasanindependentadverb
which does not modify the bold-printed material.) Since LBC blocks extraction of
whose on its own in (60), the Convergence Principle (58) tells us to try preposing
the next smallest constituent containing whose, namely the DP whose mother. But
movement of this DP is not possible either, as we see from the ungrammaticality
of (59c). How come?
One reason for the ungrammaticality of (59c) is that it violates a constraint on
movement operations posited by Huang (1982) which we can outline informally
as follows:
(63)
Constraint on Extraction Domains/CED
Only complements allow material to be extracted out of them, not speciﬁers
or adjuncts.
We can illustrate Huang’s CED constraint in terms of the following contrasts:
(64) (a)
He was taking [pictures of who]?
(b)
Who was he taking [pictures of who]?
(65) (a)
[Part of what] has broken?
(b)
∗What has [part of what] broken?
(66) (a)
He was angry [when she hid what]?
(b)
∗What was he angry [when she hid what]?
(64a), (65a) and (66a) are echo questions in which the wh-pronoun who/what
remains in situ, while (64b), (65b) and (66b) are their wh-movement counter-
parts. In (64), who is extracted out of a bracketed nominal expression which
is the complement of the verb taking, and yields the grammatical outcome
(64b) since there is no violation of CED (extraction out of complement expres-
sions being permitted by CED). By contrast, in (65) what is extracted out of a
bracketed expression which is the subject (and hence speciﬁer) of the auxiliary
has, and since CED blocks extraction out of speciﬁers, the resulting sentence
(65b) is ungrammatical. Likewise in (66), what is extracted out of a bracketed
adjunct clause, and since CED blocks extraction out of adjuncts, (66b) is ungram-
matical. (See Nunes and Uriagereka 2000 and Sabel 2002 for attempts to devise
a Minimalist account of CED effects.)

6.7 Pied-piping
219
In the light of Huang’s CED constraint, the reason why extraction of whose
mother leads to ungrammaticality in (59c) should be clear. This is because whose
mother is contained within [DP a picture of whose ø mother] in (60), and since this
DP is the speciﬁer of the T-bar was on the mantelpiece, CED blocks extraction
of any material out of this DP. As should be obvious, movement of whose on
its own in (59b) will also violate CED (as well as LBC) – hence (59b) shows a
higher degree of ill-formedness (by virtue of violating both CED and LBC) than
(59c) (which violates only CED).
In conformity with the Convergence Principle, we therefore try and prepose
the next smallest constituent containing whose in (60), namely the PP of whose
ø mother. But extraction of this PP out of the containing [DP a picture of whose
ø mother] is again blocked by CED. Accordingly, we try and prepose the next
smallest constituent containing whose, namely [NP picture of whose ø mother]:
once again, however, this is blocked by CED – as well as by the Functional
Head Constraint/FHC (discussed in §3.6) which forbids extraction of the com-
plement of a functional head like D or C (and hence blocks extraction of the
complement of the determiner a). Because it violates two constraints (CED and
FHC), (59e) induces a higher degree of ungrammaticality than (59d) (which vio-
lates only CED). We therefore prepose the next smallest constituent containing
whose, namely [DP a picture of whose ø mother]. This is permitted by CED,
since CED only blocks extraction out of a speciﬁer, not extraction of a speciﬁer.
Since this DP is the smallest maximal projection containing whose which can
be preposed without violating any constraint, the convergence analysis correctly
predicts the grammaticality of (59f) A picture of whose mother had you thought
was on the mantelpiece?
We began our analysis of pied-piping in this section by assuming that the [wh]
feature on C can only attract a maximal projection carrying a wh-feature, and
that a phrase only carries a wh-feature if it has a wh-head. We saw that one
analysis of pied-piping consistent with this assumption is that it is the result of a
feature-copying operation by which a head acquires a copy of a wh-feature
carried by a constituent which it merges with. However, we noted that this
account runs into problems in relation to wh-movement structures where the
wh-word is the speciﬁer of the head containing it. We sketched Chomsky’s alter-
native convergence view under which the [wh] feature on C attracts the smallest
constituent containing a wh-word whose movement will lead to a convergent
derivation.
The convergence view is not entirely without posing problems however, as we
can illustrate in terms of the following Polish examples kindly provided by Bob
Borsley:
(67) (a)
Kt´orego Jan widzial me˙zczyzna?
Which
Jan saw
man?
‘Which man did Jan see?’
(b)
Kt´orego me ˙zczyznaJan widzial?
Which
man
Jan saw?
‘Which man did Jan see?’

220
6 wh-movement
If convergence requires us to move the smallest wh-marked constituent, then the
fact that movement of the quantiﬁer kt´orego ‘which’ on its own is permitted would
lead us to suppose that it should not be possible to move the larger QP kt´orego
me˙zczyzna ‘which man?’. It is not clear how such data can best be dealt with
under the convergence account: perhaps (as brieﬂy mentioned in a parenthetical
remark in §6.5) Polish allows either movement of a wh-head to C or movement of
a wh-phrase to spec-CP, and hence permits either the smallest wh-marked head
to move to C, or the smallest wh-phrase to move to spec-CP. Other solutions can
be envisaged, but a book on English syntax is not the place to speculate on Polish
syntax.
6.8
Yes–no questions
Implicit in our earlier claim (41) is the following assumption about
wh-questions in English:
(68)
Main-clause questions are CPs headed by a C which carries [tns, wh, epp] features.
This assumption has interesting implications for the syntax of yes–no questions
such as:
(69)
Is it raining?
It implies that not only wh-questions but also yes–no questions are CPs contain-
ing an interrogative speciﬁer. But what kind of speciﬁer could yes–no questions
contain? The answer suggested in Grimshaw (1993) and Roberts (1993) is that
they contain a null question operator which is directly generated in spec-CP (i.e.
which is positioned in spec-CP by simple merger rather than movement). From
a historical perspective, the null-operator analysis is by no means implausible,
since in Elizabethan English we found main-clause yes–no questions introduced
by the overt question word whether, as illustrated below:
(70) (a)
Whether had you rather lead mine eyes or eye your master’s heels? (Mrs
Page, The Merry Wives of Windsor, III.ii)
(b)
Whether dost thou profess thyself a knave or a fool? (Lafeu, All’s Well That
Ends Well, IV.v)
Given the null-operator analysis of yes–no questions, we can posit that yes–
no questions have essentially the same syntax in present-day English as in
Elizabethan English, save that yes–no questions could be introduced by the
overt interrogative operator whether in Elizabethan English, but are introduced
by a null interrogative operator (a null counterpart of whether) in present-day
English.
A second piece of evidence in support of the null-operator analysis comes
from the fact that yes–no questions can be introduced by whether when they are

6.8 Yes–no questions
221
transposed into reported speech (and so occur in a complement clause), as we see
from the examples below:
(71) (a)
‘Are you feeling better?’ he asked
(b)
He asked whether I was feeling better
A third piece of evidence is that yes–no questions with auxiliary inversion resem-
ble whether questions in that in both cases yes/no are appropriate answers:
(72) (a)
When he asked ‘Did you vote for Larry Loudmouth?’, I said ‘Yes’ and you said ‘No’
(b)
When he asked whether we voted for Larry Loudmouth, I said ‘Yes’ and you said ‘No’
A fourth argument is that main-clause yes–no questions can be tagged by or not
in precisely the same way as complement-clause whether questions:
(73) (a)
Has he ﬁnished or not?
(b)
I can’t say whether he has ﬁnished or not
If yes–no questions are CPs containing a null yes–no question operator (a null
counterpart of whether) in spec-CP, we can arrive at a unitary characterisation of
questions as CPs with an interrogative speciﬁer.
What all of this means is that (69) Is it raining? will be derived as follows.
The present-tense auxiliary is merges with the verb raining to form the T-bar
is raining. The resulting T-bar merges with the subject it to form the TP it is
raining. This TP in turn merges with a null C which has [tns, wh, epp] fea-
tures. The [tns] feature of C attracts (a copy of) the T constituent is to merge
with C; the requirement imposed by the [wh, epp] features of C for CP to con-
tain a wh-speciﬁer is satisﬁed by merging a null yes–no question operator in
spec-CP (which, for concreteness, we can take to be a null counterpart of the
adverb whether, below symbolised as whether), ultimately deriving the structure
shown below (after deletion of the features of C and of the original occurrence
of is):
(74)
CP
ADV
whether
C'
C
[TNS, WH, EPP]
Is+ø
TP
 PRN
it
T'
T
is
V
raining
If we take the yes–no question operator to be a null counterpart of whether, the
lexical entry for whether will need to specify that it receives a null spellout in
main clauses but is spelled out as |weðə| elsewhere.

222
6 wh-movement
6.9
Wh-exclamatives
Although we have so far concentrated on interrogative clauses, there
are a number of other types of wh-clause found in English. One of these are
exclamative clauses like:
(75) (a)
What fun we have had!
(b)
What a pain in the neck he must be!
(c)
How badly he is behaving!
(d)
How he longed to see her again!
These show wh-movement of an (italicised) exclamative wh-expression (contain-
ing what! or how!) but no auxiliary inversion. Within the framework adopted here,
one way of accounting for this is to suppose that wh-exclamative clauses are CPs
headed by an exclamative C – i.e. by a C containing an exclamative force feature,
[excl-force] – and that an exclamative C carries [wh] and [epp] features but no
[tns] feature (because the only kind of wh-clause whose head C contains a [tns]
feature is a main-clause question). This means that when C merges with its TP
complement, (75a) will have the following structure:
(76)
C' 
C
[WH, EPP]
ø
TP
PRN
we
T'
T
have
VP
V
had
QP
Q
what
N
fun
The [wh] feature of C attracts the closest maximal projection with a wh-word (i.e.
the QP what fun) and moves it into spec-CP, simultaneously deleting the [wh,
epp] features on C. The resulting derived structure is that shown in simpliﬁed
form below:
(77)
CP
QP
C'
Q
what
N
fun
C
[WH, EPP]
ø
TP
PRN
we
T'
T
have
VP
had what fun 

6.10 Relative clauses
223
The auxiliary have remains in situ in the head T position of TP, since C in (76)
and (77) does not have a [tns] feature and hence cannot attract have to move
from T to C.
6.10
Relative clauses
A further type of wh-clause (brieﬂy touched on earlier in relation to
(12c), (13), (19) and (20) above) are relative clauses like those bracketed below:
(78) (a)
It’s hard to ﬁnd someone [who you can relate to]
(b)
It’s hard to ﬁnd someone [to whom you can relate]
(c)
Can you think of things [which she might need]?
(d)
Is there anybody [whose car I can borrow]?
They are called relative clauses because they contain a relative pronoun
(who/whose/which) that ‘relates’ (i.e. refers back) to an (italicised) antecedent
in a higher clause (generally one which immediately precedes the bold-printed
relative wh-expression). Each of the bracketed relative clauses in (78) contains
a bold-printed wh-expression which has undergone wh-movement and thereby
been positioned at the front of the bracketed relative clause. In (78b) the prepo-
sition to has been pied-piped along with the (relative) wh-pronoun whom, so that
to whom is preposed rather than whom on its own; likewise, in (78d) the noun car
is pied-piped along with the genitive wh-pronoun whose.
Relativewh-clausesresembleexclamativewh-clausesinthattheytooshowwh-
movement without auxiliary inversion. We can therefore analyse them in a similar
way, namely as CPs containing a C with [wh, epp] features but no [tns] feature.
On this view, the bracketed relative clause in (78a) would have the simpliﬁed
structure shown below at the point where C is merged with its TP complement:
(79)
[C øwh, epp] [TP you [T can] [VP [V relate] [PP [P to] who]]]
The [wh, epp] features of the null C attract the closest maximal projection with
a wh-word – i.e. the bold-printed relative pronoun who (which is the maximal
projection of the wh-word who). Who then moves to spec-CP, thereby deleting
the [wh, epp] features of C and so forming the CP (80) below:
(80)
[CP who [C øwh, epp] [TP you [T can] [VP [V relate] [PP [P to] who]]]]
An alternative possibility found in more formal styles is for the whole PP to be
preposed, so that to is pied-piped along with the relative pronoun, deriving the
structure shown in simpliﬁed form below:
(81)
[CP to whom [C øwh, epp] [TP you [T can] [VP [V relate] to whom]]]
The relative pronoun in structures like (81) is spelled out as the accusative form
whom in formal styles.

224
6 wh-movement
Although the relative pronoun is overtly spelled out as who/whom in structures
like (80) and (81) above, relative pronouns in English can also be given a null
spellout, so resulting in bare relative clauses (i.e. relative clauses which contain
no overt relative pronoun) like those bracketed in the (b) examples below:
(82) (a)
It’s hard to ﬁnd people [who you can trust]
(b)
It’s hard to ﬁnd people [you can trust]
(83) (a)
This is something [which I will treasure]
(b)
This is something [I will treasure]
(84) (a)
I know a place [where you can stay]
(b)
I know a place [you can stay]
(85) (a)
I remember the time [when we ﬁrst met]
(b)
I remember the time [we ﬁrst met]
(86) (a)
That’s the reason [why I was late]
(b)
That’s the reason [I was late]
Although the bare relative clauses in the (b) examples don’t contain an overt rela-
tive pronoun, there is reason to believe that they contain a null relative pronoun –
and hence (e.g.) that (82b) contains a null counterpart of who. For example, the
verb trust in (82b) is a two-place transitive predicate which requires a noun or
pronoun expression as its complement: since trust has no overt object, it must
have a null object of some kind. On the assumption that all relative clauses contain
a relative pronoun, the object must be a relative pronoun (or relative operator,
to use alternative technical terminology). For concreteness, let’s suppose that the
object of the verb trust in (82b) is the relative pronoun who. If so, the bracketed
relative clauses in (82a,b) will both have the structure shown below at the point
where the null complementiser C is merged with its TP complement:
(87)
[C øwh, epp] [TP you [T can] [VP [V trust] who]]
The [wh, epp] features of the complementiser will attract the relative pronoun
who to move to spec-CP and are thereafter deleted (along with the trace copy of
the moved pronoun who), so deriving the CP (88) below:
(88)
[CP who [C øwh, epp] [TP you [T can] [VP [V trust] who]]]
If we further suppose that the PF component permits a relative pronoun which
occupies spec-CP position in a relative clause to be given a null spellout, then
who in (88) can be given a null spellout in the PF component, so deriving:
(89)
[CP who [C øwh, epp] [TP you [T can] [VP [V trust] who]]]
One reason why the relative pronoun can be given a null spellout may be that
its person/number/gender features can be identiﬁed by its antecedent: e.g. who
refers back to people in (82a) and so is identiﬁable as a third-person-plural animate
pronoun even if deleted.

6.10 Relative clauses
225
While the analysis of bare relative clauses sketched above is plausible, an
important question to ask is whether there is any empirical evidence in support
of the key assumption that bare relative clauses contain a relative pronoun which
undergoes wh-movement in the same way as overt relative pronouns do. An
interesting piece of evidence in support of a wh-movement analysis comes from
islandhood effects. As we noted earlier in §6.3, Ross (1967) argued that certain
types of syntactic structures are islands – i.e. they are structures out of which
no subpart can be moved via any kind of movement operation (the general idea
behind his metaphor being that any constituent which is on an island is marooned
there and can’t be removed from the island by any movement operation of any
kind). One type of island identiﬁed by Ross are wh-clauses (i.e. clauses beginning
with a wh-expression). In this connection, note the ungrammaticality of sentences
like:
(90)
∗He is someone [who nobody knows [what the FBA did to]]
(intended to have a meaning which can be paraphrased somewhat clumsily as
‘He is someone such that nobody knows what the FBA did to him’). In (90), the
relative pronoun who is the object of the preposition to, and is moved out of the
bracketed did-clause to the front of the knows-clause. However, the did-clause is
a wh-clause (by virtue of being introduced by what) and wh-clauses are islands:
this means that moving who out of the did-clause will lead to violation of Ross’s
wh-island constraint (forbidding any constituent from being moved out of a
wh-clause: see Sabel 2002 for a more detailed account of the constraint).
What is of more immediate relevance to our claim that bare relative clauses
contain a relative pronoun which undergoes wh-movement is that bare relative
clauses exhibit the same islandhood effect, as we see from the ungrammaticality
of:
(91)
∗He is someone [nobody knows [what the FBA did to]]
How can we account for this? Given our assumption that bare relative clauses
contain a relative pronoun which moves to spec-CP and is subsequently given
a null spellout in the PF component, (91) will have the structure (92) below
(simpliﬁed in numerous respects, including by not showing trace copies of moved
constituents):
(92)
∗He is someone [CP who [C ø] nobody knows [CP what [C ø] the FBA did to]]
The relative pronoun who is initially merged as the complement of the preposition
to and is then moved out of the did-clause to the front of the knows-clause, and
receives a null spellout in the PF component. But since the did-clause is a wh-
clause (by virtue of containing the preposed wh-word what) and since wh-clauses
are islands, movement of the relative pronoun out of the did-clause will lead to
violation of the wh-island constraint. Thus, our assumption that bare relative
clauses contain a relative pronoun which undergoes wh-movement provides a
principled account of the ungrammaticality of structures like (92).

226
6 wh-movement
In ﬁnite relative clauses like those bracketed in (82)–(86) above, the (italicised)
relative pronoun can optionally be given a null spellout. But in inﬁnitival relative
clauses like those bracketed below, it is obligatory for the relative pronoun to
have a null spellout:
(93) (a)
∗Everyone needs someone [who to love]
(b)
Everyone needs someone [to love]
(94) (a)
∗I have no comment [which to make]
(b)
I have no comment [to make]
(95) (a)
∗I need a place [where to stay]
(b)
I need a place [to stay]
(96) (a)
∗It’s the right time [when to act]
(b)
It’s the right time [to act]
(97) (a)
∗There’s no reason [why to complain]
(b)
There’s no reason [to complain]
The bracketed structures in (93)–(97) above are control clauses, hence CPs con-
taining a null intransitive complementiser and a null PRO subject. Given the
assumptions made here, (93b) will have the partial, simpliﬁed structure shown in
(98) below:
(98)
Everyone needs someone [CP who [C øwh, epp] [TP pro [T to] [VP [V love] who]]]
The relative pronoun will move from VP-complement position to CP-speciﬁer
position, and obligatorily be given a null spellout.
It is also obligatory for a relative pronoun to be given a null spellout in inﬁnitival
relative clauses containing the transitive complementiser for – as we see from the
examples below:
(99) (a)
∗Find someone [who for them to play with]!
(b)
Find someone [for them to play with]!
(100) (a)
∗Find a pen [which for me to write with]!
(b)
Find a pen [for me to write with]!
(101) (a)
∗I’ve got a place [where for him to stay]
(b)
I’ve got a place [for him to stay]
(102) (a)
∗This is the time [when for you to leave]
(b)
This is the time [for you to leave]
(103) (a)
∗There’s no reason [why for her to cry]
(b)
There’s no reason [for her to cry]
Accordingly, an inﬁnitival relative clause like that bracketed in (99b) will contain
a relative pronoun like who which is initially merged as the complement of the
preposition with and then moves to become the speciﬁer of the complementiser
for, ultimately being given a null spellout.

6.10 Relative clauses
227
So far, we have seen that relative pronouns are optionally given a null spell-
out in ﬁnite relative clauses, and obligatorily given a null spellout in non-ﬁnite
(inﬁnitival) relative clauses. However, there is an important complication which
we have overlooked so far, which relates to pied-piping. In (both ﬁnite and non-
ﬁnite) relative clauses in which other material is pied-piped along with the relative
pronoun when it moves to the front of the relative clause, the relative pronoun
cannot be null but rather must be overtly spelled out – as we see from the contrast
below (where strikethrough is used to denote a ‘silent’ relative pronoun with a
null spellout, and traces of moved wh-pronouns are omitted):
(104) (a)
I need something [which I can write with]
(b)
I need something [which I can write with]
(c)
I need something [with which I can write]
(d)
∗I need something [with which I can write]
(105) (a)
He is someone [who you can rely on]
(b)
He is someone [who you can rely on]
(c)
He is someone [on whom you can rely]
(d)
∗He is someone [on whom you can rely]
Why should it be that relative pronouns can have a null spellout in structures like
(104b) and (105b), but not in structures like (104d) and (105d)?
The reason seems to be related to a difference in the superﬁcial position occu-
pied by the relative pronoun in the two types of clause. This positional difference
becomes apparent if we compare the superﬁcial structure of the bracketed relative
clauses in (104a,b) with that of the relative clauses in (104c,d), shown in (106)
below:
(106)
CP
(b)  
(a)  
CP
C'
PP
C'
P
with
PRN
which
PRN
which
C
ø
TP
I can write with which
C
ø
TP
I can write with which
In (106a), the italicised relative pronoun which ends up (at the end of the syntactic
derivation) as the speciﬁer of the null complementiser heading the relative clause,
and can be given a null spellout. By contrast, in (106b) the relative pronoun
remains the complement of the preposition with throughout the derivation, and
it is the whole PP with which that is in spec-CP. The descriptive generalisation
which this suggests is the following:
(107)
Relative Pronoun Spellout Condition/RPSC
A relative pronoun occupying spec-CP position in a relative clause is given
a null spellout at PF (optionally in a ﬁnite clause, obligatorily in a non-ﬁnite
clause)

228
6 wh-movement
In accordance with RPSC, which can receive a null spellout in (106a) by virtue
of occupying CP-speciﬁer position, but not in (106b) by virtue of occupying
PP-complement position.
Since it is obligatory for a relative pronoun in spec-CP to receive a null spellout
in a non-ﬁnite relative clause, relative pronouns in non-ﬁnite relative clauses are
spelled out differently from their ﬁnite counterparts – as we can see by comparing
the examples in (104) above with those in (108) below:
(108) (a)
∗I need something [which to write with]
(b)
I need something [which to write with]
(c)
I need something [with which to write]
(d)
∗I need something [with which to write]
The key difference is that whereas a relative pronoun which occupies the speciﬁer
position in a ﬁnite relative clause can either have an overt spellout as in (104a)
or a null spellout as in (104b), a relative pronoun which occupies spec-CP in an
inﬁnitival relative clause obligatorily receives a null spellout as in (108b), and
cannot be overtly spelled out – as we see from the ungrammaticality of (108a).
6.11
That-relatives
A type of relative clause which we have not so far looked at are that-
relatives (i.e. relative clauses introduced by that) like those bracketed below:
(109) (a)
It’s hard to ﬁnd people [that you can trust]
(b)
There is little [that anyone can do]
(c)
We now have computers [that even a child can use]
What’s the status of that in such clauses? One answer (suggested by Sag 1997)
is that the word that is a relative pronoun which behaves in much the same way
as other relative pronouns like who and which. However, an alternative analysis
which we will adopt here is to take that to be a relative clause complementiser
(= C). The C analysis accounts for several properties of relative that. Firstly, it
is homophonous with the complementiser that found in declarative clauses like
that bracketed in:
(110)
I said [that you were right]
and has the same phonetically reduced exponent /ðət/. Secondly, (unlike a typical
wh-pronoun) it can only occur in ﬁnite relative clauses like those bracketed in
(109) above, not in inﬁnitival relative clauses like those bracketed below:
(111) (a)
The director is looking for locations [in which to ﬁlm a documentary about the FBA]
(b)
∗The director is looking for locations [that to ﬁlm a documentary about the FBA in]
Thirdly, unlike a typical wh-pronoun such as who (which has the formal-style
accusative form whom and the genitive form whose), relative that is invariable

6.11 That-relatives
229
and has no variant case forms – e.g. it lacks the genitive form that’s in standard
varieties of English, as we see from (112) below:
(112) (a)
Lord Lancelot Humpalot is someone [whose ego is even bigger than his libido]
(b)
∗Lord Lancelot Humpalot is someone [that’s ego is even bigger than his libido]
Fourthly, unlike a typical wh-pronoun, that does not allow pied-piping of a prepo-
sition:
(113) (a)
There are still diseases [for which there is no cure]
(b)
∗There are still diseases [for that there is no cure]
Observations such as these suggest that relative that is a complementiser rather
than a relative pronoun. If so, that-relative clauses will be headed by an overt
complementiser in the same way as inﬁnitival relative clauses containing the
transitive complementiser for in sentences such as (99–103) above.
However, given the assumption that all relative clauses contain a relative pro-
noun, it is plausible to conclude that relative clauses headed by that contain a
relative pronoun which moves to spec-CP and which is ultimately given a null
spellout in the PF component. The analysis of relative clause that as a complemen-
tiser which attracts a wh-pronoun to become its speciﬁer is lent some plausibility
by the fact that in earlier varieties of English we found relative clauses containing
an overt (preposed) wh-pronoun followed by the complementiser that – as the
following examples illustrate:
(114) (a)
In every peril [which that is to drede] . . . (Chaucer, Troilus and Criseyde)
(b)
He hathe seyd that he woold lyfte them [whom that hym plese] (Middle
English, from Traugott 1972, p. 156)
Moreover, we have syntactic evidence from island constraints in support of
analysingthat-relativesinpresent-dayEnglishasinvolvingmovementofarelative
pronoun to spec-CP. For example, relative clauses containing that show the same
wh-island sensitivity as relative clauses containing an overt wh-pronoun like
who:
(115) (a)
∗He is someone [who nobody knows [what the FBA did to]]
(b)
∗He is someone [that nobody knows [what the FBA did to]]
This parallelism suggests that the derivation of that-relatives involves a relative
pronoun moving to the spec-CP position within the relative clause and subse-
quently being given a null spellout at PF, with the ungrammaticality of (115a,b)
being attributed to the fact that the relative pronoun originates as the complement
of the preposition to and is extracted out of the bracketed what-clause in violation
of the wh-island constraint.
This being so, the bracketed relative clause in (109a) It’s hard to ﬁnd people
[that you can trust] will involve merging a relative pronoun like who as the object
of the verb trust, so that the relative clause has the structure shown below at the
point where the complementiser that is merged with its TP complement:

230
6 wh-movement
(116)
[C thatwh, epp] [TP you [T can] [VP [V trust] who]]
The [wh, epp] features of the complementiser that will attract the relative pronoun
who to become the speciﬁer of that and are thereby deleted (along with the trace
copy of the moved pronoun who), so deriving the CP (117) below:
(117)
[CP who [C thatwh, epp] [TP you [T can] [VP [V trust] who]]]
The spellout condition (107) will allow the relative pronoun to be given a null
spellout in the PF component, so deriving:
(118)
[CP who [C thatwh, epp] [TP you [T can] [VP [V trust] who]]]
and (118) is the structure of the bracketed relative clause in (109a).
However, an important complication arises at this point. After all, our Relative
Pronoun Spellout Condition/RPSC (107) tells us that a relative pronoun is option-
ally given a null spellout in a ﬁnite clause. So, while we would expect a structure
like (118) in which the relative pronoun has a null spellout to be grammatical, we
would also expect a structure like (117) in which the relative pronoun is overtly
spelled out as who to be grammatical. It might at ﬁrst sight seem as if we can get
round this problem by modifying RPSC so as to specify that a relative pronoun
is obligatorily given a null spellout in a relative clause headed by the comple-
mentiser that. However, this will not account for the fact that relative clauses
headed by that are also ungrammatical if other material is pied-piped along with
the relative pronoun:
(119) (a)
∗Colombo has found the weapon [with which that she was killed]
(b)
∗She is someone [on whom that you can rely]
And indeed, the same is true of inﬁnitival relative clauses headed by the comple-
mentiser for:
(120) (a)
∗Try and ﬁnd something [with which for me to write]
(b)
∗There must be someone [in whom for me to conﬁde]
Why should sentences like (119) and (120) be ungrammatical?
The answer given to this question by Chomsky and Lasnik (1977) is that
such sentences violate a constraint operating in present-day English they call the
Multiply Filled COMP Filter/MFCF, and which we can outline informally as
follows:
(121)
Multiply Filled COMP Filter/MFCF
Any CP which contains an overt complementiser (that/if/for) with an overt
speciﬁer is ungrammatical
The relevant ‘ﬁlter’ is arguably reducible to a lexical property of overt com-
plementisers (namely that they don’t allow an overt speciﬁer). Be that as it
may, MFCF helps us account for contrasts such as the following in present-day
English:

6.11 That-relatives
231
(122) (a)
∗They’re looking for places [CP which [C that] FBA agents can hide in]
(b)
∗They’re looking for places [CP in which [C that] FBA agents can hide]
(c)
They’re looking for places [CP which [C that] FBA agents can hide in]
(123) (a)
∗They’re looking for places [CP which [C for] FBA agents to hide in]
(b)
∗They’re looking for places [CP in which [C for] FBA agents to hide]
(c)
They’re looking for places [CP which [C for] FBA agents to hide in]
Sentences like (122a,b) and (123a,b) violate MFCF because they contain an overt
wh-expression (which or in which) which serves as the speciﬁer of an overt
complementiser (that or for): (123b) is also ruled out by the spellout condition
(107) which requires a relative pronoun which occupies the speciﬁer position in
a non-ﬁnite relative clause to have a null spellout. By contrast, (122c) and (123c)
involve no violation of MFCF because they contain a null relative pronoun which
serves as the speciﬁer of an overt complementiser.
In some varieties of English, MFCF seems to have a rather different form,
permitting wh+that clauses like that bracketed (124a) below, but not those like
that bracketed in (124b):
(124) (a) %I really don’t know [what kind of plan that he has in mind]
(b)
∗I really don’t know [what that he has in mind]
As noted by Zwicky (2002), the relevant varieties permit wh+that structures when
the wh-expression is a wh-phrase like what kind of plan, but not when it is a wh-
pronoun like what. Such varieties seem to have a somewhat different version of
MFCF from that which operates in Standard English.
Since our discussion in this section and the last has made much use of null
relative pronouns, it is interesting to explore the question of whether there are
parallels between these and other null pronouns – e.g. null subject pronouns
like ‘big PRO’ and ‘little pro’. The answer seems to be that there are indeed
potential parallels. For example, we claimed in §4.9 that in a control clause like
that bracketed below:
(125)
I tried [CP [C ø] [TP PRO [T to] help him]]
the null complementiser [C ø] in the bracketed control clause obligatorily assigns
null case to the subject of its TP complement. What this means is that the only
type of subject which TP permits in a control clause is a null ‘big PRO’ subject.
Let’s suppose that just as the complementiser in a control clause requires the
null spellout of a constituent which it case-marks (with the result that the only
kind of subject allowed in a control clause is PRO), so too an overt relative-
clause complementiser like for/that requires the null spellout of the wh-marked
constituent which it attracts (with the result that relative clauses headed by for/that
must contain a null relative pronoun). This assumption would account for the
pattern of data found in for/that relative clauses like those bracketed in (122) and
(123) above.

232
6 wh-movement
But what about relative clauses headed by a null inﬁnitival complementiser?
Here the distribution of null relative pronouns seems more akin to that of ‘little
pro’ subjects in a null-subject language like Italian. In Italian, the subject of a
ﬁnite clause is only null if it is a weak pronoun (e.g. one which is not focused
or used contrastively), not if it is a DP like il presidente della repubblica ‘the
president of the republic’ or Maria: hence, we ﬁnd both overt and null subjects
in ﬁnite clauses in Italian. If we suppose that relative pronouns are weak (as
seems plausible since they cannot carry contrastive stress), we can draw a parallel
between pro subjects in a null-subject language and English relative pronouns in
a relative clause introduced by a null inﬁnitival complementiser: if the wh-moved
expression in the relative clause comprises a relative pronoun on its own (as in
structures like (108a,b) above), it must obligatorily be given a null spellout (in
the same way as a weak subject pronoun in a ﬁnite clause in Italian must be given
a null spellout). But if the moved wh-expression is a larger structure (e.g. a PP
comprising a preposition and a relative pronoun as in 108c,d), the wh-expression
cannot be given a null spellout (in the same way as a DP subject like il presidente
della repubblica ‘the president of the republic’ in a ﬁnite clause in Italian cannot
be given a null spellout).
Finally, consider ﬁnite relative clauses headed by a null complementiser like
those in (104a,b) and (105a,b) above, where a relative pronoun in spec-CP option-
ally receives a null spellout. There seem to be wider parallels here with the phe-
nomenon of Topic Drop in ﬁnite clauses in languages like German. In German,
an expression which is the topic of a sentence can be moved into the speciﬁer
position within CP (with concomitant movement of an auxiliary or non-auxiliary
verb into C) and can optionally be given a null spellout if it is a pronoun – as we
see from the optionality of the pronominal topic das ‘that’ in structures like that
below (from Rizzi 1992, p. 105):
(126)
(Das) habe ich gestern
gekauft
(That) have I
yesterday bought
‘I bought that yesterday’
If the preposed pronominal topic das ‘that’ in (126) occupies spec-CP position, the
conditions under which it optionally receives a null spellout can be assimilated to
those under which a relative pronoun in spec-CP optionally receives a null spellout
in a ﬁnite clause headed by a null complementiser in English. Of course, important
theoretical questions remain about how and why certain types of pronoun in spec-
CP in certain types of clause receive a null spellout – but we shall not pursue
these here. And the null spellout of whether in root main clauses may be a related
phenomenon, given the observation by Rizzi (2000) that (in some languages) the
speciﬁer of a root clause can have a null spellout in certain types of structure.
A ﬁnal descriptive detail which should be noted is that our discussion of relative
clauses in this section and the last has concentrated on restrictive relative clauses,
so called because in a sentence such as:
(127)
I saw the man [(who/that) they arrested] on TV

6.11 That-relatives
233
the bracketed relative clause restricts the class of men being referred to in the
sentence to the one who they arrested. A different type of relative clause are
appositive relative clauses like those italicised below:
(128) (a)
John (who used to live in Cambridge) is a very good friend of mine
(b)
Yesterday I met my bank manager, who was in a ﬁlthy mood
(c)
Mary has left home – which is very upsetting for her parents
They generally serve as ‘parenthetical comments’ or ‘afterthoughts’ set off in a
separate intonation group from the rest of the sentence in the spoken language (this
being marked by parentheses, or a comma, or a hyphen in the written language).
Unlike restrictives, appositives can be used to qualify unmodiﬁed proper nouns
(i.e. proper nouns like John which are not modiﬁed by a determiner like the).
Moreover, they are always introduced by an overt relative pronoun, as we see in
relation to the parenthesised appositive relative clauses below:
(129) (a)
John (who you met last week) is a good friend of mine
(b)
∗John (that you met last week) is a good friend of mine
(c)
∗John (you met last week) is a good friend of mine
Furthermore, whereas a restrictive relative clause like that bracketed in (130a)
below can be extraposed (i.e. moved) to the end of the containing clause and
thereby be separated from its italicised antecedent, an appositive relative clause
like that bracketed in (130b) does not allow extraposition:
(130) (a)
A man has been arrested [who the police want to interview about a series of burglaries]
(b)
∗John has been arrested [who the police want to interview about a series of burglaries]
A third type of relative clause are so-called free relative clauses such as those
italicised in:
(131) (a)
What you say is true
(b)
I will go where you go
(c)
I don’t like how he behaved towards her
They are characterised by the fact that the wh-pronoun what/where/how appears
to be antecedentless, in that it doesn’t refer back to any other constituent in the
sentence. Moreover, the set of relative pronouns found in free relative clauses is
different from that found in restrictives or appositives: e.g. what and how can serve
as free relative pronouns, but not as appositive or restrictive relative pronouns;
and conversely which can serve as a restrictive or appositive relative pronoun but
not as a free relative pronoun. Appositive relatives (discussed in Citko 2002) and
free relatives are interesting in their own right, but we shall not attempt to explore
their syntax here.
Although there are many interesting aspects of relative clauses which we will
not go into here, the brief outline given in this section and the preceding one suf-
ﬁces for the purpose of underlining that it is not only interrogative wh-expressions
which undergo wh-movement, but also exclamative wh-expressions and relative
wh-expressions (with the latter showing null spellout of a wh-pronoun in certain

234
6 wh-movement
types of relative clause). Indeed, there are a range of other constructions which
have been claimed to involve wh-movement of a null wh-operator, including com-
parative clauses like (132a) below, as-clauses like (132b), and so-called tough-
clauses like (132c):
(132) (a)
It is bigger than I expected it to be
(b)
Ames was a spy, as the FBI eventually discovered
(c)
Syntax is tough to understand
It is interesting to note that (132a) has a variant form containing the overt wh-word
what in some (non-standard) varieties of English, where we ﬁnd It is bigger than
what I expected it to be: see Kennedy and Merchant (2000), Lechner (2001) and
Kennedy (2002) for discussion of comparative structures; see also Potts (2002)
for discussion of as-structures like (132b). We will not attempt to fathom the
syntax of constructions like those in (132) here, however.
6.12
Summary
We began this chapter in §6.2 by arguing that main-clause wh-
questions are CPs headed by a C constituent which attracts a tensed auxiliary
to move to C via head movement and a wh-expression to move into spec-CP
via wh-movement. In §6.3 we argued that a moved wh-expression leaves behind
a null copy of itself at its extraction site (i.e. in the position out of which it is
extracted/moved); we presented arguments to this effect from wanna-contraction,
preposition-copying, wh-copying, split spellout and operator-variable binding;
and we noted that in earlier work, copies were analysed as traces. In §6.4 we
outlined an analysis of complement-clause wh-questions, under which C carries
[wh] and [epp] features which attract a wh-expression c-commanded by C to
move to spec-CP. We noted that in consequence of the Attract Closest Princi-
ple, C in multiple wh-questions attracts movement of the closest wh-expression
which it c-commands. In §6.5 we looked at main-clause wh-questions, arguing
that C in such cases carries not only [wh, epp] features but also a [tns] feature.
We asked why the [tns] feature of C attracts movement of T rather than TP,
and concluded that movement of TP is ruled out by a Remerger Constraint
which bars a head from being merged with the same constituent more than once;
we argued that movement of an inverted auxiliary from T to C rather than to
spec-CP is the consequence of a Constituent Structure Constraint to the effect
that only a head can occupy a head position, and only a maximal projection can
occupy a speciﬁer position. We also asked why the [wh] feature of C attracts
movement of a whmax (i.e. a maximal projection containing a wh-word) rather
than a minimal projection, and concluded that this is because the [epp] feature of
C requires C to project a speciﬁer, and the Constituent Structure Constraint will
only allow a maximal projection to occupy a speciﬁer position. We looked brieﬂy
at an alternative account developed by Chomsky under which the [tns] feature
of C is an afﬁxal feature which triggers head movement in the PF component,

6.12 Summary
235
whereas the [wh] feature of C is a syntactic feature which triggers movement of
a whmax to spec-CP. In §6.6 we discussed the syntax of wh-subject questions
like Who called the police? which contain a wh-word which is the subject of
the interrogative clause. We noted that such questions do not involve auxiliary
inversion, and outlined Pesetsky and Torrego’s account under which the rele-
vant clauses are CPs, with the [wh] and [tns] features of C jointly attracting
the wh-subject to move from spec-TP to spec-CP (the relevant wh-subject being
assumed to carry a copy of the tense feature carried by T). In §6.7 we noted that
although the [wh, epp] features of C (in simple cases) attract the closest max-
imal projection with a wh-head to move to spec-CP in English, wh-movement
in formal styles of English may result in a preposition being pied-piped along
with the wh-expression. We outlined a feature-copying account under which
(in formal but not informal styles of English) a transitive preposition inherits a
wh-feature carried by its complement, with the result that the preposition itself
carries a [wh] feature, and its containing PP thereby becomes the closest whmax
to C (and hence moves to spec-CP). We noted, however, that this account runs
into problems in relation to structures which involve movement of a wh-phrase
in which the wh-word is the speciﬁer rather than the head of the phrase. We
outlined Chomsky’s alternative convergence account under which a C with a
[wh] feature attracts the smallest constituent containing a wh-word which will
lead to convergence (i.e. which will ensure a grammatical outcome). In §6.8 we
looked brieﬂy at the syntax of yes–no questions, arguing that these contain a
null question operator (a null counterpart of whether) in spec-CP. In §6.9 we
discussed the syntax of exclamative clauses, arguing that these are CPs in which
the head C constituent carries [wh, epp] features, but no [tns] feature: hence,
exclamative clauses involve wh-movement without auxiliary inversion. In §6.10,
we looked at the derivation of relative clauses, arguing that this involves move-
ment of a wh-expression containing a relative pronoun to spec-CP, with a relative
pronoun receiving a null spellout when occupying spec-CP – optionally in ﬁnite
clauses, obligatorily in inﬁnitival clauses. In §6.11, we looked at that-relatives,
arguing that these too involve movement of a wh-pronoun to spec-CP, with the
wh-pronoun obligatorily receiving a null spellout in consequence of the Multiply
Filled COMP Filter. We explored typological similarities between null relative
pronouns and other types of null pronoun (including null pro and PRO subjects
and null topics).
Overall, the main point of this chapter has been to look at the syntax of pre-
posed (interrogative, exclamative and relative) wh-expressions. All three types of
expression end up (via movement) in an A-bar position – i.e. a speciﬁer position
which can be occupied by either an argument or an adjunct. Because it moves wh-
expressions into spec-CP and spec-CP is an A-bar position, wh-movement can be
regarded as a particular instance of a more general A-bar movement operation.
(As should be obvious, the term A-bar here is used in an entirely different manner
from the way we employed it in §3.5, when we claimed that in an adjectival phrase
like very proud of him, the string proud of him is an A-bar constituent and thus
an intermediate projection of the adjective proud.)

236
6 wh-movement
Workbook section
Exercise 6.1
Discuss the derivation of the wh-clauses below, drawing tree diagrams to show their superﬁcial
structure and saying why they are grammatical or ungrammatical in standard varieties of
English:
1a
Which ﬁlm have you seen?
b
∗Which have you seen ﬁlm?
2a
Dare anyone say anything?
b
Who interrupted him?
3a
Who/?Whom were you talking to?
b
To whom/?To who were you talking?
4a
Who have they spoken to?
b
Who’ve they spoken to?
c
?To who have they spoken?
d
∗To who’ve they spoken?
5a
Which picture of you have they published?
b
∗Which picture of you’ve they published?
6a
What excuse has he given?
b
∗What has he given excuse?
c
∗What excuse he has given?
d
∗What he has given excuse?
7a
In whose mother has he conﬁded?
b
Whose mother has he conﬁded in?
c
∗Whose has he conﬁded in mother?
d
∗In whose has he conﬁded mother?
8a
What courage he has shown!
b
∗What he has shown courage!
c
∗What courage has he shown!
d
∗What has he shown courage!
9a
How proud of him you must be!
b
How proud you must be of him!
10a
The leader of which party has resigned?
b
∗Leader of which party has the resigned?
c
?Of which party has the leader resigned?
d
?Which party has the leader of resigned?
e
∗Which has the leader of party resigned?
In addition, comment on relevant aspects of the syntax of the interrogative/exclamative
Shakespearean sentences in (11) below, the African American English interrogatives in (12) (from
Green 1998, pp. 98–9) and the bracketed complement clauses in Belfast English (adapted from
Henry 1995) in (13) and (14):
11a
What sayst thou? (Olivia, Twelfth Night, III.iv)
b
What dost thou say? (Othello, Othello, III.iii)
c
What didst not like? (Othello, Othello, III.iii)
d
What visions have I seen! (Titania, A Midsummer Night’s Dream, V.i)

Workbook section
237
12a
What I’m gon’ do? (= ‘What am I going to do?’)
b
How she’s doing? (= ‘How is she doing?’)
13a
They wondered [which one that he chose]
b
They wondered [which one did he choose]
c
∗They wondered [which one that did he choose]
14a
They wondered [if/whether (∗that) we had gone]
b
∗They wondered [if/whether had we gone]
c
They wondered [had we gone]
Helpful hints
In 2a, assume that dare, anyone and anything are polarity items, and that dare originates in T.
In 3–4, the preﬁxed question mark ? indicates that the use of who(m) in the relevant sentence (for
speakers like me) leads to stylistic incongruity (in that the accusative form whom and preposition
pied-piping are used in more formal styles, and the accusative form who and preposition stranding
in less formal styles). In 4–5, bear in mind the claim made in §4.3 that have can cliticise onto
another word W as long as W is a pronoun ending in a vowel or diphthong, W asymmetrically
c-commands (ha)ve, and there is no overt or null constituent intervening between W and have
(= no intervening constituent c-commanding have and c-commanded by W). In 6–10, compare
how well the convergence and feature-copying accounts of pied-piping would handle the
relevant data. In 14, consider the possibility that both if and whether are complementisers in
Belfast English (though only if is a complementiser in Standard English).
Model answer for sentence 1a
Sentence 1a is derived as follows. The quantiﬁer which is merged with the noun ﬁlm to form the
QP which ﬁlm. This in turn is merged with the (perfect participle) verb seen to form the VP seen
which ﬁlm. This is merged with the (present-) tense auxiliary have to form the T-bar have seen
which ﬁlm. The resulting T-bar is in turn merged with the pronoun you to form the TP you have
seen which ﬁlm. This is merged with a null C constituent containing [tns, wh, epp] features, so
forming the C-bar in (i) below:
(i)
C'
C
[TNS, WH, EPP]
ø
PRN
you
T'
T
have
VP
V
seen
QP
Q
which
N
film
TP
In principle, we would expect the [tns] feature of C to be able to attract either T or TP to move to
the edge of CP; but movement of TP is ruled out by the Remerger Constraint (because TP is
already merged as the complement of C and hence cannot be remerged as the speciﬁer of C), and
hence the [tns] feature of C attracts the present-tense auxiliary have to move to the edge of CP.

238
6 wh-movement
Since the Constituent Structure Constraint only allows a head to occupy a head position, have
adjoins to the null complementiser in C. In principle, we would expect the [wh] feature of C to be
able to attract either movement of a wh-head like which or movement of a wh-phrase like which
ﬁlm (and we see in the main text that both possibilities are found in languages like Polish).
However, since the [epp] feature of C requires C to project a speciﬁer and the Constituent
Structure Constraint requires a speciﬁer position to be ﬁlled by a maximal projection,
the [wh, epp] features of C attract the closest maximal projection containing a wh-word
(namely the QP which ﬁlm, whose head is the wh-quantiﬁer which) to move to spec-CP.
Assuming that the features of C are deleted after their requirements are satisﬁed, the structure
which results after head movement and wh-movement have applied is that shown in simpliﬁed
form below:
(ii)
CP
QP
Which film
C'
C
[TNS, WH, EPP]
have+ø
 TP
PRN
you
T'
T
have
VP
seen which film
Exercise 6.2
Discuss the derivation of the bracketed restrictive relative clauses in the sentences below, drawing
tree diagrams to show their superﬁcial structure and saying why they are grammatical or
ungrammatical in standard varieties of English:
1a
He is someone [who you can talk to]
b
He is someone [you can talk to]
c
He is someone [to whom you can talk]
d
∗He is someone [to you can talk]
2a
∗He is someone [who that you can talk to]
b
He is someone [that you can talk to]
c
∗He is someone [to whom that you can talk]
d
∗He is someone [to that you can talk]
3a
They recruit people [who have got a degree]
b
They recruit people [who’ve got a degree]
c
They recruit people [that have got a degree]
d
∗They recruit people [have got a degree]
4a
∗This is the way [how he behaved]
b
This is the way [he behaved]
c
∗This is the way [how that he behaved]
d
This is the way [that he behaved]
5a
∗I need someone [who to love me]
b
I need someone [to love me]
c
∗I need someone [who to love]
d
I need someone [to love]

Workbook section
239
6a
I need a place [in which to stay]
b
∗I need a place [in to stay]
c
∗I need a place [which to stay in]
d
I need a place [to stay in]
e
∗I need a place [where to stay]
f
I need a place [to stay]
7a
∗I need a place [in which for her to stay]
b
∗I need a place [in for her to stay]
c
∗I need a place [which for her to stay in]
d
I need a place [for her to stay in]
e
∗I need a place [where for her to stay]
f
I need a place [for her to stay]
8a
∗This is no way [how to behave]
b
This is no way [to behave]
c
∗This is no way [how for you to behave]
d
This is no way [for you to behave]
Helpful hints
In relation to 3b,d and 5a,b, consider whether a relative pronoun which is the subject of the relative
clause is in spec-CP or in spec-TP (and whether the answer you come up with for 3b,d may be
different to that you come up with for 5a,b), and how data relating to have-cliticisation and the
null spellout of relative pronouns could have a bearing on this. (See the note on have-cliticisation
in the helpful hints to the previous exercise.) In relation to 4 and 8, assume that how is a manner
pronoun/PRN which originates as the complement of the verb behave: try and identify the way in
which how differs from other restrictive relative pronouns like who/which/where/why.
Model answer for sentence1a,b
Sentence 1a is derived as follows. The preposition to merges with the wh-pronoun who to form the
PP to who. This is merged with the verb talk to form the VP talk to who. The resulting VP is
merged with the present-tense auxiliary can to form the T-bar can talk to who, and this is then
merged with the subject you to form the TP you can talk to who. This TP is subsequently merged
with a null complementiser (perhaps a null counterpart of that) which carries [wh, epp] features,
so deriving the structure shown in (i) below:
(i)
C'
C
[WH, EPP]
ø
TP
PRN
you
T'
T
can
VP
V
talk
PP
P
to
PRN
who

240
6 wh-movement
The [wh] feature of C attracts the closest expression containing a wh-feature to move to the edge
of CP. Since the [epp] feature of C requires it to project a speciﬁer, and since the Constituent
Structure Constraint requires a speciﬁer position to be ﬁlled by a maximal projection, the [wh,
epp] features of C attract the closest maximal projection containing a wh-word to move to
spec-CP. The wh-marked pronoun who is a maximal projection by virtue of being the largest
expression headed by the wh-word who. Hence, who moves to spec-CP, and thereby erases the
[wh, epp] features of C, so deriving the structure shown in simpliﬁed form below, which is the
superﬁcial structure of the bracketed relative clause in 1a:
(ii)
CP
PRN
who
C'
C
[WH, EPP]
ø
TP
you can talk to who
Given that the Relative Pronoun Spellout Condition speciﬁes that a relative pronoun occupying
the speciﬁer position in a ﬁnite relative clause can optionally have a null spellout in the PF
component, an alternative possibility is for the relative pronoun who in spec-CP to be given a null
spellout at PF, so deriving (iii) below, which is the superﬁcial structure associated with the
bracketed relative clause in 1b:
(iii)
CP
PRN
who
C
[WH, EPP]
ø
TP
you can talk to who
C'

7
A-movement
7.1
Overview
In this chapter, we look at the syntax of subjects. So far, we have
assumed that subjects originate in the speciﬁer position within TP and remain in
situ (except where the subject undergoes wh-movement and moves to spec-CP,
e.g. in sentences like Who did he say was coming?). However, in this chapter we
shall argue that subjects originate internally within the Verb Phrase as arguments
of verbs, and are subsequently raised into the speciﬁer position within TP, with
the relevant movement operation being triggered by an [epp] feature carried by
T. Since spec-TP is an A-position (i.e. a position which can generally only be
occupied by argument expressions), the operation by which subjects move into
spec-TP is traditionally known as A-movement.
7.2
Subjects in Belfast English
Let’s begin our discussion of the syntax of subjects by looking at some
interesting data from Belfast English (kindly supplied to me by Alison Henry).
Alongside Standard English constructions like (1a,b) below:
(1)(a)
Some students should get distinctions
(b)
Lots of students have missed the classes
Belfast English also has structures like (2a,b):
(2)(a)
There should some students get distinctions
(b)
There have lots of students missed the classes
Sentences like (2a,b) are called expletive structures because they contain the
expletive pronoun there. (The fact that there is not a locative pronoun in this kind
of use is shown by the impossibility of replacing it by locative here or questioning
it by the interrogative locative where? or contrastively focusing it by assigning
it contrastive stress.) For the time being, let’s focus on the derivation of Belfast
English sentences like (2a,b) before turning to consider the derivation of Standard
English sentences like (1a,b).
241

242
7 a-movement
One question to ask about the sentences in (2a,b) is where the expletive pro-
noun there is positioned. Since there immediately precedes the tensed auxiliary
should/have, a reasonable conjecture is that there is the subject of should/have
and hence occupies the spec-TP position. If this is so, we’d expect to ﬁnd that the
(bold-printed) auxiliary can move in front of the (italicised) expletive subject (via
T-to-C movement) in questions – and this is indeed the case in Belfast English,
as the sentences in (3) below illustrate:
(3) (a)
Should there some students get distinctions?
(b)
Have there lots of students missed the classes?
But what position is occupied by the underlined quantiﬁed expressions some stu-
dents/lots of students in (3)? Since they immediately precede the verbs get/missed
and since subjects precede verbs, it seems reasonable to conclude that the expres-
sions some students/lots of students function as the subjects of the verbs get/missed
and (since subjects are typically speciﬁers) occupy spec-VP (i.e. speciﬁer posi-
tion within VP). If these assumptions are correct, (2a) will have the structure (4)
below (simpliﬁed by not showing the internal structure of the expressions some
students/distinctions: we can take both of these to be QP/Quantiﬁer Phrase expres-
sions, headed by the overt quantiﬁer some in one case and by a null quantiﬁer
[Q ø] in the other):
(4)
CP
C
ø
TP
PRN
There
T'
T
should
VP
QP
some students
V'
V
get
QP
ø distinctions
The analysis in (4) claims that the sentence contains two subjects/speciﬁers: there
is the speciﬁer (and syntactic subject) of should, and some students is the speciﬁer
(and semantic subject) of get.
Given the assumptions in (4), sentence (2a) will be derived as follows. The
noun distinctions merges with a null quantiﬁer [Q ø] to form the QP ø distinc-
tions. By virtue of being the complement of the verb get, this QP is merged with
the V get to form the V-bar (incomplete verb expression) get ø distinctions. The
resulting V-bar is then merged with the subject of get, namely the QP some stu-
dents (itself formed by merging the quantiﬁer some with the noun students), so
deriving the VP some students get ø distinctions. This VP is in turn merged
with the tense auxiliary should, forming the T-bar should some students get

7.2 Subjects in Belfast English
243
ø distinctions. Let’s suppose that a ﬁnite T has an [epp] feature requiring it to
have a speciﬁer with person/number properties. In sentences like (2a,b) in Belfast
English, the requirement for T to have such a speciﬁer can be satisﬁed by merging
expletive there with the T-bar should some students get ø distinctions, so forming
the TP There should some students get ø distinctions. The resulting TP is then
merged with a null declarative complementiser, forming the CP shown in (4)
above.
But what about the derivation of the corresponding Standard English sentence
(1a) Some students should get distinctions? Let’s suppose that the derivation of
(1a) runs parallel to the derivation of (2a) until the point where the auxiliary should
merges with the VP some students get ø distinctions to form the T-bar should
some students get ø distinctions. As before, let’s assume that [T should] has an
[epp] feature requiring it to project a structural subject/speciﬁer. But let’s also
suppose that the requirement for [T should] to have a speciﬁer of its own cannot
be satisﬁed by merging expletive there in spec-TP because in standard varieties
of English there can generally only occur in structures containing an intransitive
verb like be, become, exist, occur, arise, remain etc. Instead, the [epp] requirement
for T to have a subject with person/number properties is satisﬁed by moving the
subject some students from its original position in spec-VP into a new position
in spec-TP, in the manner shown by the arrows below:
(5)
CP
C
ø
TP
QP
Some students
T'
T
should
VP
QP
some students
V'
V
get
QP
distinctions
Since spec-TP is an A-position which can only be occupied by an argument
expression, the kind of movement operation illustrated by the dotted arrow in (5)
is called A-movement.
Given the arguments presented in chapters 5 and 6 that head movement and
A-bar movement are composite operations involving copying and deletion, we
would expect the same to be true of A-movement. One piece of evidence in
support of a copying analysis of A-movement comes from scope facts in relation
to sentences such as (6a) below, which will have the syntactic structure shown in
simpliﬁed form in (6b) if everyone originates as the subject of the verb ﬁnished
and is then raised up (by A-movement) to become the subject of the present-tense
auxiliary have:

244
7 a-movement
(6) (a)
Everyone hasn’t ﬁnished the assignment yet
(b)
[CP [C ø] [TP Everyone [T has] [NegP not [Neg ø] [VP everyone [V ﬁnished] the
assignment yet]]]]
For many speakers, sentences like (6a) are ambiguous between (i) a reading on
which the quantiﬁer expression everyone has scope over not so that the sentence
means much the same as ‘Everyone is in the position of not having ﬁnished
the assignment yet’, and (ii) another reading on which everyone falls within the
scope of not (so that the sentence means much the same as ‘Not everyone has
ﬁnished the assignment yet’). We can account for this scope ambiguity in a prin-
cipled fashion if we suppose that A-movement involves copying, that scope is
deﬁned in terms of c-command (so that a scope-bearing constituent has scope
over constituents which it c-commands), and that the scope of a universally quan-
tiﬁed expression like everyone in negative structures like (6b) can be determined
either in relation to the initial position of everyone or in relation to its ﬁnal posi-
tion. In (6b) everyone is initially merged in a position (marked by strikethrough)
in which it is c-commanded by (and so falls within the scope of) not; but via
A-movement it ends up in an (italicised) position in which it c-commands (and so
has scope over) not. The scope ambiguity in (6a) therefore reﬂects the two differ-
ent positions occupied by everyone in the course of the derivation. (See Lebeaux
1995, Hornstein 1995, Romero 1997, Sauerland 1998, Lasnik 1998/1999, Fox
2000, and Boeckx 2000, 2001 for discussion of scope in A-movement structures.)
The claim that (non-expletive) subjects like some students/lots of students
in sentences like (1a, b) originate internally within the VP containing the rele-
vant verb (and from there move into spec-TP in sentences like (1a, b) above)
is known in the relevant literature as the VP-Internal Subject Hypothesis
(= VPISH), and has been widely adopted in research since the mid 1980s. An
extensive body of evidence was adduced in support of the hypothesis from a
variety of sources and languages in the 1980s and early 1990s, e.g. in Kitagawa
(1986), Speas (1986), Contreras (1987), Zagona (1987), Kuroda (1988), Sportiche
(1988), Rosen (1990), Ernst (1991), Koopman and Sportiche (1991), Woolford
(1991), Burton and Grimshaw (1992), McNally (1992), Guilfoyle, Hung and
Travis (1992), and Huang (1993). Since then, it has become a standard analysis.
In §§7.3–7.6 below, we look at some of the evidence in support of VPISH.
7.3
Quotatives and idioms
An interesting piece of evidence in support of the VP-Internal Subject
Hypothesis comes from quotative inversion structures like (7) below:
(7)
‘Sentences like this are called quotatives’, said Leon
The relevant structures are called quotative because they involve a direct quo-
tation (the underlined quoted material being enclosed within inverted commas);

7.3 Quotatives and idioms
245
they involve inversion in the sense that the bold-printed main verb said in (7)
ends up positioned in front of its italicised subject Leon. Collins (1997), Collins
and Branigan (1997) and Su˜ner (2000) argue that the italicised subject in such
structures remains in situ in the speciﬁer position within the verb phrase, and that
the bold-printed verb moves to some higher head position above the VP in which
it originates.
But what evidence is there that the subject remains in spec-VP in quotative
inversion structures like (7)? Part of the evidence comes from the syntax of
ﬂoating quantiﬁers. In structures in which the subject raises out of spec-VP into
spec-TP in English, the moved subject in spec-TP can serve as the antecedent for
a ﬂoating quantiﬁer like all/both/each (i.e. for a quantiﬁer which is positioned
after the subject and forms a separate constituent, but is nonetheless interpreted
as modifying the subject). We can illustrate this in terms of structures like (8)
below:
(8) (a)
The students should all/both/each get distinctions
(b)
The students all/both/each got distinctions
In (8a) the bold-printed subject DP the students is in spec-TP and hence pre-
cedes the auxiliary should. The italicised ﬂoating quantiﬁers all/both/each are
c-commanded by the subject DP the students, and are construed as modifying the
subject DP. Hence, examples like (8a) tell us that a moved subject in spec-TP
can serve as the antecedent of a ﬂoating quantiﬁer positioned between the moved
subject and the verb. By hypothesis, the bold-printed subject is likewise in spec-
TP in (8b) and so can again occur as the antecedent of the italicised quantiﬁer
between the moved subject and the verb.
In the light of this restriction, consider the following contrast (noted by Collins
and Branigan 1997):
(9) (a)
‘We must do this again’, the guests all declared to Tony
(b)
∗‘We must do this again’, declared the guests all to Tony
In the uninverted structure (9a), the subject the guests occupies the canonical
spec-TP position associated with subjects, and hence can serve as the antecedent
of the ﬂoating quantiﬁer all. Now, if the subject were also in spec-TP in (9b),
we’d again expect the quantiﬁer all to be able to be positioned after the subject.
The fact that this is not possible leads Collins and Branigan to conclude that the
subject in quotative inversion structures like (9b) remains in situ in spec-VP. If
so, this provides empirical evidence in support of VPISH.
However, the assumption that the postverbal subject in quotative inversion
structures like (7) and (9b) remains in situ in spec-VP raises the question of where
the verb and the quoted material (both of which end up in front of the subject)
move to, since if they remained in situ within the verb phrase, they would be
expected to follow the subject. Collins (1997) argues that the quoted material
moves to spec-TP (a position which is normally occupied by the subject, but
which is available for some other constituent to move into if the subject remains

246
7 a-movement
in spec-VP). As for where the verb moves to, Su˜ner (2000) argues that it does
not move to T (since T is not strong enough to attract main verbs to move to T
in present-day English), but rather moves to the head Asp (= Aspect) position
of an AspP (= Aspect Phrase) projection which is positioned below T but above
VP. On this view, a sentence like (7) would have the structure (10) below (with
arrows showing movement, and t indicating trace copies of moved constituents):
(10)
CP
C
ø
TP
CP
Sentences like this
are called quotatives
T'
T
ø
AsPP
Asp
said+ø
VP
DP
ø Leon
V'
V
t
CP
t
Su˜ner notes that an interesting prediction made by the assumption that the verb
undergoes short verb movement to Asp (rather than long verb movement to T)
is that inversion of verb and subject will be blocked in structures containing an
aspectual auxiliary like perfect have or progressive be, and she notes that contrasts
like that in (11) below provide empirical support for her claim:
(11) (a)
‘What time is it?’ John was asking of Mona
(b)
∗‘What time is it?’ was John asking of Mona
(c)
∗‘What time is it?’ was asking John of Mona
If ﬁnite aspectual auxiliaries originate in Asp and raise to T, was will originate in
Asp in structures like (11) and hence will block movement of the verb asking to
Asp – so accounting for the ungrammaticality of quotative inversion in structures
like (11b,c). (See Alexiadou and Anagnostopoulou 2001 for discussion of other
subject-in-situ structures.)
Further empirical evidence in support of the VP-Internal Subject Hypothesis
comes from the syntax of idioms. We can deﬁne idioms as expressions (like
those italicised below) which have an idiosyncratic meaning which is not a purely
compositional function of the meaning of their individual parts:
(12) (a)
Let’s have a couple of drinks to break the ice
(b)
Be careful not to upset the applecart
(c)
The president must bite the bullet

7.3 Quotatives and idioms
247
There seems to be a constraint that only a string of words which forms a unitary
constituentcanbeanidiom.So,whileweﬁndidiomslikethosein(12)whichareof
theformverb+complement(butwherethesubjectisn’tpartoftheidiom),wedon’t
ﬁnd idioms of the form subject+verb where the verb has a complement which
isn’t part of the idiom: this is because in subject+verb+complement structures,
the verb and its complement form a unitary constituent (a V-bar), whereas the
subject and the verb do not – and only unitary constituents can be idioms.
In the light of the constraint that an idiom is a unitary constituent with an
idiosyncratic interpretation, consider idioms such as the following:
(13) (a)
All hell broke loose
(b)
The shit hit the fan
(c)
The cat got his tongue
In (13), not only is the choice of verb and complement ﬁxed, but so too is the
choice of subject. In such idioms, we can’t replace the subject, verb or complement
by near synonyms – as we see from the fact that sentences like (14) below are
ungrammatical (on the intended idiomatic interpretation):
(14) (a)
∗The whole inferno escaped
(b)
∗Camel dung was sucked into the air conditioning
(c)
∗A furry feline bit his lingual articulator
However, what is puzzling about idioms like (13) is that one or more auxiliaries
can freely be positioned between the subject and verb:
(15) (a)
All hell will break loose
(b)
All hell has broken loose
(c)
All hell could have broken loose
(16) (a)
The shit might hit the fan
(b)
The shit has hit the fan
(c)
The shit must have hit the fan
How can we reconcile our earlier claim that only a string of words which form
a unitary constituent can constitute an idiom with the fact that all hell . . . break
loose is a discontinuous string in (15), since the subject all hell and the predicate
break loose are separated by the intervening auxiliaries will/has/could have? To
put the question another way: how can we account for the fact that although the
choice of subject, verb and complement is ﬁxed, the choice of auxiliary is not?
The VP-Internal Subject Hypothesis provides a straightforward answer, if we
suppose that subjects originate internally within VP, and that clausal idioms like
those in (13) are VP idioms which require a ﬁxed choice of head, complement
and speciﬁer in the VP containing them. For instance, in the case of (13a), the
relevant VP idiom requires the speciﬁc word break as its head verb, the speciﬁc
adjective loose as its complement, and the speciﬁc quantiﬁer phrase all hell as its
subject/speciﬁer. We can then account for the fact that all hell surfaces in front of
the auxiliary will in (15a) by positing that the QP all hell originates in spec-VP

248
7 a-movement
as the subject of break loose, and is then raised (via A-movement) into spec-TP
to become the subject of will break loose. Given these assumptions, (15a) will
be derived as follows. The verb break merges with the adjective loose to form
the idiomatic V-bar break loose. This is then merged with its QP subject all hell
to form the idiomatic VP all hell break loose. The resulting VP is merged with
the tense auxiliary will to form the T-bar will all hell break loose. Since ﬁnite
auxiliaries carry an [epp] feature requiring them to have a subject speciﬁer with
person/number features, the subject all hell moves from being the subject of break
to becoming the subject of will – as shown in simpliﬁed form in (17) below:
(17)
TP
QP
All hell
T'
 T
will
VP
QP
all hell
V'
V
break
A
loose
We can then say that (in the relevant idiom) all hell must be the sister of break
loose, and that this condition will be met only if all hell originates in spec-VP
as the subject (and sister) of the V-bar break loose. We can account for how the
subject all hell comes to be separated from its predicate break loose by positing
that subjects originate internally within VP and from there raise to spec-TP (via
A-movement) across an intervening T constituent like will, so that the subject and
predicate thereby come to be separated from each other – movement of the subject
tospec-TPbeingdrivenbyan[epp]featurecarriedby[T will]requiringwilltohave
a subject with person/number features. Subsequently, the TP in (17) is merged
with a null declarative complementiser, so deriving the structure associated with
(15a) All hell will break loose.
7.4
Argument structure
The assumption that subjects originate internally within VP ties up
in interesting ways with traditional ideas from predicate logic which we touched
on brieﬂy in §1.2. As we saw there, traditional work in logic maintains that
propositions (which can be thought of as representing the substantive semantic
content of clauses) comprise a predicate and a set of arguments. Simplifying
somewhat, we can say that a predicate is an expression denoting an activity or
event, and an argument is an expression denoting a participant in the relevant
activity or event. For example, in sentences such as those below, the italicised
verbs are predicates and the bracketed expressions represent their arguments.

7.4 Argument structure
249
(18) (a)
[The guests] have arrived
(b)
[The police] have arrested [the suspect]
Inotherwords,theargumentsofaverbaretypicallyitssubjectandcomplement(s).
It has been widely assumed in work spanning more than half a century that
complements of verbs are contained within a projection of the verb – e.g. the
suspect in (18b) is the direct-object complement of arrested and is contained
within the verb phrase headed by arrested (so that arrested the suspect is a VP).
Under the VP-Internal Subject Hypothesis, we can go further than this and make
the following (more general) claim:
(19)
Predicate-Internal Argument Hypothesis
All the arguments of a predicate originate within a projection of the predicate
Such an assumption allows us to maintain that there is a uniform mapping (i.e.
relationship) between syntactic structure and semantic argument structure – more
speciﬁcally, between the position in which arguments are initially merged in a
syntactic structure and their semantic function.
To see what this means in practice, consider the derivation of (18b) The police
have arrested the suspect. The verb arrested merges with its direct-object com-
plement the suspect (a DP formed by merging the determiner the with the noun
suspect) to form the V-bar arrested the suspect. The resulting V-bar is in turn
merged with the subject DP the police (formed by merging the determiner the
with the noun police) to form the VP shown in (20) below (simpliﬁed by not
showing the internal structure of the two DPs):
(20)
VP
DP
The police
V'
V
arrested
DP
the suspect
In a structure such as (20), the complement the suspect is said to be the internal
argumentoftheverbarrested(inthesensethatitistheargumentcontainedwithin
the immediate V-bar projection of the verb, and hence is a sister of the verb),
whereas the subject the police is the external argument of the verb arrested (in
that it occupies a position external to the V-bar constituent which is the immediate
projection of the verb arrested). The VP in (20) is then merged with the present-
tense auxiliary [T have], forming the T-bar have the police arrested the suspect.
Since a ﬁnite T has an [epp] feature requiring it to have a subject of its own, the
DP the police moves from being the subject of arrested to becoming the subject
of [T have], forming The police have the police arrested the suspect. Merging the
resulting TP with a null declarative complementiser in turn derives the structure
shown in simpliﬁed form in (21) below:

250
7 a-movement
(21)
CP
C
ø
TP
DP
The police
T' 
T
have
VP
DP
the police
V'
V
arrested
DP
the suspect
Under the analysis in (21), the argument structure of the verb arrest is directly
reﬂected in the internal structure of the VP which it heads, since the suspect is the
internal (direct-object) argument of arrested and the police was initially merged
as its external (subject) argument – and indeed a null copy of the police is left
behind in spec-VP, marking the spec-VP position as associated with the police.
7.5
Thematic roles
In the previous section, we concluded that the argument structure of
clauses is directly reﬂected in the internal syntactic structure of verb phrases.
However, there is an important sense in which it is not enough simply to say that
in a sentence such as (18b) The police have arrested the suspect the verb arrest
is a predicate which has two arguments – the internal argument the suspect and
the external argument the police. After all, such a description fails to account
for the fact that these two arguments play very different semantic roles in rela-
tion to the act of arrest – i.e. it fails to account for the fact that the police are
the individuals who perform the act (and hence get to verbally and physically
abuse the suspect), and that the suspect is the person who suffers the conse-
quences of the act (e.g. being manhandled, handcuffed, thrown into the back of
a windowless vehicle and beaten up). Hence, any adequate account of argument
structure should provide a description of the semantic role which each argument
plays.
In research spanning half a century – beginning with the pioneering work of
Gruber (1965), Fillmore (1968) and Jackendoff (1972) – linguists have attempted
todeviseauniversaltypologyofthesemanticrolesplayedbyargumentsinrelation
to their predicates. In the table in (22) below are listed a number of terms used to
describe some of these roles (the convention being that terms denoting semantic
roles are capitalised), and for each role an informal gloss is given, together with
an illustrative example (in which the italicised expression has the semantic role
speciﬁed):

7.5 Thematic roles
251
(22)
List of roles played by arguments with respect to their predicates
Role
Gloss
Example
theme
Entity undergoing the effect of some action
Mary fell over
agent
Entity instigating some action
Debbie killed Harry
experiencer
Entity experiencing some psychological state
I like syntax
locative
Place in which something is situated or takes place
He hid it under the bed
goal
Entity representing the destination of some other entity
John went home
source
Entity from which something moves
He returned from Paris
instrument
Means used to perform some action
He hit it with a hammer
We can illustrate how the terminology in (22) can be used to describe the semantic
roles played by arguments in terms of the following examples
(23) (a)
[The FBI] arrested [Larry Luckless]
[agent]
[theme]
(b)
[The suspect] received [a caution]
[goal]
[theme]
(c)
[The audience] enjoyed [the play]
[experiencer]
[theme]
(d)
[The president] went [to Boston]
[theme]
[goal]
(e)
[They] stayed [in a hotel]
[theme]
[locative]
(f)
[The noise] came [from the house]
[theme]
[source]
Given that – as we see from these examples – the theme role is a central one, it
has become customary over the past two decades to refer to the relevant semantic
roles as thematic roles; and since the Greek letter  (= theta) corresponds to th in
English and the word thematic begins with th, it has also become standard practice
to abbreviate the expression thematic role to -role (pronounced theeta-role by
some and thayta-role by others). Using this terminology, we can say (e.g.) that
in (23a) the FBI is the agent argument of the predicate arrested, and that Larry
Luckless is the theme argument of arrested.
Thematic relations (like agent and theme) have been argued to play a central
role in the description of a range of linguistic phenomena. For example, it has been
argued that the distribution of certain types of adverb is thematically determined.
Thus, Gruber (1976) argues that adverbs like deliberately can only be used to
modify agent arguments:
(24) (a)
John (= agent) deliberately rolled the ball down the hill
(b)
∗The ball (= theme) deliberately rolled down the hill
Likewise, Fillmore (1972, p. 10) argues that the adverb personally can only be
associated with experiencer arguments:

252
7 a-movement
(25) (a)
Personally, I (= experiencer) don’t like roses
(b)
Personally, your proposal doesn’t interest me (= experiencer)
(c)
∗Personally, I (= agent) hit you
(d)
∗Personally, you hit me (= theme)
In a similar vein, Fillmore (1968, p. 10) argues that only constituents with the
same thematic function can be coordinated:
(26) (a)
John (= agent) broke the window
(b)
A hammer (= instrument) broke the window
(c)
??John (= agent) and a hammer (= instrument) broke the window
And Jackendoff (1972) argues at length that a number of constraints on passive
structures can be accounted for in thematic terms. For example, he argues (1972,
p. 44) that the ill-formedness of passive sentences like:
(27) (a)
∗Five dollars are cost by this book
(b)
∗Two hundred pounds are weighed by Bill
is attributable to violation of the following condition (formulated in thematic
terms):
(28)
Passive Thematic Hierarchy Condition
The passive by-phrase must be higher on the Thematic Hierarchy than the
superﬁcial subject
The hierarchy referred to in (28) is that in (29) below:
(29)
Thematic Hierarchy
agent > locative/source/goal > theme
Jackendoff maintains that the by-phrase in both examples in (27) is a theme
argument of the relevant verb, whereas the superﬁcial subject is a locative
argument. Since theme is lower on the hierarchy (29) than locative, sentences
like (27) violate the condition (28) and so are ungrammatical.
If we look closely at the examples in (23), we see a fairly obvious pattern
emerging. Each of the bracketed argument expressions in (23) carries one and
only one θ-role, and no two arguments of any predicate carry the same θ-role.
Chomsky (1981) suggested that these thematic properties of arguments are the
consequence of a principle of Universal Grammar traditionally referred to as the
-criterion, and outlined in (30) below:
(30)
Theta-criterion/-criterion
Each argument bears one and only one θ-role, and each θ-role is assigned to
one and only one argument (Chomsky 1981, p. 36)
A principle along the lines of (30) has been assumed (in some form or other) in
much subsequent work.
However, a question which arises from (30) is how θ-roles are assigned to argu-
ments. It seems clear that in V-bar constituents of the form verb+complement, the

7.5 Thematic roles
253
thematic role of the complement is determined by the semantic properties of the
verb. As examples like (23a–c) illustrate, the θ-role associated with complements
is often that of theme (though this is not always the case – e.g. the complement
me of the verb bother in Personally, it doesn’t bother me has the thematic role
of experiencer). However, the question of how subjects are assigned -roles is
more complex.
Marantz (1984, pp. 23ff.) and Chomsky (1986a, pp. 59–60) argue that although
verbs directly assign -roles to their internal arguments (i.e. complements), it is
not the verb but rather the whole verb+complement (i.e. V-bar) expression which
determines the -role assigned to its external argument. The evidence they adduce
in support of this conclusion comes from sentences such as:
(31) (a)
John threw a ball
(b)
John threw a ﬁt
(32) (a)
John broke the window
(b)
John broke his arm
Although the subject of the verb threw in both (31a) and (31b), John plays a
different thematic role in the two sentences – that of agent in the case of threw
a ball, but that of experiencer in threw a ﬁt. Likewise, although the subject of
the verb broke in both (32a) and (32b), John plays the role of agent in (32a) but
that of experiencer on the most natural (accidental arm-breaking) interpretation
of (32b). From examples such as these, Marantz and Chomsky conclude that
the thematic role of the subject is not determined by the verb alone, but rather
is compositionally determined by the whole verb+complement structure – i.e.
by V-bar. On this view, a verb assigns a θ-role directly to its internal argument,
but only indirectly (as a compositional function of the semantic properties of the
overall V-bar) to its external argument. To use the relevant technical terminology,
we can say that predicates directly -mark their complements, but indirectly
-mark their subjects/speciﬁers.
A related observation is that auxiliaries seem to play no part in determining
the assignment of -roles to subjects. For example, in sentences such as:
(33) (a)
He will throw the ball/a ﬁt
(b)
He was throwing the ball/a ﬁt
(c)
He had been throwing the ball/a ﬁt
(d)
He might have been throwing the ball/a ﬁt
the thematic role of the subject he is determined purely by the choice of V-bar
constituent (i.e. whether it is throw the ball or throw a ﬁt), and is not affected
in any way by the choice of auxiliary. Clearly, any theory of θ-marking should
offer us a principled answer to questions such as the following: how are θ-roles
assigned? Why do some constituents (e.g. verbs) play a key role in θ-marking,
while others (e.g. auxiliaries) do not?
We can provide a principled answer to these questions in the following terms.
Let us assume that θ-roles are assigned to arguments via merger with a predicative

254
7 a-movement
expression (i.e. an expression headed by an item which functions as a predicate –
e.g. a verb). In the light of this observation, consider our earlier sentence (18b)
The police have arrested the suspect. Since the verb arrested is a predicate which
selects a theme complement, the complement the suspect will be assigned the
θ-role of theme argument of arrest when the verb merges with its complement.
Since arrest is a predicate which (in addition to requiring a theme complement)
also requires an agent external argument, the subject the police will be assigned
the θ-role of agent argument of arrest when it merges with the V-bar arrested
the suspect. The resulting VP the police arrested the suspect is then merged with
the auxiliary have to form the T-bar have the police arrested the suspect. Because
a ﬁnite T has an [epp] feature requiring it to have a speciﬁer, the subject the
police raises to spec-TP, deriving The police have the police arrested the suspect.
However, the subject the police does not receive any -role from the auxiliary
have, since auxiliaries are not predicates (unlike main verbs) and hence do not -
mark their subjects. The resulting TP is ultimately merged with a null declarative
complementiser to derive the structure associated with (18b) The police have
arrested the suspect.
Our discussion here suggests that thematic considerations lend further support
to the VP-Internal Subject Hypothesis. By positing that subjects originate inter-
nally within VP, we can arrive at a unitary and principled account of θ-marking
in terms of sisterhood, in that an argument is θ-marked by a predicative expres-
sion which is its sister: e.g. the verb arrested in (21) θ-marks its sister argument
(complement) the suspect, and the V-bar arrested the suspect θ-marks its sister
(subject) argument the police.
7.6
Unaccusative predicates
The overall conclusion to be drawn from our discussion so far is that
subjects originate internally within VP, as -marked arguments of the verb. In
all the structures we have looked at until now, the verb phrase has contained
both a complement and a speciﬁer (the speciﬁer being the subject of the verb).
However, in this and subsequent sections we look at VPs containing a verb and a
complement but no speciﬁer, and where it is the complement of the verb which
subsequently moves to spec-TP.
One such type of VP are those headed by a special subclass of intransitive
verbswhichareknownasunaccusativepredicatesforreasonswhichwillbecome
apparentshortly.Inthisconnection,considerthesyntaxoftheitalicisedarguments
in structures such as the following:
(34) (a)
There have arisen several complications
(b)
There could have occurred a diplomatic incident
(c)
There remains little hope of ﬁnding survivors

7.6 Unaccusative predicates
255
The fact that the italicised expressions are positioned after the bold-printed verbs
suggests that they function as the complements of the relevant verbs – and indeed
there is syntactic evidence in support of this view. Part of the evidence comes from
their behaviour in relation to a constraint on movement operations discovered by
Huang (1982) which we discussed in §6.7 and characterised as follows:
(35)
Constraint on Extraction Domains/CED
Only complements allow material to be extracted out of them, not speciﬁers or adjuncts.
In the light of Huang’s CED constraint, consider a sentence such as:
(36)
How many survivors does there remain [some hope of ﬁnding how many survivors]?
Here, the wh-phrase how many survivors has been extracted (via wh-movement)
out of the bracketed expression some hope of ﬁnding how many survivors. Given
that the Condition on Extraction Domains tells us that only complements allow
material to be extracted out of them, it follows that the bracketed expression in
(36) must be the complement of the verb remain. By extension, we can assume that
the italicised expressions in (34) are likewise the complements of the bold-printed
verbs.
A further argument supporting the claim that unaccusative subjects are initially
merged as complements comes from observations about quantiﬁer stranding in
the West Ulster variety of English. McCloskey (2000) notes that West Ulster
English allows wh-questions such as (37) below which have the interpretation
‘What are all the things that you got for Christmas?’:
(37) (a)
What all did you get for Christmas?
(b)
What did you get all for Christmas?
He argues that when the universal quantiﬁer all is used to modify a wh-word
like what, wh-movement can either move the whole expression what all to the
front of the sentence (as in 37a), or can move the word what on its own, thereby
stranding the quantiﬁer in situ (as in 37b). In the light of his observation, consider
the following sentence:
(38)
What happened all at the party last night?
The fact that the quantiﬁer all is stranded in a position following the unaccusative
verb happened suggests that the wh-expression what all originates in postverbal
position as the complement of the verb happened. More generally, sentences like
(38) provide empirical evidence in support of positing that unaccusative subjects
are initially merged as complements.
However, the unaccusative complements italicised in structures like (34) differ
in an important respect from the complements of typical transitive verbs. A typi-
cal transitive verb has a thematic subject and a thematic complement, and assigns
accusative case to its complement (as in She hit him, where hit has the nomina-
tive agent subject she and the accusative theme complement him). However,

256
7 a-movement
unaccusative structures like (34) differ from transitive structures in that they have a
non-thematic there subject (which is non-thematic in the sense that it isn’t a theta-
marked argument of the verb, but rather is a pure expletive), and (in languages
which have a richer case system than English) the italicised complement receives
nominative (= nom) case, as the following Icelandic example (which Matthew
Whelpton kindly asked Johannes Gisli J´onsson to provide for me) illustrates:
(39)
þad
hafa komið nokkrirNOM gestirNOM
There have come some
guests
Because they don’t assign accusative case to their complements, such verbs are
known as unaccusative predicates.
Not all intransitive verbs allow their arguments to be positioned after them,
however – as we see from the ungrammaticality of sentences such as (40) below:
(40) (a)
∗When the Snail Rail train arrived ﬁve hours late, there complained many passengers
(b)
∗In the dentist’s surgery, there groaned a toothless patient
(c)
∗Every time General Wynott Nukem goes past, there salutes a guard at the gate
Intransitive verbs like complain/groan/salute are known as unergative verbs:
they differ from unaccusatives in that the subject of an unergative verb has the
thematic role of an agent argument, whereas the subject of an unaccusative verb
has the thematic property of being a theme argument.
In addition to the contrast illustrated in (34) and (40) above, there are a num-
ber of other important syntactic differences between unaccusative verbs and other
typesofverb(e.g.unergativeverbsortransitiveverbs).Forexample,AlisonHenry
(1995) notes that in one dialect of Belfast English (which she calls dialect A) unac-
cusative verbs can have (italicised) postverbal subjects in imperative structures
like:
(41) (a)
Leave you now!
(b)
Arrive you before 6 o’clock!
(c)
Be going you out of the door when he arrives!
By contrast, other (e.g. unergative or transitive) verbs don’t allow postverbal
imperative subjects, so that imperatives such as (42) below are ungrammatical in
the relevant dialect:
(42) (a)
∗Read you that book!
(b)
∗Eat you up!
(c)
∗Always laugh you at his jokes!
Additional evidence for positing that unaccusative verbs are syntactically distinct
from other verbs comes from auxiliary selection facts in relation to earlier stages
of English when there were two perfect auxiliaries (have and be), each taking a
complement headed by a speciﬁc kind of verb. Unaccusative verbs differed from
transitive or unergative verbs in being used with the perfect auxiliary be, as the
sentences in (43) below (taken from various plays by Shakespeare) illustrate:

7.6 Unaccusative predicates
257
(43) (a)
Mistress Page is come with me (Mrs Ford, The Merry Wives of Windsor, V.v)
(b)
Is the duke gone? Then is your cause gone too (Duke, Measure for Measure, V.i)
(c)
How chance thou art returned so soon? (Antipholus, The Comedy of Errors, I.ii)
(d)
She is fallen into a pit of ink (Leonato, Much Ado About Nothing, IV.i)
We ﬁnd a similar contrast with the counterparts of perfect have/be in a number of
other languages – e.g. Italian and French (cf. Burzio 1986), Sardinian (cf. Jones
1994), German and Dutch (cf. Haegeman 1994), and Danish (cf. Spencer 1991):
see Sorace (2000) for further discussion. A last vestige of structures like (43)
survives in present-day English structures such as All hope of ﬁnding survivors
is now gone.
A further difference between unaccusative predicates and others relates to the
adjectival use of their perfect-participle forms. As the examples below indicate,
perfect-participle (-n/-d) forms of unaccusative verbs can be used adjectivally (to
modify a noun), e.g. in sentences such as:
(44) (a)
The train arrived at platform 4 is the delayed 8.28 for London Euston
(b)
The vice squad arrested a businessman recently returned from Thailand
(c)
Several facts recently come to light point to his guilt
(d)
Brigadier Bungle is something of a fallen hero
By contrast, perfect-participle forms of (active) transitive verbs or unergative
verbs cannot be used in the same way, as we see from the ungrammaticality of
examples like (45) below:
(45) (a)
∗The man committed suicide was a neighbour of mine
(b)
∗The thief stolen the jewels was never captured
(c)
∗The man overdosed was Joe Dough
(d)
∗The yawned student eventually fell asleep in class
In this respect, unaccusative verbs resemble passive participles, which can
also be used adjectivally (cf. a changed man, a battered wife, a woman
arrested for shoplifting etc.). Additional syntactic differences between unac-
cusative verbs and others have been reported for other languages (see e.g. Burzio
1986 on ne cliticisation in Italian, and Contreras 1986 on bare nominals in
Spanish).
We thus have a considerable body of empirical evidence that unaccusative sub-
jects behave differently from subjects of other (e.g. unergative or transitive) verbs.
Why should this be? The answer given in work dating back to Burzio (1986) is
that the subjects of unaccusative verbs do not originate as the subjects of their
associated verbs at all, but rather as their complements, and that unaccusative
structures with postverbal arguments involve leaving the relevant argument in
situ in VP-complement position – e.g. in unaccusative expletive structures such
as (34) above, and in Belfast English unaccusative imperatives such as (41). This
being so, a sentence such as (34a) There have arisen several complications will be
derived as follows. The quantiﬁer several merges with the noun complications to

258
7 a-movement
form the QP several complications. This is merged as the complement of the unac-
cusative verb arisen, forming the VP arisen several complications. The resulting
VP is merged with the auxiliary have to form the T-bar shown in simpliﬁed form
below:
(46)
T'
T
have
VP
V
arisen
QP
several complications
The [epp] feature carried by the ﬁnite T constituent have requires it to have a nom-
inal expression as its speciﬁer. This requirement is satisﬁed by merging expletive
there in spec-TP. The resulting TP there have arisen several complications is then
merged with a null declarative-force complementiser to form the CP (47) below:
(47)
CP
C
ø 
TP 
PRN
There
T' 
T
have
VP
V
arisen
QP
several complications
And (47) is the structure of (34a) There have arisen several complications.
However, an alternative way for the T constituent in (46) to satisfy the [epp]
requirement to have a nominal speciﬁer is for T to attract a nominal to move
to spec-TP. In accordance with the Attract Closest Principle, T will attract the
closest nominal within the structure containing it. Since the only nominal in (46)
is the QP several complications, T therefore attracts this QP to move to spec-TP
in the manner shown in simpliﬁed form in (48) below:
(48)
 TP
QP
several complications
T' 
T
have 
VP
V
arisen
QP
several complications

7.6 Unaccusative predicates
259
The type of movement involved is the familiar A-movement operation which
moves an argument from a position lower down in a sentence to become the
structural subject (and speciﬁer) of TP. The resulting TP in (48) is subsequently
merged with a null complementiser marking the declarative force of the sen-
tence, so generating the structure associated with Several complications have
arisen.
The A-movement analysis of unaccusative subjects outlined in (48) above
allows us to provide an interesting account of sentence pairs like that in (49)
below:
(49) (a)
All hope of ﬁnding survivors has gone
(b)
All hope has gone of ﬁnding survivors
Sincegoisanunaccusativeverb,theQPallhopeofﬁndingsurvivorswilloriginate
as the complement of gone. Merging gone with this QP will derive the VP gone
all hope of ﬁnding survivors. The resulting VP is merged with the T constituent
has to form the T-bar has gone all hope of ﬁnding survivors. Since T has an [epp]
feature requiring it to project a speciﬁer, the QP all hope of ﬁnding survivors is
raised to spec-TP, leaving an (italicised) copy behind in the position in which
it originated. Merging the resulting TP with a null complementiser marking the
declarative force of the sentence derives the structure shown in simpliﬁed form
in (50) below:
(50)
[CP [C ø] [TP [QP All hope of ﬁnding survivors] [T has] [VP [V gone]
[QP all hope of ﬁnding survivors]]]]
In the case of (49a), the whole of the QP all hope of ﬁnding survivors is spelled
out in the bold-printed spec-TP position it moves to, and the italicised copy of
the moved QP in VP-complement position is deleted in its entirety – as shown in
simpliﬁed form in (51) below:
(51)
[CP [C ø] [TP [QP All hope of ﬁnding survivors] [T has] [VP [V gone]
[QP all hope of ﬁnding survivors]]]]
In the case of (49b), the quantiﬁer all and the noun hope are spelled out in the
bold-printed position they move to in (50), and the PP of ﬁnding survivors is
spelled out in the VP-complement position in which it originates – as shown in
(52) below:
(52)
[CP [C ø] [TP [QP All hope of ﬁnding survivors] [T has] [VP [V gone]
[QP all hope of ﬁnding survivors]]]]
(52) thus presents us with another example of the discontinuous/split spellout
phenomenon highlighted in §6.3. It also provides evidence in support of taking A-
movement(likeothermovementoperations)tobeacompositeoperationinvolving
copying and deletion.

260
7 a-movement
7.7
Passive predicates
A class of predicates which are similar in some respects to unac-
cusative predicates are passive predicates. Traditional grammarians maintain
that the bold-printed verbs in sentences such as the (a) examples in (53)–(55)
below are in the active voice, whereas the italicised verbs in the corresponding (b)
sentences are in the passive voice (and have the status of passive participles):
(53) (a)
Hundreds of passers-by saw the attack
(b)
The attack was seen by hundreds of passers-by
(54) (a)
Lex Luthor stole the kryptonite
(b)
The kryptonite was stolen by Lex Luthor
(55) (a)
They took everything
(b)
Everything was taken
There are four main properties which differentiate passive sentences from their
active counterparts. One is that passive (though not active) sentences generally
require the auxiliary be. Another is that the main verb in passive sentences is in the
passive participle form (cf. seen/stolen/taken), which is generally homophonous
with the perfect-participle form. A third is that passive sentences may (though
need not) contain a by-phrase in which the complement of by plays the same
thematic role as the subject in the corresponding active sentence: for example,
hundreds of passers-by in the active structure (53a) serves as the subject of saw
the attack, whereas in the passive structure (53b) it serves as the complement of
the preposition by (though in both cases it has the thematic role of experiencer
argument of see). The fourth difference is that the expression which serves as the
complement of an active verb surfaces as the subject in the corresponding passive
construction: for example, the attack is the complement of saw in the active
structure (53a), but is the subject of was in the passive structure (53b). Since this
chapter is concerned with A-movement (and hence the syntax of subjects), we
focus on the syntax of the superﬁcial subjects of passive sentences (setting aside
the derivation of by-phrases).
Passive predicates resemble unaccusatives in that alongside structures like
those in (56a)–(58a) below containing preverbal subjects they also allow expletive
structures like (56b)–(58b), in which the italicised argument can be postverbal
(providing it is an indeﬁnite expression):
(56) (a)
No evidence of any corruption was found
(b)
There was found no evidence of any corruption
(57) (a)
Several cases of syntactophobia have been reported
(b)
There have been reported several cases of syntactophobia

7.7 Passive predicates
261
(58) (a)
A signiﬁcant change of policy has been announced
(b)
There has been announced a signiﬁcant change of policy
How can we account for the dual position of the italicised expression in such
structures?
The answer given within the framework outlined here is that a passive subject
is initially merged as the thematic complement of the main verb (i.e. it originates
as the complement of the main verb as in (56b)–(58b) and so receives the θ-role
which the relevant verb assigns to its complement), and subsequently moves from
VP-complement position into TP-speciﬁer position in passive sentences such as
(56a)–(58a). On this view, the derivation of sentences like (56) will proceed as
follows. The noun corruption merges with the quantiﬁer any to form the QP any
corruption. The resulting QP then merges with the preposition of to form the PP
of any corruption. This PP in turn merges with the noun evidence to form the
NP evidence of any corruption. The resulting NP is merged with the negative
quantiﬁer no to form the QP no evidence of any corruption. This QP is merged
as the complement of the passive verb found (and thereby assigned the thematic
role of theme argument of found) to form the VP found no evidence of any
corruption. The VP thereby formed is merged with the auxiliary was forming the
T-bar was found no evidence of any corruption. The auxiliary [T was] carries an
[epp] feature requiring it to have a speciﬁer. This requirement can be satisﬁed
by merging the expletive pronoun there in spec-TP, deriving the TP There was
found no evidence of any corruption. Merging this TP with a null complementiser
marking the declarative force of the sentence will derive the structure shown in
simpliﬁed form in (59) below:
(59)
CP
C
ø
PRN
There
T'
T
was
VP
V
found
QP
no evidence of any corruption
TP
However, an alternative way of satisfying the [epp] feature of T is not to merge
there in spec-TP but rather to passivise the QP no evidence of any corruption –
i.e. to move it from being the thematic object of found to becoming the structural
subject of was. Merging the resulting TP with a null complementiser which marks
the sentence as declarative in force derives the CP shown in simpliﬁed form in
(60) below (with the dotted arrow showing the movement which took place on
the TP cycle):

262
7 a-movement
(60)
CP
C
ø
QP
No evidence of any corruption
T'
T
was 
VP
V
found
QP
no evidence of any corruption
TP
The arrowed movement operation (traditionally called passivisation) by which
QP moves from thematic complement position into structural subject position
turns out to be a particular instance of the more general A-movement operation
which serves to create structural subjects (i.e. to move arguments into spec-TP
in order to satisfy the [epp] feature of T). Note that an assumption implicit in
the analyses in (59) and (60) is that verb phrases headed by intransitive passive
participles remain subjectless throughout the derivation, because the T constituent
was is the head which requires a structural subject by virtue of its [epp] feature,
not the verb found (suggesting that it is functional heads like T and C which
trigger movement, not lexical heads like V).
In the case of (56a) No evidence of any corruption was found, the whole of
the QP no evidence of any corruption is spelled out in the bold-printed spec-
TP position in (60) at the head of the movement chain, and all the material
in the italicised VP-complement position at the foot of the movement chain is
deleted. However, in §6.3 we saw that some structures in which a moved noun has
a prepositional complement may allow discontinuous spellout, with the noun
and any preceding expressions modifying it being spelled out at the head of the
movement chain, and its prepositional or clausal complement being spelled out
at the foot of the movement chain. Discontinuous spellout is also permitted in
(60), allowing for the possibility of the quantiﬁer no and the noun evidence being
spelled out in the bold-printed position at the head of the movement chain, and the
PP of any corruption being spelled out in the italicised VP-complement position
at the foot of the movement chain, so deriving the structure associated with the
sentence in (61) below:
(61)
No evidence was found of any corruption
Sentences such as (61) thus provide us with empirical evidence that passive
subjects originate as complements, on the assumption that of any corruption
is a remnant of the preposed complement no evidence of any corruption.
Further evidence that passive subjects originate as complements comes from
the distribution of idiomatic nominals like those italicised below:

7.7 Passive predicates
263
(62) (a)
They paid little heed to what he said
(b)
Little heed was paid to what he said
(63) (a)
They paid due homage to General Ghouly
(b)
Due homage was paid to General Ghouly
(64) (a)
The FBI kept close tabs on the CIA
(b)
Close tabs were kept on the CIA by the FBI
In expressions such as pay heed/homage to and keep tabs on, the verb pay/keep
and the noun expression containing heed/tabs/homage together form an idiom.
Given our arguments in §7.3 that idioms are unitary constituents, it is apparent
that the bold-printed verb and the italicised noun expression must form a unitary
constituent when they are ﬁrst introduced into the derivation. This will clearly be
the case if we suppose that the noun expression originates as the complement of
the associated verb (as in (62a)–(64a)), and becomes the subject of the passive
auxiliary was/were in (62b)–(64b) via passivisation/A-movement.
Additional evidence that passive subjects are initially merged as complements
comes from quantiﬁer stranding in West Ulster English structures such as the
following (from McCloskey 2000, p. 72):
(65)
What was said all at the meeting?
Recall from our earlier discussion of sentences like (37) that McCloskey argues
that stranded quantiﬁers modifying wh-expressions are left behind via movement
of the wh-expression without the quantiﬁer. This being so, sentences such as
(65) provide evidence that what all originates as the complement of the passive
participle said (with what subsequently being passivised on its own, stranding
all) – and more generally, that passive subjects are initially merged as thematic
objects.
A claim which is implicit in the hypothesis that passive subjects originate
as thematic objects is that the subjects of active verbs and the complements of
passive verbs have the same thematic function. Evidence that this is indeed the
case comes from the traditional observation that the two are subject to the same
pragmatic restrictions on the choice of expression which can occupy the relevant
position, as we see from sentences such as the following (where ?, ?! and ! mark
increasing degrees of pragmatic anomaly):
(66) (a)
The students/?the camels/?!The ﬂowers/!The ideas were arrested
(b)
They arrested the students/?the camels/?!the ﬂowers/!the ideas
We can account for this if we suppose that pragmatic restrictions on the choice
of admissible arguments for a given predicate depend jointly on the semantic
properties of the predicate and the thematic role of the argument: it will then
followthattwoexpressionswhichfulﬁlthesamethematicroleinrespectofagiven
predicate will be subject to the same pragmatic restrictions on argument choice.

264
7 a-movement
Since passive subjects like those italicised in (66a) originate as complements, they
will have the same θ-role (and hence be subject to the same pragmatic restrictions
on argument choice) as active complements like those italicised in (66b).
We can arrive at the same conclusion (that passive subjects originate as the-
matic complements) on theoretical grounds. It seems reasonable to suppose that
principles of UG correlate thematic structure with syntactic structure in a uni-
form fashion: this assumption is embodied in the Uniform Theta Assignment
Hypothesis/UTAH argued for at length in Baker (1988). Given UTAH, it follows
that two arguments which fulﬁl the same thematic function with respect to a given
predicate will occupy the same initial position in the syntax. Hence if passive sub-
jects have the same -role as active objects, it is plausible to suppose that passive
subjects originate in the same VP-complement position as active objects.
7.8
Long-distance passivisation
Thus far, the instances of passivisation which we have looked at have
been clause-internal in the sense that they have involved movement from com-
plement to subject position within the same clause/TP. However, passivisation
can also apply across certain types of clause boundary – as can be illustrated in
relation to structures such as (67) and (68) below:
(67) (a)
There are alleged to have been stolen a number of portraits of the queen
(b)
A number of portraits of the queen are alleged to have been stolen
(68) (a)
There are believed to have occurred several riots
(b)
Several riots are believed to have occurred
It seems clear that the italicised expression in each case is the thematic comple-
ment of the bold-printed verb in the inﬁnitive clause, so that a number of portraits
of the queen is the thematic complement of the passive verb stolen in (67), and
several riots is the thematic complement of the unaccusative verb occurred in
(68). In (67a) and (68a), the italicised argument remains in situ as the com-
plement of the bold-printed verb; but in (67b) and (68b) the italicised argument
moves to become the structural subject of the auxiliary are. Let’s look rather more
closely at the derivation of sentences like (68a) on the one hand and (68b) on the
other.
(68a) is derived as follows. The quantiﬁer several merges with the noun riots
to form the QP several riots. This QP merges with (and is θ-marked by) the
unaccusative verb occurred to form the VP occurred several riots. The resulting
VP merges with the perfect auxiliary have to form the AUXP have occurred
several riots. This in turn merges with the inﬁnitival tense particle to, so forming
the TP to have occurred several riots. The resulting TP merges with the passive
verb believed to form the VP believed to have occurred several riots. This then
merges with the auxiliary are to form the T-bar are believed to have occurred

7.8 Long-distance passivisation
265
several riots. A ﬁnite T like are has an [epp] feature requiring it to have a speciﬁer,
and one way of satisfying this requirement is for expletive there to be merged
in spec-TP, forming the TP shown in (69) below (simpliﬁed by not showing
intermediate projections, and by not showing the internal structure of the QP
several riots):
(69)
[TP There [T are] [VP [V believed] [TP [T to] [AUXP [AUX have]
[VP [V occurred] [QP several riots]]]]]]
However, an alternative way of satisfying the [epp] requirement for are to have
a structural subject is for the closest nominal expression it c-commands (namely,
several riots) to passivise (i.e. undergo A-movement) and thereby move into
spec-TP, as shown by the dotted arrow in (70) below (where t is a trace copy of
the moved QP several riots):
(70)
[TP Several riots [T are] [VP [V believed] [TP [T to] [AUXP [AUX have] [VP [V occurred] [QP t]]]]]]
The kind of passivisation operation shown by the dotted arrow in (70) is some-
times termed long-distance passivisation, since it involves moving an argument
out of a lower TP into the speciﬁer position in a higher TP. Since operations which
move a nominal into spec-TP are instances of A-movement, long-distance pas-
sivisation is yet another instance of the familiar A-movement operation. The TPs
in (69,70) will subsequently be merged with a null complementiser marking the
declarative force of the sentence, so deriving the overall structure associated with
(68a,b).
A key assumption made in (69, 70) is that the to-inﬁnitive complement of the
verb believed is a TP and not a CP. This is in line with our assumption in §4.8 that
believe is an ECM verb when used with an inﬁnitival complement, and that its
complement is a defective clause (lacking the CP layer found in canonical clauses)
and hence a TP. Recall that we have independent evidence from contrasts such
as the following:
(71) (a)
Nobody intended [you to get hurt]
(b)
You weren’t intended [to get hurt]
(72) (a)
Nobody intended [for you to get hurt]
(b)
∗You weren’t intended [for to get hurt]
that an (italicised) expression contained within a TP complement like that brack-
eted in (71) can passivise, but an expression contained within a CP complement
like that bracketed in (72) cannot. Consequently, the fact that several riots can
passivise in (70) suggests that the to-inﬁnitive complement of believed must be a
TP, not a CP.
Evidence that we need to posit a long-distance passivisation operation comes
from the fact that idiomatic nominals can undergo long-distance passivisation, as
in the following examples:

266
7 a-movement
(73) (a)
Little heed is thought to have been paid to what he said
(b)
Close tabs are alleged to have been kept on the FBI
(c)
All hell is expected to break loose
(d)
The shit is said to have hit the fan
The italicised idiomatic nominals are normally used as the complement of the
bold-printed verbs in (73a,b) and as the subject of the bold-printed expressions
in (73c,d). So how do they come to be used as the subject of a higher passive
clause in sentences like (73)? The answer is that they undergo long-distance
passivisation. Note, incidentally, that sentences like (73c,d) suggest that long-
distance passivisation can move subjects as well as objects. This is because (in
conformity with the Attract Closest Principle), passivisation involves movement
of the closest nominal which the relevant tense auxiliary c-commands. In a clause
like (73a) in which the verb paid projects a complement but no subject, the
auxiliary will trigger preposing of the complement little heed on the TP cycle
because this is the closest nominal c-commanded by the auxiliary is – the relevant
movement being shown in skeletal form in (74a) below; by contrast, in a clause
like (73c) in which the verb break projects a subject all hell, the auxiliary is will
trigger passivisation of all hell because this is the closest nominal c-commanded
by is – as shown in (74b) below:
(74) (a)
[TP Little heed [T is] [VP [V  thought] [TP [T to] have been [VP [V paid] little heed to what he said]]]]
(b)
[TP All hell [T is] [VP [V expected] [TP [T to] [VP all hell [V break] loose]]]]
Although we have referred to the movement operation involved in structures
like (74) as long-distance passivisation, it is in fact our familiar A-movement
operation by which T attracts the closest nominal expression which it c-commands
to move to spec-TP. (An incidental detail to note is that the TPs in (74) are
subsequently merged with a null complementiser marking the declarative force
of the sentence.)
7.9
Raising
A further type of structure which involves movement of an argument
expression out of one clause to become the subject of another clause is illustrated
by the (b) examples in (75)–(78) below:
(75) (a)
There does seem [to remain some hope of peace]
(b)
Some hope of peace does seem [to remain]
(76) (a)
There does appear [to have been made remarkably little progress on disarmament]
(b)
Remarkably little progress on disarmament does appear [to have been made]

7.9 Raising
267
(77) (a)
It would seem [that Senator Slyme has been lying to Congress]
(b)
Senator Slyme would seem [to have been lying to Congress]
(78) (a)
It would appear [that they have underestimated her]
(b)
They would appear [to have underestimated her]
In (75), the italicised expression some hope of peace is the thematic complement
of the unaccusative predicate remain; it remains in situ in the expletive structure
(75a), but raises to become the subject of the seem-clause in (75b). In (76), the
italicised expression remarkably little progress on disarmament is the thematic
complement of the passive verb made; it remains in situ in the expletive structure
(76a) but raises to become the subject of the appear-clause in (76b). In (77), the
italicised expression Senator Slyme is the thematic subject of the verb lying: if
the complement clause is a ﬁnite clause as in (77a), it surfaces as the subject of
the complement clause; but if the complement clause is inﬁnitival as in (77b), it
surfaces as the subject of the seem clause. Likewise, in (78), the italicised pronoun
they is the thematic subject of the verb underestimate: if the complement clause
is ﬁnite as in (78a), it surfaces as the subject of the complement clause; if the
complement clause is inﬁnitival as in (78b), it surfaces as the subject of the appear
clause.
Examples like (75)–(78) suggest that verbs like seem and appear resemble pas-
sive predicates in that they allow an expression which is a theta-marked argument
of a predicate in a lower clause to raise to become the subject of the seem/appear-
clause. Given this assumption, a sentence such as (75b) will have the following
simpliﬁed derivation. At the point where the QP some hope of ø peace has been
formed (the noun peace having been merged with a null quantiﬁer), it will be
merged with (and θ-marked by) the verb remain to form the VP remain some
hope of ø peace. This VP is then merged with the inﬁnitival tense particle to
to form the TP to remain some hope of ø peace. The resulting inﬁnitival TP is
subsequently merged with the verb seem to form the VP seem to remain some
hope of ø peace. This in turn is merged with the ﬁnite tense auxiliary do to form
the T-bar does seem to remain some hope of ø peace. A ﬁnite T has an [epp]
feature requiring it to have a subject; one way of satisfying this requirement is to
merge expletive there with the resulting T-bar, to form the TP shown in simpliﬁed
form in (79) below:
(79)
[TP There [T does] [VP [V seem] [TP [T to] [VP [V remain] some hope of ø peace]]]]
An alternative way of satisfying the [epp] feature of [T does] is to move the closest
nominal c-commanded by does (= the QP some hope of ø peace) from being
the thematic complement of remain to becoming the structural subject of does,
as shown in simpliﬁed form in (80) below:
(80)
[TP Some hope of Ø peace [T does] [VP [V seem] [TP [T to] [VP [V remain] some hope of  ø peace]]]]

268
7 a-movement
The type of movement operation arrowed in (80) is traditionally known as raising
(because it raises an argument out of a lower clause to become the subject of a
higher clause) but in reality it turns out to be yet another instance of the more
general A-movement operation by which T attracts the closest nominal which it
c-commands to move to spec-TP. Words like seem/appear (when used with an
inﬁnitival complement) have the property that the subject of the seem/appear-
clause is created by being raised out of a complement clause, and so (for this
reason) are known as raising predicates. The parallels between raising in struc-
tures like (80) and long-distance passivisation in structures like (70) should be
obvious. (A minor detail to be tidied up is that the TPs in (79) and (80) are subse-
quently merged with a null complementiser marking the sentence as declarative
in force.)
7.10
Comparing raising and control predicates
It might at ﬁrst sight seem tempting to conclude from our discussion of
long-distance passivisation structures like (74) and raising structures like (80) that
all clauses containing a structure of the form verb+to+inﬁnitive have a similar
derivation to that in (74) and (80) in which some expression is raised out of
the inﬁnitive complement to become the subject of the main clause. However,
any such conclusion would be undermined by our claim in §4.2 and §4.7 that
some verbs which take to+inﬁnitive complements are control predicates. In this
connection, consider the difference between the two types of inﬁnitive structure
illustrated below:
(81) (a)
He does seem [to scare them]
(b)
He does want [to scare them]
As used in (81), the verb seem is a raising predicate, but the verb want is a control
predicate. We will see that this reﬂects the fact that the verbs seem and want differ
in respect of their argument structure. We can illustrate this by sketching out the
derivation of the two sentences.
In the raising structure (81a), the verb scare merges with (and assigns the
experiencer θ-role to) its internal argument/thematic complement them. The
resulting V-bar scare them then merges with (and assigns the agent θ-role to)
its external argument/thematic subject he. The resulting VP he scare them is then
merged with the inﬁnitival tense particle to, so forming the TP to he scare them.
This in turn merges with the raising verb seem to form the VP seem to he scare
them. The resulting VP seem to he scare them is subsequently merged with the
(emphatic) auxiliary does. The [epp] feature carried by [T does] requiring it to
have a structural subject triggers raising of the closest nominal c-commanded
by does (namely he) from being thematic subject of scare them to becoming
structural subject of does – as shown in schematic form below:

7.10 Comparing raising and control predicates
269
(82)
[TP He [T does] [VP [V seem] [TP [T to] [VP he [V scare] them]]]]
The resulting TP is then merged with a null complementiser marking the sentence
as declarative in force.
A key assumption made in the raising analysis in (82) is that the verb seem
(as used there) is a one-place predicate whose only argument is its inﬁnitival TP
complement, to which it assigns an appropriate θ-role – perhaps that of theme
argument of seem. This means that the VP headed by seem has no thematic
subject: note, in particular, that the verb seem does not θ-mark the pronoun he,
since he is θ-marked by scare, and the -criterion (30) rules out the possibility
of any argument being θ-marked by more than one predicate. Nor does the VP
headed by seem have a structural subject at any stage of derivation, since he
raises to become the subject of the TP containing does, not of the VP containing
seem.
Now let’s turn to consider the derivation of the control inﬁnitive structure (81b)
He does want to scare them. As before, the verb scare merges with (and assigns
the experiencer θ-role to) its internal argument (i.e. thematic complement) them.
The resulting V-bar scare them then merges with (and assigns the agent θ-role
to) its external argument. Given the assumption we made in §4.2 that control
inﬁnitives have a particular kind of null pronominal subject known as ‘big PRO’,
the thematic subject of scare them will be PRO, and this will be merged in spec-VP
(in accordance with the VP-Internal Subject Hypothesis), and thereby be assigned
the θ-role of agent argument of scare. The resulting VP PRO scare them then
merges with inﬁnitival to, forming the TP to pro scare them. Given the conclusion
we drew in §4.8 that control inﬁnitives are CPs, this TP will in turn merge with
a null inﬁnitival complementiser to form the CP ø to PRO scare them. The CP
thereby formed serves as the internal argument (and thematic complement) of
the verb want, so is merged with want and thereby assigned the θ-role of theme
argument of want. The resulting V-bar want ø to PRO scare them then merges
with its external argument (and thematic subject) he, assigning he the thematic
role of experiencer argument of want. The resulting VP he want ø to PRO scare
them is then merged with the tense auxiliary do, forming the T-bar does he want
ø to PRO scare them. The [epp] feature carried by [T does] requires it to have a
structural subject, and this requirement is satisﬁed by moving the closest noun or
pronoun expression c-commanded by does (namely the pronoun he) to become
the structural subject of does, as shown in simpliﬁed form below:
(83)
[TP He [T does] [VP he [V want] [CP [C ø] [TP [T to] [VP PRO [V scare] them]]]]]
The TP in (83) is then merged with a null complementiser marking the sentence
as declarative in force. The resulting structure satisﬁes the -criterion (which
requires each argument to be assigned a single θ-role, and each θ-role to be

270
7 a-movement
assigned to a single argument), in that he is the experiencer argument of want,
the bracketed CP in (83) is the theme complement of want, pro is the agent
argument of scare, and them the experiencer argument of scare.
The analysis of control predicates presented here differs from that presented
in chapter 4 in that it assumes that the PRO subject of a control inﬁnitive like
that bracketed in (81b) He does want to scare them is merged in spec-VP, and
not (as assumed in chapter 4) in spec-TP. As we have seen, the requirement for
PRO to be generated in spec-VP follows from the Predicate-Internal Argument
Hypothesis (19) which posits that arguments are generated internally to a pro-
jection of their predicate, so that PRO (by virtue of being the thematic subject
of scare) is generated as the speciﬁer of the VP headed by scare. Baltin (1995,
p. 244) provides an empirical argument in favour of claiming that the PRO subject
is positioned in spec-VP in control inﬁnitives. He notes that under the spec-VP
analysis in (83), PRO will be positioned between to and scare rather than between
want and to (as would be the case if PRO were in spec-TP), and hence PRO will
not block to from cliticising onto want forming wanta/wanna. The fact that the
contraction is indeed possible – as we see from (84) below:
(84)
He does wanta/wanna scare them
leads Baltin to conclude that PRO is merged in spec-VP, and remains there
throughout the derivation – at no point becoming the subject of inﬁnitival to.
Of course, an ancillary assumption which has to be made is that the null C which
intervenes between want and to in (83) does not block contraction. One way
of accounting for this might be to assume that to ﬁrst cliticises onto the null C
constituent introducing the complement clause in (83), and then subsequently
(together with the null complementiser to which it has attached) cliticises onto
the verb want.
An important conclusion which Baltin draws from his analysis of wanna con-
traction is that inﬁnitival to in control structures does not have an [epp] feature,
and hence does not have a speciﬁer at any stage of derivation. In much the same
way, we can argue that the possibility of gonna contraction in raising structures
such as (85) below:
(85)
Little heed is gonna be paid to my proposal
provides evidence in support of positing that inﬁnitival to in raising structures
does not have an [epp] feature either. Prior to passivisation, (85) will have the
structure shown informally in (86) below:
(86)
[T is] [VP [V going] [TP [T to] be paid little heed to my proposal]]
If the idiomatic nominal little heed is raised directly to become the subject of is
without ﬁrst becoming the subject of to, (85) will have the structure shown in (87)
below after passivisation has applied:
(87)
[TP little heed [T is] [VP [V going] [TP [T to] be paid little heed to my proposal]]]

7.10 Comparing raising and control predicates
271
The absence of any constituent intervening between to and going means that to
can cliticise onto going, forming gonna. But if to in raising/passive inﬁnitive
structures has an [epp] feature, the idiomatic nominal little heed will have to raise
to become the speciﬁer of inﬁnitival to before becoming the subject of is, so that
after passivisation we will have the structure (88) below:
(88)
[TP little heed [T is] [VP [V going] [TP little heed [T to] be paid little heed to my proposal]]]
We would then expect that the presence of a trace copy of little heed intervening
between going and to should block contraction, and we would therefore wrongly
predict that gonna contraction is not possible, and hence that (85) is ungrammati-
cal. The fact that contraction is indeed possible suggests that inﬁnitival to does not
have an [epp] feature in passive inﬁnitive structures. Moreover, Boˇskovi´c (2002b)
argues that the ungrammaticality of double there structures like:
(89) (a)
∗There seems [there to be a problem]
(b)
∗There was reported [there to be a problem]
provides further evidence that inﬁnitival to in raising/passive structures does not
have an [epp] feature, since if it did we should expect the bracketed inﬁnitive
complements to allow an expletive subject of their own. Epstein and Seeley (1999)
likewise argue that A-movement always takes place in a single step, and not in
multiple (successive-cyclic) steps. Given Baltin’s argument that to does not have
an [epp] feature in control inﬁnitives either, the more general conclusion which
these two sets of claims invite is that:
(90)
A ﬁnite T has an [epp] feature, but inﬁnitival to does not
And indeed this assumption is implicit in the analyses outlined in (79), (80), (82),
(83) and (87) above.
There are interesting parallels between the derivation of unaccusative structures
like (91a) below (sketched in (48) above), passive structures like (91b) (sketched
in (70) above) and raising structures like (91c) (sketched in (82) above):
(91) (a)
[TP   
 [T have] [VP [V arisen] several complications]]
(b)
[TP  [T are] [VP [V believed] [TP [T to] [AUXP [AUX have] [VP [V occurred] [QP several riots]]]]]]
(c)
[TP   [T does]   [VP [V seem] [TP [T to]    [VP he [V scare] them]]]]
In each of these structures, a (bold-printed) one-place predicate which has no
external argument (and which therefore projects into an intransitive VP which
has a complement but no subject) allows movement of the closest (italicised)
constituentc-commandedbytheunderlinedTconstituentoutofthecontainingVP
into spec-TP. For instance, the VP headed by the unaccusative verb arisen in (91a)

272
7 a-movement
has no subject and consequently allows its complement several complications to
move out of its containing VP into spec-TP. Likewise, the VPs headed by the
passive verb believed and the unaccusative verb occurred in (91b) have no subject
of their own, and so allow several riots to move out of both VPs into spec-TP in
the main clause. Similarly, the VP headed by the raising verb seem in (91c) has
no subject of its own and so allows the pronoun he to move into the main-clause
spec-TP position.
What all of this points to is that an intransitive (subjectless) VP allows a nominal
c-commanded by its head verb to be attracted by a higher T constituent to move
into spec-TP. However where a VP has a thematic subject of its own, it is this
subject which raises to spec-TP (because the Attract Closest Principle requires
T to attract the closest nominal which it c-commands to raise to spec-TP). So,
for example, in (91c) above, it is the subject he of the VP headed by scare which
raises to spec-TP and thereby becomes the subject of the present-tense auxiliary
does. The same is true of a control structure like (92) below (repeated from (83)
above):
(92)
[TP He [T does] [VP he [V want] [CP [C ø] [TP [T to] [VP PRO [V scare] them]]]]]
Here, the pronoun he originates as the thematic subject of want, and hence raises
to spec-TP by virtue of being the closest nominal c-commanded by [T does].
What this suggests is that the particular property of passive, unaccusative and
raising predicates which enables them to permit A-movement of a nominal argu-
ment which they c-command is that they are intransitive and therefore do not
project an external argument (so that the VP they head is subjectless). By con-
trast, verbs which project an external argument of their own (and hence occur
in a VP which has a thematic subject) require this subject to be attracted by
a higher T constituent to move into spec-TP. These distinct patterns of move-
ment are a consequence of the Attract Closest Principle. (See Culicover and
Jackendoff 2001 for arguments that control and raising predicates have a distinct
syntax.)
Having looked at the syntax of control predicates on the one hand and raising
predicates on the other, we end this chapter by looking brieﬂy at the question of
how we can determine whether a given predicate which selects an inﬁnitival to
complement is a control predicate or a raising predicate. In this connection, it
should be noted that there are a number of syntactic differences between raising
and control predicates which are a direct reﬂection of the different thematic
properties of these two types of predicate. For example, raising predicates like
seem can have expletive it/there subjects, whereas control predicates like want
cannot:
(93) (a)
It seems/∗wants to be assumed that he lied to Congress
(b)
There seem/∗want to remain several unsolved mysteries

7.10 Comparing raising and control predicates
273
(The expletive nature of it in (93a) is shown by the fact that it cannot be substi-
tuted by a referential pronoun like this/that, or questioned by what? Likewise,
the expletive nature of there in (93b) is shown by the fact that it cannot be sub-
stituted by a referential locative adverb like here, or questioned by where?) This
is because control predicates like want are two-place predicates which project
a thematic subject (an experiencer in the case of want, so that the subject of
want must be an expression denoting an entity capable of experiencing desires),
and non-referential expressions like expletive it/there are clearly not thematic
subjects and so cannot be assigned a θ-role. By contrast, raising predicates
like seem have no thematic subject, and hence impose no restrictions on the
choice of structural subject in their clause, so allowing a (non-thematic) expletive
subject.
Similarly, raising predicates like seem (but not control predicates like want)
allow idiomatic subjects such as those italicised below:
(94)
Whenever they meet, . . .
(a)
all hell seems/∗wants to break loose
(b)
the fur seems/∗wants to ﬂy
(c)
the cat seems/∗wants to get his tongue
The ungrammaticality of sentences like ∗All hell wants to break loose can be
attributed to the fact that want is a control predicate, and hence (in order to derive
such a structure) it would be necessary to assume that all hell originates as the
subject of want, and that break loose has a separate PRO subject of its own: but
this would violate the requirement that (on its idiomatic use) all hell can only
occur as the subject of break loose, and conversely break loose (in its idiomatic
use) only allows all hell as its subject. By contrast, All hell seems to break loose
is grammatical because seem is a raising predicate, and so all hell can originate as
the subject of break loose and then be raised up to become the subject of the null
tense constituent [T ø] in the seem clause. The null T agrees in person and number
with the 3Sg expression all hell, but because there is no overt auxiliary in the
head T position of TP to spell out the relevant features, the tense and agreement
features of T are spelled out on the verb seem (via the morphological operation
of Afﬁx Hopping), with the consequence that the main verb ultimately surfaces
in the third-person-singular present-tense form seems.
A further property which differentiates the two types of predicate is that raising
predicates like seem preserve truth-functional equivalence under passivisation, so
that (95a) below is cognitively synonymous with (95b):
(95) (a)
John seems to have helped Mary
(b)
=Mary seems to have been helped by John
By contrast, control predicates like want do not preserve truth-functional equiv-
alence under passivisation, as we see from the fact that (96a) below is not cogni-
tively synonymous with (96b):

274
7 a-movement
(96) (a)
John wants to help Mary
(b)
̸=Mary wants to be helped by John
Moreover, there are pragmatic restrictions on the choice of subject which control
predicates like want allow (in that the subject generally has to be a rational being,
not an inanimate entity) – as we see from (97) below (where ! marks pragmatic
anomaly):
(97)
My cat/!My gesture wants to be appreciated
By contrast, raising predicates freely allow animate or inanimate subjects:
(98)
My cat/My gesture seems to have been appreciated
The different properties of the two types of predicate stem from the fact that
control predicates like want -mark their subjects, whereas raising predicates
like seem do not: so, since want selects an experiencer subject as its external
argument (and prototypical experiencers are animate beings), want allows an
animate subject like my cat, but not an inanimate subject like my gesture. By
contrast, since raising predicates like seem do not θ-mark their subjects, they
allow a free choice of subject.
A ﬁnal remark to be made is that although our discussion of raising and control
predicates has revolved around verbs, a parallel distinction is found in adjectives.
For example, in sentences such as:
(99) (a)
John is likely to win the race
(b)
John is keen to win the race
the adjective likely is a raising predicate and keen a control predicate. We can
see this from the fact that likely allows expletive and idiomatic subjects, but keen
does not:
(100) (a)
There is likely/∗keen to be a strike
(b)
All hell is likely/∗keen to break loose
This is one reason why throughout this chapter we have talked about different
types of predicate (e.g. drawing a distinction between raising and control predi-
cates) rather than different types of verb.
7.11
Summary
This chapter has primarily been concerned with the syntax of sub-
jects. In §7.2 we argued that Belfast English structures such as There should
some students get distinctions provide us with evidence that subjects originate
internally within VP, and we noted that the claim that subjects originate internally

7.11 Summary
275
within VP is known as the VP-Internal Subject Hypothesis/VPISH. We also
maintained that sentences such as Some students should get distinctions involve
movement of some students from the speciﬁer position within VP to the speciﬁer
position within TP, and we noted that the relevant movement operation is known
as A-movement. In §7.3 we claimed that the syntax of quotative structures like ‘It
wasn’t me’, said Mary provides support for VPISH, if Mary remains in situ in
the speciﬁer position within VP. We suggested that idioms like All hell will break
loose provide further empirical support for the VPISH, since the assumption that
idioms are unitary constituents requires us to suppose that all hell originates as
the subject of break loose (in the speciﬁer position within VP) and from there is
raised up (by application of A-movement) to become the subject/speciﬁer of the
TP headed by will. In §7.4 we argued that the VP-Internal Subject Hypothesis
allows us to posit a uniform mapping between (semantic) argument structure
and (initial) syntactic structure, if we suppose that all arguments of a predicate
originate internally within a projection of the predicate. It then follows that in
a sentence such as The police have arrested the suspect, the predicate arrested
is merged with its internal argument (= complement) the suspect to form the
V-bar arrested the subject, and then the resulting structure is merged with the
external argument (= subject) of arrested to form the VP the police arrested the
suspect. Because ﬁnite auxiliaries have an [epp] feature requiring them to project
a speciﬁer, the subject the police then moves (via A-movement) from spec-VP
to spec-TP, thereby becoming the subject of have. In §7.5 we saw that differ-
ent arguments play different semantic roles with respect to their predicates, and
that these have traditionally been described in terms of a set of thematic roles
(= -roles) such as theme, agent, experiencer, locative, goal, source etc.
We suggested that an argument is assigned a θ-role (= -marked) via merger
with a predicative expression. Hence, in The police have arrested the suspect, the
internal argument the suspect is assigned the θ-role of theme argument of the
predicate arrested via merger with arrested; likewise, the external argument the
police is assigned the θ-role of agent via merger with the V-bar arrested the sus-
pect. We noted that there are constraints on θ-marking imposed by the -criterion,
which requires each argument to bear one and only one θ-role, and each θ-role
assigned by a given predicate to be assigned to one and only one argument. In
§7.6, we looked at the syntax of unaccusative predicates like arise/remain/occur
etc. and argued that the argument of an unaccusative verb originates as its com-
plement but differs from the complement of a transitive verb in that it receives
nominative rather than accusative case. We highlighted a number of further dif-
ferences between unaccusative predicates and other types of predicate (e.g. in
relation to the position of subjects in Belfast English imperatives, and auxiliary
selection in earlier varieties of English). In §7.7, we looked at the structure of
simple passive clauses, arguing that a passive subject originates as the thematic
complement of a subjectless passive participle, and is raised into spec-TP (via
A-movement) in order to satisfy the [epp] feature of T. In §7.8 we saw that

276
7 a-movement
passivisation can be a long-distance operation involving movement of an argu-
ment contained within an inﬁnitival TP which is the complement of a passive
participle. We noted that the position of idiomatic subjects in sentences like Little
heed is thought to have been paid to their proposal provides empirical support
for positing long-distance passivisation (as a particular instance of a more general
A-movement operation whereby T attracts the closest noun or pronoun expression
it c-commands to move to spec-TP). In §7.9 we argued that predicates like
seem/appear function as raising predicates in the sense that their subjects orig-
inate internally within their inﬁnitive complement, and from there are raised to
spec-TP position within the seem/appear-clause: hence, in a sentence such as
All hell would appear to have broken loose, the idiomatic expression all hell
originates as the subject of broken loose and from there is raised up to become
the subject of would by A-movement. In §7.10, we contrasted raising predicates
with control predicates, noting that they differ in that control predicates -mark
their subjects (and hence generally require an animate subject) and have a CP
complement, whereas raising predicates do not -mark their subjects (and hence
freely allow inanimate, expletive and idiomatic subjects) and have a TP comple-
ment. We also noted that (unlike control predicates), raising predicates preserve
truth-functional equivalence under passivisation.
Workbook section
Exercise 7.1
Say whether the italicised verbs as used in the type of construction illustrated in the examples
below function as raising or control predicates (or are ambiguous and can serve as both), and what
evidence there is to support your analysis. Provide a detailed outline of the derivation of any one
of the control sentences and any one of the raising sentences, giving arguments in support of your
answer.
1
Employers tend to exploit employees
2
John has decided to quit the university
3
We came to appreciate the classes
4
You have to help me
5
They failed to hit the target
6
He tried to rectify the situation
7
He refused to sign the petition
8
He’s beginning to irritate me
9
They attempted to pervert the course of justice
10
I happened to be passing your house
11
He is going to quit his job
12
He stands to lose a fortune
13
John promises to be a good student
14
He needs to have a shave
15
They managed to open the door

Workbook section
277
16
We intend to close the store
17
The weather is threatening to ruin the weekend
18
We are hoping to get a visa
19
She has chosen to ignore him
20
They are planning to visit London
Model answer for sentence 1
There are a number of reasons for suggesting that tend functions as a raising predicate when it
takes an inﬁnitive complement. For one thing (as we would expect if tend is a one-place raising
predicate which does not -mark its subject), tend imposes no restrictions on its choice of subject,
and so freely allows either an expression like Professor Peabrain (denoting an animate being) or
an expression like Syntax (denoting an inanimate entity) as the subject of its containing clause – as
illustrated in (i) below:
(i)
Professor Peabrain/Syntax tends to bafﬂe people
Moreover, tend allows a non-thematic subject like expletive there/it – as in the examples below:
(ii)
There tends to be a lot of confusion about syntax
(iii)
It tends to be assumed that syntax is hard
(We can tell that there is an expletive pronoun in (ii) from the fact that it cannot be substituted by
here or questioned by where? Likewise, it must be expletive in (iii) because it cannot be substituted
by this/that or questioned by what?) Moreover, tend can have an idiomatic subject, as in (iv)
below:
(iv)
All hell tends to break loose
Given that all hell can serve only as the subject of break loose in the relevant idiom in (iv), it is
clear that we could not analyse tend as a control predicate in (iv) and claim that all hell originates
as the subject of tend and pro as the subject of break loose, since this would violate the
requirement that all hell can occur only as the subject of break loose and conversely that break
loose can only have the subject all hell (in the relevant idiom). By contrast, if tend is a raising
predicate, we can claim that all hell originates as the subject of break loose and then raises up to
become the subject of the (null T constituent in the) tend clause. Furthermore, tend preserves
truth-functional equivalence under passivisation, as we can see from the fact that (v) and (vi) are
truth-functionally equivalent:
(v)
Employers tend to exploit employees
(vi)
= Employees tend to be exploited by employers
Given the assumption that tend is a raising predicate, sentence 1 will be derived as follows. The
noun employees merges with a null determiner (which has much the same generic sense as the in
The Italians love pasta) to form the DP ø employees. The resulting DP merges with (and is
assigned the θ-role of theme argument of) the verb exploit to form the V-bar exploit ø employees.
The DP ø employers (itself formed by merging a null determiner with the noun employers) is then

278
7 a-movement
merged with (and assigned the θ-role of agent argument of) this V-bar, forming the VP ø
employers exploit ø employees. This VP is merged as the complement of the inﬁnitival tense
particle to, forming the TP to ø employers exploit ø employees. The relevant TP is in turn merged
with the verb tend, forming the VP tend to ø employers exploit ø employees: we can perhaps take
the TP complement of tend to have the thematic function of being a theme argument of tend. The
resulting VP is merged with a null present tense T, forming [T ø] tend to ø employers exploit ø
employees. By virtue of being ﬁnite, [T ø] has an [epp] feature requiring it to have a speciﬁer. In
accordance with the Attract Closest Principle, this requirement is satisﬁed by moving the closest
nominal c-commanded by [T ø] – namely the DP ø employers – into spec-TP in the manner shown
by the dotted arrow below:
(vii)
[TP      employers [
 [
 tend] 
 ø] 
[TP [T to]
[V exploit] employees
T
[VP [V
    employers
]]]]
VP
The resulting structure (vii) is merged with a null complementiser marking the declarative force of
the sentence, so forming the structure (viii) below:
(viii)
[CP [C ø] [TP ø employers [T ø] [VP [V tend] [TP [T to] [VP ø employers [V exploit]
employees]]]]]
The derivation satisﬁes the -criterion by virtue of the fact that each argument carries one and
only one -role: i.e. ø employees is the theme argument of exploit, ø employers is the agent
argument of exploit and the TP complement of tend is its theme argument.
Exercise 7.2
Discuss the derivation of the following sentences:
1 a
There are certain to remain some problems
b
There were reported to remain some problems
c
There were thought likely to remain some problems
2 a
A change of policy was envisaged
b
A change of policy seems to be envisaged
c
A change of policy is thought likely to be envisaged
3 a
Differences of opinion are emerging
b
Differences of opinion are beginning to emerge
c
Differences of opinion appear to be starting to emerge
4 a
He is leaving the country
b
He is planning to leave the country
c
He is thought to be planning to leave the country
5 a
No details are going to be revealed
b
No details of any threats seem likely to be revealed
c
No details are expected to be revealed of any threats
6 a
What has happened?
b
What is expected to happen?
c
What seems to be likely to happen?

Workbook section
279
Helpful hints
Assume that the inﬁnitive form be is a copular verb occupying the head V position of VP when
immediately followed by an adjective, but is an auxiliary occupying the head AUX position of
AUXP when immediately followed by a passive or progressive participle. For the purposes of this
exercise, assume that a ﬁnite T has an [epp] feature, but that inﬁnitival to does not. Assume that he
has the thematic role of an experiencer argument of the relevant predicates in 4, but that all other
arguments in 1–6 are theme arguments of their associated predicates. In relation to 5a, consider
the signiﬁcance of the fact that going to can contract to gonna; in 5b,c assume that any is a
partitive quantiﬁer which has the property of being a polarity item (in the sense speciﬁed in
exercise 3.2); in relation to 5c, bear in mind the discussion of discontinuous spellout in the text. In
relation to 6, bear in mind the discussion of the syntax of wh-subjects in §6.6.
Model answer for sentence 1a
The quantiﬁer some merges with the noun problems to form the QP some problems. This QP is
merged with (and assigned the θ-role of theme complement of) the unaccusative predicate remain
to form the VP remain some problems. This in turn is merged with the inﬁnitival tense particle to,
forming the TP to remain some problems. This is then merged with the raising adjective certain to
form the AP certain to remain some problems. This in turn is merged with the copular verb be to
form the VP be certain to remain some problems. The resulting VP is merged with a null ﬁnite T
which attracts the copula be to move from V to T in the manner indicated by the dotted arrow in
(i), so forming the structure shown in simpliﬁed form below:
(i)
T'
T
be
VP
V
be
AP
A
certain 
TP
T
to
VP
V
remain
QP
some problems
T (by virtue of being ﬁnite) has an [epp] feature requiring it to project a subject, and this
requirement is satisﬁed by merging there in spec-TP, forming the structure shown in abbreviated
form in (ii) below (where t is a trace of the moved copula be):
(ii)
TP
PRN
There
T'
T
are 
VP
V
t
AP
certain to remain some problems

280
7 a-movement
The TP in (ii) is subsequently merged with a null declarative complementiser.
The analysis presented here assumes that certain is a raising adjective. Evidence that this is so
comes from the fact that clauses containing certain allow expletive and idiomatic subjects, as in:
(iii) (a)
It is certain to be raining in Manchester
(b)
The fur is certain to ﬂy
The expletive nature of it in (iiia) is shown by the fact that it cannot be substituted by referential
pronouns like this/that or questioned by what?

8
Agreement, case and movement
8.1
Overview
In this chapter, we take a look at the syntax of agreement. We begin
by outlining the claim made by Chomsky in recent work that agreement involves
a relation between a probe and a goal (though it should be noted that the term
goal in this chapter is used in an entirely different way from the term goal which
was used to denote the thematic role played by a particular kind of argument in
relation to its predicate in §7.5). We look at the nature of agreement, and go on to
show that nominative and null case-marking involve agreement with T. Finally,
we explore the relationship between the [epp] feature carried by T and agreement,
and look at the consequences of this for control inﬁnitives on the one hand and
raising inﬁnitives on the other.
8.2
Agreement
In traditional grammars, ﬁnite auxiliaries are said to agree with their
subjects. Since (within the framework used here) ﬁnite auxiliaries occupy the head
T position of TP and their subjects are in spec-TP, in earlier work agreement was
said to involve a speciﬁer–head relationship (between T and its speciﬁer). How-
ever, there are both theoretical and empirical reasons for doubting that agreement
involves a spec–head relation. From a theoretical perspective (as we saw in §4.9),
Minimalist considerations lead us to the conclusion that we should restrict the
range of syntactic relations used in linguistic description, perhaps limiting it to the
relation c-command created by merger. From a descriptive perspective, a spec–
head account of agreement is problematic in that it fails to account for agreement
between the auxiliary are and the nominal several prizes in passive structures
such as:
(1)
There are thought likely to be awarded several prizes
Since the auxiliary are occupies the head T position of TP in (1) and the expletive
pronoun there is in spec-TP, a spec–head account of agreement would lead us to
expect that are should agree with there. But instead, are agrees with the in situ
281

282
8 agreement, case and movement
complement several prizes of the passive participle awarded. What is going on
here? In order to try and understand this, let’s take a closer look at the derivation
of (1).
The quantiﬁer several merges with the noun prizes to form the QP several
prizes. This is merged as the thematic complement of the passive verb awarded
to form the VP awarded several prizes. This in turn is merged with the passive
auxiliary be to form the AUXP be awarded several prizes. This is then merged
with the inﬁnitival tense particle to, forming the TP to be awarded several prizes.
The resulting TP is merged with the raising adjective likely to derive the AP likely
to be awarded several prizes. This AP is subsequently merged with the passive
verb thought to form the VP thought likely to be awarded several prizes. This in
turn merges with the passive auxiliary be, forming the T-bar shown in simpliﬁed
form in (2) below (where the notation be indicates that the morphological form
of the relevant item hasn’t yet been determined):
(2)
T'
T
 BE
VP
V
thought
AP
A
likely
TP
T
to
AUXP
AUX
be
VP
V 
awarded
QP
several prizes
The tense auxiliary [T be] needs to agree with an appropriate nominal within
the structure containing it. Given Pesetsky’s Earliness Principle (which requires
operations to apply as early as possible in a derivation), T-agreement must apply as
early as possible in the derivation, and hence will apply as soon as be is introduced
into the structure. On the assumption that c-command is central to syntactic
operations, T will agree with a nominal (i.e. a noun or pronoun expression) which
it c-commands. Accordingly, as soon as the structure in (2) is formed, [T be]
searches for a nominal which it c-commands to agree with.
To use the terminology introduced by Chomsky (1998, 1999, 2001), by virtue
of being the highest head in the overall structure at this point in the derivation,
be serves as a probe which searches for a c-commanded nominal goal to agree
with. The only nominal goal c-commanded by [T be] within the structure in (2) is
the QP several prizes: [T be] therefore agrees in person and number with several
prizes, and so is ultimately spelled out as the third-person-plural form are in
the PF component. Chomsky refers to person and number features together as

8.2 Agreement
283
-features (where  is the Greek letter phi, pronounced in the same way as ﬁe
in English): using this terminology, we can say that the probe [T be] agrees in
-features with the goal several prizes. Subsequently, expletive there is merged
in spec-TP to satisfy the [epp] requirement for T to project a speciﬁer, and the
resulting TP is in turn merged with a null declarative complementiser to form the
CP shown in simpliﬁed form below (which is the structure of (1) above):
(3)
[CP [C ø] [TP There [T are] [VP [V thought] [AP [A likely] [TP to be awarded
several prizes]]]]]
However, there are a number of details which we have omitted in (3); one relates
to the case assigned to the complement (several prizes) of the passive participle
awarded. Although case is not overtly marked on the relevant noun expressions
in English, evidence from languages like Icelandic with a richer case system
suggests that the complement of a passive participle in ﬁnite expletive clauses is
assigned nominative case via agreement with T – as the following contrast (from
Sigurðsson 1996, p. 12) illustrates:
(4) (a)
þad
voru lesnar fj´orar
bœkur
There were read
fourNOM.PL booksNOM.PL
(b)
þad
var
skilað
fj´orum
b´okum
There was returned fourDAT.PL booksDAT.PL
In (4a), the auxiliary voru is a third-person-plural form which agrees with
the nom.pl/nominative plural complement fj´orar bœkur ‘four books’. In (4b),
the auxiliary is the agreementless form var ‘was’, and the complement of the pas-
sive participle is dat.pl/dative plural. (Var is a third-person-singular form, but
can be treated as an agreementless form if we characterise agreement by saying
that ‘An auxiliary is ﬁrst/second person if it agrees with a ﬁrst/second-person
subject, but third person otherwise; it is plural if it agrees with a plural subject,
but singular otherwise.’ This means that a third-person-singular auxiliary can
arise either by agreement with a third-person-singular expression or – as here –
can be a default form used as a fall-back when the auxiliary doesn’t agree with
anything.) Sigurðsson argues that it is an inherent lexical property of the partici-
ple skila ‘returned’ that (like around a quarter of transitive verbs in Icelandic) it
assigns so-called inherent dative case to its complement (see Svenonius 2002a,b
on dative complements), and (because it can’t agree with a non-nominative com-
plement) the auxiliary surfaces in the agreementless form var; by contrast, the
participle lesnar ‘read’ in (4a) does not assign inherent case to its complement,
and instead the complement is assigned (so-called) structural nominative case
via agreement with the past-tense auxiliary voru ‘were’.
Icelandic data like (4) suggest that there is a systematic relationship between
nominative case assignment and T-agreement: they are two different reﬂexes of
an agreement relationship between a ﬁnite T probe and a nominal goal. In conse-
quence of the agreement relationship between the two, the T probe agrees with a
nominal goal which it c-commands, and the nominal goal is assigned nominative

284
8 agreement, case and movement
case. Accordingly, several prizes in (3) receives nominative case via agreement
with[T are].(Itshouldbenotedinpassingthatthroughoutthischapter,wefocuson
characterising syntactic agreement. On so-called ‘semantic agreement’ in British
English structures like The government are ruining the country, see den Dikken
2001 and Sauerland and Elbourne 2002.)
The approach to case assignment outlined here (in which subjects are assigned
nominative case via agreement with a ﬁnite T) is different from that outlined in
§4.10, where we suggested that subjects are case-marked by a c-commanding C
constituent. But in one sense, our revised hypothesis that ﬁnite subjects are case-
marked by T is consistent with our earlier analysis. In chapter 4, we argued that
(in consequence of the Earliness Principle) a noun or pronoun expression is case-
marked by the closest case-assigner which c-commands it: since we also assumed
in chapter 4 that subjects originate in spec-TP, it was natural to assume that they
are case-marked by the closest functional head above them, namely C. But once
we move to an analysis like that in chapter 7 in which subjects originate internally
within VP, our assumption that they are case-marked by the closest case-assigning
head above them opens up the possibility that nominative subjects may be case-
marked by T rather than by C – and indeed this is the assumption which we will
make from now on (an assumption widely made in current research).
8.3
Feature valuation
Let’s think through rather more carefully what it means to say that
case is systematically related to agreement, and what the mechanism is by which
case and agreement operate. To illustrate our discussion, consider the derivation
of a simple passive such as that produced by speaker B below:
(5)
speaker a: What happened to the protestors?
speaker b: They were arrested
Here, discourse factors determine that a third-person-plural pronoun is required in
order to refer back to the third-person-plural expression the protestors, and that a
past-tense auxiliary is required because the event described took place in the past.
So (as it were) the person/number features of they and the past-tense feature of
were are determined in advance, before the items enter the derivation. By contrast
the case feature assigned to they and the person/number features assigned to were
are determined via an agreement operation in the course of the derivation: e.g. if
the subject had been the singular pronoun one, the auxiliary would have been third
person singular via agreement with one (as in One was arrested); and if they
had been used as the object of a transitive verb (as in The police arrested them), it
would have surfaced in the accusative form them rather than the nominative form
they.
Generalising at this point, let’s suppose that noun and pronoun expressions
like they enter the syntax with their (person and number) -features already

8.3 Feature valuation
285
valued, but their case feature as yet unvalued. (The notation they is used here
to provide a case-independent characterisation of the word which is variously
spelled out as they/them/their depending on the case assigned to it in the syn-
tax.) Using a transparent feature notation, let’s say that they enters the deriva-
tion carrying the features [3-Pers, Pl-Num, u-Case], where Pers = person, Pl
= plural, Num = number, and u = unvalued. Similarly, let’s suppose that ﬁnite
T constituents (like the tense auxiliary be) enter the derivation with their tense
feature already valued, but their person and number -features as yet unval-
ued (because they are going to be valued via agreement with a nominal goal).
This means that be enters the derivation carrying the features [Past-Tns, u-Pers,
u-Num]. In the light of these assumptions, let’s see how the derivation of (5B)
proceeds.
The pronoun they is the thematic complement of the passive verb arrested
and so merges with it to form the VP arrested they. This is in turn merged with
the tense auxiliary be, forming the structure (6) below (where already-valued
features are shown in bold, and unvalued features in italics):
(6)
T'
T
BE
[Past-Tns]
[u-Pers]
[u-Num]
VP
V
arrested
PRN
THEY
[3-Pers]
[Pl-Num]
[u-Case]
Given Pesetsky’s Earliness Principle, T-agreement will apply at this point. Let’s
suppose that agreement in such structures involves a c-command relation between
a probe and a goal in which unvalued -features on the probe are valued by
the goal, and an unvalued case feature on the goal is valued by the probe. (In
Chomsky’s use of these terms, it is the unvalued person/number features which
serve as the probe rather than the item be itself, but this is a distinction which
we shall overlook throughout, in order to simplify exposition.) Since [T be] is
the highest head in the structure (6), it serves as a probe which searches for a
c-commanded goal with an unvalued case feature, and locates the pronoun they.
Accordingly, an agreement relation is established between the probe be and the
goal they. One reﬂex of this agreement relation is that the unvalued person and
number features carried by the probe be are valued by the goal they. Valuation
here involves a Feature-Copying operation which we can sketch in general terms
as follows (where  and ß are two different constituents contained within the same
structure, and where one is a probe and the other a goal):
(7)
Feature-Copying
If  is valued for some feature [f] and  is unvalued for [f] and if  agrees with , the
feature-value for [f] on  is copied onto ß

286
8 agreement, case and movement
In consequence of the Feature-Copying operation (7), the values of the person/
number features of they are copied onto be, so that the unvalued person and
number features [u-Pers, u-Num] on be in (6) are assigned the [3-Pers, Pl-Num]
values carried by they – as shown in (8) below, where the underlined features
are those which have been valued via the Feature-Copying operation (7):
(8)
T'
T
BE
[Past-Tns]
[3-Pers]
[Pl-Num]
VP
V
arrested
PRN 
THEY
[3-Pers]
[Pl-Num]
[u-Case]
Asecondreﬂexoftheagreementrelationbetweenbeandtheyisthattheunvalued
case feature [u-Case] carried by the goal they is valued by the probe be. Since
only auxiliaries with ﬁnite (present/past) tense have nominative subjects (and
not e.g. inﬁnitival auxiliaries), we can suppose that it is the ﬁnite tense features
of the probe which are responsible for assigning nominative case to the goal.
Accordingly, we can posit that nominative case assignment involves the kind of
operation sketched informally below:
(9)
Nominative Case Assignment
An unvalued case feature on a goal is valued as nominative by a probe
carrying ﬁnite tense if probe and goal match in -features (i.e. in person and
number)
Since the person/number features of the probe be match those of the goal they
in (8), and since be carries ﬁnite tense (by virtue of its [Past-Tns] feature), the
unvalued case feature on they is valued as nominative, resulting in the structure
shown in (10) below (where the underlined feature is the one valued as nominative
in accordance with (9) above):
(10)
T'
T
BE
[Past-Tns]
[3-Pers]
[Pl-Num]
VP
V
arrested
PRN
THEY
[3-Pers]
[Pl-Num]
[Nom-Case]
Since all the features carried by be are now valued, be can ultimately be spelled out
in the phonology as the third-person-plural past-tense form were. Likewise, since
all the features carried by they are also valued, they can ultimately be spelled out
as the third-person-plural nominative form they. However, the derivation in (8) is
not yet terminated: the [epp] feature of T will subsequently trigger A-movement

8.4 Uninterpretable features and feature-deletion
287
of they to become the structural subject of were, and the resulting TP they were
arrested they will then be merged with a null declarative complementiser to form
the structure ø they were arrested they: but since our immediate concern is with
case and agreement, we skip over these details here.
Although we have given an essentially Chomskyan account of nominative
case-marking in (9) and will continue to use it throughout the rest of the book,
a theoretically more elegant account would be to make use of Pesetsky and
Torrego’s assumption (discussed in §6.6) that nominative case is a manifesta-
tion of a tense feature on T. On this alternative view, the [u-Case] feature on
they in (8) would be replaced by a [u-Tense] feature which is valued as [Past-
Tense] by the Feature-Copying operation in (7), with any (present- or past-) tensed
form of the pronoun being spelled out as they. This solution is more elegant in
two respects. Firstly, it eliminates the need for a Nominative Case Assignment
operation, since nominative case assignment becomes a tense-copying operation
which is simply a particular instance of the Feature-Copying operation in (7).
Secondly, it avoids a potential violation of a UG principle which Chomsky terms
the Inclusiveness Condition and which he says (1999, p. 2) ‘bars introduction
of new elements (features) in the course of a derivation’. Under the analysis
sketched in (8), they enters the derivation with an unvalued case feature which is
then assigned the value nominative via agreement with a T constituent which has
person, tense and number features. So it would seem that the value nominative
is introduced into the derivation via a case-valuation operation like (9), leading
to a potential violation of the Inclusiveness Condition. By contrast, under the
alternative tense-copying analysis of nominative case, no new feature value is
introduced into the derivation: instead, the existing [Past] value for the [Tns]
feature on T is copied onto the subject.
8.4
Uninterpretable features and feature-deletion
Our discussion of how case and agreement work in a sentence such as
(5B) has wider implications. One of these is that items may enter the derivation
with some of their features already valued and others as yet unvalued: e.g.
be enters the derivation in (6) with its tense feature valued, but its -features
unvalued; and they enters with its -features valued but its case feature unvalued.
This raises the question of which features are initially valued when they ﬁrst enter
thederivation,whichareinitiallyunvalued–andwhy.Chomsky(1998)arguesthat
the difference between valued and unvalued grammatical features correlates with
a further distinction between those grammatical features which are interpretable
(in the sense that they play a role in semantic interpretation), and those which are
uninterpretable (and hence play no role in semantic interpretation). For example,
it seems clear that the case feature of a pronoun like they is uninterpretable, since
a subject pronoun surfaces as nominative, accusative or genitive depending on
the type of [bracketed] clause it is in, without any effect on meaning – as the
examples in (11) below illustrate:

288
8 agreement, case and movement
(11) (a)
It is said [they were arrested]
(b)
He expected [them to be arrested]
(c)
He was shocked at [their being arrested]
By contrast, the (person/number) -features of pronouns are interpretable, since
e.g. a ﬁrst-person-singular pronoun like I clearly differs in meaning from a third-
person-plural pronoun like they. In the case of ﬁnite auxiliaries, it is clear that
their tense features are interpretable, since a present-tense form like is differs
in meaning from a past-tense form like was. By contrast, the (person/number)
-features of auxiliaries are uninterpretable, in that they serve purely to mark
agreement with a particular nominal. This suggests a correlation such as (12)
below between whether or not features are interpretable and whether or not they
are initially valued:
(12)
Feature Value Correlation
(i)
Interpretable features enter the derivation already valued
(ii)
Features which enter the derivation unvalued are uninterpretable
The correlation between valuedness and interpretability turns out to be an impor-
tant one. (It should be noted that Chomsky 1998 offers a rather different for-
mulation of (12ii) to the effect that uninterpretable features enter the derivation
unvalued, but his claim seems problematic e.g. for languages in which nouns
may enter the derivation with an uninterpretable gender -feature with a ﬁxed
but arbitrary value: e.g. the noun M¨adchen ‘girl’ is inherently neuter in gender in
German, though it denotes a feminine entity.)
As we saw in the simpliﬁed model of grammar which we presented in §1.3, each
structure generated by the syntactic component of the grammar is subsequently
sent to the PF component of the grammar to be spelled out (i.e. assigned a PF
representation which provides a representation of its Phonetic Form). If we
assume that unvalued features are illegible to (and hence cannot be processed by)
the PF component, it follows that every unvalued feature in a derivation must
be valued in the course of the derivation, or else the derivation will crash (i.e.
fail) because the PF component is unable to spell out unvalued features. In more
concrete terms, this amounts to saying that unless the syntax speciﬁes whether
we require e.g. a ﬁrst-person-singular or third-person-plural present-tense form of
be, the derivation will crash because the PF component cannot determine whether
to spell out be as am or are.
In addition to being sent to the PF component, each structure generated by
the syntactic component of the grammar is simultaneously sent to the semantic
component, where it is converted into an appropriate semantic representation.
Clearly, interpretable features play an important role in the computation of seman-
tic representations. Equally clearly, however, uninterpretable features play no
role whatever in this process: indeed, since they are illegible to the semantic
component, we need to devise some way of ensuring that uninterpretable features
do not input into the semantic component. How can we do this?

8.4 Uninterpretable features and feature-deletion
289
Chomsky’s answer is to suppose that uninterpretable features are deleted in
the course of the syntactic derivation, in the speciﬁc sense that they are marked as
being invisible in the semantic component while remaining visible in the syntax
and in the PF component. To get a clearer idea of what this means in concrete
terms, consider the uninterpretable nominative case feature on they in (5B) They
were arrested. Since this case feature is uninterpretable, it has to be deleted in the
course of the syntactic derivation, so that the semantic component cannot ‘see’
it. However, the PF component must still be able to ‘see’ this case feature, since
it needs to know what case has been assigned to the pronoun they in order to
determine whether the pronoun should be spelled out as they, them or their. This
suggests the following convention:
(13)
Feature Visibility Convention
Any uninterpretable feature deleted in the syntax is invisible to the semantic
component, but remains visible in the syntactic component and in the PF
component
The next question to ask at this juncture is what kind of syntactic operation
is involved in the deletion of uninterpretable features. Let’s suppose (following
Chomsky) that feature-deletion involves the kind of operation outlined informally
below (where  and ß enter into an agreement relation, and one is a probe and
the other a goal):
(14)
Feature-Deletion
 deletes any uninterpretable (person/number/case) feature(s) carried by ß
if  is -complete and if the value(s) of any -feature(s) carried by ß match
those of the corresponding -feature(s) of 
Here,  and ß are two different constituents contained within the same structure,
and one is a probe and the other a goal. In a language like English where ﬁnite
verbs agree with their subjects in person and number (but not gender), ß is -
complete if it carries both person and number features (though in a language like
Arabic where ﬁnite verbs agree in person, number and gender with their subjects,
 is -complete if it carries person, number and gender: see Nasu 2001, 2002 for
discussion). For ß to delete the person/number/case features of , the -features
of ß must match the -features carried by . Let’s deﬁne the relation ‘match’ in
the following terms:
(15)
The relation ‘match’
 and  match in respect of some feature [f] either if both have the same
value for [f], or if one is valued for [f] and the other unvalued for [f] – but
not if they have different values for [f].
To make a rather abstract discussion more concrete, let’s consider how feature-
deletion applies in the case of our earlier structure (10) above. Here, both be
and they are -complete, since both are speciﬁed for person as well as num-
ber. Moreover, the two match in respect of their -features, since the two have

290
8 agreement, case and movement
the same value for person and number (in that both are third person plural). Let’s
assume that (in consequence of the Earliness Principle), feature-deletion applies
as early as possible in the derivation, and hence applies at the point where the
structure in (10) has been formed. In accordance with Feature-Deletion (14),
-complete be can delete the uninterpretable case feature carried by they; and
conversely -complete they can delete the uninterpretable person/number fea-
tures carried by be. Feature-Deletion therefore results in the structure (16) below
(where strikethrough indicates deletion):
(16)
T'
T
BE
[Past-Tns]
[3-Pers]
[Pl-Num]
VP
V
arrested
PRN
THEY
[3-Pers]
[Pl-Num]
[Nom-Case] 
The deleted features will now be invisible in the semantic component – in accor-
dance with (13). The rest of the derivation proceeds as before.
Chomsky sees uninterpretable features as being at the very heart of agreement,
and posits (1999, p. 4) that ‘Probe and Goal must both be active for Agree to apply’
and that a constituent  (whether Probe or Goal) is active only if  contains one
or more uninterpretable features. In other words, it is the presence of uninter-
pretable features on a constituent that makes it active (and hence able to serve as
a probe or goal, and to play a part in feature-valuation and feature-deletion).
As should be obvious, the Feature-Deletion operation posited in (14) is very
different from the (Trace) Copy-Deletion operation we assumed in earlier chap-
ters by which a trace copy of a moved constituent is deleted. Feature-Deletion is
an operation which renders the affected features invisible to the semantic com-
ponent, while leaving them visible to the phonological component. By contrast,
Copy-Deletion is an operation which renders traces of moved constituents invis-
ible to the phonological component (in the sense that they are not given any
phonetic spellout), while leaving them visible in the semantic component. The
reason why traces must remain visible in the semantic component is that they
play an important role in semantic interpretation, as we can see in relation to a
sentence such as (17a) below, which has the simpliﬁed structure (17b) (assuming
that a famous politician originates as the object of the passive participle seen and
raises to become the subject of has):
(17) (a)
A famous politician has not been seen in the Hotel Casanova for weeks
(b)
A famous politician has not been seen a famous politician in the Hotel
Casanova for weeks
(17a) exhibits a scope ambiguity in respect of whether a famous politician has
scope over not (so that the sentence is paraphraseable as ‘There is a speciﬁc

8.5 Expletive it subjects
291
famous politician, Gerry Attrick, who has not been seen in the Hotel Casanova
for weeks’) or conversely whether not has scope over a famous politician (so that
the sentence is paraphraseable as ‘Not a single famous politician has been seen in
the Hotel Casanova for weeks’). If the semantic component is able to ‘see’ traces,
it will ‘see’ the structure represented in skeletal form in (17b) above. One way
of handling the scope ambiguity of sentences like (17a) is to posit that scope is
deﬁned in terms of c-command and that the scope ambiguity correlates with the
fact that in the structure (17b), not is c-commanded by (so falls within the scope
of) the moved constituent a famous politician, but conversely not c-commands
(and hence has scope over) its trace a famous politician. A plausible conclusion
to draw is that trace-deletion takes place in the phonological component, so that
traces remain in the syntax and hence are visible in the semantic component, and
can play a role in determining scope in relevant types of structure. The assumption
that trace-deletion is a phonological operation is implicit in Chomsky’s remark
(1999, p. 11) that ‘Phonological rules . . . eliminate trace.’
8.5
Expletive it subjects
So far, all the constructions we have looked at have involved a ﬁnite T
agreeing with a noun or pronoun expression which carries interpretable per-
son/number -features. However, English has two expletive pronouns which
(by virtue of being non-referential) carry no interpretable -features. One of
these is expletive it in sentences such as:
(18) (a)
It is said that he has taken bribes
(b)
It can be difﬁcult to come to terms with long-term illness
(c)
It’s a pity that she can’t come
(d)
It’s a long way from here to Lands End
The pronoun it in sentences like these appears to be an expletive, since it cannot
be replaced by a referential pronoun like this or that, and cannot be questioned
by what. Let’s examine the syntax of expletive it by looking at the derivation of
a sentence like (18a).
Suppose that we have reached the stage of derivation where the (passive par-
ticiple) verb said has been merged with its CP complement that he has taken
bribes to form the VP said that he has taken bribes. Merging this VP with the
tense auxiliary be forms the structure shown in simpliﬁed form below:
(19)
T'
T
BE
[Pres-Tns]
[u-Pers]
[u-Num]
VP
V
said
CP
that he has taken bribes

292
8 agreement, case and movement
In accordance with Pesetsky’s Earliness Principle, we might expect T-agreement
to apply at this point. Accordingly, the probe be (which is active by virtue of its
uninterpretable person/number -features) searches for an active goal to value
its unvalued -features. It might at ﬁrst sight seem as if the CP headed by that
is an appropriate goal, and is a third-person-singular expression which can value
the person/number features of be. However, it seems unlikely that such clauses
have person/number features. One reason for thinking this is that even if the that-
clause in (19) is coordinated with another that-clause as in (20) below, the verb
be remains in the singular form is:
(20)
It is said [that he has taken bribes and that he has embezzled company funds]
If each of the italicised clauses in (20) were singular in number, we would expect
the bracketed coordinate clause to be plural (in the same way as the coordi-
nate structure John and Mary is a plural expression in a sentence like John and
Mary are an item): but the fact that the passive auxiliary is remains singular
in (20) suggests that the CP has no number properties of its own. Nor indeed
does the that-clause in (19) have an unvalued case feature which could make it
into an active goal, since that-clauses appear to be caseless (as argued by Saﬁr
1986), in that a that-clause cannot be used in a position like that italicised in (21)
below where it would be assigned accusative case by a transitive preposition such
as of:
(21)
∗There have been reports of that he has taken bribes
If the CP in (19) has no uninterpretable case feature, it is inactive and so cannot
value the -features of be.
However, a question we might ask about (19) is whether be could instead agree
with the subject of the that-clause, namely he: after all, he has an uninterpretable
case feature (making it active), and is a third-person-singular expression and so
could seemingly value the unvalued person/number features of be. Yet it is clear
that be does not in fact agree with he, since if we replace he by the ﬁrst-person-
plural subject we, be still surfaces in the third-person-singular form is – as (22)
below illustrates:
(22)
It is said [CP that [TP we have taken bribes]]
Something, then, must prevent be from agreeing with we – but what? The answer
lies in a constraint developed by Chomsky termed the Phase Impenetrability
Condition/PIC. Since understanding PIC requires a prior understanding of the
notion of phase developed by Chomsky in recent work (1998, 1999, 2001), let’s
ﬁrst take a look at what phases are.
In §1.5 we suggested that a fundamental principle of UG is a Locality Principle
which requires all grammatical operations to be local. Using the probe–goal
terminology introduced in this chapter, we can construe this as meaning that all
grammatical operations involve a relation between a probe P and a local goal G
which is sufﬁciently ‘close’ to the probe. However, an important question to ask
is why probe–goal relations must be local. In this connection, Chomsky (2001,

8.5 Expletive it subjects
293
p. 13) remarks that ‘the P, G relation must be local’ in order ‘to minimise search’
(i.e. in order to ensure that a minimal amount of searching will enable a probe
to ﬁnd an appropriate goal). His claim that locality is forced by the need ‘to
minimise search’ suggests a processing explanation: the implication is that the
Language Faculty can only process limited amounts of structure at one time –
and, more speciﬁcally, can only hold a limited amount of structure in its ‘active
memory’ (Chomsky 1999, p. 9). In order to ensure a ‘reduction of computational
burden’ (1999, p. 9) Chomsky proposes that ‘the derivation of EXP[ressions]
proceeds by phase’ (ibid.), so that syntactic structures are built up one phase at
a time. He maintains (2001, p. 14) that ‘phases should be as small as possible,
to minimise memory’. More speciﬁcally, he suggests (1999, p. 9) that phases are
‘propositional’ in nature, and hence include CPs. His rationale for taking CP to be
phases is that CP represents a complete clausal complex (including a speciﬁcation
of force).
In what sense do phases ensure that grammatical operations are purely local?
The answer given by Chomsky is that any goal within the (c-command) domain
of the phase (i.e. any goal c-commanded by the head of the phase) is impene-
trable to further syntactic operations. He refers to this condition as the Phase
Impenetrability Condition/PIC – and we can state it as follows (cf. Chomsky
2001, p. 5, ex. 6):
(23)
Phase Impenetrability Condition/PIC
Any goal in the (c-command) domain of a phase head is impenetrable to a
probe outside the phase
Stated in a form like (23), the relevant condition clearly begs the question of why a
goal positioned ‘below’ a phase head should be impenetrable to a probe positioned
‘above’ the phase. Chomsky’s answer (2001, p. 5) is that once a complete phase
has been formed, the domain of the phase head (i.e. its complement) undergoes
a transfer operation by which it is simultaneously sent to the phonological com-
ponent to be assigned an appropriate phonetic representation, and to the semantic
component to be assigned an appropriate semantic representation – and hence
no constituent in the relevant domain is thereafter able to undergo any further
syntactic operations. So, for example, once the operations which take place on
the CP cycle have been completed, the TP which is the domain/complement of
the phase head C will be sent to the phonological and semantic components for
processing. As a result, TP is no longer accessible in the syntax, and hence neither
TP itself nor any constituent of TP can subsequently serve as a goal for a higher
probe of any kind in the syntax.
InthelightofthePhaseImpenetrabilityCondition(23),let’sreturntoourearlier
structure (19) and ask why the auxiliary is in the main clause can’t agree with the
subject he of the complement clause. The answer is as follows. The complement
clause that he has taken bribes is a CP, hence a phase. The domain of that CP
(i.e. the constituent which is the complement of the head C of CP) is the TP he
has taken bribes. This means that neither this TP nor any of its constituents can
serve as a goal for a probe outside CP. Since is in (19) lies outside the bracketed

294
8 agreement, case and movement
CP phase, and he lies inside its bracketed TP domain, PIC prevents agreement
between the two. (See Polinsky and Potsdam 2001, and Branigan and MacKenzie
2002 for an analysis of apparent long-distance agreement in terms of PIC.)
So far, what we have established in relation to the structure in (19) is that
be cannot agree with the that-clause because the latter is inactive and has no
-features or case feature; nor can be agree with he, because PIC makes he
impenetrable to be. It is precisely because be cannot agree with CP or with
any of its constituents that expletive it has to be used, in order to satisfy the
[epp] requirement of T, and to value the -features of T. In keeping with the
Minimalist spirit of positing only the minimal apparatus which is conceptu-
ally necessary, let’s further suppose that expletive it has ‘a full complement of
-features’ (Chomsky 1998, p. 44) but that (as Martin Atkinson (pc) suggests)
these are the only features carried by it in its expletive use. More speciﬁcally,
let’s assume that expletive it carries the features [third-person, singular-number].
Since expletive it is a ‘meaningless’ expletive pronoun, these features will be
uninterpretable. Given this assumption, merging it as the speciﬁer of the T-bar in
(19) above will derive the structure (24) below (with interpretable features shown
in bold, and uninterpretable features in italics):
(24)
TP
PRN
it
[3-Pers]
[Sg-Num]
T'
T
BE
[Pres-Tns]
[u-Pers]
[u-Num]
VP 
V
said
CP
that he has taken bribes
At this stage in the derivation, the pronoun it can serve as a probe because it is the
highest head in the structure, and because it is active by virtue of its uninterpretable
-features. Likewise, the auxiliary be can serve as a goal for it because be is c-
commanded by it and be is active by virtue of its uninterpretable -features.
Feature-Copying (7) can therefore apply to value the unvalued -features on be
as third person singular (via agreement with it), and Feature-Deletion (14) can
apply to delete the uninterpretable -features of both it and be, so deriving:
(25)
TP
PRN
it
[3-Pers]
[Sg-Num]
 
T'
T
BE
[Pres-Tns]
[3-Pers]
[Sg-Num]
VP 
V
said
CP
that he has taken bribes

8.5 Expletive it subjects
295
As required, all unvalued features have been valued at this point (be ultimately
being spelled out in the PF component as is), and all uninterpretable features
deleted.Theresultingstructure(25)issubsequentlymergedwithanulldeclarative
complementiser. The deleted uninterpretable person/number features of it and be
will be visible in the PF component and the syntax, but not in the semantic
component; the undeleted [Pres-Tns] feature of be will be visible in all three
components. Hence, be will be spelled out as is in the PF component, since the
phonology can ‘see’ the third-person, singular-number, present-tense features
carried by be.
There are two particular features of the analysis outlined above which merit
further comment. One is that we have assumed that expletive it carries person and
number features, but no gender feature and no case feature. While it clearly carries
an interpretable (neuter/inanimate) gender feature when used as a referential
pronoun (e.g. in a sentence like This book has interesting exercises in it, where it
refers back to this book), it has no semantic interpretation in its use as an expletive
pronoun, and so can be assumed to carry no interpretable gender feature in such
a use. The reason for positing that expletive it is a caseless pronoun is that it is
alreadyactivebyvirtueofitsuninterpretable-features,andhencedoesnot‘need’
a case feature to make it active for agreement (unlike subjects with interpretable
-features). Some suggestive evidence that expletive it may be a caseless pronoun
comes from the fact that it has no genitive form its – at least for speakers like me
who don’t say (e.g.) ∗He was annoyed at its raining.
A further assumption worth commenting on is that we have assumed that
expletive it is intrinsically third person singular, and that this is why be ends
up in the third-person-singular form is in sentences like (18a) It is said that
he has taken bribes. However, if we were to accept Chomsky’s view that all
uninterpretable features enter the derivation unvalued, we’d have to say that the
pronoun it enters the derivation with unvalued person/number features, as in (26)
below:
(26)
TP
PRN
it
[u-Pers]
[u-Num]
T'
T
BE
[Pres-Tns]
[u-Pers]
[u-Num]
VP 
V
said
CP
that he has taken bribes
The obvious question which such an analysis would raise is how a pronoun with
unvalued person/number features can value the unvalued person/number features
of T (and conversely). To answer this question, we’d have to invoke default
number/person valuation conditions such as those italicised below:

296
8 agreement, case and movement
(27)
Person/Number Valuation
Where  and  enter into an agreement relation and  has one or more
unvalued -features which match corresponding -features carried by ,
 values  as:
(i) ﬁrst person if  is ﬁrst person, second person if  is second person, and
third person otherwise
(ii) plural if  is plural and singular otherwise
(27i)wouldensurethatthepersonfeaturesofbothitandbeareassignedthedefault
(otherwise) value [3-Pers]; and (27ii) would ensure that the number features of
both it and be are assigned the default value [Sg-Num]. We will not attempt to
choose between the analyses in (24) and (26) here, but for concreteness we will
henceforth assume (24).
Let’s now turn to consider the question of how we handle sentences like the
following, which contain so-called weather it:
(28) (a)
It is raining
(b) It has been snowing
One way of analysing a sentence like (28a) is to treat rain as a predicate which has
no -marked argument, and to take it to be a non-referential (expletive) pronoun.
This would mean that the ﬁrst stage in the derivation of (28a) is for the tense
auxiliary be to be merged with the verb rain (which is ultimately spelled out
as the form raining because the progressive auxiliary be requires a complement
headed by a verb in the ing-form). Merging expletive it as the speciﬁer of the
resulting T-bar be raining would derive the structure (29) below, if we assume
(for expository purposes) that it is intrinsically third person singular:
(29)
TP
PRN
it
[3-Pers]
[Sg-Num]
T'
T
BE
[Pres-Tns]
[u-Pers]
[u-Num]
V
raining
At this point, it is the highest head in the overall structure, and is active (by
virtue of its uninterpretable -features) and so can serve as a probe. [T be] is
c-commanded by it and is also active (by virtue of its own uninterpretable -
features), and so can serve as a goal for the probe it. Accordingly, the unvalued
person/number features on be are valued via the Feature-Copying operation (7),
with the result that the -features of be are assigned the same values as those of
it. Since both it and be are -complete (by virtue of carrying both person and
number features), and since their -features have matching values, each can delete
the uninterpretable -features of the other in accordance with Feature-Deletion
(14), so deriving:

8.5 Expletive it subjects
297
(30)
TP
PRN
it
[3-Pers]
[Sg-Num]  
T'
T
BE
[Pres-Tns]
[3-Pers]
[Sg-Num]
V
raining
The deleted uninterpretable person/number features of it and be will be visible
in the PF component and the syntax, but not in the semantic component; the
undeleted [Pres-Tns] feature of be will be visible in all three components. Hence,
be will be spelled out as is in the PF component, since PF can ‘see’ the third-
person, singular-number, present-tense features carried by be. The resulting TP
will subsequently be merged with a null declarative-force complementiser.
A key assumption in the analysis outlined above is that expletive it is a mean-
ingless ‘ﬁller’, and so non-referential. However, this assumption would seem to be
called into question by the observation that expletive it can serve as the antecedent
of PRO: cf.
(31) (a)
It sometimes rains after PRO snowing (Chomsky 1981, p. 324)
(b)
It can seem that someone is guilty without [PRO seeming that they actually
committed the crime] (Williams 1994, p. 91)
If we suppose that only a referential pronoun can serve as the controller of PRO,
a plausible conclusion to draw is that expletive it is referential (in a sense made
precise by Chomsky 1981, who suggests that expletive it is a quasi-argument).
And if weather it in sentences like (28a,b) is referential, it is also plausible to
suppose that it is initially merged as a (quasi-)argument of the weather predicate
with which it is associated. If we suppose that weather verbs like rain/snow are
unaccusative (as is suggested by the fact that in Italian they can be used with the
auxiliary essere ‘be’ in perfect-participle forms), this would mean that it in (28a,b)
originates as the complement of the verb rain/snow. If weather it is indeed refer-
ential and if this means that its person/number features are interpretable, then it
follows that weather it will also need an unvalued case feature to make it active
in the syntax. Assuming all of this, we will have the structure shown in simpliﬁed
form in (32) below at the stage when T is merged with its complement:
(32)
TP
T
BE
[Pres-Tns]
[u-Pers]
[u-Num]
[EPP] 
VP
V
raining
PRN
it
[3-Pers]
[Sg-Num]
[u-Case]

298
8 agreement, case and movement
The unvalued person/number features of be will be valued as third person sin-
gular in accordance with Feature-Copying (7), and deleted in accordance with
Feature-Deletion (14). The unvalued case feature on it will be valued as nom-
inative by Nominative Case Assignment (9), and deleted by Feature-Deletion
(14). The [epp] feature of T will simultaneously trigger movement of it (which
is active by virtue of its unvalued case feature) to spec-TP, so deriving the struc-
ture in (33) below (simpliﬁed by not showing features carried by the trace copy
of it):
(33)
TP
PRN
it
[3-Pers]
[Sg-Num]
[Nom-Case]
T'
T
BE
[Pres-Tns]
[3-Pers]
[Sg-Num]
[EPP] 
VP 
V
raining
it
As required, all uninterpretable features have been deleted, so the resulting deriva-
tion is convergent. If the analysis of expletive it outlined here is along the right
lines it suggests that (contrary to what we assumed earlier) expletive it is not a
pure ‘dummy’ element inserted in spec-TP to satisfy the [epp] requirement of T,
but rather is a (quasi-)argument which originates internally within VP. Of course,
if expletive it carries case, we have to ask why (as noted above) it has no genitive
form: however, this is arguably just a lexical idiosyncrasy, since even in its refer-
ential use it has no strong genitive form (Peter Evans (pc) points out), as we see
from the ungrammaticality of ?∗Its watering the ﬂowers is something I don’t like
about my cat.
8.6
Expletive there subjects
Having looked at the syntax of expletive it in the previous section,
we now turn to look at expletive there. As a starting point for our discussion,
we’ll go back to the very ﬁrst sentence we looked at in this chapter, namely
(1) There are thought likely to be awarded several prizes. Let’s suppose that the
derivation proceeds as before, until we reach the stage in (2) above. However, let’s
additionally assume that several prizes carries interpretable -features (marking
it as a third-person-plural expression) and an uninterpretable (and unvalued) case-
feature. Let’s also assume (as in earlier discussions) that be carries an interpretable
present-tense feature, and uninterpretable (and unvalued) -features. This being
so, the structure formed when be is merged with its VP complement will be that
shown in simpliﬁed form below:

8.6 Expletive there subjects
299
(34)
T'
T
BE
[Pres-Tns]
[u-Pers]
[u-Num]
VP
V
thought
AP
A
likely
TP
T
to
AUXP
AUX
be
VP
V
awarded
QP
several prizes
[3-Pers]
[Pl-Num]
[u-Case]
Given the Earliness Principle, T-agreement will apply at this point in the deriva-
tion. Because be is the highest head in the structure (in that it is the only head
in the structure which is not c-commanded by another head), and because be is
active (by virtue of its uninterpretable -features), be serves as a probe which
searches for a nominal goal within the structure containing it. The nominal several
prizes can serve as a goal for the probe be, since several prizes is active by virtue
of carrying an uninterpretable case feature. By application of Feature-Copying
(7), the unvalued person and number features on be are given the same values as
those on several prizes – as shown in simpliﬁed form in (35) below:
(35)
[be]
thought likely to be awarded [several prizes]
[Pres-Tns]
[3-Pers]
[3-Pers]
[Pl-Num]
[Pl-Num]
[u-Case]
By application of Nominative Case Assignment (9), the unvalued case feature of
the goal several prizes in (35) is assigned the value nominative as shown in (36)
below, since the probe be carries ﬁnite tense (more speciﬁcally, present tense),
and since the probe [be] and the goal several prizes have matching -feature
values because both are third person plural:
(36)
[be]
thought likely to be awarded [several prizes]
[Pres-Tns]
[3-Pers]
[3-Pers]
[Pl-Num]
[Pl-Num]
[Nom-Case]
Via Feature-Deletion (14), the probe be deletes the uninterpretable nominative
case feature on several prizes, since be is -complete (by virtue of carrying both
person and number features) and the -features of the probe be match those
of the goal several prizes. Conversely, via the same Feature-Deletion operation

300
8 agreement, case and movement
(14), the goal several prizes deletes the uninterpretable person/number features
on the probe be, since the goal is -complete (carrying both person and number
features), and probe and goal have matching -feature values. Feature-Deletion
yields:
(37)
[be]
thought likely to be awarded [several prizes]
[Pres-Tns]
[3-Pers]
[3-Pers]
[Pl-Num]
[Pl-Num]
[Nom-Case]
We have thus deleted all uninterpretable case/agreement features on both probe
and goal, as required.
However, be also has an [epp] feature (not shown above) requiring it to project
a structural subject. In (1) There are thought likely to be awarded several prizes,
the [epp] requirement of [T be] is satisﬁed by merging expletive there in spec-TP.
Let’s assume that (like expletive it), expletive there carries no case feature (and
hence has no genitive form, as we see from the ungrammaticality of ∗She was
upset by there’s being nobody to help her). More precisely, let’s follow Chomsky
(1998, 1999, 2001) in positing that the only feature carried by expletive there is an
uninterpretable person feature, and let’s further suppose that there is intrinsically
third person (consistent with the fact that a number of other words beginning
with th- are third person – e.g. this, that, these, those and the). Accordingly,
merging there in spec-TP will derive the structure shown in abbreviated form
below:
(38)
TP
PRN
there
[3-Pers]
T'
T
BE
[Pres-Tns]
[3-Pers]
[Pl-Num]
VP
V 
thought
AP
likely to be awarded [several prizes]
[Pl-Num]
[3-Pres]
[Nom-Case]
The pronoun there serves as a probe because it is the highest head in the structure,
and because it is active by virtue of carrying an uninterpretable third-person -
feature. It therefore searches for a c-commanded goal to agree with. Let’s suppose
that agreement (of the kind we are concerned with here) involves a T–nominal
relation (i.e. a relation between T and a noun/pronoun expression): this being so,
there (being a pronominal probe) will search for an active T constituent to serve
as its goal, and ﬁnd [T be]. be is an active goal for the probe there in (38) because
be contains uninterpretable person/number features: these have been marked as
invisible to the semantic component (via Feature-Deletion), but remain visible

8.6 Expletive there subjects
301
and active in the syntax in accordance with the Feature Visibility Convention (13).
Accordingly, Feature-Deletion (14) applies, and the goal be deletes the matching
uninterpretable third-person feature carried by the probe there. This is possible
because there is active as a probe and be is active as a goal (as we have just
seen), and because the goal be is -complete (having both person and number
features), and the third-person feature carried by the probe there matches the
third-person feature carried by the goal be. Deleting the uninterpretable person
feature of there, and merging the resulting TP with a null complementiser carrying
an interpretable declarative force feature [Dec-Force], derives the CP shown in
skeletal form below:
(39)
ø
there
be
thought likely to be awarded [several prizes]
[Dec-Force]
[3-Pers] [Pres-Tns]
[3-Pers]
[3-Pers]
[Pl-Num]
[Pl-Num]
[Nom-Case]
Only the bold-printed interpretable features will be processed by the semantic
component, not the barred italicised uninterpretable features (since these have all
been deleted and deletion makes features invisible to the semantic component,
while leaving them visible to the syntactic and phonological components); both
the interpretable and uninterpretable features will be processed by the phonolog-
ical component where be will be spelled out as are. (On colloquial structures like
There’s lots of people in the room, see den Dikken 2001.)
An important question to ask in the context of our discussion of expletive it
in the previous section and expletive there in this section is what factors deter-
mine the choice of expletive in a particular sentence. In this connection, let’s ask
why expletive there can’t be used in place of expletive it in sentences like (40b)
below:
(40) (a)
It is said that he has taken bribes
(b)
∗There is said that he has taken bribes
Let’s suppose that merging be with the VP headed by the verb said forms the
structure shown in (19) above, and that subsequently merging there in spec–TP
derives the structure shown in (41) below:
(41)
TP
PRN
there
[3-Pers]
T'
T
BE
[Pres-Tns]
[u-Pers]
[u-Num]
VP
V
said
CP
that he has taken bribes
Because it is the highest head in the structure, and because it is active by virtue of
its uninterpretable person feature, there serves as a probe. be serves as the goal for

302
8 agreement, case and movement
there because be is c-commanded by there, and be itself is active by virtue of its
uninterpretable person/number features. Via Feature-Copying (7), the unvalued
person feature of be will be assigned the same third-person value as there – as
shown in schematic form below:
(42)
there
be
said that he has taken bribes
[3-Pers] [Pres-Tns]
[3-Pers]
[u-Num]
Via Feature-Deletion (14), be can delete the uninterpretable person feature of
there, because be is -complete and the person features of be and there have
matching values. However, there cannot delete the person feature of be, since
there is -incomplete (in that it has person but not number), and only a -complete
 can delete one or more features of ß. Accordingly, the structure which results
after Feature-Deletion applies is:
(43)
there
be
said that he has taken bribes
[3-Pers] [Pres-Tns]
[3-Pers]
[u-Num]
However, the resulting derivation will ultimately crash, for two reasons. Firstly,
the number feature on be has remained unvalued, and the PF component cannot
process unvalued features. And secondly, the uninterpretable person and number
features on be have not been deleted, and the semantic component cannot process
uninterpretable features. In other words, our assumptions about the differences
between expletive it and expletive there allow us to provide a principled account
of why (40a) It is said that he has taken bribes is grammatical, but (40b) ∗There
is said that he has taken bribes is not.
Now let’s ask why expletive it can’t be used in place of there in a sentence like
(44b) below:
(44) (a)
There are thought likely to be awarded several prizes
(b)
∗It is thought likely to be awarded several prizes
One way of answering this question is by making the assumption outlined below:
(45)
EPP Generalisation
When T carries an [epp] feature, this can be deleted
(i) by merging expletive there in spec-TP if T c-commands a matching
indeﬁnite goal (i.e. an indeﬁnite noun or pronoun expression which
matches T in person/number)
or
(ii) by merging expletive it in spec-TP if T c-commands no matching goal
or
(iii) by moving the closest matching active goal c-commanded by T into
spec-TP
The requirement in (45iii) for T to attract the closest matching goal is a con-
sequence of the Attract Closest Principle. (45i) stipulates the indeﬁniteness

8.6 Expletive there subjects
303
requirement without explaining it. An interesting possibility to explore would
be that in expletive there structures, the associate is indeﬁnite because it has no
person properties, so that there is inserted in order to value the person properties
of T (though see Frampton and Gutmann 1999 for an alternative explanation. See
also Lasnik 2001 on the nature of EPP.)
It follows from (45) that in structures like (34) where [T be] c-commands (and
agreesinpersonandnumberwith)anindeﬁnitenominal(severalprizes),expletive
there can be used but not expletive it, so deriving (44a) There are thought likely
to be awarded several prizes. Conversely in structures like (19) where there is
no matching goal accessible to the probe [Tbe], it can be used but not there – so
deriving (18a) It is said that he has taken bribes. It also follows from (45) that
neither expletive can be used in structures like the following:
(46) (a)
∗There was impeached the president
(b)
∗It was impeached the president
This is because was in (46) c-commands and agrees in person and number with
the deﬁnite goal the president, so that the conditions for the use of either expletive
in (45i,ii) are not met. The only way of deleting the [epp] feature of T in such a
case is to passivise the deﬁnite DP the president, so deriving:
(47)
The president was impeached
So, we see that the EPP Generalisation in (45) provides a descriptively adequate
characterisation of data like (40), (44), (46) and (47). (See Bowers 2002 for an
alternative account of the there/it distinction in expletives.)
However, our so-called ‘generalisation’ in (45) is little more than a descriptive
stipulation, and begs the question of why the relevant restrictions on the use of
expletives should hold. A preferable solution would be to see the choice between
expletive there and expletive it as one rooted in UG principles. Reasoning along
these lines, one possibility would be to posit that economy considerations dictate
that we use an expletive carrying as few uninterpretable features as possible. In a
structure like (19), the expletive has to serve two functions: (i) to satisfy the [epp]
requirement for T to have a speciﬁer with person and/or number properties; and
(ii) to value the unvalued person/number features of [T be]. Hence only expletive it
can be used, since this carries both person and number. But in a structure like (2),
the expletive is not needed to value the person/number features of [Tbe] since
these are valued by several prizes; rather, the expletive serves only to satisfy the
requirement for T to have a speciﬁer with person and/or number features. In this
situation, we might suppose, there is preferred to it because there carries only
person, and economy considerations dictate that we use as few uninterpretable
features as possible.
Throughout this section, we have followed Chomsky in assuming that expletive
there is a ‘dummy’ pronoun directly merged in spec-TP. However, just as there
are some who believe that expletive it originates internally within VP, so too
there are some who believe that expletive there originates internally within VP,

304
8 agreement, case and movement
perhaps with a locative function (as suggested by Moro 1997). Bowers (2002,
p. 195) argues that the ungrammaticality of transitive expletive structures such as
the following in Standard English:
(48)
∗There has [someone eaten a bagel]
cannot be accounted for under Chomsky’s spec-TP analysis of expletive there,
since nothing in the spec-TP account prevents has from agreeing with (and assign-
ing nominative case to) someone, with expletive there being inserted in spec-TP in
order to delete the [epp] feature of T. A principled way of ruling out sentences like
(48), Bowers argues, is by supposing that expletive there originates in spec-VP
as a nonthematic subject – and hence it can only occur in intransitive VPs which
(by their very nature) do not have a thematic subject.
We can illustrate how such an analysis might work in terms of a sentence such
as (49) below:
(49)
There have arisen several problems
The verb arise is an unaccusative predicate which projects a complement, but no
thematic subject. Precisely because it projects no thematic subject, it can project
an expletive subject (on Bowers’s assumption that a predicate only allows an
expletive subject if it has no thematic subject). This means that expletive there
will initially be merged as the speciﬁer of the VP headed by arisen in (49), so
that at the stage of derivation when have is merged with its VP complement, we
have the structure shown in (50) below:
(50)
T'
T
HAVE
[Past-Tns]
[u-Pers]
[u-Num]
[EPP]
VP
PRN
there
[3-Pers]
V'
V
arisen
QP
several problems
[Pl-Num]
[3-Pers]
[u-Case]
[T have] will then probe for active matching goals which carry person and/or
number features, and locates two such active goals, there and several problems.
Accordingly, T simultaneously agrees with both there and several problems –
resulting in multiple agreement (i.e. agreement between a probe and more than
one matching goal). Clearly, this will only yield a successful outcome if the asso-
ciate carries the same third-person feature as there – thereby accounting for the
observation by Sigurðsson (1996) that expletive associates must be third-person
expressions. The [epp] feature of T simultaneously attracts the closest active
goal, so triggering movement of there to spec-TP. We can assume that all the

8.6 Expletive there subjects
305
various operations affecting a given probe (like T in (50) above) apply simul-
taneously, so that agreement with there, agreement with several problems and
movement of there to spec-TP all apply at the same time.
A potential problem posed by analysing expletive there as a (perhaps locative)
quasi-argument initially merged in spec-VP is that (unlike expletive it in sentences
such as (31) above) expletive there cannot serve as a controller for PRO – as we
see from (51) below:
(51)
There occurred three more accidents without [there/∗PRO being any
medical help available on the premises]
(Haegeman 1994, p. 279)
If quasi-arguments have the property of being able to serve as controllers of PRO,
sentences like (51) might be thought to argue against a VP-internal origin for
expletive there. However, a straightforward way of accounting for the contrast
between (31) and (51) is to suppose that PRO requires an antecedent with both
person and number features, and that expletive it carries both of these features,
but expletive there carries only person.
A VP-internal analysis of expletives like that in (50) also offers signiﬁcant theo-
retical advantages over Chomsky’s TP analysis, in that it provides us with a way of
avoiding two potentially problematic aspects of Chomsky’s analysis. One is that
although a probe is generally the head of a containing projection (so that the head
T of TP is the probe in most of the structures we have looked at in this chapter),
Chomsky’s TP analysis of expletives has to stipulate that a speciﬁer can also serve
as a probe when it is an expletive pronoun like there/it – a claim which is hard to
square with his (2001) view that speciﬁer–head agreement should be eliminated
from the set of operations permitted by UG. By contrast, the VP-internal analysis
of expletives allows us to maintain the stronger claim that only a head can be a
probe. A second feature of Chomsky’s analysis (illustrated in (38) above) is that
he needs to assume that a T which has already had its person/number features val-
ued and deleted by agreement with an indeﬁnite associate can nonetheless serve
as an active goal for agreement with an expletive probe. One way round this prob-
lem (suggested by Pesetsky and Torrego 2001) is to say that the relevant features
are marked for deletion (or metaphorically speaking, sentenced to death) on the
TP cycle, but not actually deleted (or, metaphorically speaking, executed) until
a later stage of derivation (at the end of the CP cycle/phase). However, any such
intrinsically undesirable splitting of deletion into two processes can be avoided
under the account suggested here, which allows us to posit a unitary treatment of
deletion along the lines of (52) below:
(52)
Feature Inactivation Hypothesis
An uninterpretable feature becomes inactive in the syntax (and invisible to
the semantic component) immediately it is deleted
However, it should be noted that while (52) is compatible with a VP analysis
of expletives, it is not compatible with Chomsky’s claim that expletive there is
directly merged in spec-TP.

306
8 agreement, case and movement
A crucial premise of our alternative account of expletives is that in structures
like (50), a T-probe can agree simultaneously with multiple goals (so that have
simultaneously agrees in person with there and in person and number with several
problems). However, this assumption raises interesting questions about how
agreement works in transitive sentences like:
(53)
We are helping him
Given the assumptions we are making here, (53) will be derived as follows. The
verb helping merges with its theme complement him to form the V-bar helping
him. This V-bar is in turn merged with its agent argument we to form the VP we
helping him. The resulting VP is then merged with a present-tense T constituent
to form the T-bar shown in simpliﬁed form in (54) below:
(54)
T'
T
BE
VP
PRN
we
V'
V
helping
PRN
him
Given the Earliness Principle, T will serve as a probe at this point and look for
one or more nominal goals to value (and delete) its unvalued person/number
features. However, if (as we assumed in our discussion of (50) above) a probe
can agree with multiple goals, an important question to ask is why T can’t agree
with both the subject we and the complement him. If (contrary to fact) multiple
agreement were permitted in structures like (54), it would cause the derivation to
crash because the person/number features of be would have to be valued as ﬁrst
person plural in order to agree with the subject we and as third person singular
in order to agree with the object him, and this would clearly lead to conﬂicting
requirements on how the person/number features of be should be valued. In
reality, T agrees with the subject we in transitive structures like (54) and not with
the object him. But in a framework which allows a probe to agree with multiple
goals, how can we rule out agreement between T and the object of a transitive
verb?
One answer to this question is provided by the Phase Impenetrability Condition,
which we formulated in (23) above in the manner set out in (55) below:
(55)
Phase Impenetrability Condition/PIC
Any goal c-commanded by a phase head is impenetrable to any probe outside the phase
In our earlier discussion of PIC in §8.5, we noted Chomsky’s (1999, p. 9) claim
that phases are ‘propositional’ in nature, and that accordingly CPs are phases.
However, Chomsky claims that transitive verb phrases (but not intransitive
VPs) are also propositional in nature and hence phases, by virtue of the fact

8.7 Agreement and A-movement
307
that transitive VPs contain a complete thematic (argument structure) complex,
including an external argument in spec-VP.
If transitive VPs are phases, and PIC allows only constituents on the edge (i.e.
in the head or speciﬁer position) of a phase to be accessible to a higher probe, it
follows that in a structure like (54) above, the T constituent be will only be able
to agree with the subject we on the edge of the transitive VP phase, not with the
object him which lies within the (c-command) domain of the transitive phase head
helping. By contrast, in expletive structures like (50), PIC will not prevent the T
constituent have from agreeing with both there and several problems, since the
VP headed by the unaccusative verb arisen is intransitive (its speciﬁer there not
being an external argument but rather being a non-referential expletive pronoun).
If we adopt the Feature Inactivation Hypothesis (52), there is also another way
in which we can prevent agreement between T and the object of a transitive verb
in structures like (54). If the object him enters the derivation with an unvalued
case feature and (in accordance with the Earliness Principle) the relevant case
feature is valued as accusative (and deleted) as soon as him is merged with the
transitive verb helping, it follows that once we reach the stage of derivation shown
in (54) above, the accusative case feature carried by him will have been deleted, so
making him inactive for agreement with T. (We look at accusative case assignment
in the next chapter, so will say no more about it for the time being.)
8.7
Agreement and A-movement
So far, we have seen that agreement plays an important role not only
in valuing the -features of T but also in valuing the case features of nominals.
Chomsky (1998, 1999, 2001) goes further and suggests that agreement also plays
an important role in A-movement operations. To see why, let’s return to consider
the derivation of our earlier sentence (5B) They were arrested. Assume that the
derivation proceeds as sketched earlier, with they being merged as the thematic
complement of arrested, and the resulting VP in turn being merged with the tense
auxiliary be to form the structure (56) below:
(56)
T'
T
BE
[Past-Tns]
[u-Pers]
[u-Num]
[EPP]
VP
V
 arrested 
PRN
THEY
[3-Pers]
[Pl-Num]
[u-Case]
In (56), [Tbe] is an active probe (by virtue of its uninterpretable person and number
features) and has an uninterpretable [epp] feature. It therefore searches for active

308
8 agreement, case and movement
nominal goals which can value and delete its person/number features, locating
the pronoun they (which is active by virtue of its uninterpretable case feature
and which has person and number features which match those of be). Since the
matching goal they is a deﬁnite pronoun, the [epp] feature of [T be] cannot be
deleted by merging an expletive in spec-TP, but rather can only be deleted by
movement of the goal to spec-TP, in accordance with (45iii): accordingly, they
moves to become the speciﬁer of be, thereby deleting the uninterpretable [epp]
feature of be. Assuming that Feature-Copying, Nominative Case Assignment and
Feature-Deletion work as before, the structure which is formed at the end of the
TP cycle will be that shown below:
(57)
TP
PRN
they
[3-Pers]
[Pl-Num]
[Nom-Case]
T' 
T
were
[Past-Tns]
[3-Pers]
[Pl-Num]
[EPP]
VP
V
arrested
they
(To avoid excessive visual clutter, the trace copy of they left behind in VP-
complement position is shown here simply as they, but is in fact an identical copy
of they, containing the same features as they. The same typographical convention
will be used throughout the rest of this chapter.) The TP in (57) will subsequently
be merged with a null declarative-force C, so terminating the syntactic derivation.
Since all uninterpretable features have been deleted, the derivation converges –
i.e. results in a syntactic structure which can subsequently be mapped into well-
formed phonetic and semantic representations.
A key assumption underlying the analysis sketched here is that T triggers move-
ment of a nominal goal with which it agrees in person and number. Interesting
empirical support for this claim comes from European Portuguese. Costa (2001)
notes that in colloquial Portuguese, an intransitive verb used in an unaccusative
structure like that below can be either third person singular or third person plural
if used with an in-situ postverbal argument as in (58) below:
(58) (a)
Fecharam
muitas f´abricas
(b) Fechou
muitas f´abricas
Closed-3Pl many
factories
Closed-3Sg many
factories
‘Many factories closed’
‘Many factories closed’
However, the postverbal argument (which originates as the complement of the
verb) can only move in front of the verb into spec-TP if the verb (or, more
accurately, the associated T-constituent) agrees with the subject in both person
and number: cf.
(59) (a)
Muitas f´abricas fecharam
(b) ∗Muitas f´abricas fechou
Many
factories closed-3Pl
Many
factories closed-3Sg
‘Many factories closed’
‘Many factories closed’

8.8 EPP in control inﬁnitives
309
This suggests that movement of the italicised nominal from VP-complement posi-
tion to spec-TP is dependent on full person/number agreement between T and the
nominal which it attracts. Costa follows Belletti (1988) in positing that in agree-
mentless sentences like (58b), the postverbal argument is assigned partitive case
by the verb (which, in a language in which nouns have a limited case morphology
will surface in a form homophonous with the accusative); assignment of case to
the complement makes it inactive, and so ineligible to undergo T-agreement –
with the result that T surfaces in the agreementless default (third-person-singular)
form. It may be that we ﬁnd a related phenomenon in English sentence pairs such
as:
(60) (a)
There is only me considered suitable
(b)
Only I am considered suitable
In (60a) the italicised pronoun expression follows the verb be, is not assigned
nominative case, does not trigger T-agreement and is not raised to spec-TP; by
contrast in (60b) the italicised nominal is assigned nominative case, triggers T-
agreement, and is moved to spec-TP. Accordingly, sentences like (60) provide
empirical support for Chomsky’s claim that there is a close association between
case, agreement and A-movement.
8.8
EPP in control inﬁnitives
The analysis presented in the previous section assumes that a ﬁnite
T carries an [epp] feature which drives A-movement. But what about the kind
of inﬁnitival [T to] constituent found in control clauses? In the previous chapter,
we assumed that inﬁnitival to never has an [epp] feature, and hence that the PRO
subject of a control clause like that bracketed in (61a) below remains in situ in
spec-VP as in (61b), rather than raising to spec–TP as in (61c):
(61) (a)
They don’t want [to see you]
(b)
They don’t want [CP [C ø] [TP [T to] [VP PRO [V see] you]]]
(c)
They don t want [CP [C ø] [TP PRO [T to] [VP PRO  [V see] you]]]
We noted Baltin’s (1995) claim that the in-situ analysis (61b) under which PRO
remains in situ would account for why wanna-contraction is possible in such
sentences (yielding They don’t wanna see you), since there would be no PRO
intervening between want and to. However, Baltin’s argument is not entirely con-
vincing. After all, if intervening null constituents block to from cliticising onto
want and if control clauses are CPs, why doesn’t the intervening null comple-
mentiser in (61b,c) block wanna-contraction? If we answer this question (as we
did in the previous chapter) by suggesting that to ﬁrst cliticises onto the null
complementiser and then the two of them together subsequently cliticise onto
want, we can handle the relevant data by supposing that only an overt subject in

310
8 agreement, case and movement
spec-TP (like who at the relevant stage of derivation in ∗Who don’t they want to
see you?) in spec-TP blocks cliticisation of to onto C, not a null subject like PRO
in (61c). What weakens the contraction argument still further is that this kind of
contraction is idiosyncratic to the verb want (and indeed to the form want rather
than wants, wanted, or wanting) rather than being associated with all control
predicates, and this has led some linguists to suggest that wanna should simply
be listed in the lexicon as an idiosyncratic form of want rather than being the
product of a cliticisation operation. (See Boeckx 2000 for an alternative account
of wanna-contraction.)
In short, the wanna-cliticisation argument for saying that PRO remains in situ
is potentially ﬂawed. Indeed, there seems to be counter-evidence in support of
claiming that PRO does in fact move to spec-TP in control inﬁnitives (and hence
that control to has an EPP feature). Part of the evidence comes from the syntax of
constituents like those italicised in (62) below which have the property that they
are construed as modifying a bold-printed antecedent which is not immediately
adjacent to them in the relevant structure:
(62) (a)
They were both priding themselves on their achievements
(b)
I don’t myself think that Svengali was the best choice for England manager
(c)
He was personally held responsible
Both in (62a) is a ﬂoating quantiﬁer (and each/all can be used in a similar
fashion); myself in (62b) is a ﬂoating emphatic reﬂexive; and personally in
(62c) is an argument-oriented adverb (construed as modifying an argument, in
this case he). In each sentence in (62), the italicised expression is construed as
modifying the bold-printed subject of the clause. Contrasts such as those in (63)
and (64) below:
(63) (a)
Two republican senators were themselves thought to have been implicated
(b)
∗There were themselves thought to have been implicated two republican senators
(64) (a)
Two republican senators are both thought to have been implicated
(b)
∗There are both thought to have been implicated two republican senators
suggest that a ﬂoating modiﬁer must be c-commanded by its bold-printed
antecedent.
In the light of the requirement for a ﬂoating modiﬁer to be c-commanded
by its antecedent, consider the syntax of the bracketed clauses in the following
sentences:
(65) (a)
[To both be betrayed by their friends] would be disastrous for Romeo and Juliet
(b)
[To themselves be indicted] would be unfair on the company directors
(c)
It was upsetting [to personally have been accused of corruption]
In each of these examples, the bracketed clause is a control clause containing
a PRO argument. In each case, PRO is the thematic complement of a passive
participle (viz. betrayed/indicted/accused). Hence, if control to has no [epp] fea-
ture and PRO remains in situ, the TP in the bracketed inﬁnitive complement in

8.8 EPP in control inﬁnitives
311
(65b) will have the skeletal structure (66a) below, but if control to has an [epp]
feature, this will trigger movement of PRO to become the structural subject of
to – as in (66b):
(66) (a)
[CP [C ø] [TP [T to] [AUXP themselves [AUX be] [VP [V indicted] PRO]]]]
(b)
[CP [C ø] [TP PRO [T to] [AUXP themselves [AUX be] [VP [V indicted] PRO]]]]
Given the requirement for a ﬂoating emphatic reﬂexive to be c-commanded by its
antecedent, and given that PRO is the intended antecedent of themselves in (66),
it is clear that (66a) cannot be the right structure, since PRO does not c-command
themselves in (66a). By contrast, movement of PRO to spec-TP in (66b) means
that PRO will indeed c-command themselves, so correctly predicting that (66b)
is grammatical.
Let’s therefore follow Chomsky (1998, 1999, 2001) in positing that control to
does indeed have an [epp] feature, triggering raising of PRO to spec-TP. Let’s also
follow Chomsky in positing that PRO is assigned null case by agreement with a
c-commanding T with null (non-ﬁnite) tense in much the same way as subjects in
tensed clauses are assigned nominative case by agreement with a c-commanding
T which has ﬁnite (present or past) tense. More speciﬁcally, let’s assume that to
in control inﬁnitives contains not only an abstract non-ﬁnite tense feature, but
also abstract -features; and let’s further suppose that null case assignment can
be characterised informally as follows:
(67)
Null Case Assignment
An unvalued case feature on a goal is valued as null by a probe carrying null (non-ﬁnite)
tense if probe and goal match in (person and number) -features
See Stowell (1982) and Martin (2001) on the tense properties of control to, and
Martin (2001) for evidence that control to has agreement features; but see Bowers
(2002) for a different analysis of the case-marking of PRO subjects.
In the light of these assumptions, consider the derivation of the bracketed
control clause in:
(68)
They have decided [PRO to help you]
Decide is a control predicate (as we see from the fact that (68) is paraphraseable
as They have decided that they will help you, and from the fact that decide does not
allow an expletive subject in a sentence like ∗There has decided to be an enquiry).
Given the VP-Internal Subject Hypothesis, the PRO subject of the bracketed
inﬁnitive clause will originate in spec-VP, as the speciﬁer of help you. More
speciﬁcally, the derivation proceeds as follows. The verb help merges with its
complement you, and the resulting V-bar help you in turn merges with its PRO
subject to form the VP PRO help you. Merging control to with this VP forms
the TP to help you. Let’s suppose that since PRO refers back to they in (68),
PRO (as used here) carries the interpretable features [3-Pers, Pl-Num]; let’s also
suppose that PRO enters the derivation with an unvalued case feature [u-Case].
In addition, let’s assume that control to carries an interpretable non-ﬁnite-tense

312
8 agreement, case and movement
feature [Nf-Tns] (denoting an irrealis event which has not yet happened but may
happen in the future), and also has uninterpretable (and unvalued) person/number
features. Finally (for the reasons given above), let’s assume that to carries an [epp]
feature in control clauses. Given all these assumptions, merging to with [VP PRO
help you] will form the T-bar (69) below (simpliﬁed by showing only features on
constituents of immediate concern to us):
(69)
T'
T
to
[Nf-Tns]
[u-Pers]
[u-Num]
[EPP]
VP
PRN
PRO
[3-Pers]
[Pl-Num]
[u-Case]
V'
V
help
PRN
you
Since to is the highest head in the structure and is active (by virtue of its uninter-
pretable -features), it serves as a probe which searches for a goal to value and
delete its -features. Since to c-commands PRO and PRO is active by virtue of
its uninterpretable case feature, PRO can serve as a goal for the probe to. The
unvalued -features on the probe are assigned the same third-person-plural values
as those on the goal by Feature-Copying (7) and are deleted by Feature-Deletion
(14). The unvalued case feature on PRO is assigned the value [Null-Case] by Null
Case Assignment (67) and deleted by Feature-Deletion (14). Since PRO is a def-
inite pronoun, the [epp] feature of to is deleted by movement of PRO to spec-TP
in accordance with the EPP Generalisation (45iii). The result of applying these
various operations is to derive the TP (70) below (simpliﬁed in a number of ways,
e.g. by showing the trace of PRO simply as t rather than as a deleted copy of
PRO):
(70)
TP
T'
VP
t help you
PRN
PRO
[3-Pers]
[Pl-Num]
[Null-Case]
T
to
[Nf-Tns]
[3-Pers]
[Pl-Num]
[EPP] 
The resulting TP is subsequently merged with the null non-ﬁnite complementiser
which introduces control clauses. As required, the structure which will serve as
input to the semantic component will contain only (bold-printed) interpretable
features – all uninterpretable features having been deleted.

8.9 EPP in other inﬁnitives
313
A question of incidental detail which arises from the assumption made above
that control T assigns null case to a nominal or pronominal expression which it
c-commands is why T in (69) cannot assign null case to the pronoun you which
is the object of the transitive verb help, since T c-commands you as well as PRO.
One answer to this question is that (as we saw in §8.6), transitive verb phrases
are phases, and hence the Phase Impenetrability Condition (55) allows a T probe
to locate a goal on the edge of a transitive VP (like the PRO subject of the VP
in (69) above), but not to locate a goal in the c-command domain of a transitive
verb (hence not a pronoun like you in (69) since this is c-commanded by the
transitive phase head help). A second answer is that the Earliness Principle
requires you to be assigned case as early as possible in the derivation; and given
our assumption in §4.9 that a transitive head assigns accusative case to a noun or
pronoun expression which it c-commands, it follows that the case feature carried
by you will be valued as accusative (and, we suppose, deleted) at the stage of
derivation where it is merged as the complement of the transitive verb help: and
our Feature Inactivation Hypothesis (52) tells us that once its case feature is
deleted, you thereafter becomes inactive for agreement.
In the previous section, we suggested that a ﬁnite T has an [epp] feature which
triggers movement of the closest active matching goal to spec-TP, in conformity
with the Attract Closest Principle. In this section, we have suggested that control
to likewise carries an [epp] feature triggering movement of the closest active
goal to spec-TP. This suggests that we should look to see whether there is some
property which ﬁnite T and control T share in common which will account for
why both of them have an [epp] feature. One possibility suggested by Chomsky
(1999, p. 6) is ‘to associate EPP with -completeness’. What this would mean is
that T has an [epp] feature only if it has a complete set of -features – an idea
explored in Nasu (2001, 2002). On the assumption that in a language like English
where T probes agree in person and number but not gender with appropriate
goals T is -complete if it carries person and number features, we can say that
a ﬁnite T is -complete by virtue of carrying person and number features, and
the same is true of control to under the formulation of Null Case Assignment
given in (67) above. However, a natural question to ask in relation to the -
completeness analysis of [epp] is whether raising to also has an [epp] feature, and
if so whether it is -complete or not. This is the question we explore in the next
section.
8.9
EPP in other inﬁnitives
In the previous chapter, we posited that raising to does not carry an
[epp] feature. This would mean that a sentence such as (71a) below has the skeletal
structure (71b), with he originating as the thematic subject of admire and being
raised directly to become the structural subject of does (as shown by the dotted
arrow):

314
8 agreement, case and movement
(71) (a)
He does seem to admire her
(b)
[CP [C ø] [TP he [T does] [VP [V seem] [TP [T to] [VP he [V admire] her]]]]]
More speciﬁcally, we assumed that to in raising structures like (71b) does not
have an [epp] feature, so that he does not become the subject of to at any stage of
derivation. If to in raising clauses is assumed to be defective (and hence to lack
person and/or number -features), this is entirely consistent with Chomsky’s
suggested generalisation that only a -complete T carries an [epp] feature.
However, Chomsky (2001, fn. 56) argues that (somewhat contrived) sentences
like (72) below provide empirical evidence that raising to does after all have an
[epp] feature:
(72)
John seems to Fred [to appear to himself [to like Mary]]
Here, himself refers to John, not to Fred. This is puzzling if we assume that the
antecedent of a reﬂexive must be an argument locally c-commanding the reﬂexive
(and hence contained within the same TP as the reﬂexive), since if raising to has
no [epp] feature and John moves directly from being the subject of the like clause
to becoming the subject of the seem clause, the lefthand bracketed TP containing
the reﬂexive will contain no antecedent for himself, and hence we will wrongly
predict that sentences like (72) are ill-formed. By contrast, argues Chomsky, if we
posit that raising to does indeed have an [epp] feature, John will move from being
subject of like Mary to becoming subject of to like Mary, then later becoming
subject of to appear to himself to like Mary, before ﬁnally moving to become
the subject of the null T constituent in the seem clause. This will mean that a
null trace copy of John is left behind as the subject of each of the two inﬁnitive
clauses, as shown in skeletal form in (73) below:
(73)
John seems to Fred [John to appear to himself [John to like Mary]]
Since the reﬂexive himself is locally c-commanded by the bold-printed trace John
in (73) within the lefthand bracketed TP containing the reﬂexive, (73) correctly
predicts that himself will be interpreted as referring to John. (Recall that Chomsky
posits that traces are deleted in the phonological component but remain visible in
the syntactic and semantic components.) Further evidence that A-movement in
raising structures is successive-cyclic is presented in Boˇskovi´c (2002b).
Sentences like (73) suggest that raising to must have an [epp] feature triggering
movement of an argument to spec-TP. But it’s important to bear in mind that the
[epp] feature on T works in conjunction with the person/number -features of
T: more speciﬁcally, the [epp] feature on T triggers movement to spec-TP of an
expression which matches one or more of the -features of T. It therefore follows
that T in raising clauses must carry one or more -features if it is to trigger
movement of a nominal carrying -features of its own. Now it clearly cannot
be the case that raising to carries both person and number, since if it did we

8.9 EPP in other inﬁnitives
315
would wrongly predict that raising clauses require a null PRO subject (given that
inﬁnitival to assigns null case to its subject by (67) when carrying both person
and number). The conclusion we reach, therefore, is that raising to must carry
only one -feature. But which -feature – person or number?
The answer is provided by raising sentences such as the following:
(74)
There do seem to remain several problems
On the assumption that raising to carries an [epp] feature requiring it to project a
subject, it seems reasonable to posit that expletive there will become the speciﬁer
of to remain several problems at some stage of derivation, and thereafter be raised
up (in the manner shown by the arrow in the skeletal structure in (75) below) to
become the speciﬁer of do on the main-clause TP cycle:
(75)
[TP There [T do] [VP [V seem] [TP there [T to] [VP [V remain] several problems]]]]
This being so, merging there as the speciﬁer of raising to on the subordinate
clause TP cycle must satisfy the [epp] feature of to. It follows that the -feature
carried by to in (75) must match that carried by expletive there. Since we argued
in §8.6 that expletive there carries person (but not number), it also follows that
to in (75) must carry a person feature. This being so, the [epp] feature of raising
to will require it to project a speciﬁer carrying a person feature, and expletive
there clearly satisﬁes this requirement. (Note that the argument goes through
irrespective of whether we follow Chomsky 2001 in positing that there origi-
nates as the speciﬁer of to, or Bowers 2002 in assuming that there originates
as the speciﬁer of remain and is subsequently raised up to become the speciﬁer
of to.)
Our conclusion can be generalised from raising sentences like (74/75) to long-
distance passives like (76a) below, involving the movement operation arrowed
in (76b):
(76) (a)
There are thought to remain several problems
(b)
[TP There [T are] [VP [V thought] [TP there [T to] [VP [V remain] several problems]]]]
Passive to (i.e. the kind of to found in long-distance passives) cannot carry both
person and number features, since otherwise it would wrongly be predicted to
require a subject with null case. Since the derivation of (76a) involves a stage at
which there is the speciﬁer of to and since there carries person but not number,
it seems reasonable to conclude that passive to (like raising to) likewise carries
person but not number.
We can generalise our ﬁnding still further to inﬁnitival TPs such as those
bracketed in (77) and (78) below:

316
8 agreement, case and movement
(77) (a)
They were expecting [TP the visitors to be met at the airport]
(b)
They were expecting [TP there to be someone to meet the visitors at the airport]
(78) (a)
I will arrange [CP for [TP the visitors to be met at the airport]]
(b)
I will arrange [CP for [TP there to be someone to meet the visitors at the airport]]
The bracketed TPs in (77) are ECM clauses (with the properties noted in §4.8).
Since the visitors originates as the thematic complement of the passive verb met
in (77a) but ends up as the subject of [T to], it is clear that the head T of the
bracketed complement-clause TP must contain an [epp] feature and at least one
-feature. Since the inﬁnitive subject can be expletive there in (77b), and since
there carries only person, it follows that the head T of an ECM clause must carry
a person feature as well as an [epp] feature. But if we suppose that a non-ﬁnite
T which carries a full set of person and number features (like the head T of a
control clause) assigns null case to its subject, then it is apparent from the fact
that the subject of an ECM clause is an overt constituent and hence does not have
null case that the head T of an ECM clause must also be defective, and so carry
an [epp] feature and a person feature, but no number feature. Our conclusion can
be generalised in a straightforward fashion to for-inﬁnitive structures like those
bracketed in (78): if we deﬁne ECM structures as structures in which a constituent
within TP is assigned case by an external head lying outside the relevant TP, it
follows that for-inﬁnitives are also ECM structures.
Our argumentation here leads us to the following more general conclusions:
(79)
Feature composition of T in English
(i)
T always carries an [epp] feature in all types of (ﬁnite and non-ﬁnite, main
and complement) clauses
(ii)
T carries a complete set of (person and number) -features in ﬁnite
clauses and non-ﬁnite control clauses
(iii)
T is defective in respect of its -features in other types of non-ﬁnite clause
(e.g. in raising clauses, long-distance passives, and ECM clauses) and
carries only person (not number).
And these are essentially the assumptions made in Chomsky (2001).
In the light of the assumptions in (79), consider the derivation of the following
sentence:
(80)
Several prizes are thought likely [to be awarded]
Since the bracketed inﬁnitive complement in (80) is a defective clause, [T to]
will carry uninterpretable [epp] and person features (but no number feature) in
accordance with (79i,iii). This means that at the point where to is merged with its
complement we have the structure shown in skeletal form below:
(81)
[T to]
be awarded [several prizes]
[u-Pers]
[3-Pers]
[epp]
[Pl-Num]
[u-Case]

8.9 EPP in other inﬁnitives
317
Since [T to] is the highest head in the structure at this point and is active by virtue
of its uninterpretable person feature, [T to] serves as a probe which searches for
an active goal and locates several prizes, which is active by virtue of its unval-
ued case feature. The goal several prizes values the unvalued person feature of
to as third person and (by virtue of being -complete) deletes it. The unval-
ued case feature of several prizes cannot be valued or deleted by to, since to
is -incomplete (by virtue of having no number feature), and only a ﬁnite/non-
ﬁnite -complete T can assign nominative/null case to a goal, and only a -
complete  can delete a matching feature of ß. The [epp] feature of to is deleted
by movement of several prizes to spec-TP in accordance with the EPP Gener-
alisation (45iii), thereby deriving the structure (82) below (simpliﬁed in vari-
ous ways, including by showing the deleted trace of several prizes without its
features):
(82)
[several prizes]
[T to] be awarded several prizes
[3-Pers]
[3-Pers]
[Pl-Num]
[epp]
[u-Case]
Merging the structure (82) with the raising adjective likely, merging the resulting
AP with the passive verb thought and then merging the resulting VP with a ﬁnite
present-tense T constituent containing be will derive:
(83)
[T be]
thought likely [several prizes]
[T to] be awarded several prizes
[Pres-Tns]
[3-Pers]
[3-Pers]
[u-Pers]
[Pl-Num]
[epp]
[u-Num]
[u-Case]
[epp]
Because it is the highest head in the structure and is active by virtue of its unin-
terpretable -features, be serves as a probe which searches for an active goal
and locates several prizes. By virtue of being -complete, the goal several prizes
values and deletes the uninterpretable person/number features of the probe be.
By virtue of being ﬁnite and -complete, be values the unvalued case feature of
several prizes as nominative, and deletes it. The [epp] feature of be is deleted by
moving several prizes to spec-TP in accordance with (45iii), so deriving:
(84) [several prizes]
[T be]
thought likely several prizes
[T to]
be awarded several prizes
[3-Pers]
[Pres-Tns]
[3-Pers]
[Pl-Num]
[3-Pers]
[epp]
[Nom-Case]
[Pl-Num]
[epp]
The resulting TP is subsequently merged with a null declarative complementiser,
andbeisultimatelyspelledoutasare.Sinceallunvaluedfeatureshavebeenvalued
and all uninterpretable features have been deleted, the derivation converges (i.e.
results in a well-formed structure which can be assigned an appropriate phonetic
representation and an appropriate semantic representation).

318
8 agreement, case and movement
Now let’s return to take another look at the derivation of our earlier sentence
(1) There are thought likely to be awarded several prizes. Let’s adopt Chomsky’s
TP analysis of expletives and suppose that we have reached the stage of derivation
in (81) above, repeated as (85) below:
(85)
[T to] be awarded [several prizes]
[u-Pers]
[3-Pers]
[epp]
[Pl-Num]
[u-Case]
As before, to serves as a probe and identiﬁes several prizes as an active goal. Since
several prizes is -complete, it can not only value the unvalued person feature of
to but also delete it, yielding:
(86)
[T to] be awarded [several prizes]
[3-Pers]
[3-Pers]
[epp]
[Pl-Num]
[u-Case]
Since the goal several prizes is an indeﬁnite expression, the [epp] feature of to
can be deleted by merging expletive there in spec-TP in accordance with the epp
Generalisation (45i), deriving:
(87)
there
[T to] be awarded [several prizes]
[3-Pers] [3-Pers]
[3-Pers]
[epp]
[Pl-Num]
[u-Case]
Since there is the highest head in the structure and is active by virtue of its
uninterpretable person feature, it serves as a probe, and picks out to as a matching
goal containing a person feature. However, since to is defective (in that it has no
number feature), it cannot delete the uninterpretable person feature on there. (We
assume here that several prizes cannot serve as a possible goal for there, because
agreement is a relation between a noun/pronoun expression like there and a T
constituent like to, not a relation between two noun/pronoun expressions like
there and several prizes.)
Merging the TP in (87) with the raising adjective likely, merging the resulting
AP with the passive verb thought and merging the resulting VP with a present-
tense T containing be will derive:
(88)
[T be]
thought likely [there]
[T to]
be awarded [several prizes]
[Pres-Tns]
[3-Pers] [3-Pers]
[3-Pers]
[u-Pers]
[epp]
[Pl-Num]
[u-Num]
[u-Case]
[epp]
At this point, [T be] is the highest head in the structure and so serves as a probe.
Its uninterpretable person and number features make it active, and mean that
[T be] looks for active nominal goals which have person and/or number features.

8.9 EPP in other inﬁnitives
319
However, there are two such active nominal goals which are accessible to the
probe [T be] in (88) – namely the expletive pronoun there (active by virtue of
its uninterpretable third-person feature) and the quantiﬁer phrase several prizes
(active by virtue of its uninterpretable case feature, and carrying both person and
number features). Both are accessible to [T be] in terms of the Phase Impene-
trability Condition (55) since neither is c-commanded by a phase head (i.e. by a
complementiser or by a transitive verb). Let’s suppose (consistent with Chomsky
2001 and with our earlier discussion of (50) above) that when a probe locates
more than one active goal, it undergoes simultaneous multiple agreement with
all active goals accessible to it – in other words, the probe be simultaneously
agrees with both there and several prizes. The unvalued person feature of be will
be valued as third person via Feature Matching with the third-person goals there
and several prizes; the unvalued number feature of be will be valued as plural via
agreement with the plural goal several prizes. The unvalued case feature on the
goal several prizes will be valued as nominative (and deleted) by the -complete
probe be because the two match in person and number and be carries ﬁnite tense.
The uninterpretable person/number features of the probe be can in turn be deleted
by the -complete goal several prizes. In accordance with (45iii) and the Attract
Closest Principle, the [epp] feature of be attracts the closest active goal (namely
there) to move to become the speciﬁer of be (movement resulting in deletion of
the [epp] feature on be), deriving:
(89)
there
[T be]
thought likely there
[T to]
be awarded [several prizes]
[3-Pers] [Pres-Tns]
[3-Pers]
[3-Pers]
[3-Pers]
[epp]
[Pl-Num]
[Pl-Num]
[Nom-Case]
[epp]
The resulting structure will then be merged with a null declarative complemen-
tiser, and be will ultimately be spelled out as the third-person-plural present-tense
form are. As required, all uninterpretable features have been deleted from (89),
so only the bold interpretable features are seen by the semantic component.
Note that an important assumption which is incorporated into the analysis
presented here is that the -features of T agree with every goal which is accessible
to them (giving rise to multiple agreement), but that (in consequence of the Attract
Closest Principle) the [epp] feature of T only triggers movement of the closest
goal to spec-TP.
Under the analysis presented in this section (in which all instances of inﬁnitival
to carry an [epp] feature), an important question which arises is how we account
for the ungrammaticality of sentences like:
(90)
∗There are thought likely several prizes to be awarded
Consider ﬁrst how (90) might be derived, before considering why it is ill-formed.
The derivation proceeds along familiar lines until we reach the stage of derivation
in (83) above, repeated as (91) below:

320
8 agreement, case and movement
(91)
[T be]
thought likely [several prizes]
[T to] be awarded several prizes
[Pres-Tns]
[3-Pers]
[3-Pers]
[u-Pers]
[Pl-Num]
[epp]
[u-Num]
[u-Case]
[epp]
As before, the case feature of several prizes is valued as nominative and deleted
by [T be], and conversely the person/number features of be are valued and deleted
by several prizes. Let’s suppose that the lexical array contains expletive there and
that the [epp] feature of be is deleted by merging there in spec-TP, and that the
uninterpretable third-person feature of there is deleted by the -complete [T be],
so deriving:
(92)
there
[T be]
thought likely [several prizes]
[T to] be awarded several prizes
[3-Pers] [Pres-Tns]
[3-Pers]
[3-Pers]
[3-Pers]
[Pl-Num]
[epp]
[Pl-Num]
[u-Case]
[epp]
(92) is then merged with a null declarative complementiser, and be is ultimately
spelled out as are. Since the resulting structure contains no unvalued or uninter-
pretable features, we expect the corresponding sentence (90) to be well-formed.
But it is ungrammatical. Why should this be?
Chomsky’s answer is that Merge is a more primitive and less complex operation
than Move and that ‘Simple operations preempt more complex ones’ (Chomsky
1998, p. 18). Merge is a more primitive relation than Move in that other combina-
torial systems (like the artiﬁcial languages used in mathematics, logic or computer
science) employ Merge but not Move. Move is more complex than Merge because
it is a composite agree+copy+merge+pied-pipe operation. It therefore follows
from ‘complexity considerations’ (Chomsky 1998, p. 18) that spec-TP must be
ﬁlled by merger if the lexical array (i.e. the set of items taken out of the lexicon
to build the relevant sentence structure) contains an expletive, with movement to
spec-TP being used only as a last resort (i.e. where the lexical array contains no
expletive). As Chomsky (1998, p. 17) puts it, ‘Merge preempts the more com-
plex operation Move’ (though see Shima 2000 for a dissenting view). Since the
sentence in (90) contains expletive there, it is clear that the lexical array for (90)
includes an expletive. In the light of this observation, let’s return to the earlier
stage of derivation represented in (81) above, repeated as (93) below:
(93)
[T to]
be awarded [several prizes]
[u-Pers]
[3-Pers]
[epp]
[Pl-Num]
[u-Case]
Complexity considerations – more explicitly what Chomsky (1999, p. 5) refers
to as ‘preference of Merge over (more complex) Move’ – will require the [epp]
feature of [T to] be satisﬁed by merging expletive there in spec-TP, so resulting
in (87) above, repeated as (94) below:

8.9 EPP in other inﬁnitives
321
(94)
there
[T to]
be awarded [several prizes]
[3-Pers] [3-Pers]
[3-Pers]
[epp]
[Pl-Num]
[u-Case]
Subsequently, the derivation will proceed through the steps discussed in (88) and
(89) above, ultimately deriving the CP structure associated with There are thought
likely to be awarded several prizes.
To revert to terminology used in earlier chapters, if T in English always has an
[epp] feature, A-movement will always be a local operation which (in complex
structures where an argument moves out of one or more lower TP constituents to
become the subject of a higher TP) applies in a successive-cyclic fashion, with the
relevant argument moving to become the subject of a lower TP before going on to
becomethesubjectofahigherTP.Sincewesawin§5.6thatheadmovementisalso
successive-cyclic (in that a moved head moves into the next highest head position
within the structure immediately containing it), the greater generalisation would
appear to be that all movement is local (and hence successive-cyclic in complex
structures), so that any moved constituent moves into the closest appropriate
landing site above it (as argued in Rizzi 2001a). If so, we would expect to ﬁnd
that wh-movement is also a local (hence successive-cyclic) operation. And indeed,
theoretical considerations suggest that it must be.
In this chapter, we have seen that CPs and transitive VPs are phases, and that
the Phase Impenetrability Condition/PIC (55) prevents a constituent which is c-
commanded by a complementiser or a transitive verb from being attracted by
an external head which c-commands the CP/VP containing the relevant comple-
mentiser/transitive verb. PIC turns out to have important consequences for how
wh-movement operates in complex sentences such as:
(95)
What will they think that he has done?
The wh-pronoun what originates as the thematic complement of the transitive verb
done, and it might at ﬁrst sight seem as if it moves from being the complement of
the transitive verb done to becoming the speciﬁer of the C constituent containing
the inverted auxiliary will in a single step like that shown in highly simpliﬁed
form in (96) below:
(96)
[CP What [C will+ø] they will think that he has done what]
And indeed, this is precisely what we tacitly assumed in chapter 6. However, a
single-step movement operation like that shown in (96) will involve three viola-
tions of the Phase Impenetrability Condition, since it involves the bracketed C
constituent serving as a probe which attracts the wh-pronoun what to move out of
a transitive VP headed by done, out of a CP headed by that, and out of a further
transitive VP headed by think. The only way of avoiding violation of PIC is for
wh-movement to apply in a successive-cyclic fashion, moving what ﬁrst to the

322
8 agreement, case and movement
front of the transitive VP headed by do, then to the front of the complement clause
CP headed by that, then to the front of the transitive VP headed by think, and
ﬁnally to the front of the main-clause CP headed by the null complementiser to
which the inverted auxiliary will adjoins. It would not be appropriate for us to look
in more detail at the successive-cyclic nature of wh-movement at this point, until
we have taken a closer look at the internal structure of verb phrases in chapter 9
and at the nature of phases in chapter 10: hence we postpone discussion of this
until chapter 10.
8.10
Summary
In this chapter, we have taken a look at Chomsky’s recent work on
case, agreement and A-movement. In §8.2 we saw that agreement plays an inte-
gral role in nominative case assignment, in that nominative case is assigned to a
nominal which agrees in person and number with a ﬁnite T. In §8.3 we argued that
some features enter the derivation already valued (e.g. the tense feature of T and
the person/number -features of nominals), whereas others (e.g. the -features of
T and the case feature of nominals) are initially unvalued and are assigned values
in the course of the derivation by operations like Feature-Copying (7) and Nomi-
native Case Assignment (9). In §8.4, we claimed that interpretable features enter
the derivation already valued, whereas those features which are initially unvalued
are uninterpretable. We saw that agreement and case-marking involve a relation
between an active probe and an active goal, and that probe and goal are only
active if they carry one or more uninterpretable features (e.g. uninterpretable
-features or case features). We also saw that uninterpretable features have to
be deleted in the course of the derivation by a Feature-Deletion operation (14),
in order to ensure that they do not feed into the semantic component and thereby
cause the derivation to crash (because they are illegible in the semantic compo-
nent), and that only a -complete  can delete an uninterpretable feature of ß.
In §8.5, we suggested that expletive it enters the derivation with uninterpretable
third-person and singular-number features, and that these value, delete and in turn
are deleted by those of the auxiliary in sentences such as It is said that he has taken
bribes. However, we noted that weather it is quasi-referential, and may originate
as an argument internally within VP. In §8.6, we looked at Chomsky’s claim that
there is merged directly in spec-TP, and serves as a probe whose uninterpretable
third-person feature is deleted via agreement with a -complete T. We noted that
such an analysis has consequences (for the nature of probes and the inacti-
vation of features) which may not seem desirable, and outlined an alternative
analysis of expletives as originating within VP. In §8.7 we outlined Chomsky’s
agreement-based theory of movement under which movement involves an agree-
ment relation between an active probe with an [epp] feature and an active goal,
and we suggested in (45) that the [epp] feature of T can be satisﬁed either by
merger of an expletive in spec-TP, or by movement of the closest active matching

Workbook section
323
goal to spec-TP, with merger/movement of the relevant constituent in spec-TP
deleting the [epp] feature of T. In §8.8 we looked at the syntax of control inﬁni-
tives, claiming that their PRO subject is assigned null case via agreement with
a -complete T carrying null (non-ﬁnite) tense. We went on to argue that data
relating to the distribution of ﬂoating modiﬁers suggest that T in control clauses
has an [epp] feature which triggers movement of PRO to spec-TP. In §8.9 we
argued that T in other kinds of inﬁnitive clause (e.g. the inﬁnitival complements
of raising, passive and ECM predicates) is defective in that although it carries
uninterpretable [epp] and person features (the latter serving to make T active), it
lacks the number feature carried by a -complete T in ﬁnite and control clauses.
We saw that such an analysis entails that A-movement takes place in a successive-
cyclic fashion, with the moved argument being raised to become the subject of
a lower TP before raising to become the subject of a higher TP. We went on to
consider the possibility that all movement operations are local (and hence apply
in a successive-cyclic fashion in complex structures) and noted that this implies
that A-bar movement operations like wh-movement are also successive-cyclic in
complex sentences (but said we would postpone detailed discussion of this until
chapter 10).
Workbook section
Exercise 8.1
Discuss the derivation of the following sentences.
1
There remains little hope of ﬁnding any survivors
2
There are expected to remain some problems
3
Several mineworkers are thought to have died
4
They are considered likely to want to enter the race
5
It would be unthinkable to compromise yourself
6
He appears to be thought to be certain to win the race
7
He is hoping to be promoted
8
It is rumoured that there have been several riots
9
It is thought to be likely that some houses have collapsed
10
There seem certain to remain some problems
In addition, say why the derivation of each of the following sentences crashes (informal
paraphrases of the intended meaning being given where this may be unclear):
11
∗There are expected some problems to remain (= ‘There are expected to remain some
problems’)
12
∗Some problems are expected there to remain (= ‘There are expected to remain some
problems’)
13
∗It is expected there to remain some problems (= ‘There are expected to remain some
problems’)
14
∗There are rumoured that several prisoners were recaptured
15
∗They appear were detained (= ‘It appears that they were detained’)
16
∗He is believed has quit his job (= ‘It is believed that he has quit his job’)

324
8 agreement, case and movement
Helpful hints
Assume (as in §§4.6–4.7) that all ﬁnite clauses and all control inﬁnitive clauses (i.e. inﬁnitive
clauses which are the complement of a control predicate like decide) are canonical clauses and
hence CPs containing a T headed by a -complete T with person, number and [epp] features.
By contrast, assume (as in §4.8) that seemingly subjectless inﬁnitive clauses which are the
complement of a raising predicate like seem/likely or a passive participle like expected are
defective clauses, and hence are TPs headed by a defective T which has person and [epp] features,
but no number feature. Be careful not to confuse raising structures like It’s likely to rain with
control structures like It’s easy to make a mistake: note that in the ﬁrst structure we can have an
expletive there subject (There’s likely to be a strike), but not in the second (∗There’s easy to be a
mistake). Assume that inﬁnitival be is the head AUX constituent of an AUXP when followed by a
passive participle, but the head V of a VP when followed by an adjective. Finally, assume that the
preference for Merge over Move holds only internally within a given CP (i.e. where an expletive
and a nominal which are competing for the same spec-TP position are both contained in the
same CP). Do any of these sentences prove problematic for the analysis in the text – and if so,
why?
Model answer for sentence 1
If we assume Chomsky’s TP analysis of expletives, sentence 1 will be derived as follows. The
noun hope is merged with its PP complement of ﬁnding any survivors (whose structure need not
concern us here) to form the NP hope of ﬁnding any survivors. This NP is merged with the
quantiﬁer little to form the QP little hope of ﬁnding any survivors. This QP is merged as the
complement of the unaccusative verb remain to form the VP remain little hope of ﬁnding any
survivors. This in turn is merged with an afﬁxal ﬁnite T constituent (below denoted as aff) to
form the structure shown in simpliﬁed form in (i) below:
(i)
T'
T
AFF
[Pres-Tns]
[u-Pers]
[u-Num]
[EPP]
VP
V
remain
QP
little hope of finding any survivors
[3-Pers, Sg-Num, u-Case]
The afﬁxal T serves as a probe because it is the highest head in the structure, and because its
uninterpretable person/number features make it active. In accordance with the Earliness Principle,
T immediately searches for an active goal, locating the QP little hope of ﬁnding any survivors
(which is active by virtue of having an uninterpretable case feature). The T probe values the case
feature on the QP goal as nominative via the Nominative Case Assignment operation (9) in the
main text, and deletes it via Feature-Deletion (14). Conversely, the QP goal values the unvalued
-features on the T probe as third person singular via Feature-Copying (7) and deletes them via
Feature-Deletion (14). If the lexical array for the relevant CP (i.e. the set of constituents out of
which the CP in question is formed) includes expletive there, preference of Merge over
Move will mean that the [epp] requirement for T to have a speciﬁer must be satisﬁed by

Workbook section
325
merging there in spec-TP, thereby deleting the [epp] feature of T in accordance with (45i); the
uninterpretable third-person feature of there will be deleted by the -complete afﬁx in T. Merging
the resulting TP with a null complementiser marking the sentence as declarative in force derives:
(ii)
CP
C
[Dec-Force]
TP
PRN
There
[3-Pers]
T'
T
AFF
[Pres-Tns]
[3-Pers]
[Sg-Num]
 [EPP]
VP
V
remain
QP
little hope of finding any survivors
[3-Pers, Sg-Num, Nom-Case]
All the features in (ii) feed into the PF component, and since there are no unvalued features in (ii),
the relevant structure can be assigned an appropriate PF representation: since there is no overt
auxiliary in T on which the Tense Afﬁx (aff) containing the person/number/tense features of T
can be spelled out, the relevant afﬁx is lowered onto the verb remain (by the morphological
operation of Afﬁx Hopping) in the PF component, so that the verb ultimately surfaces in the
third-person-singular present-tense form remains. Since all features in (ii) are valued, (ii) can be
mapped into an appropriate PF representation; and since all (italicised) uninterpretable features
have been deleted, (ii) can also be mapped into an appropriate semantic representation.
Exercise 8.2
Discuss the derivation of following Belfast English sentences (kindly supplied to me by Alison
Henry):
1
There should have been lots of students taking the course
2
There should have lots of students been taking the course
3
There should lots of students have been taking the course
4
There have seemed to be lots of students enjoying the course
5
There have seemed lots of students to be enjoying the course
6
There have lots of students seemed to be enjoying the course
Model answer for sentence 1
If we assume Chomsky’s TP analysis of expletive there, sentence 1 will have the following
(simpliﬁed) derivation. The transitive verb taking merges with its DP complement the course to
form the V-bar taking the course. This is in turn merged with its subject QP lots of students
(whose internal structure need not concern us here) to form the VP lots of students taking the
course. This then merges with the progressive auxiliary been to form the progressive auxiliary
projection (PROGP) been lots of students taking the course. This in turn is merged with the
perfect auxiliary have to form the Perfect Auxiliary Projection (PERFP) have been lots of students
taking the course. The resulting PERFP is in turn merged with a ﬁnite T constituent containing the
past-tense modal auxiliary should, so deriving the T-bar shown in simpliﬁed form in (i) below
(where only the features of those constituents of immediate interest to us are shown):

326
8 agreement, case and movement
(i)
T'
T
should
[Past-Tns]
[u-Pers]
[u-Num]
[EPP]
PERFP 
PERF
have
PROGP
PROG
been
VP  
QP
lots of students
[3-Pers, Pl-Num, u-Case]
V'
 taking the course
By virtue of its uninterpretable person and number features, [T should] serves as a probe and
identiﬁes the QP lots of students as the only accessible active goal. (Since a transitive VP is a
phase, the Phase Impenetrability Condition prevents T from accessing any constituent of a
transitive VP other than its speciﬁer and head – and hence prevents the VP complement the course
from being a goal for T.) Accordingly, lots of students values (as third person plural) and deletes
the person/number features of should, and conversely should values (as nominative) and deletes
the case feature of lots of students. Since the goal lots of students is an indeﬁnite expression, the
[epp] feature carried by [T should] can be deleted by merging expletive there in spec-TP in
accordance with the EPP Generalisation (45i) in the main text – and indeed, preference of Merge
over Move would dictate that we need to use an expletive subject if (as in 1) we have an expletive
pronoun in our lexical array. Merging expletive there in spec-TP will delete the [epp] feature of
T, and conversely the uninterpretable person feature carried by there can be deleted by the
-complete T constituent should, so deriving the simpliﬁed structure:
(ii)
There
should
have been lots of students taking the course
[3-Pers] [Past-Tns]
[3-Pers]
[3-Pers]
[Pl-Num]
[Pl-Num]
[Nom-Case]
[epp]
The resulting TP will subsequently be merged with a null declarative C. Since all unvalued
features have been valued and all uninterpretable features deleted, the resulting derivation is
convergent (in that it can be mapped into appropriate phonetic and semantic representations).
Helpful hints on sentences 2–6
Discuss the problems posed for Chomsky’s Prefer-Merge-Over-Move principle by some of the
sentences 2–6, and also the problems posed for the assumption made throughout our text so far
that only C (in wh-clauses) and T (in all types of clause) have an [epp] feature. Consider the
possibility of an alternative account under which languages (and language varieties) may differ in
respect of an epp parameter in relation to what kind of heads carry an [epp] feature.

9
Split projections
9.1
Overview
Hitherto, we have assumed a simple model of clause structure in
which canonical clauses are CP+TP+VP structures. However, in §5.6 we sug-
gested that it is necessary to ‘split’ TP into two different auxiliary-headed pro-
jections in sentences like He may be lying – namely a TP projection headed
by the T constituent may and an AUXP projection headed by the AUX con-
stituent be; and in §7.3 we suggested that it may be necessary to posit a further
Asp(ect) head in clauses to house the preposed verb in quotative structures like
‘We hate syntax’, said the students. In this chapter, we go on to suggest that CPs,
VPs and NPs should likewise be split into multiple projections – hence the title
of the chapter. We begin by looking at arguments that the CP layer of clause
structure should be split into a number of separate projections: Force Phrase,
Topic Phrase, Focus Phrase and Finiteness Phrase. We then go on to explore
the possibility of splitting verb phrases into two or more separate projections –
an inner core headed by a lexical verb, and an outer shell headed by a light verb
(with perhaps an additional projection between the two in transitive verb phrases).
Finally we turn to look at evidence for a split projection analysis of NPs.
9.2
Split CP: Force, Topic and Focus projections
Our discussion of wh-movement in chapter 6 was concerned with
movement of (interrogative, exclamative and relative) wh-expressions to the
periphery of clauses (i.e. to a position above TP). However, as examples like
(1) below illustrate, it is not simply wh-constituents which undergo movement to
the clause periphery:
(1)
No other colleague would he turn to
In (1), no other colleague (which is the complement of the preposition to) has been
focused/focalised – i.e. moved to the front of the sentence in order to focus it (and
thereby give it special emphasis). At ﬁrst sight, it would appear that the focused
object moves into spec-CP and that the pre-subject auxiliary would moves from
327

328
9 split projections
T to C in the manner shown in (2) below (simpliﬁed inter alia by not showing he
originating within VP):
(2)
[CP No other colleague [C would] [TP he [T would] [VP [V turn] [PP [P to] no other colleague]]]]
However,oneproblemposedbytheCPanalysisoffocusing/focalisationsketched
in (2) is that a structure containing a preposed focused constituent can occur after
a complementiser like that, as in:
(3)
I am absolutely convinced [that no other colleague would he turn to]
This suggests that there must be more than one type of CP projection ‘above’
TP in clauses: more speciﬁcally, there must be one type of projection which
hosts preposed focused constituents, and another type of projection which hosts
complementisers. Reasoning along these lines, Luigi Rizzi (1997, 2001b, 2003)
suggests that CP should be split into a number of different projections – an analysis
widely referred to as the split CP hypothesis. More speciﬁcally, he suggests that
complementisers (by virtue of their role in specifying whether a given clause is
declarative, interrogative, imperative, or exclamative in force) should be analysed
as Force markers heading a ForceP (= Force Phrase) projection, and that focused
constituents should be analysed as contained within a separate FocP (= Focus
Phrase) headed by a Foc constituent (= Focus marker).
On this view, the bracketed complement clause in (3) would have the structure
shown in simpliﬁed form below:
(4)
ForceP
Force
that 
FocP
QP
no other colleague   
Foc' 
Foc
would 
TP
he would turn to no other colleague
The focused QP/quantiﬁer phrase no other colleague originates as the comple-
ment of the preposition to and (by virtue of being focused) moves from comple-
ment position within PP into speciﬁer position within FocP. The auxiliary would
originates in T and from there moves into the head Foc position of FocP. One
way of describing the relevant data is to suppose that the head Foc constituent of
FocP carries an [epp] feature and an uninterpretable focus feature which together
attract the focused object no other colleague (which itself contains a matching
interpretable focus feature) to move into spec-FocP, and that Foc is a strong head
carrying an afﬁxal [tns] feature which attracts the auxiliary would to move from
T into Foc.

9.2 Split CP: Force, Topic and Focus projections
329
From a discourse perspective, a focused constituent typically represents new
information (i.e. information not previously mentioned in the discourse and
assumed to be unfamiliar to the hearer). In this respect, focused constituents
differ from another class of preposed expressions which serve as the topic of the
clause immediately containing them. Topics typically represent old information
(i.e. information which has already been mentioned in the discourse and hence
is assumed to be known to the hearer). In this connection, consider the sentence
produced by speaker B below:
(5)
speaker a: The demonstrators have been looting shops and setting ﬁre to cars
speaker b: That kind of behaviour, we cannot tolerate in a civilised society
Here, the italicised phrase that kind of behaviour refers back to the activity of
looting shops and setting ﬁre to cars mentioned earlier by speaker A, and so is the
topic of the discourse. Since the topic that kind of behaviour is the complement
of the verb tolerate it would be expected to occupy the canonical complement
position following tolerate. Instead, it ends up at the front of the overall sentence,
and so would seem to have undergone a movement operation of some kind.
Since the relevant movement operation serves to mark the preposed constituent
as the topic of the sentence, it is widely known as topicalisation. (On differences
between focusing and topicalisation, see Rizzi 1997; Cormack and Smith 2000b;
Smith and Cormack 2002; Alexopoulou and Kolliakou 2002; and Drubig 2003.)
However, since topicalisation moves a maximal projection to a speciﬁer position
on the periphery of the clause, it can (like focusing and wh-movement) be regarded
a particular instance of the more general A-bar movement operation we looked
at in chapter 7 whereby a moved constituent is attracted into an A-bar speciﬁer
position (i.e. the kind of speciﬁer position which can be occupied by arguments
and adjuncts alike).
Rizzi (1997) and Haegeman (2000) argue that just as focused constituents
occupy the speciﬁer position within a Focus Phrase, so too topicalised constituents
occupy the speciﬁer position within a Topic Phrase. This in turn raises the ques-
tion of where Topic Phrases are positioned relative to other constituents within
the clause. In this connection, consider the italicised clause in (6) below:
(6)
He had seen something truly evil – prisoners being ritually raped, tortured and mutiliated.
He prayed that atrocities like those, never again would he witness
In the italicised clause in (6), that marks the declarative force of the clause;
atrocities like those is the object of the verb witness and has been preposed in
order to mark it as the topic of the sentence (since it refers back to the acts of
rape, torture and mutilation mentioned in the previous sentence); the preposed
negative adverbial phrase never again is a focused constituent, and hence requires
auxiliary inversion. Thus, the italicised that-clause in (6) will have the simpliﬁed
structure shown below:

330
9 split projections
(7)
ForceP
Force
that
TopP
DP
ø atrocities
like those
Top' 
Top
ø
FocP
AdvP
never again
Foc'
Foc
would
TP
he would never again witness
ø atrocities like those
We can assume that the head Top constituent of the Topic Phrase contains an [epp]
feature and an uninterpretable topic feature, and that these attract a maximal
projection which carries a matching interpretable topic feature to move to the
speciﬁer position within the Topic Phrase. If we further assume that Top is a
weak head (and so does not carry an afﬁxal [tns] feature), we can account for
the fact that the auxiliary would remains in the strong Foc position and does not
raise to the weak Top position.
Rizzi’s split CP analysis raises interesting questions about the syntax of the
kind of wh-movement operation which we ﬁnd (inter alia) in interrogatives, rel-
atives and exclamatives. Within the unitary (unsplit) CP analysis outlined in
chapter 7, it was clear that wh-phrases moved into spec-CP; but if CP can be split
into a number of distinct projections (including a Force Phrase, a Topic Phrase
and a Focus Phrase), the question arises as to which of these projections serves
as the landing site for wh-movement. Rizzi (1997, p. 289) suggests that ‘rela-
tive operators occupy the highest speciﬁer position, the spec of Force’. In this
connection, consider the syntax of the bracketed relative clauses in (8) below:
(8) (a)
A university is the kind of place [in which, that kind of behaviour, we cannot tolerate]
(b)
Syntax is the kind of subject [which only very rarely will students enjoy]
In (8a), the preposed wh-expression in which precedes the preposed topic that kind
of behaviour; in (8b) the preposed relative pronoun which precedes the preposed
focused expression only very rarely. If Rizzi is right in suggesting that preposed
relative operator expressions occupy speciﬁer position within the Force Phrase,
the bracketed relative clauses in (8a,b) above will have the simpliﬁed structures
shown below:
(9) (a)
[ForceP in which [Force ø] [TopP that kind of behaviour [Top ø] [TP we cannot tolerate t t]]]
(b)
[ForceP which [Force ø] [FocP only very rarely [Foc will] [TP students t enjoy t t]]]
(Trace copies of moved constituents are shown as t and printed in the same type-
face as their antecedent.)
By contrast, Rizzi argues (1997, p. 299) that a preposed wh-operator expres-
sion ‘ends up in Spec of Foc in main questions’. If (as he claims) clauses may

9.2 Split CP: Force, Topic and Focus projections
331
contain only a single Focus Phrase constituent, such an assumption will provide
a straightforward account of the ungrammaticality of main-clause questions such
as (10) below:
(10) (a)
∗What never again will you do?
(b)
∗What will never again you do?
If both what and never again (when preposed) move into the speciﬁer position
within FocP, if Foc allows only one focused constituent as its speciﬁer, and if no
clause may contain more than one FocP constituent, it follows that (10a) will be
ruled out by virtue of Foc having two speciﬁers (what and never again) and that
(10b) will be ruled out by virtue of requiring two Focus Phrase constituents (one
hosting what and another hosting never again). Likewise, multiple wh-movement
questions (i.e. questions in which more than one wh-expression is preposed) like
(11) below will be ruled out in a similar fashion:
(11) (a)
∗Who where did he send?
(b)
∗Who did where he send?
The assumption that preposed wh-phrases occupy spec-FocP has interesting
implications for our claim in §6.8 that yes–no questions contain an interroga-
tive operator whether (a null counterpart of whether). If this null operator (like
other interrogative expressions) occupies spec-FocP, and if Foc is a strong head, it
follows that inverted auxiliaries in main-clause yes–no questions like Has he left?
will involve movement of the inverted auxiliary has into the head Foc position
within FocP, with the speciﬁer position in FocP being ﬁlled by a null counterpart
of whether. This assumption would account for the ungrammaticality of sentences
such as the following:
(12) (a)
∗Will never again things be the same?
(b)
∗Can that kind of behaviour we tolerate in a civilised society?
If never again is the speciﬁer of a FocP constituent in (12a), the inverted auxiliary
must be in a higher FocP projection whose speciﬁer is whether. However, we have
already seen in relation to sentences like (10) and (11) above that clauses may only
contain one FocP constituent, so the ungrammaticality of (12a) can be attributed
to the impossibility of stacking one FocP on top of another. Likewise, if that kind
of behaviour is a topicalised constituent occupying the speciﬁer position within
a Topic Phrase in (12b) and if an inverted auxiliary like can in a yes–no question
occupies the head Foc position of a FocP containing whether as its speciﬁer, this
means that FocP is positioned above TopP in (12b). Given the Head Movement
Constraint, can will have to move through Top to get into Foc; but since Top is a
weak head, can is prevented from moving through Top into Foc; and since Foc is
a strong afﬁxal head, the afﬁx in Foc ends up being stranded without any verb to
attach to. If we reverse the order of the two projections and position TopP above
FocP, the resulting structure is ﬁne, as we see from (13) below:

332
9 split projections
(13)
That kind of behaviour, can we tolerate in a civilised society?
In (13), the topic that kind of behaviour occupies the speciﬁer position of a TopP
which has a weak head, while the inverted auxiliary can occupies the strong head
Foc position in a FocP which has the null operator whether as its speciﬁer.
Although Rizzi argues that a preposed interrogative wh-expression moves into
spec-FocP in main clauses, he maintains that a preposed wh-expression moves
into a different position (spec-ForceP) in complement-clause questions. Some
evidence in support of this claim comes from sentences such as the following
(from Culicover 1991):
(14) (a)
Lee wonders [whether under no circumstances at all would Robin volunteer]
(b)
Lee wonders [why under no circumstances at all would Robin volunteer]
Here, the wh-expressions whether/why occur to the left of the focused negative
phrase under no circumstances, suggesting that whether/why do not occupy spec-
iﬁer position within FocP but rather some higher position – and since ForceP is the
highest projection within the clause, it is plausible to suppose that whether/why
occupy spec-ForceP in structures like (14).
A question raised by Rizzi’s analysis of relative and interrogative wh-clauses is
where preposed wh-expressions move in exclamative clauses. In this connection,
consider (15) below:
(15) (a)
How many of their policies only rarely do politicians get around to implementing!
(b)
In how many countries, that kind of behaviour, autocratic leaders would simply not
tolerate!
In (15a), the italicised exclamative wh-expression how many of their policies
precedes the bold-printed focused constituent only rarely, while in (15b) the
exclamative wh-phrase in how many countries precedes the underlined topic that
kind of behaviour. And in (16) below:
(16)
In how many countries of the world, such behaviour, under no circumstances would
autocratic leaders tolerate!
an italicised exclamative expression precedes both an underlined topicalised
expression and a bold-printed focused expression – though the resulting sentence
is clearly highly contrived. All of this suggests that exclamative wh-expressions
(like relative wh-expressions) move into the speciﬁer position within ForceP.
9.3
Split CP: Finiteness projection
In the previous section, we argued that above TP there may be not just a
single CP projection but rather at least three different types of projection – namely
a Force Phrase, a Topic Phrase and a Focus Phrase (the latter two being found only
in clauses containing focused or topicalised constituents). However, Rizzi argues

9.3 Split CP: Finiteness projection
333
that below FocP (and above TP) there is a fourth functional projection which he
terms FinP/Finiteness Phrase, whose head Fin constituent serves the function of
marking a clause as ﬁnite or non-ﬁnite. He argues that Fin is the position occupied
by prepositional particles like di ‘of’ which introduce inﬁnitival control clauses
in languages like Italian in structures such as (17) below:
(17)
Gianni pensa, il
tuo libro, di PRO conoscerlo bene
Gianni thinks, the your book, of PRO know.it
well
‘Gianni thinks that your book, he knows well’
Rizzi maintains that the italicised clause which is the complement of pensa
‘thinks’ in (17) has the simpliﬁed structure (18) below:
(18)
ForceP
Force
ø
TopP
DP 
il tuo libro
your book
Top'
Top
ø
FinP
Fin
di
of
TP
PRO concoscerlo bene
PRO know.it well
Under his analysis, il tuo libro ‘the your book’ is a topic and di ‘of’ is a Fin head
which marks its clause as non-ﬁnite (more speciﬁcally, as inﬁnitival). Moreover,
Rizzi maintains that the Fin head di ‘of’ assigns null case to the PRO subject of its
clause (an account of null case assignment in keeping with our account in §4.9,
but not with the Chomskyan account given in §8.8).
While present-day English has no overt counterpart of inﬁnitival particles like
Italian di in control clauses, it may be that for served essentially the same function
in Middle English control inﬁnitives such as those bracketed below:
(19) (a)
Al were it good [no womman for to touche] (Chaucer, Wife of Bath’s Tale, line 85)
Although it would be good to touch no woman
(b)
I wol renne out, [my borel for to shewe] (Chaucer, Wife of Bath’s Tale, line 356)
I will run out, in order to show my clothing
In (19a,b) the italicised expression is the direct object of the verb at the end of the
line, but has been focalised/topicalised and thereby ends up positioned in front of
for. This is consistent with the possibility that for occupies the same Fin position
in Middle English as di in Modern Italian, and that the italicised complements in
(19a,b) move into speciﬁer position within a higher Focus Phrase/Topic Phrase
projection. Since the for inﬁnitive complement in (19) has a null subject rather
than an overt accusative subject, we can suppose that it is intransitive in the
relevant use.

334
9 split projections
An interesting possibility raised by this analysis is that for in overt-subject
inﬁnitives in present-day English also functions as a non-ﬁnite Fin head – though
an obligatorily transitive one. In this regard, consider the two different replies
given by speaker B below:
(20)
speaker a: What was the advice given by the police to the general public?
speaker b: (i) Under no circumstances for anyone to approach the escaped convicts
(ii) That under no circumstances should anyone approach the escaped
convicts
What is particularly interesting about speaker B’s replies in (20) is that the focused
prepositional phrase under no circumstances precedes the complementiser for in
(20Bi), but follows the complementiser that in (20Bii). This suggests that for
occupies the head Fin position of FinP, but that occupies the head Force position
of ForceP. On this view, the two answers given by speaker B would have the
respective skeletal structures shown in (21a,b) below:
(21)
ForceP
Force
ø 
FocP
PP
under no circumstances
Foc'
Foc
ø 
FinP
Fin
for
TP
anyone to approach the escaped convicts
(a)
(b)
ForceP
Force
that
FocP
PP
under no circumstances 
Foc'
Foc
should
FinP
Fin
should
TP 
any one should approach the
 escaped convicts 
If Foc is a strong head in ﬁnite (though not inﬁnitival) clauses, it follows that
the auxiliary should in (21b) will raise from the head T position of TP into the
head Foc position of FocP; and if we assume the Head Movement Constraint,
it also follows that should must move ﬁrst to Fin before moving into Foc. We can
suppose that the reply given by speaker B in (22) below:
(22)
speaker a: What was the advice given by the police to the general public?
speaker b: Under no circumstances to approach the escaped convicts

9.3 Split CP: Finiteness projection
335
has essentially the same structure as that shown in (21a), save that in place of the
overt Fin head for we have a null Fin head, and that in place of the overt subject
anyone we have a null PRO subject. In addition, if Foc is only a strong head in
ﬁnite clauses, the Fin head remains in situ rather than raising to Foc.
The overall gist of Rizzi’s split CP hypothesis is that in structures containing
a topicalised and/or focalised constituent, CP splits into a number of different
projections. In a clause containing both a topicalised and a focalised constituent,
CP splits into four separate projections – namely a Force Phrase, Topic Phrase,
Focus Phrase and Finiteness Phrase. In a sentence containing a topicalised but
no focalised constituent, CP splits into three separate projections – namely into
a Force Phrase, Topic Phrase and Finiteness Phrase. In a sentence containing a
focalised but no topicalised constituent, CP again splits into three projections –
namely into a Force Phrase, Focus Phrase and Finiteness Phrase. However, in
a structure containing no focalised or topicalised constituents, Rizzi posits that
Force and Finiteness features are syncretised (i.e. collapsed) onto a single head,
with the result that CP does not split in this case: in other words, rather than
being realised on two different heads, the relevant force and ﬁniteness features
are realised on a single head corresponding to the traditional C constituent (so
that C is in effect a composite force/ﬁniteness head). In simple terms, what this
means is that C only splits into multiple projections in structures containing a
topicalised and/or focalised constituent.
We can illustrate the conditions under which CP does (or does not) split in
terms of the syntax of the that-clauses in (23) below:
(23) (a)
You must know that this kind of behaviour we cannot tolerate
(b)
You must know that we cannot tolerate this kind of behaviour
In (23a) the object this kind of behaviour has been topicalised, so forcing CP to
split into three projections (ForceP, TopP and FinP) as shown in simpliﬁed form
in (24) below:
(24)
[ForceP [Force that] [TopP this kind of behaviour [Top ø] [FinP [Fin ø] [TP we [T cannot]
tolerate t]]]]
By contrast, in (23b) there is no topicalised or focalised constituent, hence CP
does not split into multiple projections. Accordingly, only a single C constituent
is projected which carries both ﬁniteness and force features, as in (25) below
(where dec is a declarative force feature and ﬁn is a ﬁniteness feature):
(25)
[CP [C thatDEC, FIN] [TP we [T cannot] tolerate this kind of behaviour]]
Rizzi posits that (in ﬁnite clauses) the relevant types of head are spelled out in
the manner shown informally in (26) below:
(26)
A head in a split CP projection can be spelled out in English as:
(i)
that in a complement clause if it carries a declarative force feature (with
or without a ﬁniteness feature)
(ii)
ø if it carries a ﬁniteness feature (with or without a declarative force feature)

336
9 split projections
It follows from (26) that the Force head in (24) can be spelled out as that but not
as ø, and that Fin can be spelled out as ø but not as that, so accounting for the
ungrammaticality of:
(27) (a)
∗You must know ø this kind of behaviour that we cannot tolerate
(b)
∗You must know that this kind of behaviour that we cannot tolerate
(c)
∗You must know ø this kind of behaviour ø we cannot tolerate
(Irrelevantly, (27c) is grammatical if written with a colon between know and this
kind of behaviour and read as two separate sentences.) It also means that the
syncretised (force/ﬁniteness) C constituent in (25) can either be spelled out as
that in accordance with (26i), or be given a null spellout in accordance with (26ii)
as in (28) below:
(28)
You must know [C øDEC, FIN] we cannot tolerate this kind of behaviour
In other words, Rizzi’s analysis provides a principled account of the (overt/null)
spellout of ﬁnite declarative complementisers in English (though see Sobin
2002 for complications). (Complementiser spellout may be different in other
languages – see e.g. Alexopoulou and Kolliakou 2002 on Greek.)
Before leaving the split CP analysis, an important technical complication
should be pointed out (highlighted in relation to wh-movement at the end of
§8.8). If we adopt Chomsky’s Phase Impenetrability Condition/PIC (under
which the complement of a phase head is impenetrable to an external probe) and
if we assume that not only CPs but also transitive VPs are phases, it follows that
topicalisation or focalisation of the complement of a transitive verb will mean
that the object must ﬁrst move to the edge of the verb phrase before moving to
the clause periphery. For the time being we set this issue aside here, returning to
it in chapter 10 because Chomsky’s work on phases assumes that verb phrases
are analysed as split projections in the manner outlined below.
9.4
Split VPs: VP shells in ergative structures
Having looked at evidence that CP can be split into a number of
different projections, we now turn to look at evidence arguing that VPs should be
split into two distinct projections – an outer VP shell and an inner VP core. For
obvious reasons, this has become known as the VP shell analysis.
The sentences we have analysed throughout this book so far have generally
contained simple verb phrases headed by a verb with a single complement. Such
single-complement structures can easily be accommodated within the binary-
branching framework adopted here, since all we need say is that a verb merges
with its complement to form a (binary-branching) V-bar constituent. However, a
particular problem for the binary-branching framework is posed by three-place

9.4 Split VPs: VP shells in ergative structures
337
predicates like those italicised in (29) below which have a (bold-printed) subject
and two (bracketed) complements:
(29 (a)
He rolled [the ball] [down the hill]
(b)
He ﬁlled [the bath] [with water]
(c)
He broke [the vase] [into pieces]
(d)
They withdrew [the troops] [from Ruritania]
If we assume that complements are sisters to heads, it might seem as if the V-bar
constituent headed by rolled in (29a) has the structure (30) below:
(30)
V' 
V
rolled
DP
the ball
PP
down the hill
However, a structure such as (30) is problematic within the framework adopted
here. After all, it is a ternary-branching structure (V-bar branches into the three
separate constituents, namely the V rolled, the DP the ball and the PP down
the hill), and this poses an obvious problem within a framework which assumes
that the merger operation which forms phrases is an inherently binary opera-
tion which can only combine constituents in a pairwise fashion. Moreover, a
ternary-branching structure such as (30) would wrongly predict that the string
the ball down the hill does not form a constituent, and so cannot be coordinated
with another similar string (given the traditional assumption that only identical
constituents can be conjoined) – yet this prediction is falsiﬁed by sentences such
as:
(31)
He rolled the ball down the hill and the acorn up the mountain
How can we overcome these problems?
One answer is to suppose that transitive structures like He rolled the ball down
the hill have a complex internal structure which is parallel in some respects to
causative structures like He made the ball roll down the hill (where make has
roughly the same meaning as cause). On this view the ball roll down the hill
would serve as a VP complement of a null causative verb (which can be thought
of informally as an invisible counterpart of make). We can further suppose that
the null causative verb is afﬁxal in nature and so triggers raising of the verb roll
to adjoin to the causative verb, deriving a structure loosely paraphraseable as He
made + roll [the ball roll down the hill], where roll is a trace copy of the moved
verb roll. We could then say that the string the ball down the hill in (31) is a
VP remnant headed by a trace copy of the moved verb roll. Since this string is a
VP constituent, we correctly predict that it can be coordinated with another VP
remnant like the acorn up the mountain – as is indeed the case in (31).
Analysing structures like roll the ball down the hill as transitive counterparts
of intransitive structures is by no means implausible, since many three-place
transitive predicates like roll can also be used as two-place intransitive predicates

338
9 split projections
in which the (italicised) DP which immediately follows the (bold-printed) verb
in the three-place structure functions as the subject in the two-place structure –
as we see from sentence-pairs such as the following:
(32) (a)
They will roll the ball down the hill
(b)
The ball will roll down the hill
(33) (a)
He ﬁlled the bath with water
(b)
The bath ﬁlled with water
(34) (a)
He broke the vase into pieces
(b)
The vase broke into pieces
(35) (a)
They withdrew the troops from Ruritania
(b)
The troops withdrew from Ruritania
(36) (a)
They closed the store down
(b)
The store closed down
(37) (a)
They moved the headquarters to Brooklyn
(b)
The headquarters moved to Brooklyn
(Verbs which allow this dual use as either three-place or two-place predicates are
sometimes referred to as ergative predicates.) Moreover, the italicised DP seems
to play the same thematic role with respect to the bold-printed verb in each pair
of examples: for example, the ball is the theme argument of roll (i.e. the entity
which undergoes a rolling motion) both in (32a) They will roll the ball down the
hill and in (32b) The ball will roll down the hill. Evidence that the ball plays
the same semantic role in both sentences comes from the fact that the italicised
argument is subject to the same pragmatic restrictions on the choice of expression
which can fulﬁl the relevant argument function in each type of sentence: cf.
(38) (a)
The ball/the rock/!the theory/!sincerity will roll down the hill
(b)
They will roll the ball/the rock/!the theory/!sincerity down the hill
If principles of UG correlate thematic structure with syntactic structure in a uni-
form fashion (in accordance with Baker’s 1988 Uniform Theta Assignment
Hypothesis/UTAH), then it follows that two arguments which fulﬁl the same
thematic function with respect to a given predicate must be merged in the same
position in the syntax.
An analysis within the spirit of UTAH would be to assume that since the ball
is clearly the subject of roll in (32a) The ball will roll down the hill, then it must
also be the case that the ball originates as the subject of roll in (32b) They will
roll the ball down the hill. But if this is so, how come the ball is positioned
after the verb roll in (32b), when subjects are normally positioned before their
verbs? A plausible answer to this question within the framework we are adopting
here is to suppose that the verb roll moves from its initial (post-subject) position
after the ball into a higher verb position to the left of the ball. More speciﬁcally,
adapting ideas put forward by Larson (1988, 1990), Hale and Keyser (1991, 1993,

9.4 Split VPs: VP shells in ergative structures
339
1994) and Chomsky (1995), let’s suppose that the (b) examples in sentences like
(32)–(37) are simple VPs, but that the (a) examples are split VP structures which
comprise an outer shell and an inner core.
More concretely, let’s make the following assumptions. In (32b) The ball will
roll down the hill, the V roll is merged with its PP complement down the hill to
form the V-bar roll down the hill, and this is then merged with the DP the ball to
form the VP structure (39) below:
(39)
VP
DP
The ball
V'
V
roll
PP
down the hill
In the case of (32b), the resulting VP will then be merged with the T constituent
will to form the T-bar will roll down the hill; the [epp] and -features of [T will]
trigger raising of the subject the ball into spec-TP to become subject of will (in
the manner shown by the dotted arrow below), deriving:
(40)
TP
DP
The ball 
T' 
 T
will
VP
DP
the ball
V'
V
roll
PP
down the hill
The resulting TP is subsequently merged with a null declarative C constituent.
(Throughout this chapter, we simplify exposition by omitting details like this
which are not directly relevant to the point at hand.)
Now consider how we derive (32a) They will roll the ball down the hill. Let’s
suppose that the derivation proceeds as before, until we reach the stage where
the VP structure (39) the ball roll down the hill has been formed. But this time,
let’s assume that the VP in (39) is then merged as the complement of an abstract
causative light verb (v) – i.e. a null verb with much the same causative interpre-
tation as the verb make (so that They will roll the ball down the hill has a similar
interpretation to They will make the ball roll down the hill). Let’s also suppose that
this causative light verb is afﬁxal in nature (or has a strong V-feature), and that the
verb roll adjoins to it, forming a structure which can be paraphrased literally as
‘make+roll the ball down the hill’ – a structure which has an overt counterpart in
French structures like faire rouler la balle en bas de la colline (literally ‘make roll
the ball into bottom of the hill’). The resulting v-bar structure is then merged with

340
9 split projections
the subject they (which is assigned the -role of agent argument of the causative
light verb), to form the complex vP (41) below (lower-case letters being used to
denote the light verb, and the dotted arrow showing movement of the verb roll to
adjoin to the null light verb ø):
(41)
vP
PRN
They
v' 
v
ø+roll
VP
DP
the ball
V' 
V
roll
PP
down the hill
Subsequently, the vP in (41) merges with the T constituent will, the subject they
raises into spec-TP, and the resulting TP is merged with a null declarative com-
plementiser, forming the structure (42) below (where the dotted arrows show
movements which have taken place in the course of the derivation):
(42)
CP
C
ø
TP
PRN
They
T'
T
will
vP
PRN
they
v' 
v
ø+roll
VP
DP
the ball
V' 
V
roll 
PP
down the hill
The analysis in (42) correctly speciﬁes the word order in (32a) They will roll the
ball down the hill. (See Stroik 2001 for arguments that do is used to support a
null light verb in elliptical structures such as John will roll a ball down the hill
and Paul will do so as well.)
The VP-shell analysis in (42) provides an interesting account of an otherwise
puzzling aspect of the syntax of sentences like (32a) – namely the fact that adverbs
like gently can be positioned either before roll or after the ball, as we see from:
(43) (a)
They will gently roll the ball down the hill
(b)
They will roll the ball gently down the hill

9.4 Split VPs: VP shells in ergative structures
341
Let’s suppose that adverbs like gently are adjuncts, and that adjunction is a dif-
ferent kind of operation from merger. Merger extends a constituent into a larger
type of projection, so that (e.g.) merging T with an appropriate complement
extends T into T-bar, and merging T-bar with an appropriate speciﬁer extends
T-bar into TP. By contrast, adjunction extends a constituent into a larger projec-
tion of the same type, e.g. merging a moved V with a minimal projection like
T forms a larger T constituent; merging an adjunct with an intermediate projec-
tion like T-bar extends T-bar into another T-bar constituent; merging an adjunct
with a maximal projection like TP forms an even larger TP – and so on. (See
Stepanov 2001 and Chomsky 2001 for technical accounts of differences between
adjunction and merger.) Let’s suppose that gently is the kind of adverb which
can adjoin to an intermediate verbal projection. Given this assumption and the
light-verb analysis in (42), we can then propose the following derivations for
(43a,b).
In (43a), the verb roll merges with the PP down the hill to form the V-bar
roll down the hill, and this V-bar in turn merges with the DP the ball to form
the VP the ball roll down the hill, with the structure shown in (39) above.
This VP then merges with a null causative light verb ø to which the verb roll
adjoins, forming the v-bar ø+roll the ball roll down the hill. The resulting v-bar
merges with the adverb gently to form the larger v-bar gently ø+roll the ball
roll down the hill; and this v-bar in turn merges with the subject they to form
the vP they gently ø+roll the ball roll down the hill. The vP thereby formed
merges with the T constituent will, forming the T-bar will they gently ø+roll
the ball roll down the hill. The subject they raises to spec-TP forming the TP
they will they gently ø+roll the ball roll down the hill. The resulting TP is then
merged with a null declarative complementiser to derive the structure shown in
simpliﬁed form in (44) below (with arrows showing movements which have taken
place):
(44)
CP
C
ø
TP
PRN
They
T' 
T
will
vP
PRN
they
v' 
ADV
gently
v' 
v
ø+roll
VP
DP
the ball
V'
V
roll
PP
down the hill

342
9 split projections
The analysis in (44) correctly speciﬁes the word order in (43a) They will gently
roll the ball down the hill.
Now consider how (43b) They will roll the ball gently down the hill is derived.
As before, the verb roll merges with the PP down the hill, forming the V-bar roll
down the hill. The adverb gently then merges with this V-bar to form the larger
V-bar gently roll down the hill. This V-bar in turn merges with the DP the ball
to form the VP the ball gently roll down the hill. The resulting VP is merged
with a causative light verb [v ø] to which the verb roll adjoins, so forming the
v-bar ø+roll the ball gently roll down the hill. This v-bar is then merged with
the subject they to form the vP they ø+roll the ball gently roll down the hill. The
vP thereby formed merges with [T will], forming the T-bar will they ø+roll the
ball gently roll down the hill. The subject they raises to spec-TP, and the resulting
TP is merged with a null declarative C to form the CP (45) below (with arrows
showing movements which have taken place):
(45)
CP
C
ø
TP
PRN
They
T'
T
will
vP
PRN
they
v'
v
ø+roll
VP
DP
the ball
V'
ADV
gently
V'
V
roll
PP
down the hill
The different positions occupied by the adverb gently in (44) and (45) reﬂect a
subtle meaning difference between (43a) and (43b): (43a) means that the action
which initiated the rolling motion was gentle, whereas (43b) means that the rolling
motion itself was gentle.
A light-verb analysis also offers us an interesting account of adverb position
in sentences like:
(46) (a)
He had deliberately rolled the ball gently down the hill
(b)
∗He had gently rolled the ball deliberately down the hill
Let’s suppose that deliberately (by virtue of its meaning) can only be an adjunct to
a projection of an agentive verb (i.e. a verb whose subject has the thematic role of
agent). If we suppose (as earlier) that the light verb [v ø] is a causative verb with
an agent subject, the contrast in (46) can be accounted for straightforwardly: in
(46a) deliberately is contained within a vP headed by a null agentive causative

9.4 Split VPs: VP shells in ergative structures
343
light verb; but in (46b) it is contained within a VP headed by the non-agentive verb
roll. (The verb roll is a non-agentive predicate because its subject has the -role
theme, not agent.) We can then say that adverbs like deliberately are adverbs
which adjoin to a v-bar headed by an agentive light verb, but not to V-bar.
This in turn might lead us to expect to ﬁnd a corresponding class of adverbs
which can adjoin to V-bar but not v-bar. In this connection, consider the following
contrasts (adapted from Bowers 1993, p. 609):
(47) (a)
Mary jumped the horse perfectly over the last fence
(b)
∗Mary perfectly jumped the horse over the last fence
Given the assumptions made here, the derivation of (47a) would be parallel to
that in (45), while the derivation of (47b) would be parallel to that in (44). If
we assume that the adverb perfectly (in the relevant use) can function only as an
adjunct to a V-projection, the contrast between (47a) and (47b) can be accounted
for straightforwardly: in (47a), perfectly is adjoined to a V-bar, whereas in (47b)
it is merged with a v-bar (in violation of the requirement that it can only adjoin
to a V-projection).
As we have seen, the VP shell analysis outlined here provides an interesting
solution to the problems posed by three-place predicates which have two comple-
ments. However, the problems posed by verbs which take two complements arise
not only with transitive verbs which have intransitive counterparts (like those in
(32)–(37) above), but also with verbs such as those bold-printed in (48) below
(the complements of the verbs being bracketed):
(48) (a)
They will load [the truck] [with hay]
(b)
He gave [no explanation] [to his friends]
(c)
They took [everything] [from her]
(d)
Nobody can blame [you] [for the accident]
Verbs like those in (48) cannot be used intransitively, as we see from the ungram-
maticality of sentences such as:
(49) (a)
∗The truck will load with hay
(b)
∗No explanation gave to his friends
(c)
∗Everything took from her
(d)
∗You can blame for the accident
However, it is interesting to note that in structures like (48) too we ﬁnd that
adverbs belonging to the same class as gently can be positioned either before the
verb or between its two complements:
(50) (a)
They will carefully load the truck with hay
(b)
They will load the truck carefully with hay
This suggests that (in spite of the fact that the relevant verbs have no intransitive
counterpart) a shell analysis is appropriate for structures like (48) too. If so, a
sentence such as (48a) will have the structure shown in simpliﬁed form in (51)
below (with arrows showing movements which take place):

344
9 split projections
(51)
CP
C
ø
TP
PRN
They
T'
T
will
vP
PRN
they
v'
v
ø+load
VP
DP
the truck 
V'
V
load
PP
with hay 
We can then say that the adverb carefully adjoins to v-bar in (50a), and to V-bar
in (50b). If we suppose that verbs like load are essentially afﬁxal in nature (in the
sense that they must adjoin to a null causative light verb with an agent external
argument) we can account for the ungrammaticality of intransitive structures such
as (49a) ∗The truck will load with hay.
9.5
VP shells in resultative, double-object and
object-control structures
The VP shell analysis outlined above can be extended from predicates
like load which have both nominal and prepositional complements to so-called
resultative predicates which have both nominal and adjectival complements –
i.e. to structures such as those below:
(52) (a)
The acid will turn the litmus-paper red
(b)
They may paint the house pink
In (52a), the verb turn originates in the head V position of VP, with the DP the
litmus-paper as its subject and the adjective red as its complement (precisely as
in The litmus-paper will turn red); turn then raises to adjoin to a strong causative
light verb ø heading vP; the subject of this light verb (the DP the acid) in turn
raises from spec-vP to spec-TP, and the resulting TP merges with a null declarative
complementiser – as shown informally in (53) below:
(53)
[CP [C ø [TP the acid [T will] [vP the acid [v ø +turn] [VP the litmus-paper [V turn] red]]]]
(For alternative analyses of resultative structures like (52), see Keyser and Roeper
1992; Carrier and Randall 1992; and Oya 2002.)

9.5 VP shells in resultative, double-object and object-control structures
345
We can extend the vP shell analysis still further, to take in double-object
structures. such as:
(54) (a)
They will get [the teacher] [a present]
(b)
Could you pass [me] [the salt]?
(c)
I showed [them] [my passport]
(d)
She gave [me] [a hat]
For example, we could suggest that (54a) has the structure (55) below (with arrows
indicating movements which take place in the course of the derivation):
(55)
CP
C
ø
TP
PRN
They
T'
T
will
vP
PRN
they
v'
v
ø+get
VP
DP
the teacher
V'
V
get
QP
a present 
That is, get originates as the head V of VP (with the teacher as its subject and a
present as its complement, much as in The teacher will get a present), and then
raises up to adjoin to the strong causative light verb ø heading vP; the subject
they in turn originates in spec-vP (and has the thematic role of agent argument of
the null causative light verb ø), and subsequently raises to spec-TP. (For a range
of alternative analyses of the double-object construction, see Larson 1988; 1990;
Johnson 1991; Bowers 1993; and Pesetsky 1995.)
The VP shell analysis outlined above also provides us with an interesting
solution to the problems posed by so-called object-control predicates. In this
connection, consider the syntax of the inﬁnitive structure in (56) below:
(56)
What decided you to take syntax?
For reasons given below, decide functions as a three-place predicate in this use,
taking what as its subject, you as its object, and the clause to take syntax as a
further complement. If we suppose that the inﬁnitive complement to take syntax
has a PRO subject (and is a CP headed by a null complementiser ø), (56) will
have the skeletal structure (57) below (simpliﬁed e.g. by ignoring traces: the three
arguments of decide are bracketed):

346
9 split projections
(57)
[What] decided [you] [ø PRO to take syntax]?
Since PRO is controlled by the object you, the verb decide (in such uses) is an
object-control predicate.
There are a number of reasons for thinking that the verb decide in sentences
like (56) is indeed a three-place object-control predicate, and that you is the object
of decide (rather than the subject of to take syntax). Thus, (56) can be paraphrased
(albeit a little clumsily) as:
(58)
What decided you [that you should take syntax]?
We can then say that you in (57) corresponds to the italicised object you in
(58), and the PRO subject in (57) corresponds to the bold-printed you subject
of the complement clause in (58). Moreover, the verb decide imposes pragmatic
restrictions on the choice of expression following it (which must be a rational,
mind-possessing entity – not an irrational, mindless entity like the exam):
(59)
!What decided the exam to be difﬁcult?
This suggests that the relevant expression must be an argument of decide.
Furthermore, the expression following decide cannot be an expletive pronoun
such as there:
(60)
∗What decided there to be an election?
A plausible conclusion to draw from observations such as these is that the
(pro)nominal following decide is an (object) argument of decide in sentences
such as (56), and serves as the controller of a PRO subject in the following to
inﬁnitive. However, this means that decide has two complements in structures
such as (56) – the pronoun you and the control inﬁnitive to take syntax. Within a
binary-branching framework, we clearly can’t assume that the V-bar headed by
decide in (56) has a ternary-branching structure like:
(61)
V'
V
decided
PRN
you
CP
ø PRO to take syntax
However, we can avoid a structure like (61) if we suppose that (56) has a structure
more akin to that of:
(62)
What made you decide to take syntax?
but differing from (62) in that in place of the overt causative verb make is an
afﬁxal causative light verb ø, with the verb decide raising to adjoin to the light
verb as in (63) below:

9.5 VP shells in resultative, double-object and object-control structures
347
(63)
CP
PRN
What
C'
C
ø
PRN
what
T'
T
Tns
vP
PRN
what
v'
v
ø+decide
VP
PRN
you
V'
V
decide
CP
ø PRO to take syntax
TP
The wh-pronoun what moves from spec-vP to spec-TP by A-movement, and then
from spec-TP to spec-CP by A-bar movement. There is no T-to-C movement here
for reasons which should be familiar from §6.6 (where we saw that questions with
a wh-subject do not trigger auxiliary inversion). Instead, the past-tense afﬁx (Tns)
in T which carries person/number/tense features is lowered onto the light-verb
complex ø+decide,whichisultimatelyspelledoutasthepast-tenseformdecided.
The light-verb analysis in (63) offers two main advantages over the analysis in
(61). Firstly, (63) is consistent with the view that the merger operation by which
phrases are formed is binary; and secondly, (63) enables us to attain a more unitary
theory of control under which the controller of PRO is always a subject/speciﬁer,
never an object (since PRO in (63) is controlled by you, and you is the subject of
the VP which was originally headed by the verb decide). This second result is a
welcome one, since the verb decide clearly functions as a subject-control verb in
structures such as:
(64)
Who decided PRO to take syntax?
where the PRO subject of to take syntax is controlled by the thematic subject of
decided (i.e. by who).
Although the verb decide can be used both as a so-called object-control pred-
icate in sentences like What decided you to take syntax? and as a subject-control
predicate in sentences like Who decided to take syntax?, most object-control pred-
icates (like persuade) have no subject-control counterpart – as we see from (65)
below:
(65) (a)
He persuaded Mary to come to his party
(b)
∗Mary persuaded to come to his party
This means that the analysis of sentences like (65a) will involve a greater level
of abstraction, since it involves claiming that persuade originates in the head V
position of VP and that Mary is the thematic subject of persuade (so that persuade

348
9 split projections
originates in the same position as decide in (63) above, and Mary in the same
position as you). We will also have to say that persuade is an obligatorily transitive
afﬁxal verb which must adjoin to the kind of abstract light verb which we ﬁnd
in structures like (63) – so accounting for the ungrammaticality of structures like
(65b). (For further discussion of so-called object-control verbs, see Bowers 1993;
for an analysis of the control verb promise, see Larson 1991.)
9.6
VP shells in transitive, unergative, unaccusative, raising
and locative inversion structures
In §9.4 and §9.5, we looked at how to deal with the complements of
three-place transitive predicates. But now we turn to look at the complements
of simple (two-place) transitive predicates (which have subject and object argu-
ments) like read in (66) below:
(66)
He read the book
Chomsky (1995) proposes a light-verb analysis of two-place transitive predicates
under which (66) would (at the end of the vP cycle) have a structure along the
lines of (67) below (with the arrow showing movement of the verb read from V
to adjoin to a null light verb in v):
(67)
vP
PRN
He
v'
v
ø+read
VP
V
read
DP
the book
That is, read would originate as the head V of VP, and would then be raised to
adjoin to a null agentive light verb ø. (A different account of transitive comple-
ments as VP-speciﬁers is offered in Stroik 1990 and Bowers 1993.)
Chomsky’s light-verb analysis of two-place transitive predicates can be
extended in an interesting way to handle the syntax of a class of verbs which
are known as unergative predicates. These are verbs like those italicised in (68)
below which have agentive subjects, but which appear to have no complement:
(68) (a)
Shall we lunch?
(d) Why not guess?
(b)
Let’s party!
(e) He apologised
(c)
Don’t fuss!
(f) She overdosed
Such verbs pose obvious problems for our assumption in the previous chapter that
agentive subjects originate as speciﬁers and merge with an intermediate verbal
projection which is itself formed by merger of a verb with its complement. The
reason should be obvious – namely that unergative verbs like those italicised

9.6 VP shells in other structures
349
in (68) appear to have no complements. However, it is interesting to note that
unergative verbs often have close paraphrases involving an overt light verb (i.e. a
verb such as have/make/take etc. which has little semantic content of its own in
the relevant use) and a nominal complement:
(69) (a)
Shall we have lunch
(d) Why not make a guess?
(b)
Let’s have a party!
(e) He made an apology
(c)
Don’t make a fuss!
(f) She took an overdose
This suggests a way of overcoming the problem posed by unergative verbs –
namely to suppose (following Baker 1988 and Hale and Keyser 1993) that unerga-
tive verbs are formed by incorporation of a complement into an abstract light verb.
This would mean (for example) that the verb lunch in (68a) is an implicitly tran-
sitive verb, formed by incorporating the noun lunch into an abstract light verb
which can be thought of as a null counterpart of have. Since the incorporated
object is a simple noun (not a full DP), we can assume (following Baker 1988)
that it does not carry case. The VP thereby formed would serve as the comple-
ment of an abstract light verb with an external argument (the external argument
being we in the case of (68a) above). Under this analysis, unergatives would in
effect be transitives with an incorporated object: hence we can account for the
fact that (like transitives) unergatives require the use of the perfect auxiliary have
in languages (like Italian) with a have/be contrast in perfect auxiliaries.
Moreover, there are reasons to suppose that a light-verb analysis is required for
unaccusative structures as well, and that the syntax of unaccusative predicates
like come/go is rather more complex than we suggested in §7.6, where we noted
Burzio’s claim that the arguments of unaccusative predicates originate as their
complements. An immediate problem posed by Burzio’s assumption is how we
deal with two-place unaccusative predicates which take two arguments. In this
connection, consider unaccusative imperative structures such as the following in
(dialect A of) Belfast English (see Henry 1995: note that youse is the plural form
of you – corresponding to American English y’all):
(70) (a)
Go you to school!
(b)
Run youse to the telephone!
(c)
Walk you into the garden!
If postverbal arguments of unaccusative predicates are in-situ complements, this
means that each of the verbs in (70) must have two complements. But if we make
the traditional assumption that complements are sisters of a head, this means that
if both you and to school are complements of the verb go in (70a), they must be
sisters of go, and hence the VP headed by go must have the (simpliﬁed) structure
(71) below:
(71)
VP
V
Go
PRN
you
PP
to school

350
9 split projections
However, a ternary-branching structure such as (71) is obviously incompatible
with a framework such as that used here which assumes that the merger operation
by which phrases are formed is inherently binary.
Since analysing unaccusative subjects in such structures as underlying comple-
ments proves problematic, let’s consider whether they might instead be analysed
as speciﬁers. On this view, we can suppose that the inner VP core of a Belfast
English unaccusative imperative structure such as (70a) Go you to school! is not
(71) above, but rather (72) below:
(72)
VP
PRN
you
V'
V
go 
PP
to school
We can then say that it is a property of unaccusative predicates that all their
arguments originate within VP. But the problem posed by a structure like (72)
is that it provides us with no way of accounting for the fact that unaccusative
subjects like you in (70a) Go you to school! surface postverbally. How can we
overcome this problem? One answer is the following. Let us suppose that VPs like
(72) which are headed by an unaccusative verb are embedded as the complement
of a null light verb, and that the unaccusative verb raises to adjoin to the light
verb in the manner indicated by the arrow in (73) below:
(73)
vP
v
ø+go
VP
PRN
you
V'
V
go
PP
to school
If (as Alison Henry argues) subjects remain in situ in imperatives in dialect A
of Belfast English, the postverbal position of unaccusative subjects in sentences
such as (70) can be accounted for straightforwardly. And the shell analysis in (73)
is consistent with the assumption that the merger operation by which phrases are
formed is intrinsically binary.
Moreover, the shell analysis enables us to provide an interesting account of
the position of adverbs like quickly in unaccusative imperatives (in dialect A of
Belfast English) such as:
(74)
Go you quickly to school!
If we suppose that adverbs like quickly are adjuncts which merge with an inter-
mediate verbal projection (i.e. a single-bar projection comprising a verb and its
complement), we can say that quickly in (74) is adjoined to the V-bar go to school

9.6 VP shells in other structures
351
in (73). What remains to be accounted for (in relation to the syntax of imperative
subjects in dialect A of Belfast English) is the fact that subjects of transitive and
unergative verbs occur in preverbal (not postverbal) position: cf.
(75) (a)
You read that book!
(b)
∗Read you that book!
(76) (a)
Youse tell the truth!
(b)
∗Tell youse the truth
(77) (a)
You protest!
(b)
∗Protest you!
Why should this be? If we assume (as in our discussion of (66) above) that
transitive verbs originate as the head V of a VP complement of a null agentive
light verb, an imperative such as (75a) will contain a vP with the simpliﬁed
structure shown in (78) below (where the dotted arrow indicates movement of the
verb read to adjoin to the null light verb heading vP):
(78)
vP
PRN
You
v'
v
ø+read
VP
V
read  
DP
that book
The agent subject you will originate in spec-vP, as the subject of the agentive
light verb ø. Even after the verb read adjoins to the null light verb, the subject
you will still be positioned in front of the resulting verbal complex ø+read. As
should be obvious, we can extend the light-verb analysis from transitive verbs like
read to unergative verbs like protest if we assume (as earlier) that such verbs are
formed by incorporation of a noun into the verb (so that protest is analysed as
having a similar structure to make (a) protest), and if we assume that unergative
subjects (like transitive subjects) originate as speciﬁers of an agentive light verb.
Given these assumptions, we could then say that the difference between unac-
cusative subjects and transitive/unergative subjects is that unaccusative subjects
originate within VP (as the argument of a lexical verb), whereas transitive/
unergative subjects originate in spec-vP (as the external argument of a light verb).
If we hypothesise that verb phrases always contain an outer vP shell headed by
a strong (afﬁxal) light verb and an inner VP core headed by a lexical verb, and
that lexical verbs always raise from V to v, the postverbal position of unac-
cusative subjects can be accounted for by positing that the subject remains in
situ in such structures. Such a hypothesis will clearly require us to modify our
earlier assumptions about the intransitive use of ergative predicates in sentences
like (32)–(37) above, and to analyse intransitive ergatives in a parallel fashion to
unaccusatives.

352
9 split projections
The light-verb analysis sketched here also offers us a way of accounting for
the fact that in Early Modern English, the perfect auxiliary used with unaccusative
verbs was be (as we saw in §7.6), whereas that used with transitive and unergative
verbs was have. We can account for this by positing that the perfect auxiliary have
selected a vP complement headed by a transitive light verb with an external argu-
ment, whereas the perfect auxiliary be selected a complement headed by an intran-
sitivelightverbwithnoexternalargument.Thedistinctionhasbeenlostinpresent-
day English, with perfect have being used with both types of vP complement.
A class of predicates which are related to unaccusatives (in that they project no
external argument) are raising predicates like seem. In this connection, consider
the syntax of a raising sentence such as:
(79)
The president does seem to me to have upset several people
Given the assumptions made in this chapter, (79) will be derived as follows. The
verb upset merges with its QP complement several people to form the VP upset
several people. This in turn merges with a null causative light verb, which (by
virtue of being afﬁxal in nature) triggers raising of the verb upset to adjoin to the
light verb (as shown by the dotted arrow below); the resulting v-bar merges with
its external agent argument the president to form the vP in (80) below (para-
phraseable informally as ‘The president caused-to-get-upset several people’):
(80)
vP
DP
The president
v'
v
ø+upset
VP
V
upset
QP
several people
The resulting vP is then merged with the auxiliary have to form an AUXP, and this
AUXP is in turn merged with [T to]. If we follow Chomsky (2001) in supposing
that T in raising inﬁnitives has an [epp] feature and an unvalued person feature, the
subject the president will be attracted to move to spec-TP, so deriving the structure
shown in simpliﬁed form below (with the arrow marking A-movement):
(81)
 TP
DP
The president
T' 
T
to
AUXP
AUX
have
vP
the president upset several people

9.6 VP shells in other structures
353
The TP in (81) is then merged as the complement of seem, forming the V-bar
seem the president to have upset several people (omitting traces and other empty
categories, to make exposition less abstract). Let’s suppose that to me is the
experiencer argument of seem and is merged as the speciﬁer of the resulting
V-bar, forming the VP shown in (82) below (once again simpliﬁed by not showing
traces and other empty categories):
(82)
VP
PP
to me
V' 
V
seem
TP
the president to have upset several people
On the assumption that all verb phrases contain an outer vP shell, the VP in (82)
will then merge with a null (afﬁxal) light verb, triggering raising of the verb seem
to adjoin to the light verb. Merging the resulting vP with a ﬁnite T constituent
containing (emphatic) do will derive the structure shown in simpliﬁed form below
(with the arrow showing the verb movement that took place on the vP cycle):
(83)
T'
T
DO
vP
v
ø+seem
VP
PP
to me
V' 
V
seem
TP
the president to have upset several people
[T do] serves as a probe looking for an active nominal goal. The Phase Impen-
etrability Condition (which renders the object of a transitive verb impenetrable
to a c-commanding T constituent) makes the nominal several people impene-
trable to T, since it is the object of the transitive verb upset: and let’s assume
that the pronoun me is likewise inaccessible to T (perhaps because a nominal
goal is only active if it has an unvalued case feature, and the case feature of me
has already been valued as accusative by the transitive preposition to; or perhaps
because me serves as the goal of a closer probe, namely the transitive prepo-
sition to). If so, the president (which is active by virtue of having an unvalued
case feature) will be the only nominal which can serve as the goal of [T do] in
(83). Accordingly, do assigns nominative case to the president (and conversely
agrees with the president, with do ultimately being spelled out at PF as does),
and the [epp] and uninterpretable person/number features of do ensure that the
president moves into spec-TP, so deriving the structure shown in simpliﬁed form
below:

354
9 split projections
(84)
TP
DP 
The president 
T' 
T
does 
vP
v
ø+seem
VP
PP
to me 
V' 
V
seem
TP
the president to have upset several people
The resulting TP will then be merged with a null declarative complementiser,
forming the CP structure associated with (79) The president does seem to me to
have upset several people. We can assume that the related sentence (85) below:
(85)
The president does seem to have upset several people
has an essentially parallel derivation, except that the verb seem in (85) projects
no experiencer argument, so that the structure formed when seem is merged
with its TP complement will not be (82) above, but rather [VP [V seem] [TP the
president [T to] have upset several people]].
An interesting corollary of the light-verb analysis of raising verbs like seem is
that the Italian counterpart of seem is used with the perfect auxiliary essere ‘be’
rather than avere ‘have’ – as we can illustrate in relation to:
(86)
Maria mi `e sempre sembrata essere simpatica
Maria me is always seemed
be
nice
‘Maria has always seemed to me to be nice’
(The position of the experiencer argument mi ‘to me’ in (86) is accounted for
by the fact that it is a clitic pronoun, and clitics attach to the left of a ﬁnite
auxiliary or verb in Italian – in this case attaching to the left of `e ‘is’.) Earlier, we
suggested that in languages with the have/be contrast, have typically selects a
vP complement with an external argument, whereas be selects a vP complement
with no external argument. In this context, it is interesting to note (e.g. in relation
to structures like (84) above) that the light verb found in clauses containing a
raising predicate like seem projects no external argument, and hence would be
expected to occur with (the relevant counterpart of) the perfect auxiliary be in a
language with the have/be contrast. Data such as (86) are thus consistent with
the light-verb analysis of raising predicates like seem outlined here. (It should
be noted, however, that the have/be contrast is somewhat more complex than
suggested here: see Sorace 2000 for a cross-linguistic perspective.)
The assumption made in this section that intransitive clauses have a split
vP+VP structure in which the verb raises from V to v provides us with a way of

9.6 VP shells in other structures
355
analysing locative inversion structures such as (87) below, so called because the
locative expression down the hill precedes the auxiliary will:
(87)
Down the hill will roll the ball
We can derive this as follows. The verb roll merges with its complement down
the hill and its speciﬁer the ball to form the VP the ball roll down the hill shown
in (39) above. This is then merged with an intransitive light verb which (being
strong) triggers movement of the verb roll from V to v, so deriving the structure
shown in simpliﬁed form below:
(88)
vP
v
ø+roll
VP
DP
the ball
V' 
V
roll
PP
down the hill
The resulting vP is then merged with a ﬁnite T constituent will which has an [epp]
feature. Let’s suppose that T (in addition to its person/number/tense and [epp]
features) in this kind of structure carries some additional feature which enables it
to attract the PP down the hill and that as a result, down the hill moves to spec-TP,
so deriving the structure:
(89)
TP
PP
Down the hill
T' 
T 
vP
will 
v
ø+roll
VP
DP
the ball
V' 
V
roll
PP
down the hill
Such an analysis leaves the subject the ball in situ in spec-VP (hence following
the raised verb roll), thereby accounting for the word order we ﬁnd in (87) Down
the hill will roll the ball. Interestingly, a locative inversion structure can occur as
the complement of a complementiser like that, as we see from:
(90)
He was startled to ﬁnd that down the hill was rolling an enormous snowball
This is precisely what would be expected if locative inversion involves move-
ment of a locative to spec-TP, as in (89) above. (See Levin and Rappaport Hovav

356
9 split projections
1995; Collins 1997; Nakajima 2001; and Bowers 2002 on locative inversion;
see Culicover and Levins 2001 for arguments that locative inversion structures
are different in nature from structures like ‘Into the room walked carefully
the students in the class who had heard about the social psych experiment
that we were about to perpetrate’ containing a long italicised postverbal
subject.)
9.7
Transitive light verbs and accusative case assignment
In the previous chapter, we saw that nominative and null case are
assigned to a goal by a matching -complete probe (the probe being a ﬁnite T for
nominative case, and a non-ﬁnite control T for null case); however, we had nothing
to say about accusative case assignment. If UG principles determine that all
structural case assignment involves assignment of case to a goal by a -complete
matching probe, we can hypothesise that accusative case is likewise assigned to
a goal by a -complete probe which matches the goal in respect of its person
and number features. But what could be the probe responsible for assignment of
accusative case to (say) the accusative complement them in a transitive sentence
such as that below?
(91)
You have upset them
Chomsky in recent work has suggested an answer along the lines of (92) below:
(92)
A transitive light verb carrying person and number -features serves as a
probe which assigns accusative case to a goal with matching person and
number features and an active (unvalued) case feature
Let’s further suppose that:
(93)
A light verb is transitive only if it has a theta-marked external argument
In the light of (92) and (93), consider how the derivation of (91) proceeds.
The verb upset is merged with its complement they to form the VP upset they
(capital letters being used to denote an abstract lexical item whose precise pho-
netic spellout as they/them/their has not yet been determined): the pronoun carries
interpretable third-person, plural-number features and an uninterpretable (and
unvalued) case feature. The resulting VP is then merged with a null transitive light
verb which (since case assignment requires probe and goal to match in -features)
will carry unvalued and uninterpretable person/number features, so forming the
v-bar below (with interpretable features shown in bold and uninterpretable fea-
tures in italics):

9.7 Transitive light verbs and accusative case assignment
357
(94)
v' 
v
ø
[u-Pers]
[u-Num]
VP
V
upset
PRN
THEY
[3-Pers]
[Pl-Num]
[u-Case]
The null light verb probes and identiﬁes they as the only active goal which
carries an uninterpretable case feature. The goal they values (and, being -
complete, deletes) the person/number -features of the light-verb probe (these
will ultimately have a null spellout, like the light verb itself). Conversely, the
transitive light verb values the unvalued case feature of they as accusative in
accordance with (92) (so that they is ultimately spelled out as them) and (by
virtue of being -complete) deletes it, so deriving:
(95)
v' 
v
ø
[3-Pers]
[Pl-Num]
VP
V
upset
PRN
THEY
[3-Pers]
[Pl-Num]
[Acc-Case]
The null light verb is afﬁxal, and so will trigger raising of the verb upset from
V to v. Since the (causative) light verb in (95) is transitive, it projects an agent
external argument. The relevant external argument is you in (91), and (if it refers
to more than one individual) this enters the derivation with interpretable second-
person and plural-number features, but an unvalued case-feature, so forming the
vP (96) below:
(96)
vP
PRN
YOU
[2-Pers]
[Pl-Num]
[u-Case] 
v' 
v
ø+upset
[3-Pers]
[Pl-Num]
VP
V
upset
PRN
them
[3-Pers]
[Pl-Num]
[Acc-Case]
The vP thereby formed is merged with a null ﬁnite T containing the perfect
auxiliary have, which has an interpretable present-tense feature, uninterpretable

358
9 split projections
(and unvalued) -features, and an uninterpretable [epp] feature. Merging T with
its vP complement derives:
(97)
T' 
T
HAVE
[Pres-Tns]
[u-Pers]
[u-Num]
[EPP]
vP
PRN
YOU
[2-Pers]
[Pl-Num]
[u-Case]
v' 
v
ø+upset
[3-Pers]
[Pl-Num]
VP
V
upset
PRN
them
[3-Pers]
[Pl-Num]
[Acc-Case]
[T have] then probes and locates the pronoun you as the only active goal with an
unvalued case feature which it c-commands. This results in the pronoun valuing
and deleting the person/number features of the auxiliary, and conversely in the
auxiliary valuing the case feature of the pronoun as nominative, and deleting it:
hence the items have and you are spelled out as have and you at PF. The [epp]
feature of T triggers raising of the pronoun you from spec-vP to spec-TP (thereby
deleting the [epp] feature on T), deriving the structure (98) below:
(98)
TP
PRN
You
[2-Pers]
[Pl-Num]
[Nom-Case]
T'
T
have
[Pres-Tns]
[2-Pers]
[Pl-Num]
[EPP] 
vP
PRN
you
v'
v
ø+upset
[3-Pers]
[Pl-Num]
VP
V
upset
PRN
them
[3-Pers]
[Pl-Num]
[Acc-Case]
The resulting structure is then merged with a null declarative complementiser to
derive the CP structure associated with (91) You have upset them. (On accusative
case assignment in double-object structures like give someone something, see
Goodall 1999.)
An interesting question arising from the assumption that the objects of transi-
tive verbs are assigned accusative case by a light verb which projects an external
argument is whether this analysis can be extended to the case-marking of (itali-
cised) accusative subjects of the (bracketed) inﬁnitival TPs in ECM/Exceptional
Case-Marking structures like those below:

9.7 Transitive light verbs and accusative case assignment
359
(99) (a)
They proved [him to have stolen the jewels]
(b)
They suspect [me to be an agent for the FBA]
(c)
I believe [them to be innocent]
(d)
I have always found [them to be accommodating]
At ﬁrst sight, the answer would appear to be straightforward. After all, if the
italicised subject occupies spec-TP position within the bracketed TP complement,
and if the bold-printed ECM verb originates as the head of a VP which is the com-
plement of a transitive light verb and subsequently raises to adjoin to the light verb
(in the manner shown by the dotted arrow below), (99a) will have the structure
shown in (100) below at the end of the main-clause vP cycle (simpliﬁed by not
showing the internal structure of T-bar):
(100)
vP
PRN
They
v'
v
ø+prove
VP
V
prove
TP
PRN
him  
T' 
to have stolen the jewels
Since the light verb ø which occupies the head v position within vP is transitive
(by virtue of having an external argument, namely they), and since it c-commands
the inﬁnitive subject him, it can assign accusative case to him with concomitant
-feature matching (i.e. the light verb will contain unvalued person and number
features which are valued by those of him; like the light verb itself, these will
ultimately have a null phonetic spellout).
However, an important question raised by the above analysis is how we account
for the position of the italicised adverbial and prepositional expressions in ECM
structures such as the following:
(101) (a)
The DA will prove [the witness conclusively to have lied] (adapted from
Bowers 1993, p. 632)
(b)
I suspect [him strongly to be a liar] (Authier 1991, p. 729)
(c)
I’ve believed [Gary for a long time now to be a fool] (Kayne 1984b, p. 114)
(d)
I have found [Bob recently to be morose] (Postal 1974, p. 146)
In sentences like (101), the italicised adverbial/prepositional expression is posi-
tioned inside the bracketed inﬁnitive complement, and yet is construed as modify-
ing the (bold-printed) transitive verb which lies outside the bracketed complement
clause. How can we account for this seeming paradox? To make our discussion
more concrete, let’s consider how to derive (101a).
If we assume that the adverb conclusively (by virtue of modifying the verb
prove) originates as an adjunct to the V-bar headed by prove, the problem we face

360
9 split projections
is accounting for how both the verb prove and the DP the witness end up in front
of the adverb conclusively. Movement of the verb prove in front of conclusively
is no problem if we suppose that verbs move from the head V position in VP to
adjoin to a null light verb, and thereby come to occupy the head v position of vP.
But how does the inﬁnitival subject the witness come to be positioned above the
adverb conclusively, but below the verb prove?
One possibility is that an ECM verb like prove (like inﬁnitival to in raising
structures) has an [epp] feature and an unvalued person feature which together
require the closest matching nominal expression which they c-command to be
moved to the outer edge of VP. Given this assumption, the relevant part of the
derivation of (101a) will proceed as follows. The verb prove merges with the
inﬁnitival TP the witness to have lied (whose structure we ignore here, in order
to simplify exposition) to form the V-bar prove the witness to have lied, and
the adverb conclusively merges with this V-bar to form the even larger V-bar
conclusively prove the witness to have lied. Let’s suppose that the witness has
valued (third-)person and (singular-)number features, and an unvalued and unin-
terpretable case feature, so that at this stage we have formed the V-bar shown in
simpliﬁed form below:
(102)
V'
ADV
conclusively
V'
V
prove
[u-Pers]
[EPP]
TP
DP
the witness
[3-Pers]
[Sg-Num]
[u-Case]
T'
to have lied
The uninterpretable person feature on the verb prove serves as a probe which
picks out the closest active goal with a matching person feature, locating the DP
the witness, which is active by virtue of its uninterpretable case feature: since the
DP the witness is -complete, it values and deletes the person feature on the verb
prove. The [epp] feature of prove triggers movement of the witness to the outer
edge of the relevant V-projection (and is thereafter deleted), so that the witness
becomes the speciﬁer of the V-bar in (102), forming the VP (103) below:
(103)
VP
DP
the witness
[3-Pers]
[Sg-Num]
[u-Case]
V'
ADV
conclusively
V'
V
prove
[3-Pers]
[EPP] 
TP
t
T'
to have lied

9.7 Transitive light verbs and accusative case assignment
361
Because the verb prove is not -complete (by virtue of carrying only person and
not number), it does not value or delete the case feature on the DP the witness, so
that the latter remains active.
The VP in (103) is then merged as the complement of a null (afﬁxal) light-
verb. The light verb is transitive (since it has the external argument the DA), and
transitive light verbs carry a complete set of unvalued -features, so that merging
the relevant light verb with (103) above will form (104) below:
(104)
v'
v
ø+
[u-Pers]
[u-Num]
VP
DP
the witness
[3-Pers]
[Sg-Num]
[u-Case]
V'
ADV
conclusively
V'
V
prove
[EPP]
TP
t
T'
to have lied
At this point, the light verb (active by virtue of its uninterpretable -features)
serves as a probe and searches for an active matching nominal goal which it c-
commands, locating the witness (which is active by virtue of its uninterpretable
case feature). The light verb values the unvalued case feature of the witness as
accusative in accordance with (92), and deletes it. The DP the witness in turn
values and deletes the unvalued person and number features of the light verb.
Since the light verb is afﬁxal in nature (indicated by the + sign in ø+), it triggers
raising of the verb prove to adjoin to the light verb. Since the light verb is transitive,
it also projects an external argument (in this case, the DA) in spec-vP. Thus, at the
end of the vP cycle, we have the structure shown in (105) below (simpliﬁed by
showing only features of the light verb ø and the DP the witness, and by omitting
a number of traces and other empty categories):
(105)
vP
DP
The DA
v'
v
ø+prove
[3-Pers]
[Sg-Num]
VP
DP
the witness
[3-Pers]
[Sg-Num]
[Acc-Case]
V'
ADV
conclusively
V' 
prove to have lied
Subsequently, the resulting vP is merged as the complement of [T will], which
serves as a probe valuing (as nominative) and deleting the uninterpretable case
feature on the DA (not shown here); the [epp] feature and unvalued person/number
features of will trigger movement of the DA to become the speciﬁer of the TP
headed by will. Merging the resulting TP with a null declarative complementiser

362
9 split projections
derives the structure associated with (101a) The DA will prove the witness con-
clusively to have lied.
9.8
Evidence for a further projection in transitive
verb phrases
The account of the syntax of ECM subjects given in the previous
section provides a way of capturing the intuition (defended in Postal 1974 and
Lasnik and Saito 1991) that the subject of an ECM inﬁnitive raises to become the
object of the ECM verb. The raised subject the witness in (102)–(105) becomes
the highest constituent within the inner VP core in which the ECM verb prove
originates (as in L´opez 2001); and since direct objects are the highest internal
arguments within VP, this amounts to claiming that the inﬁnitive subject is raised
up to become the direct object of the verb prove.
However, some of the assumptions underlying this analysis seem questionable.
For example, the assumption that a lexical verb like prove can have an [epp] feature
which triggers raising of the subject of its inﬁnitive complement to become an
internal argument of prove seems problematic from three standpoints. Firstly,
[epp] is a feature canonically associated with functional categories like T and C,
and not with substantive (lexical) categories like V. Secondly, an internal argument
of a verb is theta-marked by the verb, and yet the raised nominal the witness in
a structure like (105) is not theta-marked by the ECM verb prove (but rather
is a thematic argument of the verb lied). Thirdly, the verb prove starts out as a
predicate with a single internal argument (a clausal complement), but ends up
with two internal arguments – an accusative object and a clausal complement.
This violates the Projection Principle suggested in earlier work by Chomsky
(1981, p. 29) – a principle which requires that the properties of lexical items
(including the kinds of arguments they permit) should remain constant throughout
the derivation.
A further questionable aspect of the ECM analysis outlined in the previous
section is the assumption that adverbs adjoin to intermediate projections. This is
problematic in two respects. Firstly, other grammatical operations like movement
seem ‘blind’ to intermediate projections, so that no intermediate projection can
be a goal for movement (in the sense that no intermediate projection can undergo
movement) or a target for movement (in the sense that no movement operation
adjoins a moved constituent to an intermediate projection): on the contrary, only
a head or a maximal projection can be a goal or target for movement. If move-
ment cannot involve intermediate projections, we might assume that adjunction
cannot either. Moreover, the assumption that adverbs can adjoin to intermedi-
ate projections seems to conﬂict with a principle suggested by Chomsky (1998,
p. 49) to the effect that the selectional properties of a head must be satisﬁed before
any other constituent can be introduced into the projection containing the head.
Since a head selects its arguments, this suggests that a head must merge with its

9.8 Evidence for a further projection in transitive verb phrases
363
arguments before any material can be adjoined to the relevant projection – or in
simpler terms, it suggests that adverbs can adjoin only to maximal projections,
and not (as we have assumed throughout so far in this chapter) to intermediate
projections. But if this is so, an analysis of ECM structures like that in (105) is
untenable, because it presupposes that an adverb like conclusively can be adjoined
to an intermediate V-bar projection of the verb prove.
However, the dilemma we face is that if we suppose that adverbs like conclu-
sively adjoin only to maximal projections like VP, it follows that conclusively
must adjoin to the VP in (105), so that in place of (105) we will have the structure
shown in simpliﬁed form in (106) below:
(106)
vP
DP
The DA 
v'
v
ø+prove
VP
ADV
conclusively
VP
DP
the witness
V'
prove to have lied
The twin problems posed by a structure like (106) are that on the one hand
it wrongly predicts that (107a) below is grammatical, and that on the other it
wrongly predicts that (107b) is ungrammatical:
(107) (a)
∗The DA will prove conclusively the witness to have lied
(b)
The DA will prove the witness conclusively to have lied (= 101a)
How can we get round this problem without abandoning the claim that adverbs
adjoin to maximal (and not intermediate) projections?
A solution advocated in Koizumi (1993, 1995) is to suppose that transitive
verb phrases can be split into three projections rather than (as we have assumed
so far) two, with an additional AgrOP (Object Agreement Projection) positioned
between VP and vP. Work in the same era (dating back to Pollock 1989) similarly
supposed that TP could be split into separate TP and AgrSP (Subject Agree-
ment Projection) constituents: see Radford (1997a, §10.2–§10.9) for discussion
of earlier work on Agr projections in English. However, after surveying the evi-
dence for positing projections of abstract Agr(eement) heads, Chomsky (1995,
p. 377) concludes that ‘It seems reasonable to conjecture that Agr does not exist.’
One objection which he voices to Agr heads is that they cannot be assigned any
interpretation at the semantics interface, and hence will cause the derivation to
crash.
Mindful of Chomsky’s objections, Bowers (2002) proposes an alternative
triple-projection account of the structure of transitive clauses in which located
between vP and VP is a projection of a functional head which encodes an inter-
pretable Transitivity property: he labels this head Tr, and assumes that it projects

364
9 split projections
into a TrP ‘Transitivity Phrase’. Bowers further supposes that Tr carries a set of
(object-agreement) -features, and that it also has an [epp] feature. On this view,
(107b) will be derived as follows. The derivation proceeds in familiar ways until
we reach the stage where the verb prove merges with its TP complement the
witness to have lied to form the VP prove the witness to have lied. The adverb
conclusively is then adjoined to this VP, expanding it into an even larger VP con-
stituent. The resulting VP is then merged with a Tr(ansitivity) head which carries
an interpretable transitivity feature (below shown crudely as [+Trans]), together
with uninterpretable person/number/epp features, so deriving (108) below:
(108)
 Tr'
Tr
[+Trans]
[u-Pers]
[u-Num]
[EPP]
ø
VP
ADV
conclusively
VP
V
prove
 
TP
DP
the witness
[3-Pers]
[Sg-Num]
[u-Case]
T'
to have lied
The Tr head is strong, and so triggers raising of the verb prove from V to Tr.
Tr is also active for agreement and case-marking by virtue of its uninterpretable
person/number features, and so probes and locates the witness as the only active
goal within its domain. Agreement between the two leads to valuation of the
person/number features of Tr and to valuation of the case feature of the witness
as accusative; the uninterpretable features on probe and goal are also deleted
once valued, since both probe and goal are -complete. (An interesting possi-
bility which we will not explore further here is that accusative case is in fact an
uninterpretable transitivity feature which is valued by the transitivity feature on
Tr – in much the same way as nominative case may be an uninterpretable tense
feature which is valued by the interpretable tense feature on T, as we saw in §6.6.)
Since Tr has an [epp] feature, it triggers raising of the witness to spec-TrP (thereby
deleting its [epp] feature), so deriving the structure shown in simpliﬁed form in
(109) below:
(109)
TrP
DP
the witness
Tr'
Tr
prove
VP
ADV
conclusively
VP
DP
the witness 
V'
prove to have lied 

9.8 Evidence for a further projection in transitive verb phrases
365
The resulting TrP is then merged with an agentive light verb (whose external
argument is the agent the DA). The light verb is strong, so triggers raising of
the verb prove from Tr to v, thereby forming the vP shown in simpliﬁed form
below:
(110)
vP
DP
The DA
v'
v
prove
TrP
DP
the witness
Tr'
Tr
prove
VP
conclusively to have lied
The derivation then continues in familiar ways, ultimately deriving (107b) The
DA will prove the witness conclusively to have lied. This revised analysis of ECM
structures is consistent with the twin assumptions that (i) adverbs adjoin only to
maximal projections, and (ii) only functional heads (like Tr, T and C) can have
an [epp] feature.
However, these twin assumptions require us to rethink our earlier vP/VP ana-
lysis of simple transitive clauses. To see why, consider sentence (47a) above,
repeated below:
(111)
Mary jumped the horse perfectly over the last fence
In the light of our revised assumptions, this will now be derived as follows. The
verb jumped merges with its complement over the last fence and its speciﬁer the
horsetoformtheVPthehorsejumpedoverthelastfence.TheVP-adverbperfectly
adjoins to this VP, so forming the even larger VP perfectly the horse jumped
over the last fence. The resulting VP is then merged with a Tr(ansitivity) head
which carries an interpretable transitivity feature, uninterpretable person/number
-features and an interpretable [epp] feature, so forming the structure shown in
simpliﬁed form below:
(112)
 Tr'
Tr
[+Trans]
[u-Pers]
[u-Num]
[EPP] 
ø 
VP
ADV
perfectly
VP
DP
the horse
[3-Pers]
[Sg-Num]
[u-Case]
V'
V
jumped 
PP
over the last fence

366
9 split projections
The Tr head is strong, and consequently triggers raising of the verb jumped from
V to Tr. Agreement between the Tr head and the DP the horse values (and deletes)
the person/number features of Tr and values (as accusative) and deletes the case
feature of the horse. The [epp] feature of Tr triggers movement of the horse to
spec-TrP, so deriving the overt structure shown in skeletal form in (113) below:
(113)
[TrP the horse [Tr jumped] [VP perfectly over the last fence]]
The resulting TrP is then merged with an agentive light verb (whose external
argument is the agent Mary). The light verb is strong, so triggers raising of the
verb jumped from Tr to v, thereby forming the overt structure shown in highly
simpliﬁed form below:
(114)
[vP Mary [v jumped] [TrP the horse [VP perfectly over the last fence]]]
The resulting vP will then be merged with a past-tense T constituent, with Mary
raising to spec-TP. Merging the resulting TP with a null declarative complemen-
tiser will derive the syntactic structure associated with (111) Mary jumped the
horse perfectly over the last fence.
If we follow Bowers (2002) in supposing that passive VPs also contain a TrP
projection, we can offer an interesting account of the position of the italicised
indeﬁnite nominal in passives such as:
(115)
There were several prizes awarded
The (passive) verb award(ed) merges with its complement several prizes to form
the VP awarded several prizes. This VP merges with a Tr head which (by virtue
of being strong) triggers movement of the verb awarded from V to Tr and (by
virtue of its [epp] feature) triggers raising of the complement several prizes to
become the speciﬁer of the transitivity head Tr, so deriving the structure shown
in skeletal form below:
(116)
[TrP several prizes [Tr awarded] [VP [V awarded] several prizes]]
This is then merged with a light verb containing the passive auxiliary be. Since
be is a non-thematic verb which projects no external argument, expletive there
can be merged in spec-vP, so deriving:
(117)
[vP there [v be] [TrP several prizes [Tr awarded] [VP [V awarded] several prizes]]]
The resulting vP is then merged with a ﬁnite T constituent which agrees with both
there and several prizes (assigning nominative case to the latter), triggers raising
of be from v to T, and also triggers raising of there from spec-vP to spec-TP, so
ultimately deriving:
(118)
[TP There [T be] [vP there [v be] [TrP several prizes [Tr awarded] [VP [V
awarded] several prizes]]]]
The resulting TP is then merged with a null declarative complementiser, and be
is spelled out as were in the PF component. (See Chomsky 1999 for an alternative

9.9 Extending the shell analysis to nominals
367
account of sentences like (115) in which the preverbal position of several prizes
is claimed to be the result of a PF movement process.)
While passives like (115) allow the complement to be positioned preverbally,
unaccusatives do not – as we see from the ungrammaticality of:
(119)
∗There have several guests arrived
One way of accounting for this contrast is to suppose (following Bowers 2002) that
passive verb phrases are vP+TrP+VP structures which contain a TrP projection
which can house a preposed complement, whereas unaccusative verb phrases are
simple vP+VP structures which (by virtue of lacking TrP) contain no landing site
for a preposed complement.
9.9
Extending the shell analysis to nominals
In much work over the past three decades (dating back to Chomsky
1970), linguists have argued that there is cross-categorial symmetry between
the structure of verb phrases and noun phrases. If this is so and if VPs have a
complex shell structure comprising (at least) an inner VP core and an outer vP
shell, we should expect to ﬁnd that noun phrases too can be split into an outer
nP shell headed by a light noun and an inner NP core headed by a lexical noun:
the nP shell in turn would be embedded within higher-level nominal projections
which house adjectives, possessors, determiners and other nominal modiﬁers (see
Cinque 1994, Longobardi 1994, 1996, 2001 and Bernstein 2001 for discussion
of nominal superstructure). In this section, we brieﬂy explore the possibility of
extending the shell analysis to noun phrases. Since comparatively little detailed
research along these lines has been done, the remarks made in this section about
nP shells are inevitably somewhat speculative.
To see how a shell analysis of nominals might work, consider the derivation of
so-called process nominals (i.e. nominals describing a process) like that in (120)
below:
(120)
Israel’s withdrawal of troops from the occupied territories
Let’s suppose that internal arguments of nouns are generally introduced by a
preposition, the nature of which is determined by the theta-role carried by the
relevant argument – e.g. the preposition to is typically used to introduce a goal
argument, by an agent argument, from a source argument, with an instrument
argument and so on – and that a theme argument of a noun can optionally be
introduced by the preposition of. (It should be noted, however, that the counterpart
of the English of-phrase may be a nominal morphologically inﬂected for genitive
case in other languages, as is evident from Cornilescu’s 2001 study of Romanian,
and this raises the question of whether of in this type of use is a marker of inherent
genitive case in English: we set this question aside here.) In (120), the DP the

368
9 split projections
occupied territories is a source argument and so is introduced (and assigned
accusative case) by the preposition from, and the expression troops (which is a
QP headed by a null quantiﬁer ø) is a theme argument which can correspondingly
be introduced (and assigned accusative case by) the preposition of. Merging the
noun withdrawal with its source complement from the occupied territories forms
the N-bar withdrawal from the occupied territories; this N-bar is in turn merged
with the theme complement of ø troops to form the NP shown below:
(121)
NP
PP
of ø troops
N'
N
withdrawal
PP
from the occupied territories
Let us suppose that the resulting NP is then merged with a null light noun, which
is causative in sense and projects an agent external argument Israel (which is a
DP headed by a null determiner), and (being afﬁxal) triggers raising of the noun
withdrawal to adjoin to the light noun, so deriving the nP structure (122) below:
(122)
nP
DP
ø Israel
n'
n
ø+withdrawal
NP
PP
of ø troops  
N'
N
withdrawal
PP
from the occupied territories
However, the derivation is not yet terminated – for two reasons. Firstly, under
the DP hypothesis, nominal arguments are DPs headed by an (overt or null)
determiner, so that the nP in (122) has to be merged with an appropriate kind
of D constituent; and secondly, the DP ø Israel in (122) has an unvalued case
feature which needs to be valued and deleted. Given that case is assigned to a goal
by a c-commanding probe, an interesting possibility to explore at this juncture
is that it is the head D of DP which assigns case to the nominal ø Israel. More
speciﬁcally, let’s suppose that the nP in (122) is merged with a null -complete
determiner which has the property that it assigns structural genitive case to a goal
with an unvalued case feature and matching -features, in accordance with (123)
below:
(123)
Genitive Case Assignment
A null -complete determiner probe assigns genitive case to a matching
case-unvalued goal

9.9 Extending the shell analysis to nominals
369
Let’s also suppose that the genitive case assigned by D to a noun expression is
spelled out in the PF component as the genitive sufﬁx ’s. If none of the constituents
in (123) undergo any further movement operations, merger of the relevant null
(genitive-case-assigning)determinerwiththenPin(122)willderivetheDPshown
in simpliﬁed form in (124) below:
(124)
DP
D
ø
nP
DP
ø Israel’s
n'
n
ø+withdrawal
NP
of troops withdrawal from the occupied territories
However, a potential problem for the analysis in (124) is posed by nominals
such as:
(125)
Israel’s unexpected withdrawal of troops from the occupied territories
If we suppose that an adjective like unexpected occupies some position above nP
(perhaps serving as the speciﬁer of a functional head F which has an adjectival
speciﬁer, as in Cinque 1994), we have to account for how the ‘subject’ of the
nominal (the DP Israel’s) comes to be positioned in front of the adjective unex-
pected. The answer suggested by Abney (1987) is that the subjects of nominals
move into spec-DP. In terms of the framework adopted here, this means that D
in (124) carries an [epp] feature (in addition to a complete set of – initially unval-
ued – -features), and hence triggers movement of the genitive DP Israel’s from
spec-nP to spec-DP in the manner shown by the arrow in (126) below (with traces
shown as t/t):
(126)
DP
DP
ø Israel’s
D'
D
ø
FP
A
unexpected
F'
F
ø
nP
t
n'
n
ø+withdrawal
NP
of troops t from the
occupied territories
We can then account for the relevant word-order facts in a straightforward fashion.
The claim that unexpected occupies the speciﬁer (and not the head) position within
FP is borne out by the possibility of substituting it by a phrasal constituent like

370
9 split projections
almost entirely unexpected – the signiﬁcance of this being that phrases can only
be speciﬁers, not heads. (Fu, Roeper and Borer 2001 present an alternative anal-
ysis of process nominals under which they contain an internal verb projection –
hence VP rather than NP. Their evidence for positing a VP comes from the
possibility of using a VP adverb like suddenly and the VP proform do so in nom-
inals like Israel’s withdrawal of troops suddenly from the occupied territories
before being asked to do so. If adverbs adjoin to maximal projections and sud-
denly adjoins to VP, this raises the possibility that transitive nominals contain a
nominal counterpart of the TrP/Transitivity Phrase projection which appears in
transitive verb phrases, and that the head Tr constituent of TrP case-marks the
complementoftroupsandattractsittomovetospec-TrP,withthenounwithdrawal
raising from the head V position of VP, through the head Tr position of TrP into
the head v position of vP. However, we will not pursue this possibility any further
here.)
The account of genitive case-marking outlined above can be extended to pos-
sessive constructions such as (127) below (intended to mean much the same as
‘the picture of Mary which is in our possession’):
(127)
our picture of Mary
Let’s suppose that the noun picture merges with its theme complement of ø
Mary (where Mary is a DP headed by a null determiner) to form the NP picture
of ø Mary. Let’s further suppose (following Carstens 2001) that the resulting NP
merges with a null light noun which has the function of marking possession, and
that this light noun projects as its external argument the pronoun we to which it
assigns the -role of possessor (its NP complement being in turn assigned the
-role of possessee). Given the assumption that light nouns are afﬁxal, the noun
picture will raise from N to adjoin to the light noun, so deriving:
(128)
nP
PRN
WE
n'
n
ø+picture
NP
N
picture 
DP
of ø Mary
The resulting nP will then be merged with a null -complete determiner which
assigns genitive case to the pronoun we in accordance with (123), so that it will
ultimately be spelled out as our at PF. If the relevant determiner also carries an
[epp] feature, it will trigger movement of the genitive possessor our from spec-nP
to spec-DP, so deriving the structure shown in simpliﬁed form below:

9.9 Extending the shell analysis to nominals
371
(129)
DP
PRN
our
D'
D
ø
nP
PRN
our
n'
picture of ø Mary
IfadjectivesoccupyspeciﬁerpositionwithinafunctionalprojectionFPpositioned
between D and nP (as in (126) above), such an analysis will correctly predict that
our precedes the adjective latest in our latest picture of Mary.
The analysis presented above follows Abney (1987) in positing that genitive
nominals move to spec-DP in English. However, there is some evidence that (in
some other languages, at least) the true landing-site of preposed possessives may
be a position beneath DP. In this connection, consider the following possessive
nominal in Italian:
(130)
la loro bellissima casa
the their beautiful house
‘their beautiful house’
Here, the possessive pronoun loro ‘their’ occupies a position which is lower than
that of the determiner la ‘the’ but higher than that of the attributive adjective
bellissima ‘beautiful’. So where is it positioned? We noted in §5.9 that work on
the syntax of nominals has suggested that they contain a NumP ‘Number Phrase’
projection positioned immediately below DP. This being so, one possibility is to
follow Valois (1991), Cinque (1994) and Carstens (2000, 2001) in positing that
possessives in Italian (and perhaps genitive nominals in languages like English)
move to spec-NumP. If so, and if we assume (as above) that adjectives occupy
the speciﬁer position within a functional projection FP, a nominal like our lat-
est picture of Mary will have the structure shown in simpliﬁed form in (131)
below:
(131)
DP
D
ø 
NumP
PRN
our
Num'
Num
ø
FP
A
latest
F'
F
ø
nP
our picture of Mary

372
9 split projections
On the revised analysis in (131), it would be the head Num constituent of NumP
which agrees with and assigns genitive case to the possessor we and attracts it
to move from the speciﬁer position within nP to the speciﬁer position within
NumP.
The agreement-based analysis of structural genitive case assignment outlined
here is not without posing problems, however. Not the least of these is that if
the head Num constituent of NumP is the locus of the agreement properties of
nominals, and if Num agrees with the possessor in possessive structures like (131),
we should expect the overall DP to be plural (because the possessor our is plural) –
and yet it is singular, as we see from the singular agreement required on the bold-
printed verb in sentences like:
(132)
Our latest picture of Mary is/∗are on the mantelpiece
Moreover, in Italian structures like (130), the determiner la ‘the’ and the adjec-
tive bellissima ‘beautiful’ are feminine singular and hence clearly agree with the
feminine singular noun casa ‘house’ and not with the third-person-plural posses-
sor loro ‘their’. However, agreement facts are different in some other languages:
for example, Dixon (2000) notes that the gender properties of a DP in certain
types of possessive structure in Jarawara are determined by the possessor. We
shall not delve into these issues here, but simply note the problems posed by an
agreement-based analysis of genitive case-marking.
9.10
Summary
We began this chapter in §9.2 by outlining the claim made by Luigi
Rizzi that in clauses which contain preposed focus/topic expressions, CP splits
into a number of separate projections, viz. a Force Phrase/ForceP, a Topic
Phrase/TopP and a Focus Phrase/FocP (with a Focus head being strong in ﬁnite
clauses in English, but not a Topic or Force head). We pointed out that the
split CP analysis of clauses raises interesting questions about the landing site
of preposed wh-expressions; and we suggested that relative and exclamative wh-
expressions move to the speciﬁer position within the Force Phrase, but that inter-
rogative wh-expressions move to the speciﬁer position within the Focus Phrase in
main-clause questions (though they move to the speciﬁer position within the
Force Phrase in complement-clause questions). In §9.3 we went on to examine
Rizzi’s claim that split CP structures also contain a Finiteness Phrase/FinP. We
noted his suggestion that clauses containing both a topicalised and a focalised
constituent are ForceP/TopP/FocP/FinP structures; clauses containing only a
topicalised(butnofocalised)constituentareForceP/TopP/FinPstructures;clauses
containing a focalised (but no topicalised) constituent are ForceP/FocP/FinP

9.10 Summary
373
structures; and clauses which contain neither a focalised nor a topicalised con-
stituent are simple CPs (with the relevant force and ﬁniteness features being
syncretised on a single C head). In §9.4 we went on to outline work by Chomsky,
Larson and Hale suggesting that VPs can be split into two distinct projections –
an inner VP core headed by a lexical verb and an outer vP shell headed by an
afﬁxal light verb. In particular, we looked at the syntax of ergative verbs like
roll which are used both intransitively in structures like The ball rolled down
the hill and transitively in structures like They rolled the ball down the hill. We
argued that the verb phrase in the transitive structures comprises an inner VP
core contained within an outer vP shell headed by a causative light verb with an
agent subject, and that the light verb triggers raising of the verb roll from V
to v. We argued that data relating to the distribution of various types of adverb
lend support to the shell analysis, and we extended the shell analysis to transitive
prepositional structures such as load the cart with hay. In §9.5, we presented a VP
shell analysis for resultatives like turn the litmus-paper red, and double-object
structures like get the teacher a present. We went on to argue that object-control
structures like What decided you to take syntax? can likewise be analysed in
terms of a shell structure in which you originates as the subject of decide and
what as the subject of a causative light verb; and we suggested that this ana-
lysis can be extended to other object-control predicates like persuade. In §9.6
we outlined Chomsky’s vP shell analysis of simple transitive structures like John
read the book, and showed how such an analysis could be extended to unergatives
if these are analysed as transitive predicates which undergo object incorpora-
tion. We went on to outline a shell analysis of two-place unaccusative predicates,
showing how this would account for the word order found in Belfast English
imperatives such as Go you to school! We also saw how the shell analysis can
handle raising structures such as They seem to me to be ﬁne, if the experiencer
to me is analysed as occupying spec-VP, and if the verb seem raises from V to
v and so comes to be positioned in front of to me. We concluded that intran-
sitive verb phrases (like their transitive counterparts) have a shell structure in
which the verb raises from V to v, and we showed that this would enable us to
provide an account of locative inversion structures like Down the hill will roll
the ball. In §9.7 we outlined Chomsky’s account of accusative case-marking,
under which accusative case is assigned to a case-unvalued goal by a -complete
transitive light-verb (i.e. one which has an external argument). We suggested
a way of extending this analysis to ECM inﬁnitive structures like The DA will
prove the witness conclusively to have lied, arguing that the inﬁnitive subject (the
witness) raises to become the speciﬁer of the VP headed by prove, and that the
verb prove in turn raises to adjoin to a light verb which occupies the head v
position of vP. We noted that this analysis amounts to claiming that the subject
the witness of the inﬁnitive complement raises up to become the object of the
transitive verb prove. However, in §9.8 we argued that the analysis of ECM sub-
jects proposed in §9.7 is problematic in certain respects: ﬁrstly, it assumes that

374
9 split projections
the ECM subject is raised to become an internal argument of the verb prove,
even though it is not theta-marked by prove; secondly, it assumes that the lexi-
cal verb prove can have an [epp] feature, when this is canonically a property of
functional categories like T and C; and thirdly, it assumes that adverbs like con-
clusively can adjoin to intermediate projections, even though other grammatical
operations (like movement) cannot target intermediate projections. We presented
Bowers’s alternative analysis under which transitive verb phrases incorporate a
TrP/Transitivity Phrase and thus have a tripartite vP+TrP+VP structure, with
accusative objects (and ECM subjects) being case-marked via agreement with
Tr and raising to spec-TrP, and the verb raising from V through Tr into v: we
showed that such an analysis would allow us to suppose that adverbs only adjoin
to maximal projections, and that only functional heads can have an [epp] fea-
ture. We went on to show that if passive clauses also contain a TrP projection,
we can provide a principled account of the preverbal position of passive comple-
ments in expletive structures like ‘There were several prizes awarded.’ In §9.9, we
looked at ways in which the shell analysis could be extended to nominals, propos-
ing an account of genitive case-marking in which a null -complete determiner
assigns genitive case to a case-unvalued goal which it c-commands: however,
we also noted that comparative evidence from Italian gives us reason to suppose
that Num is the head which case-marks and attracts genitive expressions; and
we highlighted empirical problems posed by the assumption that genitive case
assignment involves agreement between a functional head (like D or Num) and a
possessor.
Workbook section
Exercise 9.1
Assuming the grammaticality judgments given below (which are mine and which may be slightly
different from those of some speakers), discuss how the relevant sentences could be analysed
within the split CP framework. Where clauses are bracketed, concern yourself only with the
structure of the bracketed material.
1
He admitted [that students only rarely enjoy syntax]
2
He admitted [that only rarely do students enjoy syntax]
3
∗He admitted [that only rarely students enjoy syntax]
4
He admitted [that syntax, students only rarely enjoy]
5
∗He admitted [syntax, students only rarely enjoy]
6
∗He admitted [that syntax do students only rarely enjoy]
7
He admitted [that syntax, only rarely do students enjoy]
8
∗He admitted [that syntax do only rarely students enjoy]
9
∗He admitted [that only rarely do syntax, students enjoy]
10
∗He admitted [that only rarely, syntax do students enjoy]

Workbook section
375
11
∗He admitted [that only rarely, syntax, students enjoy]
12
What kind of courses do students only rarely enjoy?
13
∗What kind of courses do only rarely students enjoy?
14
Syntax is something [which only rarely do students enjoy]
15
What’s the reason [why syntax, students only rarely enjoy?]
16
I don’t understand [why only rarely do students enjoy syntax]
Consider the implications for your analysis of assuming that Fin can be syncretised with any head
immediately above it (whether a Force head, a Focus head or a Topic head) if at least one of them
is null, if both Fin and the other head have the same strength (e.g. both are weak, or both are
strong), and if Fin projects no speciﬁer of its own.
Helpful hints
To simplify discussion, concern yourself only with the structure of the left periphery of the
relevant clauses – i.e. the Force/Topic/Focus/Finiteness projections above the TP layer. Assume
that you have reached a stage of derivation at which a TP has been formed whose head is a null
third-person-plural present-tense afﬁx (Tns), which merges with the verbal projection enjoy
syntax to form the T-bar Tns enjoy syntax, and that the adverbial adjunct only rarely is then
adjoined to this T-bar to expand it into the larger T-bar only rarely Tns enjoy syntax, which is
then merged with its subject students to form the TP students only rarely Tns enjoy syntax. In
accordance with the DP hypothesis, assume that both syntax and students are DPs headed by
a null determiner. In relation to 15–16, assume that why originates in the position where it
ends up.
Model answer for sentence 1
Rizzi posits that CP splits into multiple projections in clauses which contain a preposed topic or
focus constituent. Although only rarely seems to function as a preposed focused expression and
syntax as a preposed topic in the relevant examples above, neither the main admitted clause nor
the complement enjoy clause contains a preposed topic/focus constituent in 1; hence, neither
contains a FocP or TopP projection. Since Rizzi posits that force and ﬁniteness features are
syncretised on a single head (traditionally labelled C) in clauses which do not involve
focalisation/topicalisation, both clauses in 1 will be CPs, the main clause headed by a null
complementiser, and the complement clause headed by that. However, since our concern here is
with the structure of the bracketed that clause which serves as the complement of the verb
admitted, we concentrate on how this is derived.
Assume (as in the helpful hints) that we have reached a stage of derivation where we have
formed the TP ø students only rarely Tns enjoy ø syntax (where ø is a null determiner, and Tns is a
third-person-plural present-tense afﬁx). Because there is no intervening topic or focus projection,
the relevant force and ﬁniteness features are here syncretised onto a single C/complementiser head
(which is therefore marked as being both declarative and ﬁnite), so forming the structure shown in
highly simpliﬁed form in (i) below:
(i)
[CP [C thatDEC, FIN] [TP ø students only rarely [T Tns] enjoy syntax]]

376
9 split projections
The (third-person-plural present-tense) Tns afﬁx will subsequently be lowered onto the adjacent
verb enjoy in the PF component, with the result that this is ultimately spelled out as the
third-person-plural present-tense form enjoy. The complementiser introducing the clause in (i) can
be spelled out either as that by virtue of carrying a declarative-force feature (in accordance with
(26i) in the main text), or can be given a null spellout as ø by virtue of carrying a ﬁniteness
feature (in accordance with (26ii) in the main text). We therefore correctly predict that alongside
sentence 1, we can also have a sentence like (ii) below, in which the bracketed complement clause
contains a null complementiser:
(ii)
He admitted [ø students only rarely enjoy syntax]
Exercise 9.2
Discuss how the syntax of the following sentences could be analysed within the VP shell
framework, giving arguments in support of your analysis:
1
They will increase the price to 30 dollars
2
Shall we sit him in the chair?
3
Will you climb me up there? (Child English)
4
This might make him angry
5
He will explain the problem fully to me
6
You must show her that she can trust you
7
Tourists may smuggle drugs illegally into the country
8
She will remind him to close the windows
9
The horse was jumped perfectly over the fence
10
You could ask him politely to keep quiet
11
The prosecution must prove to the jury beyond reasonable doubt that the defendant is
guilty
12
Some evidence does appear to have emerged of corruption
13
The police were reported by the press to have arrested a suspect
14
There are said to be several people suspected of corruption
15
Several politicians are widely thought to be suspected of corruption
16
There are said to have been several people detained
17
There are several people said to have been detained
18
There does seem to me to remain some unrest in Utopia
19
I believe there sincerely to remain some unrest in Utopia
20
Can you prove him to us to have defrauded the company?
Comment in particular on the syntax of the italicised constituents, saying what position each one
occupies, what case it receives and how. In addition, discuss how the shell analysis of nominals
brieﬂy sketched in §9.9 could handle the syntax of the following nominals:
21
the return of the president from Ohio
22
the president’s return from Ohio
23
the unwillingness of the chairman to admit responsibility

Workbook section
377
24
the chairman’s unwillingness to admit responsibility
25
the decision by the chairman to admit responsibility
26
the enemy’s surrender of the city to the allies
27
the surrender of the city to the allies by the enemy
28
the city’s surrender to the allies by the enemy
29
the judge’s instruction to the jury to acquit the defendant
30
the withdrawal of troops from the occupied territories by the Israelis
In relation to the merger of verbs and nouns with their internal arguments, assume that internal
arguments are canonically projected within VP/NP in the hierarchical order given by the Thematic
Hierarchy below:
(i)
theme > other internal arguments > agent by-phrase argument > clausal argument
where > = ‘is projected higher up in the VP/NP structure than’. This means that the ﬁrst
internal argument to be merged with a verb (as its complement) will be the lowest one on the
hierarchy, and the second to be merged (as its speciﬁer) will be the second lowest – and
so on.
Helpful hints
In 11, take beyond reasonable doubt to be a PP which functions as an adjunct, and don’t concern
yourself with its internal structure. (In relation to this sentence and others, you might want to
consider the issue of whether the relevant structures provide us with evidence about whether
adjuncts adjoin to intermediate or maximal projections.) In 11 and 12, take the that-clause to be a
CP but don’t concern yourself with its internal structure. In 21 and 24, assume that a theme
argument (like the president in 21 and 22) and an experiencer argument (like the chairman in 23
and 24) can be projected into the syntax either as a PP introduced (and assigned accusative case)
by the transitive preposition of, or as a DP containing an unvalued case feature. In 23, 24, 25 and
29, take the inﬁnitival clause to admit responsibility/to acquit the defendant to be a CP with a null
complementiser and a null PRO subject, but don’t concern yourself with the internal structure of
the relevant CP. In structures like 27, 28 and 30, assume that where a noun has three internal
arguments, two of them serve as speciﬁers to the same head (the one which is higher on the
thematic hierarchy being positioned above the other), so that heads may have multiple speciﬁers
(as suggested by Chomsky 1995).
Model answer for sentence 1
The verb increase can be used not only as a transitive verb in sentences such as 1 above, but also
as an intransitive verb in sentences such as:
(ii)
The price will increase to 30 dollars
Accordingly, we can take increase to be an ergative predicate which has much the same syntax as
the verb roll discussed in the main text. This would mean that 1 is derived as follows. The verb
increase merges with its PP complement to 30 dollars to form the V-bar increase to 30 dollars;
this V-bar in turn merges with the DP the price to form the VP (iii) below:

378
9 split projections
(iii)
VP
DP
the price
V'
V
increase
PP
to 30 dollars
In accordance with the Thematic Hierarchy in (i), the theme argument the price in (iii) occupies
a higher position within the structure than the goal argument to 30 dollars. On Chomsky’s
account of ergative structures, the VP in (iii) subsequently merges with a causative light verb ø
with an external agent argument (= they). The light verb is -complete and hence serves as
a probe, identifying the price as an active goal (by virtue of its unvalued case feature), and
assigning it accusative case in accordance with (92) in the main text. Because the light verb is
afﬁxal, the verb increase adjoins to it, so that at the end of the vP cycle we have the structure
shown below:
(iv)
vP
PRN
They
v'
v
ø+increase 
VP
DP
the price
V'
V
increase
PP
to 30 dollars
The vP in (iv) is then merged with a T constituent containing will, and this assigns nominative
case to the subject they (since the two match in respect of their -features, albeit those of
will are invisible). Since T has an [epp] feature, it triggers raising of the subject they to spec-TP.
Merging the resulting TP with a null declarative C forms the CP shown in simpliﬁed form
below:
(v)
[CP [C ø] [TP they [T will] [vP they [v ø + increase] [VP the price [V increase]
to 30 dollars]]]]
An interesting question which is posed by the analysis sketched here is how we account for the
position of the adverb gradually in a sentence such as:
(vi)
They will increase the price gradually to 30 dollars
An analysis along the lines of (iv) requires us to suppose that gradually is a V-bar adjunct which
extends the V-bar increase to 30 dollars to the even larger V-bar gradually increase to 30 dollars.
However, if we suppose that adjunction (like movement) cannot target intermediate projections
and that adverbs canonically adjoin to maximal projections, we will then require a more complex

Workbook section
379
analysis (like that proposed in Bowers 2002) on which transitive clauses have a tripartite
vP+TrP+VP structure. On this alternative view, the VP in (iii) will merge with a Tr(ansitivity)
head which is strong and so triggers movement of the verb increase from V to Tr. The Tr head
agrees with and assigns accusative case to the DP the price, and its [epp] feature triggers raising of
the price to spec-TrP, so deriving the structure shown in simpliﬁed form below:
(vii)
TrP
DP
the price
Tr'
v
ø+increase
VP
DP
the price
V'
V
increase 
PP
to 30 dollars
The resulting TrP is then merged with an agentive light verb whose subject is they and which (by
virtue of being strong) triggers raising of the verb increase from Tr to v, so deriving the structure
shown in skeletal form below:
(viii)
[vP they [v increase] [TrP the price [Tr increase] [VP the price [V increase] to 30 dollars]]]
The derivation will then proceed along the lines sketched earlier. Under the alternative TrP
analysis sketched here, we could then say that the adverb gradually in (vi) is a VP-adjunct, and
hence is adjoined to the VP in (vii) above.
Model answer for nominal 21
Return is an unaccusative noun with two arguments. In accordance with the Thematic Hierarchy
(i), the source argument from Ohio (being lower on the hierarchy than the theme argument the
president) is the ﬁrst argument to merge with the noun return, forming the N-bar return from
Ohio. The resulting N-bar is then merged with the theme argument the president. In the text and
the helpful hints, we suggested that a theme argument of a noun can (optionally) be introduced by
the preposition of. If this happens here, the theme argument will be projected into the syntax as
the PP of the president, the case feature of the president being valued as accusative by the
transitive preposition of. Merging of the president with the N-bar from Ohio will derive the NP
shown in simpliﬁed form below:
(ix)
NP
PP
of the president
N'
N
return 
PP
from Ohio

380
9 split projections
The resulting NP is then merged as the complement of a strong null light noun which triggers
raising of the noun return from N to n. Merging the resulting nP with the determiner the will form
the DP shown below:
(x)
DP
D
the
nP
n
ø+return
NP
PP
of the president
N'
N
return 
 PP
from Ohio
On the assumption that adjectives occupy a position between D and nP, such an analysis correctly
predicts the position of the adjective unexpected in nominals such as:
(xi)
the unexpected return of the president from Ohio

10
Phases
10.1
Overview
In this chapter, we look at recent work by Chomsky suggesting that
syntactic structure is built up in phases (with phases including CP and transitive
vP). At the end of each phase, part of the syntactic structure already formed
undergoes transfer to the phonological and semantic components, with the result
that the relevant part of the structure is inaccessible to further syntactic operations
from that point on. (An important point of detail to note is that since we are
outlining Chomsky’s ideas on phases here, we shall follow his assumptions about
the structure of verb phrases and expletive structures.)
10.2
Phases
In §8.5, we outlined Chomsky’s claim in recent work that all syntactic
operations involve a relation between a probe P and a local goal G which is
sufﬁciently ‘close’ to the probe (or, in the case of multiple agreement, a relation
between a probe and more than one local goal). We noted Chomsky’s (2001, p. 13)
remark that ‘the P, G relation must be local’ in order ‘to minimise search’, because
the Language Faculty can only hold a limited amount of structure in its ‘active
memory’ (Chomsky 1999, p. 9). Accordingly, syntactic structures are built up one
phase at a time. Chomsky suggests (1999, p. 9) that phases are ‘propositional’ in
nature, and include CP and transitive vP (more speciﬁcally, vP with an external
argument, which he denotes as v∗P). His rationale for taking CP and v∗P as phases
is that CP represents a complete clausal complex (including a speciﬁcation of
force), and v∗P represents a complete thematic (argument structure) complex
(including an external argument).
Once all the operations which apply within a given phase have been completed,
the domain of the phase (i.e. the complement of its head) becomes impenetrable
to further syntactic operations. As we have already seen, Chomsky refers to this
condition as the Phase Impenetrability Condition/PIC – and we can state it
informally as follows (cf. Chomsky 2001, p. 5, ex. 6)
381

382
10 phases
(1)
Phase Impenetrability Condition/PIC
The c-command domain of a phase head is impenetrable to an external
probe (i.e. a goal which is c-commanded by the head of a phase is
impenetrable to any probe c-commanding the phase)
The reason why the domain of the phase head is impenetrable to an external probe
(according to Chomsky 2001, p. 5) is that once a complete phase has been formed,
the domain of the phase undergoes a transfer operation by which the relevant
(domain) structure is simultaneously sent to the phonological component to be
assigned an appropriate phonetic representation, and to the semantic component
to be assigned an appropriate semantic representation – and from that point on,
the relevant domain is no longer accessible to the syntax. So, for example, once a
completeCPphasehasbeenformed,theTPwhichisthedomain(i.e.complement)
of the phase head C will be sent to the phonological and semantic components for
processing. As a result, TP is no longer visible in the syntax, and hence neither
TP itself nor any constituent of TP can subsequently serve as a goal for a higher
probe of any kind: i.e. no probe c-commanding CP can enter into a relation with
TP or any constituent of TP.
In order to make our discussion more concrete, consider the derivation of the
following sentence:
(2)
Will Ruritania withdraw troops from Utopia?
Given Chomsky’s vP+VP analysis of transitive verb phrases (which we shall
adopt throughout here, setting aside Bowers’s vP+TrP+VP analysis outlined in
§9.8), (2) will be derived as follows. The verb withdraw merges with its comple-
ment from Utopia (with Utopia being a DP headed by a null determiner, given
the DP hypothesis) and its speciﬁer troops (which is a QP headed by a null parti-
tive quantiﬁer ø) to form the VP ø troops withdraw from ø Utopia. This is then
merged with a causative light verb whose external agent argument is Ruritania
(another DP headed by a null determiner): since the light verb is afﬁxal, it triggers
movement of the verb withdraw from its original (italicised) position in V to v,
so deriving (3) below:
(3)
vP
DP
ø Ruritania 
v' 
v
ø+withdraw
VP
QP
ø  troops
V' 
V
withdraw
PP
from ø Utopia

10.2 Phases
383
The light verb will agree with (and assign accusative case to) the QP ø troops.
Since a transitive vP (i.e. a vP with an external argument) is a phase, and since
the vP in (3) is transitive and has the external argument ø Ruritania, the VP
constituent (by virtue of being the domain/complement of the light verb which
is the head of the phase) will undergo transfer to the phonological and semantic
components at this point, and thereafter cease to be accessible to further syntactic
operations. Let’s suppose that as part of the transfer operation, traces are marked
as having a null spellout in the phonological component (this being indicated
by strikethrough), and that uninterpretable features which have been deleted by
operationofagreementareremovedfromthestructurehandedovertothesemantic
component,butnotfromthestructurehandedovertothephonologicalcomponent.
Consequently, the phonological component will not spell out the trace of the verb
withdraw in V, and only the constituents ø troops and from Utopia will be given
an overt phonetic spellout.
The syntactic computation then proceeds once more, with [T will] being
merged with the vP in (3) to form the T-bar shown below (outline font being
used to indicate those parts of the structure which received an overt or null
spellout in the phonological component after the VP underwent transfer at
the end of the vP phase, and strikethrough marking traces receiving a null
spellout):
(4)
T'
T
Will
vP
DP
ø Ruritania
v'
v
ø+withdraw
VP
Since [T will] has uninterpretable (and unvalued) person/number features, it is
an active probe which searches for a local goal to value and delete its unvalued
features. Neither ø troops nor ø Utopia are accessible to the probe will (since both
are contained within a VP which has already been transferred to the phonological
and semantic components); however, the DP ø Ruritania is accessible to will
and is syntactically active by virtue of its uninterpretable case feature. Hence,
will agrees (invisibly) with and assigns (invisible) nominative case to the DP ø
Ruritania. The auxiliary [T will] also has an [epp] feature requiring movement of
the closest matching goal to spec-TP; accordingly, the DP ø Ruritania is moved
from its original (italicised) position in spec-vP to become the speciﬁer of will,
so deriving the structure:

384
10 phases
(5)
TP
DP
ø Ruritania
T'
T
will
vP
DP
ø Ruritania
v'
v
ø+withdraw
VP
The resulting TP is merged with a null interrogative C. Let’s suppose (as we did in
§6.8) that yes–no questions contain a null yes–no question operator in spec-CP
(e.g. a null counterpart of the adverb whether), and that C is strong/afﬁxal and
attracts will to move from its original (italicised) position in T to adjoin to the
null C heading CP. If so, at the end of the CP cycle we will have the structure (6)
below:
(6)
ADV
whether
C'
C
ø+will 
TP
DP
ø Ruritania
T'
T
will
vP
DP
ø Ruritania
v'
v
ø+withdraw
CP
VP
Since CP is a phase and the domain of the head of a phase is spelled out at the end
of a phase, TP undergoes transfer to the phonological and semantic components
at this point. The transfer operation results in the italicised traces of will and ø
Ruritania receiving a null spellout in the phonological component.
However, we are now left with something of a problem. We have come to the
end of the derivation, but so far neither C nor the null yes–no question operator
which serves as its speciﬁer have been ‘handed over’ to the phonological and
semantic components for further processing. In order to ensure that this happens,
let’s make the additional assumption in (7ii) below about transfer:
(7)
Transfer
(i) At the end of each phase, the domain (i.e. complement of the phase head) undergoes
transfer
(ii) At the end of the overall derivation, all remaining constituents undergo transfer

10.3 Intransitive and defective clauses
385
In the case of (6), the two remaining constituents which have not yet undergone
transfer are those at the edge of CP (the edge of a projection comprising its head
and any speciﬁers/adjuncts it has) – i.e. the C-constituent containing will and the
null yes–no question operator in spec-CP. Accordingly, these undergo transfer to
the phonological/semantic components at the end of the overall derivation.
10.3
Intransitive and defective clauses
Our illustrative account of phases in the previous section involved a
structure containing a transitive vP phase and a CP phase. However, since neither
intransitive clauses (i.e. those containing a vP with no external argument) nor
defective clauses (i.e. clauses which are TPs lacking a CP projection) are phases,
things work differently in such structures – as we can illustrate in relation to the
derivation of:
(8)
There are thought by some to remain numerous problems in Utopia
The unaccusative verb remain merges with its locative complement in ø Utopia
(Utopia being a DP headed by a null determiner) to form the V-bar remain
in ø Utopia, and this V-bar is in turn merged with its theme argument (the
quantiﬁer phrase numerous problems) to form the VP numerous problems remain
in ø Utopia. This VP in turn is merged with a null light verb which, being afﬁxal,
triggers movement of the verb remain from its italicised position in V to adjoin
to the light verb, so deriving:
(9)
vP
v
ø+remain
VP
QP
numerous problems
V'
V
remain
PP
in ø Utopia
Although a transitive vP is a phase (and requires its domain to be spelled out),
the vP in (9) is intransitive because it has no external argument (i.e. vP has no
speciﬁer). Hence, its VP complement does not undergo transfer at this point, and
the syntactic derivation proceeds by merging the resulting vP with inﬁnitival to. If
(as Chomsky 2001, fn. 56 argues) inﬁnitival to has an [epp] feature and a person
feature in defective clauses, it follows that to must project a speciﬁer with person
properties. In keeping with Chomsky’s own assumptions about expletive there
being directly generated in spec-TP and preference of Merge over Move, let’s
suppose that this requirement is satisﬁed by merging expletive there in spec-TP,
so deriving:

386
10 phases
(10)
TP
PRN
there
T'
T
to
vP
v
ø+remain
VP
QP
numerous problems
V'
V
remain
PP
in ø Utopia
The TP in (10) is then merged as the complement of the passive participle thought,
forming a V-bar constituent which is in turn merged with the agent by-phrase
by some to form a VP. Given our assumption in the previous chapter that all verb
phrases have a complex shell structure, the resulting VP will in turn be merged
as the complement of a light verb (arguably one which is participial in nature,
so accounting for why the verb is eventually spelled out in the passive-participle
form thought, and why Chomsky 1999 uses the label PRT to denote the relevant
participial head): since light verbs are afﬁxal in nature, this means that the verb
thought will raise to adjoin to the light verb. Merging the resulting vP with the
passive auxiliary be will derive the T-bar constituent shown below:
(11)
T'
T
be
vP
v
ø+thought
VP
PP
by some
V'
V
thought
TP
PRN
there
T'
T
to
vP
v
ø+remain
VP
QP
numerous
problems 
V'
V
remain
PP
in ø Utopia
At this point, be is an active probe by virtue of its uninterpretable (and unval-
ued) -features, and so it searches for an accessible active goal to value its per-
son/number features. There are two such goals within the structure in (11), namely
the third-person-expletive pronoun there (active by virtue of its uninterpretable

10.3 Intransitive and defective clauses
387
person feature) and the third-person-plural QP numerous problems (active by
virtue of its uninterpretable and unvalued case feature). Both there and numerous
problems are accessible goals for be since neither is contained within a structure
which has undergone transfer. Chomsky (2001) suggests that a probe P locates
every active matching goal G within its search space (i.e. within that part of the
syntactic structure which is accessible to the probe by virtue of not yet having
undergone transfer), and that where there is more than one such goal, the probe
simultaneously agrees with all the relevant goals at the same time: cf. his (2001,
p.13) remark that ‘P can ﬁnd any matching goal in the phase PH that it heads,
simultaneously deleting uninterpretable features.’ (We can assume that the pro-
noun some is not active at this point, because it falls within the domain of a closer
probe by which will already have valued its case feature as accusative.) What this
means is that since be has uninterpretable person and number features, it will
locate every active goal within its search space which has a person and/or number
feature. Since there has a third-person feature which is uninterpretable (making
it active), there is one such goal; likewise, numerous problems is another active
goal, since it has third-person and plural-number features and is active by virtue
of its uninterpretable case feature. Accordingly, be simultaneously agrees in per-
son with there and numerous problems, and in number with numerous problems,
so that be is assigned the values [third-person, plural-number]. Since numerous
problems is -complete, it can delete the uninterpretable person/number features
of be. Conversely, be (by virtue of being ﬁnite) can value the unvalued case fea-
ture of numerous problems as nominative, and (because be is also -complete)
can delete the relevant case feature (and also the person feature of there). The
[epp] feature of T is deleted by moving the closest active goal (i.e. there) from its
original position as the speciﬁer of to (italicised below) to become the speciﬁer
of be. Merging the resulting TP with a null declarative complementiser derives
the CP structure shown in simpliﬁed form in (12) below:
(12)
CP
C
ø
TP
PRN
There
T'
T
BE
vP
v
ø+thought
VP
PP
by some
V'
V
thought
TP
PRN
there
T'
T
to
vP
v
ø+remain
VP
QP
numerous
problems
V'
V
remain
PP
in ø Utopia

388
10 phases
Since CP is a phase, the TP headed by [T be] which constitutes its domain will
undergo transfer at this point, in accordance with (7i). The italicised traces of
moved constituents will be given a null spellout, and the auxiliary be in T will
be spelled out as are in the phonological component (since it has been valued
as third person plural in the course of the derivation). The null C heading CP
subsequently undergoes transfer by (7ii), and is assigned a null spellout in the
phonological component, and interpreted in the semantic component as marking
the relevant sentence as declarative in force.
In the context of our discussion of phases here, the key point which emerges is
that neither an intransitive vP nor a defective TP clause constitutes a phase – e.g.
in the case of (12), not the intransitive vP containing remain, or the vP containing
the passive participle thought, or the defective TP complement of thought. In
consequence, the relevant vP and TP constituents are still accessible in the syntax
at the point where be is introduced into the derivation, so allowing be to agree
with numerous problems.
10.4
Wh-movement through spec-CP
Thephase-basedtheoryofsyntaxoutlinedabovehasfar-reachingcon-
sequences for the operation of A-bar movement operations like wh-movement –
as we can illustrate in relation to the following sentence:
(13)
Where is it thought that he will go?
The derivation of (13) proceeds as follows. The unaccusative verb go is merged
with its goal argument (the locative adverbial pronoun where) to form the V-bar
go where, which in turn is merged with its theme argument he to form the VP
he go where. This in turn is merged with a null afﬁxal light verb which triggers
raising of the verb go to v from its original (italicised) position in V, so forming:
(14)
vP
v
ø+go
VP
PRN
he
V'
V
go
PRN
where
Since vP is intransitive (by virtue of the fact that the light verb has no external
argument), vP is not a phase, and Transfer cannot apply at this point. The syntactic
computation therefore continues, with [T will] merging with the vP in (14). Will
agrees with (and assigns nominative case to) he, and the [epp] feature of will
triggers raising of he from its original position (italicised below) in spec-VP to
spec-TP. Merging the complementiser that with the resulting TP forms the CP
shown in (15) below:

10.4 Wh-movement through spec-CP
389
(15)
CP
C
that
TP
PRN
he
T'
T
will
vP
v
ø+go
VP
PRN
he
V'
V
go
PRN
where
Since CP is a phase, its domain (i.e. its TP complement) will undergo transfer
at this point. This means that neither TP nor any of the constituents of TP will
subsequently be accessible to further syntactic operations – i.e. in effect, TP and
its constituents are frozen in place once TP undergoes transfer.
However, this causes an obvious problem, since if all constituents of TP are
frozen in place at this point, the wh-word where will be unable to move from
the (sentence-ﬁnal) VP-complement position it occupies in (15) to the (sentence-
initial) main-clause CP-speciﬁer position which it clearly needs to occupy in (13)
Where is it thought that he will go? One way to overcome this problem is to assume
that (as suggested in §8.9) wh-movement applies in a successive-cyclic fashion,
and that the complementiser that in structures like (15) has an [epp] feature and
a [wh] feature which together trigger movement of the closest wh-expression
(= where) to become the speciﬁer of the complement-clause CP headed by that
before where subsequently moves on to become the speciﬁer of the main clause
C constituent containing the inverted auxiliary is. If this is so, at the stage of
derivation represented in (15) above, where will move from the italicised position
shown in (16) below to become the speciﬁer of that:
(16)
CP
PRN
where
C'
C
that
TP
PRN
he
T'
T
will
vP
v
ø+go
VP
PRN
he
V'
V
go
PRN
where

390
10 phases
At this point (once all the operations which apply on the CP-cycle have applied)
the domain of C (i.e. its TP complement) will undergo transfer in accordance with
(7i), because CP is a phase: one consequence of this is that the italicised traces
will be marked as receiving a null spellout in the phonological component.
After transfer of TP is completed, the syntactic computation continues. The
CP in (16) is merged as the complement of the verb think, and the resulting
VP is in turn merged as the complement of a participial light verb (ensuring
that think is eventually spelled out as the passive participle thought), with the
verb think (below shown as thought) raising to adjoin to the light verb. The
resulting vP is in turn merged as the complement of [T be], which has an [epp]
feature that is deleted by merger of expletive it in spec-TP (it in turn serving as
a probe valuing the agreement features of be). Merging the resulting TP with a
null afﬁxal C will trigger raising of be from its original (italicised) position in T
to C; since C also has a wh-attracting [epp] feature, it will trigger movement of
where from the italicised spec-CP position in the complement clause into spec-CP
position in the main clause, so deriving the CP shown in simpliﬁed form in (17)
below:
(17)
CP
PRN
Where
C'
C
is+ø
TP
PRN
it
T'
T
is
vP
v
ø+thought
VP
V
thought
CP
PRN
where
C
 that
TP
C'
Since CP is a phase, its domain (= the main-clause TP) will undergo transfer by
(7i) at this point, so that the italicised traces of is, thought and where will receive
a null spellout in the phonological component. Subsequently, the constituents
where and is+ø on the edge of the root CP undergo transfer by (7ii).
What our discussion here tells us is that just as A-movement applies in a
successive-cyclic fashion (each time moving the relevant nominal into the next
highest spec-TP position in the structure), so too (within a phase-based the-
ory of syntax) A-bar movement operations like wh-movement must apply in
a successive-cyclic fashion: this means that each time a new phase head is

10.5 Wh-movement through spec-vP in transitive clauses
391
introduced into the structure, it will serve as a probe which attracts the closest
wh-goal to move into its speciﬁer position.
10.5
Wh-movement through spec-vP in transitive clauses
Our discussion in the previous section showed that the assumption
that CPs are phases means that long-distance wh-movement requires successive-
cyclic movement of a moved wh-expression through intermediate spec-CP posi-
tions. However, since transitive vPs are also phases, it follows that in structures
containing one or more transitive vPs, wh-movement will have to pass through
intermediate spec-vP positions as well (since transitive vPs are phases). We can
illustrate how this works in terms of the following example:
(18)
What have they done?
(18) will be derived as follows. The verb do (shown here in its spellout form
done) merges with its thematic complement what to form the VP done what. This
is merged with a transitive light verb whose external argument is they and which
(by virtue of being afﬁxal) triggers raising of done from V to v; the light verb
(by virtue of being transitive) also values the case feature of what as accusative
and (by virtue of being -complete) deletes it. Let’s suppose that just as C can
have an [epp] feature attracting movement of a wh-expression, so too a transitive
light-verb (perhaps by virtue of being a phase head, like C) can likewise have
a wh-attracting [epp] feature. This being so, what will be moved to become a
second speciﬁer for vP, forming the structure below:
(19)
vP
PRN
what
v''
PRN
they
v'
v
ø+done
VP
V
done
PRN
what
The notational convention assumed in (19) is that ﬁrst merge of a head H with its
complement forms an H-bar/H′ projection; second merge of H with a speciﬁer
forms an H-double-bar/H′′ projection; third merge of H with another speciﬁer
forms an H-treble-bar/H′′′ projection . . . and so on. However, by tradition, the
maximal projection of H is denoted as HP: hence, the node labelled vP in (19) is
a v-treble-bar projection, but is labelled vP because it is the maximal projection
of the relevant light verb.

392
10 phases
The double-speciﬁer analysis in (19) is in accordance with Chomsky’s (1998,
p.16) assumption that a head can have multiple speciﬁers – in the case of (19),
an inner speciﬁer they representing the external argument of the light verb, and an
outer speciﬁer what which deletes the [epp] feature of the light verb. In accordance
with (7i), the VP in (19) will undergo transfer at the end of the vP phase, and the
two italicised traces will thereby be given a null spellout. Of course, if what had
not moved to spec-vP at this point, it would have been spelled out in situ and
hence frozen in place, and thereby wrongly be predicted to be unable to undergo
wh-movement. (Although we adopt Chomsky’s multiple-speciﬁer analysis here, it
should be noted that one way of avoiding multiple speciﬁers would be to assume
that light verbs are A-heads like T and hence only allow an argument as their
speciﬁer, and that what doesn’t move to become a second speciﬁer of vP, but
rather moves to become the speciﬁer of a separate A-bar head above vP – perhaps
becoming the speciﬁer of a Focus head. Note that in the terminology of Roberts
1994, a head like T which allows only an argument as its speciﬁer is an A-head,
and a head like C which allows either an argument or an adjunct as its speciﬁer
is an A-bar head.)
Since a transitive vP is a phase, the VP domain done what in (19) will undergo
transfer at the end of the vP cycle, and the trace copies of the moved constituents
done and what will each receive a null spellout. The derivation then proceeds by
merging [T have] with the vP in (19), forming the T-bar (20) below:
(20)
T'
 T
have
vP
PRN
what
v''
PRN
they
v'
v
ø+done
VP
The probe have now searches for an appropriate goal. It needs to ‘skip over’ what
and instead identify they as the expression that it agrees with, assigns nominative
case to and attracts to move to spec-TP. Clearly we cannot say that what is
inactive as a goal since it needs to be an active goal in order to be able to undergo
subsequent wh-movement. However, it seems reasonable to suppose that what is
active only for agreement with an A-bar head, not for agreement with an A-head.
More speciﬁcally, we can suppose that a noun or pronoun expression which carries
interpretable person/number/gender features is only active for agreement with an
A-head if it has an unvalued and undeleted case feature: this would mean that what
is ineligible for A-agreement because its case feature was valued as accusative
and deleted by the transitive light verb at the earlier stage of derivation shown in
(19) above. By contrast, since they in (20) has an unvalued case feature, it is active

10.5 Wh-movement through spec-vP in transitive clauses
393
for A-agreement and A-movement (but not for A-bar movement). Accordingly,
have agrees with, assigns nominative case to and triggers movement of the subject
they, so deriving:
(21)
TP
PRN
they
T'
T
have
vP
PRN
what
v''
PRN
they
v'
v
ø+done
VP
This TP is then merged with a null complementiser with a strong tense feature
(triggering movement of have from T to C) and an [epp] feature which triggers
movement of what to spec-CP, so deriving:
(22)
CP
PRN
What
C'
C
have+ø
TP
PRN
they
T'
T
have
vP
PRN
what
v''
PRN
they
v'
v
ø+done
VP
At the end of the CP phase, TP undergoes transfer in accordance with (7i) and
the italicised traces are given a null spellout in the phonological component.
Subsequently, the constituents at the edge of CP (i.e. its speciﬁer what and its
head have+ø) undergo transfer in accordance with (7ii).
Our discussion of the derivation of (18) What have they done? shows us that
in transitive clauses A-bar movement will involve movement through spec-vP
into spec-CP. An obvious implication of this is that wh-sentences like (23) below
which contain two transitive clauses:

394
10 phases
(23)
What might she think that they will do?
will correspondingly involve successive-cyclic wh-movement through two spec-
vP positions (and likewise through two spec-CP positions) – as shown in skeletal
form below:
(24)
[CP What [C might] she [vP what think [CP what [C that] they will [vP what do what]]]]
More generally, a sentence containing n transitive verbs and m CPs intervening
between the initial position of a wh-expression and its ultimate landing site will
involve movement through n spec-vP positions and m spec-CP positions.
10.6
Evidence for successive-cyclic wh-movement
through spec-CP
The discussion in the previous section shows how (in a phase-based
theory of syntax in which CPs and transitive vPs are phases) theoretical con-
siderations force successive-cyclic wh-movement through spec-CP and spec-vP.
However, an interesting question which arises is whether there is any empirical
evidence in support of the successive-cyclic analysis. As we shall see, there is in
fact considerable evidence in support of such an analysis. In this section, we look
at evidence in support of successive-cyclic movement through spec-CP; and in
the next section, we examine evidence of successive-cyclic movement through
spec-vP.
Let’s begin by looking at evidence from English. Part of the evidence comes
from the interpretation of reﬂexive anaphors like himself. As we saw in exercise
3.2, these are subject to Principle A of Binding Theory which requires an anaphor
to be locally bound and hence to have an antecedent within the TP most imme-
diately containing it. This requirement can be illustrated by the contrast in (25)
below:
(25) (a)
∗Jim was surprised that [TP Peter wasn’t sure [CP that [TP Mary liked this
picture of himself best]]]
(b)
Jim was surprised that [TP Peter wasn’t sure [CP which picture of himself
[TP Mary liked best]]]
In (25a), the TP most immediately containing the reﬂexive anaphor himself is
the bold-printed TP whose subject is Mary, and since there is no suitable (third-
person-masculine-singular) antecedent for himself within this TP, the resulting
sentence violates Binding Principle A and so is ill-formed. However, in (25b)
the wh-phrase which picture of himself has been moved to the speciﬁer position
within the bracketed CP, and the TP most immediately containing the reﬂexive
anaphor is the italicised TP whose subject is Peter. Since this italicised TP does

10.6 Evidence for successive-cyclic wh-movement through spec-CP
395
indeed contain a c-commanding antecedent for himself (namely its subject Peter),
there is no violation of Principle A if himself is construed as bound by Peter –
though Principle A prevents Jim from being the antecedent of himself.
In the light of this restriction, consider the following sentence:
(26)
Which picture of himself wasn’t he sure that Mary liked best?
In (26), the antecedent of himself is he – and yet himself is clearly not c-
commanded by he, as we see from (27) below (simpliﬁed, and showing only
overt constituents):
(27)
CP
QP 
C'
Q
Which
NP
C
wasn’t
TP
N
picture
PP
PRN
he
T'
sure that Mary liked best
P
of
PRN
  himself
In fact, the only elements c-commanded by the pronoun he in (27) are T-bar and
its constituents. But if he does not c-command himself in (27), how come he is
interpreted as the antecedent of himself when we would have expected such a
structure to violate Principle A of Binding Theory and hence to be ill-formed?
We can provide a principled answer to this question if we suppose that wh-
movement operates in a successive-cyclic fashion, and involves an intermediate
stage of derivation represented in (28) below (simpliﬁed by showing overt con-
stituents only):
(28)
[TP He wasn’t sure [CP which picture of himself that [TP Mary liked best]]]
(Note that (28) is an intermediate stage of derivation, not a complete sentence
structure; if it were a sentence, in relevant varieties it would violate the Multiply
Filled Comp Filter discussed in §6.11.) In (28), the anaphor himself has a c-
commanding antecedent within the italicised TP most immediately containing
it – namely the pronoun he. If we follow Belletti and Rizzi (1988), Uriagereka
(1988) and Lebeaux (1991) in supposing that the requirements of Principle A
can be satisﬁed at any stage of derivation, it follows that positing that a sentence
like (26) involves an intermediate stage of derivation like (28) enables us to
account for why himself is construed as bound by he. More generally, sentences
like (26) provide us with evidence that long-distance wh-movement involves
successive cyclic movement through intermediate spec-CP positions – and hence
with evidence that CP is a phase. (See Fox 2000 and Barss 2001 for more detailed
discussion of related structures.) At a subsequent stage of derivation, the wh-QP

396
10 phases
which picture of himself moves into spec-CP in the main clause, so deriving the
structure (27) associated with (26) Which picture of himself wasn’t he sure that
Mary liked best?
A further argument for successive-cyclic wh-movement through spec-CP (and
consequently for the phasehood of CP) is offered by McCloskey (2000), based on
observations about quantiﬁer stranding/ﬂoating in West Ulster English. As we
saw in §7.6, in this variety, a wh-word can be modiﬁed by the universal quantiﬁer
all, giving rise to questions such as:
(29)
What all did you get for Christmas? (= ‘What are all the things which you
got for Christmas?’)
McCloskey argues that in such sentences, the quantiﬁer and the wh-word originate
as a single constituent. He further maintains that under wh-movement, the wh-
word what can either pied-pipe the quantiﬁer all along with it as in (29) above,
or can move on its own leaving the quantiﬁer all stranded. In this connection,
consider the sentences in (30) below:
(30) (a)
What all do you think that he’ll say that we should buy?
(b)
What do you think all that he’ll say that we should buy?
(c)
What do you think that he’ll say all that we should buy?
(d)
What do you think that he’ll say that we should buy all?
McCloskey claims (2000, p. 63) that ‘All in wh-quantiﬁer ﬂoat constructions
appearsinpositionsforwhichthereisconsiderableindependentevidencethatthey
are either positions in which wh-movement originates or positions through which
wh-movement passes. We have in these observations a new kind of argument for
the successive-cyclic character of long wh-movement.’
McCloskey argues that the derivation of (30a–d) proceeds along the following
lines (simpliﬁed in a number of ways). The quantiﬁer all merges with its com-
plement what to form the structure [all what]. The wh-word what then raises
to become the speciﬁer of all, forming the overt QP [what all]. (An incidental
detail to note here is that this part of McCloskey’s analysis violates the Remerger
Constraint which we posited in §6.5 to the effect that ‘No constituent can be
merged more than once with the same head.’ One way of getting round this is to
suppose that what moves to a spec-DP position above QP, rather than to spec-QP.
However, we shall ignore this detail in what follows.) The resulting QP [what
all] is merged as the object of buy, forming [buy what all]. If what undergoes
wh-movement on its own in subsequent stages of derivation, we derive (30d)
‘What do you think that he’ll say that we should buy all?’ But suppose that the
quantiﬁer all is pied-piped along with what under wh-movement until we reach
the stage shown in skeletal form below:
(31)
[CP what all [C that] we should buy]
If wh-movement then extracts what on its own, the quantiﬁer all will be stranded
in the most deeply embedded spec-CP position, so deriving (30c) ‘What do you

10.6 Evidence for successive-cyclic wh-movement through spec-CP
397
think that he’ll say all that we should buy?’ By contrast, if all is pied-piped along
with what until the end of the intermediate CP cycle, we derive:
(32)
[CP what all [C that] he’ll say that we should buy]
If wh-movement then extracts what on its own, the quantiﬁer all will be stranded
in the intermediate spec-CP position and we will ultimately derive (30b) ‘What
do you think all that he’ll say that we should buy?’ But if all continues to be
pied-piped along with what throughout the remaining stages of derivation, we
ultimately derive (30a) ‘What all do you think that he’ll say that we should
buy?’
There is also considerable empirical evidence in support of successive-cyclic
movement through spec-CP from a number of other languages. One such piece
of evidence comes from preposition pied-piping in Afrikaans. Du Plessis (1977,
p.724)notesthatinstructurescontainingawh-pronounusedasthecomplementof
a preposition in Afrikaans, a moved wh-pronoun can either pied-pipe (i.e. carry
along with it) or strand (i.e. leave behind) the preposition – as the following
sentences illustrate:
(33) (a)
Waarvoor dink julle [werk ons]?
What-for think you
work we?
‘What do you think we are working for?’
(b)
Waar dink julle [werk ons voor]?
What think you
work we for? (same interpretation as 33a)
(c)
Waar dink julle [voor werk ons]?
What think you
for
work we? (same interpretation as 33a)
Du Plessis argues that sentences such as (33c) involve movement of the PP waar-
voor ‘what-for’ to spec-CP position within the bracketed complement clause,
followed by movement of waar ‘what’ on its own into the main-clause spec-
CP position, thereby stranding the preposition in the intermediate spec-CP
position. On this view, sentences like (33c) provide empirical evidence that
long-distance wh-movement involves movement through intermediate spec-CP
positions.
A rather different kind of argument for successive-cyclic wh-movement comes
from the phenomenon of wh-copying. A number of languages exhibit a form of
long-distance wh-movement which involves leaving an overt copy of a moved
wh-pronoun in intermediate spec-CP positions – as illustrated by the following
structures cited in Felser (2001):
(34) (a)
Wˆer
tinke jo
wˆer’t
Jan wennet
Where think you where’that Jan lives?
‘Where do you think that John lives?’
(Frisian, Hiemstra 1986, p. 99)
(b)
Waarvoor dink julle waarvoor werk ons?
What-for think you what-for work we?
‘What do you think we are working for?’
(Afrikaans, du Plessis 1977, p. 725)

398
10 phases
(c)
Kas
o Demiri mislenola kas i
Ar`ıfa dikhla?
Whom
Demir think
whom Arifa saw?
‘Whom does Demir think Arifa saw?’
(Romani, adapted from McDaniel 1989, p. 569, fn.5)
(d)
Wer glaubst du, wer dass du
bist?
Who think
you who that you are?
‘Who do you think that you are?’
(German, Fanselow and Mahajan 2000, p. 220)
In cases of long-distance wh-movement out of more than one complement clause,
a copy of a moved wh-pronoun appears at the beginning of each clause – as
illustrated by (35) below:
(35)
Wen glaubst du, wen Peter meint, wen Susi heiratet?
Who believe you who Peter thinks who Susi marries?
‘Who do you believe Peter thinks that Susi is marrying?’
(German, Felser 2001, p. 13)
The wh-copies left behind at intermediate landing sites in sentences such as (34)
and (35) suggest that long-distance wh-movement involves movement of the
wh-expression through intermediate spec-CP positions – precisely as a phase-
based theory of syntax would lead us to expect. (See Nunes 2001 for further
discussion.)
A parallel wh-copying phenomenon is reported in an intriguing study of the
acquisition of wh-questions by Ros Thornton (1995). She reports children pro-
ducing long-distance wh-copy questions such as the following (1995, p. 147):
(36) (a)
What do you think [what Cookie Monster eats]?
(b)
Who do you think [who the cat chased]?
(c)
How do you think [how Superman ﬁxed the car]?
In such cases, the bold-printed wh-word moves to the front of the overall sentence,
but leaves an italicised copy at the front of the bracketed complement clause. What
this suggests is that wh-movement involves an intermediate step by which the wh-
expression moves to spec-CP position within the bracketed complement clause
before moving into its ﬁnal landing site in the main-clause spec-CP position. The
error made by the children lies in not deleting the italicised medial trace of the
wh-word. Of course, this raises the question of why the children don’t delete
the intermediate wh-word. One answer may be that the null complementiser
heading the bracketed complement clause is treated by the children as being
a clitic which attaches to the end of its speciﬁer (just as have cliticises to its
speciﬁer in Who’ve they arrested?). Leaving an overt wh-copy of the pronoun
behind provides a host for the clitic wh-complementiser to attach to. Such an
analysis seems by no means implausible in the light of the observation made
by Guasti, Thornton and Wexler (1995) that young children produce auxiliary-
copying negative questions such as the following (the names of the children and
their ages in years;months being shown in parentheses):

10.6 Evidence for successive-cyclic wh-movement through spec-CP
399
(37) (a)
What did he didn’t wanna bring to school? (Darrell 4;1)
(b)
Why could Snoopy couldn’t ﬁt in the boat? (Kathy 4;0)
If we assume that contracted negative n’t is treated by the children as a PF enclitic
(i.e. a clitic which attaches to the end of an immediately preceding auxiliary host
in the PF component), we can conclude that the children spell out the trace of
the inverted auxiliary did in order to provide a host for the enclitic negative n’t.
More generally, data like (37) suggest that children may overtly spell out traces
as a way of providing a host for a clitic.
A related phenomenon is reported by Alison Henry in her (1995) study of
Belfast English. She notes that in main-clause wh-questions in Belfast English,
not only the main-clause C but also intermediate C constituents show T-to-C
movement (i.e. auxiliary inversion), as illustrated below:
(38)
What did Mary claim [did they steal]? (Henry 1995, p.108)
We can account for auxiliary inversion in structures like (38) in a straightforward
fashion if we suppose that (in main and complement clauses alike in Belfast
English) a C which attracts an interrogative wh-expression also carries an afﬁxal
[tns] feature triggering auxiliary inversion. In order to explain auxiliary inversion
in the bracketed complement clause in (38), we would then have to suppose that
the head C of CP carries [wh, epp] features which trigger movement of the
interrogative pronoun what through spec-CP, given our assumption that C has an
afﬁxal [tns] feature triggering auxiliary inversion in clauses in which C attracts
an interrogative wh-expression. On this view, the fact that the complement clause
shows auxiliary inversion provides evidence that the preposed wh-word what
moves through the spec-CP position in the bracketed complement clause before
subsequently moving into the main-clause spec-CP position.
Returning now to wh-questions produced by young children, it is interesting
to note that a further type of structure which Ros Thornton (1995) reports one of
the children in her study (= AJ) producing are wh-questions like (39) below:
(39) (a)
Which mouse what the cat didn’t see?
(b)
Which drink do you think [what the ghost drank]?
Here, the italicised C positions are ﬁlled by what – raising the question of why
this should be. Thornton notes that a number of the children in her study also
produced questions like:
(40)
Which juice that the ghost could drink?
This suggests that what in structures such as (39) is a wh-marked variant of that.
More speciﬁcally, it suggests that (for children like AJ) the complementiser that
is spelled out as what when it carries [wh, epp] features and attracts a wh-marked
goal to move to spec-CP.
In the light of this assumption, let’s now look at how wh-movement applies
in the derivation of (39b). Since the bracketed complement clause is transitive in

400
10 phases
(39b) and a transitive vP is a phase, the wh-phrase which drink will move to spec-
vP on the embedded clause vP cycle. Thus, at the stage when the complementiser
that enters the derivation, we will have the overt structure below (a structure which
is simpliﬁed by omitting all null constituents, including traces):
(41)
[C thatWH, EPP] the ghost [vP which drink drank]
The complementiser that has [wh, epp] features and consequently attracts which
drink to move to spec-CP, so deriving the overt structure shown in simpliﬁed
form below:
(42)
[CP which drink [C thatWH, EPP] the ghost [vP drank]]
On the assumption that children like AJ spell out that as what when it carries
the features [wh, epp], the complementiser that will ultimately be spelled out as
what. (By contrast, in standard varieties of adult English, the complementiser is
always spelled out as that, irrespective of whether it is wh-marked or not.)
The next stage in the movement of the wh-phrase takes place on the main-
clause vP phase, when which drink moves to spec-vP. At the point where the null
complementiser heading the main clause is introduced into the derivation, we
will have the following skeletal structure (with aff denoting a tense afﬁx, and the
structure simpliﬁed by not showing trace copies or empty categories other than
the main-clause C and T):
(43)
[C ø] you [T aff] [vP which drink think [CP [C what] the ghost [vP drank]]]
The null main-clause complementiser has a strong [tns] feature which triggers
raising of the tense afﬁx to C. It also has [wh, epp] features which trigger move-
ment of which drink to spec-CP, so deriving (44) below (with do-support provid-
ing a host for the tense afﬁx in the PF component):
(44)
[CP Which drink [C do+aff+ø] you [vP think [CP [C what] the ghost [vP drank]]]]
On this view, the fact that the complementiser that is spelled out as what in (39b)
provides evidence that wh-movement passes through the intermediate spec-CP
position.
A more general conclusion which can be drawn from our discussion of (39)
is that wh-marking of a complementiser provides us with evidence that the rele-
vant complementiser triggers wh-movement (and indeed it may be that what in
non-standard comparatives like Yours is bigger than what mine is has the sta-
tus of a complementiser which triggers wh-movement of a null wh-operator). In
this connection, it is interesting to note that McCloskey (2001) argues that long-
distance wh-movement in Irish triggers wh-marking of intermediate complemen-
tisers. The complementiser which normally introduces ﬁnite clauses in Irish is go
‘that’, but in (relative and interrogative) clauses involving wh-movement we ﬁnd
the wh-marked complementiser aL (below glossed as what) – as the following
long-distance wh-question shows:

10.7 Evidence for wh-movement through spec-vP in transitive clauses
401
(45)
C´en
t-´ursc´eal aL
mheas
m´e aL
d´uirt s´e aL
thuig
s´e?
Which novel
what thought I
what said he what understood he?
‘Which novel did I think that he said that he understood?’
(Note that the word order in (45) is wh-word+complementiser+verb+
subject+complement.) McCloskey argues that the wh-marking of each of the
italicised complementisers in (45) provides evidence that wh-movement applies
in a successive-cyclic fashion, with each successive C which is introduced into
the derivation having [wh, epp] features which trigger wh-marking of C and
wh-movement of the relevant wh-expression. Chung (1994) provides parallel
evidence from wh-marking of intermediate heads in Chamorro. The work of
McCloskey and Chung provides further evidence that a complementiser is only
wh-marked if it carries both a [wh] feature and an [epp] feature.
Overall, then, we see that there is a considerable body of empirical evidence
which supports the hypothesis that long-distance wh-movement is successive-
cyclic in nature and involves movement through intermediate spec-CP positions.
Additional syntactic evidence comes from partial wh-movement in a variety of
languages (see e.g. Cole 1982, Saddy 1991 and Cole and Hermon 2000), and
from exceptional accusative case-marking by a higher transitive verb of the wh-
subject of a lower ﬁnite clause (reported for English by Kayne 1984a, p. 5 and
for Hungarian by Bejar and Massam 1999, p. 66).
10.7
Evidence for wh-movement through spec-vP
in transitive clauses
In the previous section, we noted that theoretical considerations lead
us to conclude that, if transitive vPs are phases, wh-movement must involve move-
ment through intermediate spec-vP positions in transitive clauses. An important
question to ask, therefore, is whether there is any empirical evidence of wh-
movement through spec-vP. We shall see that there is.
One such piece of evidence comes from observations about have-cliticisation.
In varieties of English such as my own, have when used as a main verb marking
possession can contract onto an immediately adjacent pronoun ending in a vowel
or diphthong, e.g. in sentences such as (46) below:
(46) (a)
They have little faith in the government
(b)
They’ve little faith in the government
However, cliticisation is blocked when the object of have undergoes wh-
movement, as we see from sentences like those below:
(47) (a)
How little faith they have in the government!
(b)
∗How little faith they’ve in the government
To see why this should be, let’s take a closer look at the derivation of (47).

402
10 phases
The verb have merges with the prepositional phrase in the government to form
the V-bar have in the government. This is then merged with the QP how little faith
to form the VP how little faith have in the government. The resulting VP is merged
with a null light verb forming a v-bar which is in turn merged with its subject they,
and the verb have raises to adjoin to the light verb. Being transitive, the light verb
assigns accusative case to how little faith. Since a transitive light verb is a phase
head, the light verb will carry [wh, epp] features which trigger movement of the
wh-marked QP how little faith to spec-vP. The resulting vP is merged with a T
constituent which agrees with, case-marks and triggers movement to spec-TP of
the subject they, so that on the TP cycle we have the structure shown in simpliﬁed
form in (48) below:
(48)
TP
PRN
they
T'
T
ø
vP
QP
how little faith
v''
PRN
they
v'
v
have
VP
how little faith have in the government
Since a ﬁnite T is generally able to attract possessive have to move from V to
T, we might expect have to move from v to T at this point. But if have moves
to T, it will then be adjacent to the subject they, leading us to expect have to be
able to cliticise onto they in the PF component, so wrongly predicting that (47b)
is grammatical. How can we prevent have cliticisation in such structures? One
answer is to suppose that movement of have from v to T is blocked in structures
like (48) by the intervening raised object how little faith in the outer spec-vP
position. This would mean that the verb have remains in the head v position of
vP rather than moving into T; and if have cannot move into T, it will not be
adjacent to (and so cannot cliticise onto) the subject they in spec-TP. As should
be obvious, this kind of account is crucially dependent on the assumption that the
preposed wh-phrase how little faith moves through spec-vP before moving into
spec-CP.
Interestingly, it would seem that an intervening non-object constituent does not
block movement of have from v to T, as we see from the fact that have-cliticisation
is possible in sentences such as:
(49)
This is a government [which they’ve very little faith in]
If transitive vPs are phases and trigger wh-movement to spec-vP, at the stage of
derivation corresponding to that in (48) above, the bracketed relative clause in
(49) will have the structure shown in simpliﬁed form in (50) below:

10.7 Evidence for wh-movement through spec-vP in transitive clauses
403
(50)
[TP they [T ø] [vP which they [v have] [VP very little faith [V have] in which]]]
However, since which is not the object of have in (50) but rather is the object
of the preposition in, it does not prevent have raising from v to T, and thereafter
cliticising onto the subject they in spec-TP. So it would seem that (for reasons
which are not clear) have is prevented from raising to T across its own object, but
not across other intervening constituents.
A very different kind of evidence in support of wh-movement through spec-
vP in transitive clauses comes from wh-marking of verbs (in languages with a
richer verb morphology than English). We saw in §10.6 that a complementiser
is wh-marked (in languages like Irish and Chamorro) if it has [epp, wh] features
and attracts a wh-marked goal. Chung (1994, 1998) presents evidence that wh-
movement out of a transitive verb phrase likewise triggers wh-marking of the verb
in Chamorro. We can illustrate this phenomenon of wh-marking of transitive verbs
in terms of the following example (from Chung 1998, p. 242):
(51)
Hafa si
Maria s-in-angane-n˜na as
Joaquin?
What pn Maria wh-say.to-agr
obl Joaquin
‘What did Maria say to Joaquin?’
(pn denotes a person/number marker, agr an agreement marker, and obl an
oblique case marker.) The crucial aspect of the example in (51) is that the
direct object hafa ‘what’ has been moved out of the transitive verb phrase in
which it originates, and that this movement triggers wh-marking of the itali-
cised verb, which therefore ends up carrying the wh-inﬁx in. This suggests that
a transitive light verb carrying [epp, wh] features attracts a wh-marked goal and
undergoes agreement with the goal, resulting in the verb which is adjoined to
the light verb being overtly wh-marked (though see Dukes 2000 for an alter-
native perspective on the relevant afﬁxes in Chamorro). For further examples
of wh-marking of intermediate verbs in long-distance wh-movement structures,
see Branigan and MacKenzie (2002) on Innu-aimˆun, and den Dikken (2001) on
Kilega.
A related piece of evidence comes from participle agreement in French in
transitive clauses such as (52b) below (discussed in Kayne 1989, Branigan 1992,
Ura 1993, 2001, Boˇskovi´c 1997, Richards 1997 and Sportiche 1998):
(52) (a)
Il
a
commis
quelle bˆetise?
He has committed what
blunder
‘What blunder did he make?’
(b)
Quelle bˆetise
il
a
commise?
What
blunder he has committed
‘What blunder did he make?’
The participle commis ‘committed’ is in the default (masculine-singular) form
in (52a), and does not agree with the feminine-singular in-situ wh-object quelle
bˆetise ‘what blunder’ (the ﬁnal -e in these words can be taken to be an ortho-
graphic marker of a feminine-singular form). However, the participle commise
in (52b) contains the feminine-singular marker -e and agrees with its preposed

404
10 phases
feminine-singular object quelle bˆetise ‘what blunder’ and consequently rhymes
with bˆetise. What’s going on here?
Let’s look ﬁrst at the derivation of (52a). The QP quelle bˆetise ‘what blunder’
in (52a) is merged as the complement of the verb commis ‘committed’ forming
the VP commis quelle bˆetise ‘committed what blunder’. The resulting VP is then
merged with a null transitive light verb whose external agent argument is the
pronoun il ‘he’; since the light verb is afﬁxal, it triggers movement of the verb
commis ‘committed’ to adjoin to the light verb, so that at the end of the vP phase
we have the structure (53) below:
(53)
vP
PRN
Il
v'
v
ø+commis 
VP
V
t
QP
quelle bêtise
The light verb agrees in person/number -features with the object quelle bˆetise
‘what blunder’ and assigns it accusative case. By hypothesis, the light verb has no
[epp] feature in wh-in-situ questions, so there is no movement of the wh-phrase
quelle bˆetise ‘what blunder’ to spec-vP. Subsequently the vP (53) is merged
as the complement of the auxiliary a ‘has’ which agrees in person/number -
features with (and triggers movement to spec-TP of) the subject il ‘he’. Merging
the resulting TP with a null complementiser which likewise has no [epp] feature
derives the structure associated with (52a) Il a commis quelle bˆetise? (literally
‘He has committed what blunder?’).
Now consider the derivation of (52b). This is similar in a number of respects
to that of (52a), so that (as before) the light verb agrees in person and number
with (and assigns accusative case to) its object quelle bˆetise ‘what blunder’.
But in addition, the light verb has [wh, epp] features, and these attract the wh-
marked object quelle bˆetise ‘what blunder’ to move to become an additional
(outer) speciﬁer for the vP, so deriving the structure shown in (54) below:
(54)
vP
QP
Quelle bêtise 
v''
PRN
il
v'
v
ø+commis
VP
V
t
QP
t

10.7 Evidence for wh-movement through spec-vP in transitive clauses
405
The resulting vP (54) is then merged as the complement of the auxiliary a ‘has’
which agrees in -features with (and triggers movement to spec-TP of) the subject
il ‘he’. Merging the resulting TP with a null interrogative complementiser which
has[epp, wh]featurestriggersmovementofthewh-phrasetospec-CP,soderiving
the structure associated with (52b) Quelle bˆetise il a commise? (literally ‘What
blunder he has committed?’)
In the light of the assumptions made above, consider why the participle sur-
faces in the agreeing (feminine-singular) form commise ‘committed’ in (52b),
but in the non-agreeing (default) form commis in (52a). Bearing in mind our ear-
lier observation that (in languages like Irish) a complementiser only shows overt
wh-marking if it has an [epp] feature as well as a [wh] feature, a plausible sug-
gestion to make is that French participles only overtly inﬂect for gender/number
agreement with their object if they have an [epp] feature which forces movement
of the object through spec-vP. However, any such assumption requires us to sup-
pose that wh-movement proceeds through spec-vP in transitive clauses, and hence
lends further support for Chomsky’s claim that transitive vPs are phases. (The
discussion here is simpliﬁed in a number of respects for expository purposes, e.g.
by ignoring the speciﬁcity effect discussed by Richards 1997 pp. 158–60, and
additional complications discussed by Ura 2001.)
Further evidence in support of successive-cyclic wh-movement through spec-
vP in transitive clauses comes from observations about mutation in Welsh made in
Tallerman (1993). Tallerman claims that wh-traces trigger so-called soft mutation
of the initial consonant of a following word. In this connection, consider the
sentence in (55) below (where prog denotes a progressive aspect marker):
(55)
Beth wyt ti
’n
feddwyl oedd gen
I?
What are you prog thinking was
with me
‘What do you think I had?’
What is particularly interesting here is that the italicised verb has undergone soft
mutation, so that in place of the radical form meddwyl ‘thinking’, we ﬁnd the
mutated form feddwyl. Given independent evidence that Tallerman produces in
support of claiming that wh-traces induce mutation, an obvious way of accounting
for the use of the mutated verb-form feddwyl ‘thinking’ in (55) is to suppose that
the wh-pronoun beth ‘what’ moves through spec-vP on its way to the front of
the overall sentence, in much the same way as what moves in front of think in
(24) above. We can then suppose that a wh-trace on the edge of vP triggers soft
mutation on the lexical verb adjoined to the light verb heading the vP. (See Willis
2000 for a slightly different account of Welsh mutation.)
A further argument in support of wh-movement through spec-vP in transitive
clauses comes from Spanish multiple-wh questions such as (56) below (discussed
by Boˇskovi´c 1997):
(56)
Qu´e
dir´a
qui´en?
What will.say who?
‘What will who say?’

406
10 phases
Adapting Boˇskovi´c’s account of this contrast to the framework presented here,
let’s suppose that (56) is derived as follows. The verb (which ultimately surfaces
in the form) dir´a ‘will.say’ (glossed simply as say in the numbered structures
below, in order to save space) is merged with its complement qu´e ‘what’ to form
the VP dir´a qu´e ‘will.say what’. This in turn is merged with a transitive light
verb which assigns accusative case to qu´e ‘what’, triggers raising of the verb
dir´a ‘will.say’ from V to v, and merges with its agent argument qui´en ‘who’.
On the assumption that transitive vPs are phases, and that a wh-object which
moves to spec-CP moves through spec-vP, the light verb will also have [epp, wh]
features which trigger raising of the closest wh-expression c-commanded by the
light verb (namely the wh-object qu´e ‘what’) to become a second (outer) speciﬁer
for vP, forming the structure shown in skeletal form below (with strikethrough
used to indicate constituents which ultimately receive a null spellout after
transfer):
(57)
[vP qu´ewhat [v′′ qui´enwho [v′ [v dir´asay] [VP [V dir´asay] qu´ewhat]]]]
The resulting vP in (57) is then merged with an abstract T constituent, to form
a TP. Given that Su˜ner (1994) argues that postverbal subjects in Spanish remain
in situ within the verb phrase but that verbs move to T in ﬁnite clauses, we can
assume that the verb dir´a ‘will.say’ moves from v to T, but the subject qui´en ‘who’
remains in situ in spec-vP, so that at the end of the TP cycle we have formed the
skeletal structure:
(58)
[TP [T dir´asay] [vP qu´ewhat [v′′ qui´enwho [v′ [v dir´asay] [VP [V dir´asay] qu´ewhat]]]]]
The resulting TP is then merged with a null interrogative complementiser, to form
the structure below:
(59)
C'
C
ø
TP
 T
dirásay
vP
PRN
quéwhat
v''
PRN
quiénwho
v'
v
dirásay
VP
dirásay quéwhat
As in main-clause questions in English, C has [tns, wh, epp] features. The afﬁxal
[tns] feature of C triggers raising of the verb dir´a ‘will.say’ from T to C. The
AttractClosestPrinciplerequiresthe[epp, wh]featuresofCtoattracttheclosest
wh-expression to move to spec-CP. Suppose that (following Chomsky 1995,

10.8 The role of phases in lexical selection
407
p. 358) we deﬁne closeness in terms of c-command, along the lines outlined
below:
(60)
A probe X which c-commands two goals Y and Z is closer to Y than to Z if
Y c-commands Z
(Note, incidentally, that this is a different deﬁnition of closeness from that given in
§6.4, raising obvious questions about precisely how closeness should be deﬁned –
but we’ll set this issue aside here.) It will then follow that (by virtue of having
moved to the outer speciﬁer position within vP) the wh-object qu´e ‘what’ is closer
to C than the wh-subject qui´en ‘who’. Accordingly, it is the former which moves
to spec-CP, deriving the structure (61) below:
(61)
[CP Qu´ewhat [C′ [C ø] [TP [T dir´asay] [vP qu´ewhat [v′′ qui´enwho [v′ [v dir´asay]
[VP [V dir´asay] qu´ewhat]]]]]]]
And (61) is the structure of (56) Qu´e dir´a qui´en? ‘What will who say?’ Note
that a crucial plank in the argumentation is the assumption that a wh-object in
a transitive clause like (56) moves to spec-CP through spec-vP. (However, see
Fitzpatrick 2002, pp. 457–8 for discussion of a potential problem.)
10.8
The role of phases in lexical selection
Hitherto, we have assumed that the main motivation for phases is to
reduce the complexity of the computational operations which the syntax has to
perform by ensuring that probes only have a limited search space within which
to locate matching goals – and hence that all syntactic operations are local. How-
ever, Chomsky (1998) suggests that phases also have an important role to play
in respect of lexical selection. We can illustrate this second role in relation to the
following sentence (adapted from Chomsky 1998, p. 17, ex. (7ii)):
(62)
There must be a possibility that proofs will be discovered
Suppose that we have reached the stage of derivation represented informally
below:
(63)
[T will] be discovered [proofs]
Since the lexical array for sentence (62) – i.e. the set of items we take out of
the lexicon in order to form the sentence – includes expletive there, preference
of Merge over Move will mean that we must select there at this point in order to
satisfy the [epp] requirement of [T will], so deriving:
(64)
there [T will] be discovered proofs
But this in turn means that we have no way of deriving (62), since (62) requires the
nominal proofs to become the subject of will at the stage of derivation represented
in (63). What are we to do at this point?

408
10 phases
Chomsky (1998, pp. 19–20) suggests that the problem can be overcome in
the following way. Suppose (as we have done throughout) that the ﬁrst step in
deriving a given expression is to take a set of items out of the lexicon, and that
these constitute the lexical array out of which the expression will be composed.
But suppose, in addition, that only a speciﬁc subarray of the items taken out
of the lexicon can be accessed at any phase of derivation: in particular, suppose
that the subarray out of which a given phase is built can comprise only a single
occurrence of a phase head (e.g. C or a transitive light verb, v∗) – cf. Chomsky’s
(1999, p. 9) claim that ‘a subarray contains exactly one C or v∗’. The subarray
chosen is then ‘placed in active memory (the “work space”)’ (Chomsky 1998,
p. 19). Once a given lexical subarray is exhausted (i.e. all the items it contains
have been merged in the relevant structure) and the derivation of the corresponding
phase has been completed, the computation then selects another lexical subarray
to build the next phase with . . . and so on. Returning now to (62) There must be
a possibility that proofs will be discovered, let’s suppose that our initial subarray
of items comprises the set in (65) below:
(65)
{that, will, be discovered, proofs}
Suppose furthermore that we have reached the stage of derivation in (63) above.
[T will] has an [epp] feature requiring it to project a speciﬁer. Preference of Merge
over Move will mean that if the lexical subarray contains an expletive, this will
be merged in spec-TP. But the subarray in (65) contains no expletive. Hence, the
only way of deleting the [epp] feature of [T will] in (63) is by movement of proofs
to spec-TP, deriving:
(66)
[TP proofs [T will] be discovered proofs]
Merger of the complementiser that with the TP in (66) will in turn derive the CP
(67) below:
(67)
[CP [C that] [TP proofs will be discovered proofs]]
The bracketed TP will undergo transfer at this point, and the italicised trace of
proofs will be deleted from the structure transferred to the phonological compo-
nent. Since we have now exhausted the lexical subarray in (65) and completed
the derivation of the CP phase, the syntactic computation can now access a fur-
ther subarray. Let’s suppose that this comprises the set below (where ø is a null
declarative complementiser):
(68)
{ø, there, must, be, a, possibility}
Successive merger operations introducing possibility, a, be, must, there and ø into
the derivation will generate the structure (69) below:
(69)
[CP1 ø[TP1 there must be a possibility [CP2 that [TP2 proofs will be discovered]]]]

10.9 Questions about phases
409
At this point, TP1 will undergo transfer in accordance with (7i), and subsequently
CP1 will undergo transfer in accordance with (7ii) – so eventually deriving the
structure associated with (62) There must be a possibility that proofs will be
discovered.
10.9
Questions about phases
Having presented an account of phases in §§10.2–10.8 which is
broadly consistent with Chomsky’s recent work, we turn in this section to reﬂect
on the nature of phases. One issue which arises out of our discussion in this chapter
concerns the relation between EPP-hood and phasehood. In the system outlined
in §§10.2–10.8, the relation seems relatively clear (at least for heads which trigger
A-bar movement operations like wh-movement): complementisers and transitive
light verbs are phase heads and can have an [epp] feature triggering A-bar move-
ment, whereas intransitive light-verbs which have no external argument are not
phase heads and cannot have an [epp] feature triggering A-bar movement. Note,
however, that this leads to a potential asymmetry: both transitive and intransitive
complementisers alike have an [epp] feature, but only transitive (not intransitive)
light verbs have an [epp] feature. Below, I present a piece of evidence calling
into question the assumption that intransitive vPs cannot have an [epp] feature:
the evidence suggests that just as a wh-expression extracted out of transitive vP
moves through spec-vP, so too a wh-expression extracted out of an intransitive
vP also moves through spec-vP.
The relevant evidence comes from intransitive multiple wh-questions such as
the following in Spanish (kindly provided by Cris Lozano, who trialled them on
native speakers of both Peninsular Spanish and Mexican Spanish, and obtained
unanimous, clearcut grammaticality judgments):
(70) (a)
Ad´onde fue
qui´en?
Where
went who?
(b)
∗Qui´en
fue
ad´onde?
Who
went where?
(Imagine a scenario for such sentences in which a friend says to you ‘President
Phat Khat went to New York yesterday’, and you say ‘Sorry, I didn’t hear you’ and
then go on to produce (70).) Unlike what happens in English, Spanish requires
ad´onde (literally ‘to.where’, but here glossed simply as ‘where’) to be preposed,
not qui´en ‘who’. Why should this be?
Let’s suppose that sentence (70a) is derived as follows. The unaccusative verb
(which is ultimately spelled out as) fue ‘went’ is merged with its goal argument
ad´onde ‘where’ to form the V-bar fue ad´onde ‘went where’ and the resulting
V-bar is then merged with its theme argument qui´en ‘who’ to form the VP qui´en
fue ad´onde ‘who went where’. This VP is in turn merged with an intransitive light
verb, forming the structure shown below:

410
10 phases
(71)
v'
v
ø
VP
PRN
Quiénwho
V'
V
fuewent
PRN
adóndewhere
The light verb has a strong (afﬁxal) V-feature, and so attracts the verb fue ‘went’
to move from V to v. If we suppose that the light verb also has [wh, epp] features,
it would be expected to attract the closest wh-expression to move to spec-vP. In
terms of the c-command deﬁnition of closeness given in (60) above, qui´en ‘who’
is closer to the light verb than ad´onde ‘where’, and hence we’d expect qui´en
‘who’ to move to spec-vP. But the contrast in (70) suggests that the light verb is
unable to attract qui´en ‘who’ and instead attracts ad´onde ‘where’. This suggests
that qui´en ‘who’ must be inactive for A-bar movement for some reason. But
why?
The answer we shall suggest here is that:
(72)
An expression is only active for A-bar movement if it has an active A-bar feature
(e.g. a wh-feature) but no active A-feature (e.g. no unvalued case feature)
The pronoun qui´en ‘who’ carries a case feature which is as yet unvalued at the
stage of derivation shown in (71) above, and hence – given (72) – is inactive for
an A-bar movement operation like wh-movement. If we suppose that the light
verb attracts the closest wh-expression which is active for A-bar movement, it
follows that the light verb will attract the locative pronoun ad´onde ‘where’ to
move to spec-vP, so deriving the structure shown in simpliﬁed form in (73) below
(strikethrough being used to indicate constituents which will ultimately receive a
null spellout):
(73)
[vPad´ondewhere [v′ [v fuewent] [VP qui´enwho [V′ [V fuewent] ad´ondewhere]]]]
The resulting vP is then merged with a strong T constituent which triggers raising
of verb fue ‘went’ to T, and which agrees with and assigns nominative case to the
subject qui´en ‘who’, so deriving:
(74)
[TP [T fuewent] [vP ad´ondewhere [v′ [v fuewent] [VP qui´enwho [V′ [V fuewent]
ad´ondewhere]]]]]
The TP thereby formed is then merged with a strong interrogative C constituent
which carries [tns, wh, epp] features. The afﬁxal [tns] feature of C triggers
raising of the verb fue ‘went’ from T to C, and its [wh, epp] features trigger
movement of the closest active wh-expression to spec-CP. Since ad´onde ‘where’

10.9 Questions about phases
411
is closer to C than qui´en ‘who’ in (73), it is the former which moves to spec-CP,
so deriving the overt structure shown in highly simpliﬁed form below:
(75)
[CP Ad´ondewhere [C′ [C fuewent] [TP . . .[vP . . .[VP qui´enwho . . .]]]]]
And (75) is the structure of (70a) Ad´onde fue qui´en? ‘Where did who go?’
There are several points of interest which arise from the derivation sketched
above. The ﬁrst is that in order to derive (70a) we need to assume that ad´onde
‘where’ moves to spec-vP at the stage of derivation shown in (73) above: if
this did not happen, both qui´en ‘who’ and ad´onde ‘where’ would remain in situ
until C is introduced into the derivation, and since qui´en ‘who’ would then be
the closest wh-expression to C, we would wrongly predict that (70b) ∗Qui´en
fue ad´onde? ‘Who went where?’ is the eventual outcome. More generally, the
derivation outlined above leads us to suppose that intransitive vPs as well as their
transitive counterparts can have an [epp] feature which triggers successive-cyclic
wh-movement through spec-vP.
We might therefore follow Legate (2002) in concluding that not only transitive
vPs but also intransitive vPs are phases. However, such a conclusion is incom-
patible with the derivation for sentences like (70a) outlined here. The key point
to note is that at the stage of derivation represented in (74) above, T must be
able to agree with and assign nominative case to the subject qui´en ‘who’ in spec-
VP; but if an intransitive vP is a phase, the Phase Impenetrability Condition (1)
will block qui´en ‘who’ from serving as a goal for an external T probe, thereby
leaving the uninterpretable case feature on qui´en ‘who’ and the uninterpretable
person/number features on fue ‘went’ unvalued and undeleted, and causing the
derivation to crash. In other words, the conclusion our discussion of sentences like
(70) leads us to is that both intransitive and transitive light verbs can have [wh,
epp] features, but that only transitive vPs are phases. This leads to dissociation
between the [epp] property and phasehood. However, such a dissociation is found
elsewhere (e.g. T in English has an [epp] feature but is not a phase head).
Having looked at the relation between EPP-hood and phasehood, let’s now turn
to explore the question of whether (in addition to CPs and transitive vPs) other
types of constituent may also be phases. Our discussion throughout this chapter
so far has looked at the role of phases in the derivation of clausal structures,
raising the question of whether there are also phases within the nominal domain.
Reﬂecting on this question, Chomsky (1999, p. 11) writes: ‘Considerations of
semantic-phonetic integrity, and the systematic consequences of phase identiﬁ-
cation, suggest that the general typology should include among phases nominal
categories.’ Since phases do not allow any element to be extracted out of their
domain, one way of accounting for contrasts like that in (76) below would be to
suppose that deﬁnite DPs are phases:
(76) (a)
Who were you reading [a book about]?
(b)
∗Who were you reading [the/this/that/his book about?]

412
10 phases
We could then say that extraction of who out of the bracketed indeﬁnite DP in
(76a) is permitted because indeﬁnite DPs are not phases, whereas extraction of
who out of the deﬁnite DP in (76b) is not permitted because deﬁnite DPs are
phases, and the Phase Impenetrability Condition (1) prevents who from being
extracted out of the NP book about who which is the complement of the head
D of the bracketed deﬁnite DP. (It should be noted that Chomsky 1999, p. 36,
fn. 28 envisages the possibility that ‘phases include DPs’.)
The assumption that deﬁnite DPs are phases would offer us a new perspective
on the following contrasts which we ﬁrst looked at in §3.6:
(77) (a)
Nobody had expected that the FBA would assassinate the king of Ruritania
(b)
[CP That the FBA would assassinate the king of Ruritania], nobody had expected
(c)
∗[TP The FBA would assassinate the king of Ruritania], nobody had expected that (NB
that = ðət)
(d)
[DP The king of Ruritania], nobody had expected that the FBA would assassinate
(e)
∗[nP king of Ruritania], nobody had expected that the FBA would assassinate the
In (77b–e) a variety of constituents have been preposed to highlight them. In
(77b) the fronted expression is a CP which functions as the complement of a
non-phasal head (namely the verb expected) and can be preposed under appro-
priate discourse conditions. In (77c) the fronted constituent is a TP which is the
complement of a phasal head (namely the complementiser that), and prepos-
ing the relevant TP violates the Phase Impenetrability Condition (1). In (77d),
the fronted expression is a DP which is the complement of a non-phasal head
(namely the verb assassinate), and hence there is no prohibition on extraction.
But in (77e), extraction of an nP complement of the determiner the results in
ungrammaticality: we can account for this if we suppose that deﬁnite DPs are
phases, since the Phase Impenetrability Condition will prevent extraction of the
nP king of Ruritania because this is the complement of the phase head the. The
reason why the head of a phase does not allow extraction of its complement (or
of any element contained within its complement) is that at the end of a phase,
the complement of a phase head undergoes transfer in accordance with (7i) and
thereafter becomes syntactically inactive.
The hypothesis that deﬁnite DPs are phases also offers us an interesting account
of why (in languages like English) possessives cannot be extracted out of their
containing DPs – as we see from the contrast between the echo question in (78a)
below and its wh-movement counterpart in (78b):
(78) (a)
You have framed [whose picture of Mary]?
(b)
∗Whose have you framed [whose picture of Mary]?
Suppose that (in keeping with the analysis outlined at the end of §9.9) the brack-
eted DP in (78a) has the structure shown in (79) below, with whose superﬁcially
positioned in the speciﬁer position within a NumP/Number Phrase projection:

10.9 Questions about phases
413
(79)
DP
D
ø
NumP
PRN
whose
Num'
Num
ø
nP
whose picture of Mary
We can then account for why whose cannot be extracted out of the overall DP
in (79) by supposing that a deﬁnite DP is a phase, and that at the end of the DP
cycle, the NumP complement of DP undergoes transfer, with the result that whose
cannot be extracted out of its containing NumP projection.
However, such an analysis is not entirely without posing problems. One such
is how we account for the fact that the whole DP containing whose can undergo
wh-movement:
(80)
Whose picture of Mary have you framed?
The head v of vP and the head C of CP in (80) contain [wh, epp] features which
attract the wh-pronoun whose (along with the pied-piped material picture of Mary)
to move through spec-vP into spec-CP. But if a deﬁnite DP is a phase, the problem
we face is that at the end of the DP cycle, the NumP constituent containing whose
will undergo transfer to the PF and semantic components, and so the [wh] feature
on whose will not be visible to either v or C. One apparent way of seemingly
resolving this problem (without abandoning the assumption that a deﬁnite DP is
a phase) would be to suppose that D has an [epp] feature triggering movement
of whose into spec-DP: but this would leave us with no phase-based account of
why whose cannot subsequently be extracted from its containing DP in sentences
like (78b). An alternative possibility (which would again allow us to continue to
maintain that deﬁnite DPs are phases) would be to suppose that whose remains in
spec-NumPbutthewh-featureonwhosepercolatesontotheheadDofDP,perhaps
via some form of agreement parallel to agreement between a complementiser and
a subject in a number of languages. In this connection, it is interesting to note
Haegeman’s (1992, p. 47) claim that in West Flemish ‘the complementiser of
the ﬁnite clause agrees in person and number with the grammatical subject of
the sentence it introduces’. Haegeman (1994, p. 131) provides the following
illustrative data:
(81) (a)
. . . da
den inspekteur da
boek gelezen eet
. . . that the
inspector
that book read
has
‘. . . that the inspector has read that book’
(b)
. . . dan d’inspekteurs da
boek gelezen een
. . . that the inspectors
that book read
have
‘. . . that the inspectors have read that book’

414
10 phases
The italicised complementiser has the form da when the bold-printed subject is
third person singular, but dan when it is third person plural. If the head C of
CP can agree in person and number with the speciﬁer of its TP complement in
structures like (81), it seems no less plausible to suppose that the head D of DP
can agree in wh-ness with the speciﬁer of its NumP complement in structures like
(79). This would mean that the overall DP would have a wh-marked head and
hence could undergo wh-movement.
Some evidence which is consistent with the view that deﬁnite DPs are phases
comes from observations about the pied-piping of possessive phrases in Tzotzil
made by Aissen (1996). She notes that although (italicised) possessors are gen-
erally positioned postnominally in Tzotzil as in (82a) below, when the possessor
is an interrogative pronoun, it is moved to the front of the DP containing it, and
the whole containing DP is then moved to the front of the interrogative clause, as
in (82b):
(82) (a)
Icham [xch’amal li
Xune]
Died
[child
the Xun]
‘Xun’s child died’
(b)
[Buch’u xch’amal] icham?
[Who
child]
died
‘Whose child died?’
The interrogative possessor in (82b) appears to move to spec-DP, and this move-
ment is consistent with the view that DP is a phase, since if the possessor remained
in situ within the NP complement of D, PIC would prevent C from attracting the
wh-pronoun (since NP and its constituents would be impenetrable to C). Move-
ment of the interrogative pronoun to the edge of DP makes it accessible to C.
However, there are a number of problems which arise if we assume that deﬁnite
DPs are phases. For example, Ross (1967) noted that corresponding to a sentence
like (83a) below, we ﬁnd a range of types of relative clause including like those
bracketed in (83b–e):
(83) (a)
The government prescribes the height of the lettering on the covers of the
reports
(b)
Reports [which the government prescribes the height of the lettering on the
covers of] are invariably boring
(c)
Reports [the covers of which the government prescribes the height of the
lettering on] almost always put me to sleep
(d)
Reports [the lettering on the covers of which the government prescribes the
height of] are a shocking waste of public funds
(e)
Reports [the height of the lettering on the covers of which the government
prescribes] should be abolished
Prior to wh-movement, the nominal containing the wh-pronoun which has the
structure shown in skeletal form below:
(84)
[DP the height of [DP the lettering on [DP the covers of which]]]

10.9 Questions about phases
415
This means that the italicised wh-moved expression in (83) has been moved out
of three containing deﬁnite DPs in (83b), out of two in (83c), and out of one in
(83d) – and all of these movements would be predicted to be impossible if deﬁnite
DPs were phases.
One way round this problem (consistent with maintaining that deﬁnite DPs
are indeed phases) would be to posit that (like other phase heads such as C and
transitive v), the head D constituent of DP can have an [epp] feature which allows
it to attract a DP to move to its speciﬁer position. This would mean that which
in (83b) moves ﬁrst to become the speciﬁer of the DP the covers of which, then
to become the speciﬁer of the DP the lettering on the covers of which, then to
become the speciﬁer of the DP the height of the lettering on the covers of which,
from there moving into spec-vP and thence into the spec-CP position which it
occupies in (83b). An interesting question raised by the assumption that D can
have an [epp] feature triggering movement to its speciﬁer position is why the NP
king of Ruritania in (76e) cannot move to become the speciﬁer of the DP the
king of Ruritania, and from there go on to move to the front of the overall clause.
The answer is that the Remerger Constraint prevents the NP king of Ruritania
from moving to spec-DP, since this constraint tells us that a constituent which is
merged as the complement of a given head cannot subsequently be remerged as
its speciﬁer. If DP is a phase, movement of the NP directly out of its containing
DP will be blocked by the Phase Impenetrability Condition – as we saw earlier.
(For an insightful discussion of extraction out of DPs, see Davies and Dubinsky
2003.)
However, the assumption that deﬁnite DPs are phases poses problems for case-
marking. In languages with a richer case morphology than English, in a transitive
sentence such as:
(85)
Mary chose the red dress
the accusative case which the transitive (light verb associated with the) verb chose
assigns to its complement is carried not only by the (counterpart of the) determiner
the but also by the (counterparts of the) adjective red and the noun dress. But if
DP is a phase, its complement red dress will have been sent for transfer at the
end of the DP cycle, leaving only the head D of DP visible for case-marking by
the transitive (light) verb. Such an analysis would mean that we have to posit
a PF operation which Sch¨utze (2001) terms case-spreading to ensure that the
case assigned to the determiner the in the syntax spreads to the adjective red
and the noun dress in the morphology. What this means is that we end up with
an asymmetric account of case-marking under which determiners are assigned
case via agreement in the syntax, but adjectives and nouns are assigned case via
a separate PF operation of case-spreading (which might be the analogue of the
traditional notion of concord). Moreover, if the adjective red and the noun dress
each have an unvalued and undeleted case feature at the end of the derivation, the
derivation will crash at the semantics interface (since the undeleted case feature
cannot be assigned any semantic interpretation). So, for an analysis along the

416
10 phases
lines sketched out here to be workable, we would have to abandon the claim that
uninterpretable features must be deleted in the syntax and instead suppose that
uninterpretable features are intrinsically uninterpretable and so (like phonological
features) are not handed over to the semantic component at the end of the relevant
part of the syntactic derivation. On this alternative view, the only requirement
for an unvalued, uninterpretable feature would be that it should be assigned a
value (in the syntax or morphology) in order to be spelled out at PF. As should
be apparent from our brief discussion here, the potential repercussions of taking
DPs to be phases are considerable.
A further possibility to be explored if there are parallels between phases in the
clausal and nominal domains is that just as CPs introduced by the prepositional
complementiser for are phases, so too prepositional phrases may also be phases.
This would provide one way of accounting for the fact that (as noted in §9.6)
the auxiliary probe do cannot pick out me as its goal in structures such as (86)
below:
(86)
T'
T
DO
vP
v
ø+seem
VP
PP
V'
P
to
PRN
me
V
seem
TP
the president to have upset a lot of people
If PP is a phase, the Phase Impenetrability Condition (1) will mean that the
pronoun me is impenetrable to any head outside the PP to me. Consequently, me
cannot serve as a goal for do, and the probe do therefore locates the alternative
goal the president, agreeing with it, assigning it nominative case and moving it to
spec-TP. Merging the resulting TP with a null declarative complementiser derives
the structure associated with:
(87)
The president does seem to me to have upset a lot of people
For, further details, see the discussion in §9.6.
However, one apparent problem posed by the assumption that PPs are phases
is how we account for the fact that prepositional complements can be passivised
in sentences such as:
(88) (a)
Nothing was agreed on
(b)
The information was asked for by the Dean
(c)
Jim can be depended on for sound advice
(d)
The president was shouted at by his wife
In each of the sentences in (88), the italicised nominal seems to originate as the
complement of the bold-printed preposition. If prepositional phrases are phases,

10.9 Questions about phases
417
wewouldexpectthecomplementofaprepositiontobeimpenetrabletoanexternal
head and hence not to be passivisable. To see why, suppose that we arrive at a
point in the derivation of (88a) where we have generated the structure shown in
simpliﬁed form below:
(89)
[T be] [vP [v agreed] [VP [V agreed] [PP [P on] nothing]]]
If PP is a phase, the domain of the PP phase (i.e. the nothing complement of the
preposition on) will be impenetrable to the external T probe be, so preventing be
from agreeing with, assigning nominative case to and triggering passivisation of
nothing. An analysis along the lines of (89) would therefore wrongly predict that
sentences like (88) are ungrammatical. Does the fact that sentences like (88) are
grammatical therefore provide us with evidence that PPs are not phases?
Not necessarily. Radford (1988, pp. 427–32) argues that in prepositional pas-
sives like those in (88) above the preposition is adjoined to the verb (forming
what pedagogical grammars of English sometimes call a phrasal verb). Part of
the evidence in support of such an analysis is that it correctly predicts that no
other (bold-printed) constituent can be positioned between the (italicised) verb
and preposition in prepositional passives like (90) below:
(90) (a)
∗The resolution was agreed unanimously on by the committee
(b)
∗His integrity can be depended entirely on
(c)
∗The information was asked politely for by the Dean
(d)
∗The president was shouted angrily at by his wife
If prepositional passives do indeed involve a structure in which the preposition is
adjoined to the verb, (88a) will have a structure along the lines shown in simpliﬁed
form in (91) below at the point at which the T probe be is introduced into the
derivation:
(91)
[T be] [vP [v agreed+on] [VP [V agreed+on] nothing]]
The probe [T be] will then agree with, assign nominative case to and trigger
passivisation of the pronoun nothing, thereby correctly predicting the grammati-
cality of (88a). If such an analysis can be maintained, sentences like (88) pose no
problem for the hypothesis that PPs are phases.
A further empirical challenge to the phasal status of PPs comes from the fact
that (in informal styles of English) the complement of a preposition can undergo
wh-movement, so stranding the preposition in sentences like:
(92)
Where are you going to?
Suppose we follow Chomsky in assuming that intransitive light verbs do not have
an [epp] feature triggering wh-movement, and suppose that we have reached the
stage of derivation shown in simpliﬁed form in (93) below:
(93)
[C ø] [TP you [T are] [vP [v going] [VP [V going] [PP [P to] where]]]]
The afﬁxal [tns] feature of C will attract are to move from T to C. The [wh, epp]
features of C need to attract where to move to spec-CP in order to derive (92).

418
10 phases
But if PP is a phase, where will have undergone transfer at the end of the PP
phase and so be impenetrable to C (and indeed to any head outside PP). It would
therefore seem that we wrongly predict that sentences like (92) are ungrammatical
(as indeed their counterparts are in many other languages). Does this provide us
with evidence that PPs are not phases?
Once again, not necessarily. After all, a phase head like C can have an [epp]
feature permitting a wh-expression to move into spec-CP, and then be attracted
by a higher head. Suppose, therefore, that in colloquial English, a preposition can
carry an [epp] feature. If this is so, the wh-word where can move to spec-PP in
(93), so that at the stage when C is introduced into the derivation, we will have
the structure (94) below (if we follow Chomsky in assuming that intransitive verb
phrases are not phases):
(94)
[C ø] [TP you [T are] [vP [v going] [VP [V going] [PP where [P to] where]]]]
Since the edge of a phase (i.e. its speciﬁer and head) are accessible to a c-
commanding probe, and since where is on the edge of PP in (94) by virtue of
being its speciﬁer, nothing prevents the C probe from picking out where as its
goal, so triggering movement of where to spec-CP. Concomitant movement of
the auxiliary are from T to C will derive the structure associated with (92) Where
are you going to? If we suppose that the Convergence Principle (discussed in
§6.7) requires preposing of the smallest accessible wh-constituent in structures
like (94) it follows that we correctly predict that only where will be preposed, not
the PP where to – so accounting for the ungrammaticality of:
(95)
∗Where to are you going?
However, in sentence fragments like that produced by speaker B below, we do
indeed ﬁnd structures of the form wh-word+preposition:
(96)
speaker a: We’re going off on holiday next week
speaker b: Where to?
Structures like where to? may provide us with some evidence in support of sup-
posing that prepositions can have an [epp] feature triggering movement of a
wh-expression to spec-PP (though it should be noted that structures like (96B)
are subject to strong constraints on the choice of wh-word and preposition: see
Radford 1993 for some discussion). A ﬁnal point to note about prepositions with
wh-complements is that if we assume that P does not have an [epp] feature in
those languages and language varieties which do not allow preposition stranding
(e.g. formal styles of English), we can account for why sentences like (92) are
not grammatical in the relevant languages/varieties.
Our discussion in this section has been exploratory in nature, considering the
possibility that both transitive and intransitive light verbs may have an [epp]
feature which triggers A-bar movement, and that the CP and (transitive) vP phases
found in the clausal domain may have analogues in the nominal domain, with DP
and/or PP perhaps being phases. As is clear from our discussion in this section,

10.10 The nature of A-bar movement
419
any such claim is far from straightforward, and requires us to make additional
assumptions if it is to be workable – e.g. about D having an [epp] feature in
sentences like (83), and P having an [epp] feature in sentences like (92). Clearly,
more research is needed in order to determine whether DPs and/or PPs are indeed
phases.
10.10
The nature of A-bar movement
Throughout this chapter, we have made a number of informal assump-
tions about how A-bar movement operations like wh-movement work without
looking at the precise mechanism which drives this movement. Chomsky (1998)
suggests that we should expect A-bar movement to operate in a fashion parallel
to A-movement. More speciﬁcally, he draws the following parallel:
Take wh-movement. This would be point-by-point analogous to A-movement
if the wh-phrase has an uninterpretable feature [wh-] and an interpretable
feature [Q], which matches the uninterpretable probe Q of a complementiser
in the ﬁnal stage.
(Chomsky 1988, p. 44)
Infootnote92,hemakesthefollowingadditionalobservation(whereTDEF denotes
a defective T of the kind found in bare inﬁnitival complements of raising and
passive predicates):
To complete the analogy, C (and v with its -set deleted) may have a non-
speciﬁc P-feature analogous to [person] for TDEF, perhaps contingent on the
assignment of an [epp] feature to a phase.
Let’s try and tease out what this means for wh-movement.
To make our discussion more concrete, consider the derivation of a sentence
such as:
(97)
Where might they think that he will go?
Assume that the derivation proceeds as discussed in relation to (13) Where is it
thought that he will go? until we reach the stage of derivation when the com-
plementiser that merges with its CP complement to form that he will go where
(whose structure is shown in (15) above). Let’s suppose that a wh-word contains
an interpretable operator feature marking whether it is a question operator, a rela-
tive operator, or an exclamative operator, so that interrogative wh-words have the
interpretable feature [Q-Op] ‘question operator’. Let’s further suppose (again fol-
lowing Chomsky) that wh-words also have an uninterpretable wh-feature which
makes them active: since this is a P-feature (i.e. a peripheral feature associated
with movement to the periphery of a phase) in Chomsky’s terms, let’s denote the
relevant feature as [wh-P]. In addition, we can take the complementiser that in
(97) to have an [epp] feature and contingent on this (to use Chomsky’s phrase) a
‘non-speciﬁc P-feature’. Let’s take the relevant P-feature to be an uninterpretable

420
10 phases
P-feature, and let’s assume that Chomsky’s remark that it is ‘non-speciﬁc’ means
that it enters the derivation unvalued – i.e. it enters the derivation as an unin-
terpretable and unvalued peripheral feature [u-P]. Finally, let’s assume that the
complementiser that (by virtue of being the head of a declarative clause) does
not carry a Q-feature (i.e. does not carry a feature indicating that the clause is a
question). Given these assumptions, at the point where the complementiser that
is merged with its TP complement, we will have the structure shown in skeletal
form below (where only features of immediate concern to us are shown):
(98)
[that] he will go [where]
[u-P]
[wh-P]
[epp]
[Q-Op]
Recall that in §8.4 we noted (in relation to our discussion of T-agreement and
nominative case-marking) that when a probe P which is an A-head (like T) locates
a matching goal G, uninterpretable (person/number/case) features on one can only
be deleted by the other if the deleter is complete (i.e. if it carries a complete set
of person/number -features). Let’s therefore assume that in much the same way,
when a probe P is an A-bar head which locates a matching goal G, the one
can only delete any uninterpretable A-bar features carried by the other if the
deleter is complete (i.e. if it carries both a P-feature/peripheral feature and an
O-feature/operator feature). Given this assumption, the derivation will proceed
as follows. The uninterpretable [u-P] feature of that in (98) makes it an active
A-bar probe which searches for a goal that can value its unvalued [u-P] feature,
and locates where: accordingly, where values the [u-P] feature of that as [wh-P] –
or, in simpler terms, wh-agreement takes place between that and where. Since
where is complete (by virtue of having both a P-feature and an O-feature), it
can also delete the uninterpretable [wh-P] feature of that. Conversely, however,
that cannot delete the uninterpretable wh-feature on where because that is not
complete (since it has a P-feature but no O-feature). The [epp] feature of that
is deleted by moving where to spec-CP, so that at the end of the relevant phase
we have the overt structure shown in skeletal form below (as throughout, the
term overt structure being used informally to indicate that, in order to reduce
visual clutter, we have not shown constituents which have a null spellout – e.g.
traces):
(99)
CP
PRN
where
[wh-P]
[Q-Op] 
C'
C
that
[wh-P]
[EPP]
TP
he will go
The TP complement of that undergoes transfer at this point in accordance with
(7i) above. Note that the wh-feature carried by where has not yet been deleted
and so remains active.

10.10 The nature of A-bar movement
421
Assume that the derivation proceeds until the vP phase containing the transitive
light verb associated with think is formed. Suppose that the transitive light verb
also has an [epp] feature and an unvalued, uninterpretable P-feature, but that the
light verb has no O-feature (since only the head C of an interrogative clause has
an operator feature). Much the same will happen on the vP cycle as happened on
the CP cycle: that is, the unvalued [u-P] feature of the light verb will be valued as
[wh-P] by wh-agreement with where, and thereafter deleted by complete where.
The [epp] feature of the light verb will trigger movement of where to a second
speciﬁer position above the external argument speciﬁer they, so that at the end of
the vP phase, we have the overt structure shown in (100) below:
(100)
vP
PRN
where
[wh-P]
[Q-Op] 
v''
PRN
they
v'
v
think
[wh-P]
[EPP] 
VP
that he will go
Once again, note that the wh-feature of where has not yet been deleted and so
remainsactive.Inaccordancewith(7i),theVPthathewillgowillundergotransfer
at this point (since a transitive vP is a phase, so that its complement undergoes
transfer at the end of the vP cycle).
The vP in (100) is then merged with [T might] and the subject they raises to
spec-TP, deriving the TP they might where think that he will go. The resulting
TP is subsequently merged with a null afﬁxal complementiser ø+ which has
not only an uninterpretable [epp] feature and an uninterpretable [u-P] feature,
but also (because the clause which it heads is interrogative) an uninterpretable
unvalued operator feature [u-Op]. Merger of the null complementiser with its
TP complement derives the structure shown below (in which traces have been
omitted to simplify exposition):
(101)
C'
C
ø
[u-P]
[u-Op]
[EPP] 
TP
PRN
they
T'
T
might
vP
PRN
where
[Q-Op]
[wh-P] 
v''
think that he will go

422
10 phases
C is an active probe by virtue of its uninterpretable (and unvalued) peripheral and
operatorfeatures,andlocateswhere(whichisactivebyvirtueofitsuninterpretable
wh-feature) as a matching active goal. Where values the unvalued peripheral and
operator features of C as [wh-P] and [Q-Op] respectively, and simultaneously
deletes them (because where is complete by virtue of having both a P-feature and
an O-feature). Since C is also complete, C can delete the wh-P feature of where
(making it ineligible to serve as a goal for any other probe). The [epp] feature of C
is deleted by moving where into spec-CP. Since the null complementiser ø carries
an afﬁxal tense feature (not shown above), it triggers raising of the auxiliary might
from T to C, so deriving the overt structure shown in highly simpliﬁed form in
(102) below:
(102)
CP
PRN
where
[Q-Op]
[wh-P] 
C'
C
might
[Q-Op]
[wh-P]
[EPP] 
TP
they think that he will go
In the semantic component, a CP containing an interrogative operator in spec-CP
will be interpreted as interrogative, and so (102) will receive an interpretation
which can be loosely paraphrased as ‘What is the place such that they might
think that he will go there?’, with where interpreted as an operator which binds
a theta-marked trace in VP-complement position (the trace not being shown in
(102) above).
There are two particular features of the analysis outlined here which merit
further comment. One is that the analysis assumes that a wh-expression will
remain an active goal until it encounters a C with an operator feature: only at that
point will the wh-feature on the wh-expression be inactivated, making it ineligible
to serve as a goal for another probe – hence making it ineligible to undergo further
movement. We can illustrate this in terms of the following contrast:
(103) (a)
Has she asked [where he is going]?
(b)
∗Where has she asked [he is going]?
In (103), both the main clause and the bracketed complement clause are inter-
rogative in nature and hence contain a C with (initially unvalued) O- and P-
features. Accordingly, movement of where to become the speciﬁer of the brack-
eted complement clause in (103a) will result in the wh-feature of where being
inactivated by the null C heading the bracketed complement clause, since the
complement clause C is complete by virtue of carrying O- and P-features. Hence,
once where moves to the italicised spec-CP position within the bracketed clause
in (103a) its [wh-P] feature is deleted, making it inactive and hence unable to

10.10 The nature of A-bar movement
423
subsequently move into the bold-printed spec-CP position in the main clause in
(103b).
The second feature of the analysis to note is that Chomsky’s assumption that
an interrogative C contains an uninterpretable operator feature has important
implications for the syntax of yes–no questions. What this in effect means (if
yes–no questions contain the same kind of C constituent as wh-questions) is that
yes–no questions must contain a null question operator in spec-CP. One reason
for this is that the semantic component needs some means of identifying the
relevant sentence as a question, and since Chomsky’s Q-feature on C is an unin-
terpretable feature, it clearly cannot be this feature which identiﬁes the structure
as a yes–no question since the relevant feature will be deleted in the course of the
derivation and thereby become invisible to the semantic component. A second rea-
son is that (by hypothesis) C in questions contains unvalued and uninterpretable
O- and P-features, and these need to be valued and deleted by an appropriate
constituent. Let’s therefore suppose that yes–no questions contain a null wh-
operator – an invisible counterpart of the wh-adverb whether which could be used
to introduce main-clause yes–no questions in Early Modern English sentences
such as:
(104)
Whether dost thou profess thyself a knave or a fool? (Lafeu, All’s Well That
Ends Well, IV.v)
Let’s further suppose that in sentences like (104), whether is directly merged in
spec-CP, and contains an uninterpretable [wh-P] P-feature and an interpretable
[Q-Op] O-feature, and that the head C of CP contains unvalued and uninter-
pretable O- and P-features. This being so, the CP in (104) will have the struc-
ture (105) below at the point when whether is merged in spec-CP (assuming
that merger of whether in spec-TP deletes the uninterpretable [epp] feature
of C):
(105)
CP
ADV
Whether
[Q-Op]
[wh-P]
C'
C
dost
[u-Op]
[u-P]
[EPP]
TP
thou profess thyself a knave or a fool
The operator whether (which is active by virtue of its uninterpretable wh-feature)
serves as a probe which can value and (by virtue of being complete – i.e. having
both an O-feature and a P-feature) delete the two unvalued and uninterpretable
O- and P-features of C. Conversely, C (being complete) can delete the wh-feature
of whether. Hence, agreement in O- and P-features between whether and C will
result in the following structure at the end of the relevant phase:

424
10 phases
(106)
CP
ADV
whether
[Q-Op]
[wh-P]
C'
C
dost
[Q-Op]
[wh-P]
[EPP]
TP
thou profess thyself a knave or a fool
As desired, the only undeleted P-feature which survives at the end of the CP
phase is the interpretable operator feature of whether. It may be that whether gets
interpreted as a yes–no question operator because (unlike other wh-operators) it
does not bind a trace (i.e. variable) – or its yes–no question interpretation may
simply be part of the meaning of whether. We can suppose that yes–no questions
in present-day English have a similar derivation, save that whether receives a
null spellout in main clauses, in keeping with Rizzi’s (2000) hypothesis that root
speciﬁers in certain types of structure have a null spellout under appropriate con-
ditions. (Note that the analysis of yes–no questions outlined above assumes that
C in yes–no questions has the same feature composition as in wh-questions and
hence has uninterpretable [Q-Op] and [wh-P] features. However, an alternative
possibility is that C in yes–no questions may contain an interpretable opera-
tor feature, but no [wh-P] feature: such an analysis would obviate the need for
positing a null variant of whether in spec-CP in main-clause yes–no questions in
English.)
In this section, I have developed an analysis of wh-movement which attempts
to implement the suggestion made by Chomsky (in the quotations given at the
beginning of this section) about possible parallels between A-movement and A-
bar movement. The parallels should be obvious: for example, just as a (complete)
T probe carries unvalued person/number features and an [epp] feature which
triggers movement of a goal to spec-TP, so too a (complete) C probe carries
unvalued peripheral/operator features and an [epp] feature which triggers move-
ment of a goal to spec-CP; and just as intermediate T constituents (like raising
to) are incomplete, so too intermediate C constituents are incomplete. Likewise,
just as the goal in A-movement carries interpretable person/number features and
an uninterpretable case feature which makes it active, so too the goal in A-bar
movement carries an interpretable operator feature and an uninterpretable periph-
eral feature [wh-P] which makes it active. The parallels are not exact, however:
for example, one difference is that (under the analysis presented here) the unin-
terpretable [wh-P] feature carried by the moved wh-expression enters the deriva-
tion already valued (so that it can wh-mark an intermediate complementiser),
whereas the uninterpretable case feature carried by a nominal enters the derivation
unvalued.

10.10 The nature of A-bar movement
425
There are also empirical problems posed by our attempt to implement
Chomsky’s analysis. To see why, let’s return to consider the structure of Belfast
English questions like (38) above, repeated as (107) below:
(107)
What did Mary claim [did they steal]? (Henry 1995, p.108)
Under the analysis of wh-movement sketched in this section, the intermediate C
in the bracketed complement clause will enter the derivation carrying an unvalued
P-feature [u-P] which will be assigned the value [wh-P] via agreement with the
wh-pronoun what. This predicts that the head C of the complement clause CP will
be wh-marked in precisely the same way as it would be if the wh-pronoun were
relative or exclamative. But in fact that head C of the bracketed complement-
clause CP seems to be marked as speciﬁcally interrogative in (107), and for this
reason requires auxiliary inversion – unlike what happens in a relative clause
structure like:
(108)
something which Mary claimed [that they stole/∗did they steal]
where the italicised C constituent heading the bracketed complement clause can
be spelled out as that but not as an inverted auxiliary like did. This suggests that the
italicised intermediate C is marked as interrogative in a structure like (107), and
as relative in a structure like (108). What this might suggest is that C must carry a
clause-type feature of some kind, valued as relative if the clause contains a relative
pronoun, and interrogative if it contains an interrogative pronoun. If what marks
a pronoun as interrogative or relative is an interrogative operator feature [Q-Op]
or a relative operator feature [R-Op], then it would seem as if intermediate C
constituents do indeed carry an unvalued operator feature [u-Op] which is valued
as relative/interrogative via agreement with the wh-pronoun. If this is so, then
the topmost C constituent in a wh-structure must carry some additional feature
which makes it complete – perhaps a focus/topic feature (bearing in mind that it is
sometimes claimed that interrogative pronouns behave like focused constituents,
and relative pronouns behave like topics), or alternatively a scope feature. Details
need to be worked out, but I will not attempt to do this here.
Clearly, this and other alternative analyses of A-bar movement operations need
to be evaluated in future research – and obvious questions posed by multiple wh-
questions answered (one such question being how we ensure that only the ‘high-
est’ wh-expression in a multiple wh-question in English carries whatever feature
makes such expressions active for wh-movement, and how the wh-expressions
which remain in situ can be bound by C (as Pesetsky 1987 argues they must be)
if C contains no interpretable interrogative feature. As noted in the Preface to the
book, the Minimalist Program is precisely that – a programme to guide research:
consequently, in relation to many (indeed, most) aspects of syntax we have more
questions than answers at present.

426
10 phases
10.11
Summary
In this chapter, we have taken a look at Chomsky’s phase-based the-
ory of syntax. In §10.2, we noted Chomsky’s suggestion that the computational
component of the Language Faculty can only hold limited amounts of syntactic
structure in its working memory at any one time, and that clause structure is
built up in phases (with phases including CP and transitive vP). At the end of
each phase, the domain (i.e. complement of the phase head) undergoes transfer
to the phonological and semantic components, with the result that neither the
domain nor any constituent it contains are accessible to further syntactic oper-
ations from that point on. In §10.3 we saw that intransitive vPs and defective
clauses (i.e. clauses which are TPs lacking an extended projection into CP) are
not phases, and hence allow A-movement out of their complement, as in structures
such as Numerous problems are thought to remain in Utopia. In §10.4 we saw
that a phase-based theory of syntax requires us to assume that long-distance A-
bar movement (e.g. of wh-expressions) involves movement through intermediate
spec-CP positions, since CP is a phase and only constituents at the edge of a phase
can undergo subsequent syntactic operations. In §10.5 it was argued that A-bar
movement in transitive clauses involves movement through intermediate spec-vP
positions. In §10.6 a range of arguments were presented in support of successive-
cyclic A-bar movement through intermediate spec-CP positions, from structures
including preposition stranding in Afrikaans, quantiﬁer-stranding in West Ulster
English, wh-copying in adult and child grammars, and wh-marking of comple-
mentisers in adult and child grammars. In §10.7 we looked at evidence from
have-cliticisation in English, wh-marking of verbs in Chamorro, past-participle
agreement in French, mutation in Welsh and multiple wh-questions in Spanish in
support of claiming that wh-movement in transitive clauses involves movement
through spec-vP. In §10.8 we looked at the role of phases in relation to lexical
selection, noting that only a subarray of the items in the lexical array can be
accessed on any given phase. In §10.9, we raised a number of questions about
phases. We began by exploring the relation between EPP-hood and phasehood;
we presented evidence (from multiple wh-questions in Spanish) that intransitive
light verbs may have a wh-attracting [epp] feature, and yet not be phases. We
went on to explore the possibility that DP and/or PP may also be phases, not-
ing that any such claim requires us to make a number of ancillary assumptions
(e.g. about feature percolation and [epp] features). In §10.10 we took a closer
look at what drives wh-movement, exploring a way of implementing Chomsky’s
idea that an interrogative wh-word has an interpretable Q-feature and an uninter-
pretable wh-feature which makes it active, and conversely that an interrogative C
has uninterpretable (and unvalued) Q- and P-features (with a non-interrogative C
able to bear a P-feature but not a Q-feature). We noted that such an analysis would
require us to suppose that yes–no questions contain an interrogative operator (e.g.
a null counterpart of whether) in spec-CP. However, we also observed that the

Workbook section
427
analysis proposed in the text left in its wake a number of unanswered questions
for future research.
Workbook section
Exercise 10.1
Discuss the role played by phases in the derivation of the following sentences:
1
What is expected to happen to him?
2
What is it expected will happen to him?
3
What are you expecting will happen to him?
4
What is he expected to say to her?
5
What is it expected that he will say to her?
6
What are you expecting that he will say to her?
7
How many prizes are there expected to be awarded?
8
How many prizes are you expecting there to be awarded?
9
How many prizes are you expecting to be awarded?
10
How many questions have you found the answer to?
11
Who has done what?
12
Who has gone where?
Helpful hints
In 7–10, take how many prizes/how many questions to be QPs, with many as the head,
prizes/questions as the complement and how as the speciﬁer. In relation to 11 and 12, consider
how the raising of who to spec-TP in English may help account for word-order differences with
the corresponding Spanish examples discussed in the main text.
Model answer for sentence 1
The unaccusative verb happen is merged with its PP complement to him, forming the V-bar
happen to him. This V-bar is then merged with the pronoun what to form the VP what happen to
him. This VP is in turn merged with an intransitive light verb, which (being afﬁxal) triggers
raising of the verb happen from V to v. Since the relevant vP has no external argument, it is
intransitive. If we follow Chomsky’s assumption that intransitive vPs are not phases and their
heads have no [epp] feature, no wh-movement takes place at this point. The resulting vP merges
with inﬁnitival to, forming the T-bar in (i) below:
(i)
T'
T
to
vP
v
ø+happen
VP
PRN
what
V'
V
happen
PP
to him 

428
10 phases
Since a (seemingly subjectless) inﬁnitival complement of a passive participle is a defective clause
(hence a TP headed by a defective T), inﬁnitival to is defective here and so has person and [epp]
features, but no number feature. Inﬁnitival to probes at this point, searching for an active goal with
a person feature and an active A-feature, locating what (which has a person feature and is active
by virtue of its unvalued case feature) and moving what to become the speciﬁer of to, with the
person feature of to being valued and deleted in the process, and the [epp] feature of to likewise
being deleted. The resulting TP is merged with the verb expect to form the VP expect what to
happen to him. This VP will in turn be merged as the complement of an intransitive participial
light verb (which Chomsky 1999 labels as PRT but which we label here as v) and thereby project
into an intransitive participial vP: assuming that the head v of vP is afﬁxal in nature, it will trigger
raising of the verb expect to v (with expect being spelled out as the passive participle expected in
the phonology). The resulting vP will in turn be merged as the complement of a ﬁnite T
constituent [T be], deriving the overt structure shown in simpliﬁed form below:
(ii)
T'
T
BE
vP
v
expected
VP
what to happen to him
The probe be identiﬁes what as its goal (since what is active for agreement with an A-head by
virtue of its unvalued case feature), agrees in person and number with what and (by virtue of its
[epp] feature) triggers movement of what to become the subject of be. The resulting TP is merged
with a null C constituent with carries [tns, wh, epp] features which trigger movement of what to
spec-CP (but do not trigger T-to-C movement, if we adopt Pesetsky and Torrego’s 2001 analysis
of wh-subject questions, under which a wh-subject in a ﬁnite clause is tensed). Since CP is a
phase, its TP domain will be spelled out at the end of the CP phase by (7i) in the main text, and the
edge (= speciﬁer and head) of CP will in turn be spelled out at the end of the overall derivation
(which coincides with the end of the CP phase) by (7ii), so deriving the structure shown in skeletal
form below (simpliﬁed by omitting all traces):
(iii)
CP
PRN
What
C'
C
ø
TP
is expected to happen to him
There is no movement of is from T to C, since C does not trigger auxiliary inversion in questions
in which the preposed wh-word is the subject of the TP complement of C. The only phase in the
structure is CP.
Exercise 10.2
Discuss the derivation of the following sentences, commenting on points of special interest.
(Note that 3b and 6a,b are examples from non-standard varieties of English: see the helpful
hints.)

Workbook section
429
1a
He is someone who/whom I believe has left
b
He is someone who/∗whom it is believed has left
2a
He is someone [whom they claim to have died]
b
∗They claim him to have died
3a
These are the people [who Clark thinks are telling the truth]
b
%These are the people [who Clark think are telling the truth]
4a
∗Who were you asking what happened to?
b
∗What were you asking happened to him?
5a
Who was expected to present the prizes?
b
∗Who was decided to present the prizes? (= ‘Who was it decided should present the
prizes?’)
6a
Who d’ya reckon what/∗that seen’im? (= Who d’you think saw him?’)
b
Who d’ya reckon that/∗what ’e seen? (= Who d’you think that he saw?)
7a
How little honesty there is in the world!
b
∗How little honesty there’s in the world!
8a
%What is thought has happened to him? (sentence produced by interviewer, BBC
Radio 5 Live)
b
There look like there have been some problems
Say why 8a is ungrammatical in standard varieties of English, and why sentences like 8b are
identiﬁed by Chomsky (1998, p. 46, fn.94) as potentially problematic for a phase-based theory of
syntax which assumes that all ﬁnite clauses are CPs and hence phases.
In addition, discuss the derivation of the following child wh-questions reported in Thornton
(1995). (Sentences 11 and 12 are adapted slightly for the purposes of this exercise.)
9
Which dinosaur that Grover didn’t ride on?
10
Which mouse what the cat didn’t see?
11
Which animal do you think what was chasing the cat?
12
Which Smurf do you think who was chasing the cat?
Helpful hints
In sentences 2a and 3a,b, concern yourself only with the derivation of the bracketed relative clause
structures. In relation to 2, consider the possibility that (in active uses) verbs like claim select a CP
complement headed by a null inﬁnitival complementiser which lacks the ability to assign case.
Sentence 3b is a type of structure found in some (=%) varieties of Northeastern American English
(according to Kimball and Aissen 1971) and in such clauses the verb is reported to agree with the
relative pronoun. In 4a, take who to originate as the complement of to. Sentences 6a,b are types of
structure found in a non-standard variety of colloquial British English. In relation to 8a, consider
how you might rule out movement of who through spec-CP in the complement clause into
spec-TP in the main clause, and say whether it is necessary to follow Ura (2001) in attributing the
ungrammaticality of such examples to violation of an Improper Movement Constraint which
prevents movement from an A-bar to an A position (or, equivalently, prevents an A-head like T
from attracting a constituent in an A-bar position) – or whether the case-marking properties of the
head C constituent of the complement clause CP provide us with an alternative account. In relation
to 9 and 10, make the simplifying assumption that didn’t is an inherently negative auxiliary which
originates in T. In relation to 12, consider the possibility that an intermediate C with an [epp]
feature agrees in person, number and (animate or inanimate) gender with the subject of its clause.

430
10 phases
Model answer for sentence 1a
What is puzzling about 1a is why the wh-pronoun can surface in the overtly accusative form whom
when (prior to wh-movement) it was the subject of has left and so would have been expected to
agree with (and be assigned nominative case by) has, and hence to be spelled out as nominative
who. In order to try and ﬁnd out what’s going on here, let’s take a look at the derivation of the
relevant sentence.
The verb leave is unaccusative, and so the relative pronoun who originates as its internal
argument. Merging leave with who derives the VP leave who. This VP is then merged with a strong
light verb which triggers raising of leave to adjoin to the light verb. Merging the resulting vP with
the auxiliary have (which requires the verb leave to be spelled out in the perfect participle form
left at PF) derives the structure (i) below (with italics marking a copy of a moved constituent):
(i)
T'
T
have
vP
v
leave+ø
VP
V
leave
PRN
who
The unvalued person/number features of T serve as a probe, identifying who as a goal which is
active by virtue of its unvalued case feature. Accordingly, have agrees with who and is ultimately
spelled out at PF as has. We’d also expect the unvalued case feature of who to be valued as
nominative via agreement with the ﬁnite T have at this point, but let’s suppose that this doesn’t
happen. Instead, the EPP feature of T attracts who to move to spec-TP, so deriving the structure
shown in skeletal form in (ii) below (trace copies left behind by movement being shown in italics):
(ii)
[TP who [T has] [vP [v leave] [VP [V leave] who]]]
The resulting TP is then merged with a C carrying [wh, epp] features which attract who to move
into spec-CP, and (since CP is a phase) the TP complement of C then undergoes transfer, so
deriving the structure shown in (iii) below (with items being shown in their PF form, outline font
indicating constituents which have undergone spellout, and strikethrough showing constituents
which are given a null spellout in the PF component):
(iii)
[CP who [C ø] [TP who [T has] [vP [v left] [VP [V left] who]]]]
The CP in (iii) is then embedded as the complement of the verb believe, deriving the structure
shown in skeletal form in (iv) below (simpliﬁed, inter alia, by showing only those constituents of
TP which have been overtly spelled out):
(iv)
[VP [V believe] [CP who [C ø] [TP has left]]]
The VP in (iv) is then merged with a transitive light verb whose external argument is the pronoun
(which is ultimately spelled out as) I, and the verb believe raises to adjoin to the light verb (leaving
an italicised trace copy behind), forming the structure shown in simpliﬁed form in (v) below:

Workbook section
431
(v)
v''
PRN
I
v'
v
believe+ø
VP
V
believe
CP
PRN
who
C'
C
ø
TP
The light verb is transitive (by virtue of having an external argument) and so carries unvalued
person/number features, allowing it to agree with and assign (exceptional) accusative case to the
wh-pronoun who (which remains active at this point by virtue of its case feature not having yet
been valued): accordingly, the accusative relative pronoun is spelled out as whom in formal styles,
and as who in other styles. On the assumption that the light verb also carries [wh, epp] features, it
will trigger movement of who to become a second (outer) speciﬁer for vP. The derivation will
thereafter continue in a familiar fashion, with I agreeing with, being assigned nominative case by
and moving to become the speciﬁer of the relative clause T constituent, and who moving from
spec-vP to become the speciﬁer of the null C constituent heading the relative clause. Note,
however, that a crucial feature of this analysis is the assumption that a transitive vP is a phase, and
triggers successive-cyclic movement of an extracted wh-expression through spec-vP.
While the force of the argument presented above is somewhat weakened by the problematic
status of whom in present-day English (discussed in Lasnik and Sobin 2000), it is interesting to
note that Bejar and Massam (1999, p. 66) report a similar phenomenon (of exceptional
case-marking of the subject of a ﬁnite clause by a higher transitive verb) in Hungarian sentences
such as:
(vi)
Kiket mondtad hogy szeretn´el
ha elj¨onn´ek?
Whom you.said that you.would.like if came
‘Who did you say you would like it if they came?’
Bejar and Massam suppose that different links in a movement chain can be assigned different
cases, with PF determining which of the various cases is actually spelled out. Their analysis
overcomes an apparent violation of the Earliness Principle in the derivation outlined above, since
we would have expected who to be assigned nominative case at the stage of derivation represented
in (i) above. However, their proposal poses an apparent challenge to the claim that the different
links in movement chains are identical copies, since this will clearly not be so if different chain
links carry different cases.

Glossary and list of abbreviations
Bold print is used to indicate technical terms, and to cross-refer to entries else-
where in the glossary. Abbreviations used here are: ch. = chapter; § = section
number; ex. = exercise.
A: see adjective, A-head, A-position, Binding.
AAE: African American English.
A-bar: an A-bar position is a position which can be occupied by arguments or
adjuncts alike. For example, the speciﬁer position within CP is said to be an A-bar
position because it can contain not only an argument like the italicised wh-phrase
in ‘Which car did he ﬁx?’ but also an adjunct like the italicised adverbial phrase
in ‘How did he ﬁx the car?’ A-bar movement is a movement operation (like wh-
movement) which moves an argument or adjunct expression to an A-bar position.
On A-bar head, see A-head.
Acc(usative): see case.
ACP: see Attract Closest Principle.
acquisition: the process by which people acquire their ﬁrst language (= L1 acqui-
sition) or a second language which is not their mother tongue (= L2 acquisition).
active: a contrast is traditionally drawn between sentence pairs such as (i) and
(ii) below:
(i)
The thieves stole the jewels
(ii) The jewels were stolen by the thieves
(i) is said to be an active clause (or sentence), and (ii) to be its passive counterpart;
similarly, the verb stole is said to be an active verb (or a verb in the active voice)
in (i), whereas the verb stolen is said to be a passive verb (or a verb in the passive
voice – more speciﬁcally, a passive participle) in (ii); likewise, the auxiliary
were in (ii) is said to be a passive auxiliary. In a different use, a probe or goal is
said to be active for movement/agreement if it carries an uninterpretable feature.
See §8.4.
adequacy, criteria of: these are the criteria which an adequate grammar or lin-
guistic theory must meet. See §1.3.
432

Glossary
433
adjacency condition: a condition requiring that two expressions must be imme-
diately adjacent (i.e. there must be no constituent intervening between the two)
in order for some operation to apply. For example, have must be immediately
adjacent to they in order to cliticise onto it in structures such as They’ve gone
home.
adjective: this is a category of word (abbreviated to A) which often denotes
states (e.g. happy, sad), which typically has an adverb counterpart in -ly (e.g.
sad/sadly), which typically has comparative/superlative forms in -er/-est (e.g.
sadder/saddest), which can often take the preﬁx un- (e.g. unhappy), and which
can often form a noun by the addition of the sufﬁx -ness (e.g. sadness), etc. See
§2.2 and §2.3.
adjoin: see adjunction.
adjunct: One way in which this term is used is to denote an optional constituent
typically used to specify e.g. the time, place or manner in which an event takes
place. Another way in which it is used is to denote a constituent which has been
attached to another to form a larger constituent of the same type. (See adjunction.)
adjunction: this is a process by which one constituent is adjoined (= attached)
to another to form a larger constituent of the same type. For example, we could
say that in a sentence like ‘He should not go’, the negative particle not (in the
guise of its contracted form n’t) can be adjoined to the auxiliary should to form
the negative auxiliary shouldn’t. In a sentence such as He gently rolled the ball
down the hill, the adverb gently can be taken to be an adverb which adjoins to a
verbal projection, extending it into a larger projection of the same kind. See §9.4.
adposition: a cover term subsuming preposition and postposition. For example,
the English word in is a preposition since it is positioned before its complement
(e.g. in Tokyo), whereas its Japanese counterpart is a postposition because it is
positioned after its complement Tokyo. Both words are adpositions.
ADV/adverb: this is a category of word which typically indicates manner (e.g.
‘wait patiently’) or degree (e.g. ‘exceedingly patient’). In English, most (but not
all) adverbs end in -ly (e.g. quickly – but also almost). See §2.2 and 2.3.
AFF: see afﬁx
affective: an affective constituent is an (e.g. negative, interrogative or conditional)
expression which can have a polarity expression like (partitive) any in its scope.
So, for example, interrogative if is an affective constituent as we see from the
fact that an interrogative if-clause can contain partitive any in a sentence such as
‘I wonder if he has any news about Jim.’
afﬁx/afﬁxal: the term afﬁx is typically used to describe a grammatical morpheme
which cannot stand on its own as an independent word, but which must be attached
to a host word of an appropriate kind. An afﬁx which attaches to the beginning of a

434
Glossary
word (e.g. un- in unhappy) is called a preﬁx: an afﬁx which attaches to the end of
a word (e.g. -s in chases) is called a sufﬁx. An afﬁxal head is one which behaves
like an afﬁx in needing to attach to a particular kind of host word. See also clitic.
Afﬁx Hopping is an operation by which an unattached afﬁx in T is lowered onto
a verb: see §4.4. Afﬁx Attachment is an operation whereby an unattached tense
afﬁx lowers onto a verb where possible, but is otherwise supported by use of the
dummy auxiliary do: see §5.8.
agent: this is a term used to describe the semantic (= thematic) role which a
particular type of argument plays in a given sentence. It typically denotes a person
who deliberately causes some state of affairs to come about – hence e.g. John
plays the thematic role of agent in a sentence such as ‘John smashed the bottle.’
See §7.5.
agreement: an operation by which (e.g. in a sentence like They are lying) the
person/number features of the T-constituent are get assigned the same values
as those of its subject they, so that the present-tense auxiliary are is third person
plural because it agrees in person and number with its third-person-plural subject
they. See ch. 8.
A-head: an A-head is the kind of head (like T) which allows as its speciﬁer an
argument expression but not an adjunct expression. An A-bar head is the kind
of head (like C) which allows as its speciﬁer either an argument or an adjunct
expression.
allomorphs: variant phonetic forms of a single morpheme. For example, the noun
plural morpheme {s} in English has the three allomorphs /s/ (e.g. in cats) /z/ (e.g.
in dogs) and /iz/ (e.g. in horses).
A-movement: movement from one A-position to another (typically, from a sub-
ject or complement position into another subject position). See ch. 7.
A-position: a position which can be occupied by an argument, but not by a
non-argument expression (e.g. not by an adjunct). In practice, the term denotes a
subject position, or a lexical complement position (i.e. a position occupied by a
constituent which is the complement of a lexical/substantive head).
anaphor: this is an expression (like himself) which cannot have independent ref-
erence, but which must take its reference from an appropriate antecedent (i.e.
expression which it refers to) within the same phrase or sentence. Hence, while we
can say ‘John is deluding himself’ (where himself refers back to John), we can-
not say ∗‘Himself is waiting’, since the anaphor himself here has no antecedent.
A traditional distinction is drawn between reﬂexive anaphors (i.e. self forms
like myself/ourselves/yourself/yourselves/himself/herself/itself/themselves) and
the reciprocal anaphors each other/one another (e.g. ‘They help each other/one
another’). See §3.7 and ex.3.2.

Glossary
435
animate: the term animate is used to denote (the gender of) an expression which
denotes a living being (e.g. a human being or animal), while the term inanimate
is used in relation to an expression which denotes lifeless entities. For example,
the relative pronoun who could be said to be animate in gender and the rela-
tive pronoun which inanimate – hence we say someone who upsets people and
something which upsets people.
antecedent: an expression which is referred to by a pronoun or anaphor of some
kind. For example, in ‘John cut himself shaving’, John is the antecedent of the
anaphor himself, since himself refers back to John. In a sentence such as ‘He is
someone who we respect’, the antecedent of the relative pronoun who is someone.
AP: adjectival phrase – i.e. a phrase headed by an adjective, such as fond of
chocolate, keen on sport, good at syntax etc.
appositive relative clause: a relative clause which is used as a parenthetical
comment, as with the parenthesised relative clause in ‘John (who you met last
week) is a good friend of mine.’ See relative.
arbitrary: when we say that an expression has ‘arbitrary reference’, we mean
that it can denote an unspeciﬁed set of individuals, and hence have much the same
meaning as English one/people or French on. In a sentence such as ‘It is difﬁcult
[PRO to learn Japanese]’, the bracketed clause is said to have an abstract pronoun
subject PRO which can have arbitrary reference, in which case the sentence is
paraphraseable as ‘It’s difﬁcult for people to learn Japanese.’ See §4.2.
argument: this is a term borrowed by linguists from philosophy (more speciﬁ-
cally, from predicate calculus) to describe the role played by particular types of
expression in the semantic structure of sentences. In a sentence such as ‘John hit
Fred’, the overall sentence is said to be a proposition (a term used to describe
the semantic content of a clause), and to consist of the predicate hit and its two
arguments John and Fred. The two arguments represent the two participants in
the act of hitting, and the predicate is the expression (in this case the verb hit)
which describes the activity in which they are engaged. By extension, in a sen-
tence such as ‘John says he hates syntax’ the predicate in the main clause is the
verb says, and its two arguments are John and the clause he hates syntax; the
argument he hates syntax is in turn a proposition whose predicate is hates, and
whose two arguments are he and syntax. Since the complement of a verb is posi-
tioned internally within V-bar whereas the subject of a verb is positioned outside
V-bar, complements are also referred to as internal arguments, and subjects as
external arguments. Expressions which do not function as arguments are non-
arguments. The argument structure of a predicate provides a description of the
set of arguments associated with the predicate, and the thematic role which
each fulﬁls in relation to the predicate. See §7.4 and §7.5.
array: the lexical array for a given expression denotes the set of lexical items
out of which the expression is formed. The term lexical subarray denotes the

436
Glossary
particular subset of items from the lexical array out of which a particular phase
is formed. See §10.8.
article: a term used in traditional grammar to describe a particular subclass of
determiners: the determiner the is traditionally called the deﬁnite article, and the
determiner a the indeﬁnite article.
Asp/AspP: Aspect/Aspect Phrase. See §7.3.
aspect: a term typically used to denote the duration of the activity described by
a verb (e.g. whether the activity is ongoing or completed). In sentences such as:
(i)
He has taken the medicine
(ii) He is taking the medicine
the auxiliary has is said to be an auxiliary which marks perfect aspect, in that it
marks the perfection (in the sense of ‘completion’ or ‘termination’) of the activity
of taking the medicine; for analogous reasons, taken is said to be a perfect-
participle verb form in (i) (though it is referred to in traditional grammars as a
‘past participle’). Similarly, is functions as an auxiliary which marks progressive
aspect in (ii), because it relates to an activity which is ongoing or in progress
(for this reason, is in (ii) is also referred to as a progressive auxiliary); in the
same way, the verb taking in (ii) is said to be the progressive-participle form
of the verb (though it is sometimes known in traditional grammars as a ‘present
participle’).
aspectual auxiliaries: auxiliaries which mark aspect – e.g. perfect have and
progressive be. See aspect.
associate: an expression which represents the thematic argument in an expletive
there construction, and which is associated with the expletive subject there: e.g.
several prizes in There were awarded several prizes.
asymmetric c-command: see c-command.
attract: to say that a head H attracts a constituent C is to say that H triggers
movement of C to some position on the edge of HP (so that C may move to adjoin
to H, or to become the speciﬁer of H).
Attract Closest Principle: a principle of grammar requiring that a head H which
attracts a particular type of constituent attracts the closest constituent of the
relevant type which it c-commands.
attribute: see value.
attributive adjectives: these are adjectives which are used to modify a following
noun expression – e.g. red in ‘John has a red Ferrari’, where red attributes the
property of being red to the noun Ferrari. Attributive adjectives contrast with
predicative adjectives, which are adjectives used in structures such as ‘The
house was red’ or ‘They painted the house red’, (where the property of being red
is said to be predicated of the expression the house).

Glossary
437
AUX/auxiliary: a term used to categorise items such as will/would/
can/could/shall/should/may/might/must/ought and some uses of have/be/do/
need/dare.Suchitemshaveanumberofidiosyncraticproperties,includingthefact
that they can undergo inversion (e.g. in questions like ‘Can you speak French?’).
By contrast, main verbs (i.e. verbs which are not auxiliaries) cannot undergo
inversion – as we see from the ungrammaticality ∗‘Speak you French?’ See §2.7.
AUXP: auxiliary projection/auxiliary phrase – i.e. a phrase headed by an auxiliary
which does not occupy the head T position of TP. See §5.6.
auxiliary copying: a phenomenon whereby a moved auxiliary leaves behind an
overt copy of itself when it moves – as with can in a Child English question like
What can I can have for dinner?
auxiliary inversion: see inversion.
auxiliary selection: this term relates to the type of expression which a given
auxiliary selects as its complement: e.g. in many languages (the counterpart of)
be when used as a perfect auxiliary selects only a complement headed by a
verb with no external argument, whereas (the counterpart of) have selects a
complement headed by a verb with an external argument.
B: on Principle B of Binding Theory, see ex. 3.2.
bar: when used as a sufﬁx attached to a category label such as N, V, P, T etc. (as in
N-bar, V-bar, P-bar, T-bar etc.), it denotes an intermediate projection which is
larger than a word but smaller than a phrase. Hence, in a phrase such as university
policy on drugs, we might say that the string policy on drugs is an N-bar, since
it is a projection of the head noun policy, but is an intermediate projection in
that it has a larger projection into the NP university policy on drugs. The term
bar notation refers to a system of representing projection levels which posits
that (ﬁrst) merge of a head H with its complement forms an H-bar constituent,
(second) merge of a head with a speciﬁer forms an H-double-bar constituent,
(third) merge of a head with a further speciﬁer forms an H-treble-bar constituent,
and so on (with the maximal projection of H being labelled HP). On A-bar
position, see A-position.
bare: a bare inﬁnitive structure is one which contains a verb in the inﬁnitive
form, but does not contain the inﬁnitive particle to (e.g. the italicised clause in
‘He won’t let you help him’). A bare noun is a noun used without any determiner
to modify it (e.g. ﬁsh in ‘Fish is expensive’). A bare clause is one not introduced
by an overt complementiser (e.g. he was tired in ‘John said he was tired’). A
theory of bare phrase structure is one in which there are no category labels or
projection levels associated with constituents: see §3.8.
base form: the base form of a verb is the simplest, uninﬂected form of the verb
(the form under which the relevant verb would be listed in an English dictionary) –
henceformslikego/be/have/see/want/lovearethebaseformsoftherelevantverbs.

438
Glossary
The base form can typically function either as an inﬁnitive (e.g. ‘Try to stay’),
an imperative (e.g. ‘Stay with me tonight!’), a present-tense indicative form (e.g.
‘They sometimes stay with me’), or a subjunctive form (e.g. ‘I demand that he
stay with me’).
Binarity Principle: a principle of Universal Grammar specifying that all non-
terminal nodes in syntactic structures (i.e. tree diagrams) are binary-branching.
See §3.2.
binary: a term relating to a two-way contrast. For example, number is a binary
property in English, in that we have a two-way contrast between singular forms
like cat and plural forms like cats. It is widely assumed that parameters have
binary settings, that features have binary values, and that all branching in syntactic
structure is binary.
binary-branching: a tree diagram in which every non-terminal node has two
daughters is binary-branching; a category/node which has two daughters is also
binary-branching. See §3.2.
bind/binder/binding: to say that one constituent X binds (or serves as the binder
for) another constituent Y (and conversely that Y is bound by X) is to say that
X determines properties (usually, referential properties) of Y. For example, in a
sentence such as ‘John blamed himself’, the reﬂexive anaphor himself is bound
by John in the sense that the referential properties of himself are determined by
John (so that the two refer to the same individual). The C-command condition
on binding says that a bound form must be c-commanded by its antecedent. On
principles A, B and C of Binding Theory, see ex. 3.2.
bottom-up: to say that a syntactic structure is derived in a bottom-up fashion is
to say that the structure is built up from bottom to top, with lower parts of the
structure being formed before higher parts.
bound: in a traditional use of this term, a bound form is one which cannot stand
alone and be used as an independent word, but rather must be attached to some
other morpheme (e.g. negative n’t, which has to attach to some auxiliary such as
could). In a completely different use of the term, a bound constituent is one which
has a binder (i.e. antecedent) within the structure containing it (see bind).
bracketing: a technique for representing the categorial status of an expression,
whereby the expression is enclosed in square brackets, and the lefthand bracket
is labelled with an appropriate category symbol – e.g. [D the]. See §2.10.
branch: a term used to represent a solid line linking a pair of nodes in a tree
diagram, marking a mother/daughter (i.e. containment) relation between them.
C: see complementiser.
canonical: a term used to mean ‘usual’, ‘typical’ or ‘normal’, as in ‘The canoni-
cal word order in English is speciﬁer+head+complement.’ The term canonical

Glossary
439
clause denotes a (non-defective) clause which is a full CP/complementiser phrase:
see §4.6 and §4.7.
case: the different case forms of a pronoun are the different forms which the pro-
noun has in different sentence positions. It is traditionally said that English has
three cases – nominative (sometimes abbreviated to Nom), accusative (= Acc,
sometimes referred to as objective), and genitive (= Gen). Personal pronouns
typically inﬂect overtly for all three cases, whereas noun expressions inﬂect only
for genitive case. The different case forms of typical pronouns and noun expres-
sions are given below:
nominative
I
we
you
he
she
it
they
who
the king
accusative
me
us
you
him
her
it
them
who(m)
the king
genitive
my
our
your
his
her
its
their
whose
the king’s
mine
ours
yours
hers
theirs
As is apparent, some pronouns have two distinct genitive forms: a weak (shorter)
form used when they are immediately followed by a noun (as in ‘This is my car’),
and a strong (longer) form used when they are not immediately followed by a
noun (as in ‘This car is mine’). In Chomsky and Lasnik (1995), it is suggested that
the null subject PRO found in control constructions carries null case. In languages
like English where certain types of expression are assigned case by virtue of the
structural position they occupy in a given clause (e.g. accusative if c-commanded
by a transitive head, nominative if c-commanded by ﬁnite intransitive head), the
relevant expressions are said to receive structural case. Where a constituent is
assignedcaseby virtueof its semanticfunction(e.g.a goalcomplement ofcertain
types of verb is assigned dative case in German), it is said to receive inherent
case. In languages like Icelandic where subjects can be assigned a variety of
cases (e.g. some are accusative and others dative, depending on the choice of
verb and its semantic properties), subjects are said to have quirky case. In the
Italian counterpart of a structure like ‘She gave him them’ the direct object
corresponding to English ‘them’ is assigned accusative case, and the indirect
object corresponding to English ‘him’ is assigned a distinct case, traditionally
called dative case. (On direct and indirect objects, see object.) On nominative
case assignment, see §4.9 and §8.3; on accusative case assignment, see §4.9,
§9.7 and §9.8; on null case assignment, see §4.9 and §8.8; and on genitive case
assignment, see §6.7 and §9.9.
case particle: some linguists take of in structures like destruction of the city or
fond of pasta to be a genitive case particle in the sense that the of-phrase (e.g. of
the city) is taken to have genitive case, and of is said to be the morpheme which
marks genitive case.
categorial: categorial information is information about the grammatical category
that an item belongs to. A categorial property is one associated with members of
a particular grammatical category.

440
Glossary
categorise/categorisation: assign(ing) an expression to a (grammatical) cate-
gory.
category: a term used to denote a set of expressions which share a common set
of linguistic properties. In syntax, the term is used for expressions which share a
common set of grammatical properties. For example, boy and girl belong to the
(grammatical) category noun because they both inﬂect for plural number (e.g.
boys/girls), and can both be used to end a sentence such as ‘The police haven’t
yet found the missing –.’ In traditional grammar, the term parts of speech was
used in place of categories.
causative verb: a verb which has much the same sense as ‘cause’. For example,
the verb have in sentences such as ‘He had them expelled’ or ‘He had them review
the case’ might be said to be causative in sense (hence to be a causative verb).
C-command: a structural relation between two constituents. To say that one
constituent X c-commands another constituent Y is (informally) to say that X is
no lower than Y in the structure (i.e. either X is higher up in the structure than Y,
or the two are at the same height). More formally, a constituent X c-commands its
sister constituent Y and any constituent Z that is contained within Y. A constituent
X asymmetrically c-commands another constituent Y if X c-commands Y but
Y does not c-command X. See §3.7.
C-command condition on binding: a condition to the effect that a bound con-
stituent (e.g. a reﬂexive anaphor like himself or the trace of a moved constituent)
must be c-commanded by its antecedent (i.e. by the expression which binds it).
See §3.7 and ex. 3.2.
CED: See Condition on Extraction Domains.
chain: a set of constituents comprising an expression and any trace copies asso-
ciated with it. Where a constituent does not undergo movement, it forms a single-
membered chain.
citation: the citation form of a word is the form under which the word is listed
in traditional dictionaries.
clause: a clause is deﬁned in traditional grammar as an expression which con-
tains (at least) a subject and a predicate, and which may contain other types
of expression as well (e.g. one or more complements and/or adjuncts). In most
cases, the predicate in a clause is a lexical (= main) verb, so that there will be
as many different clauses in a sentence as there are different lexical verbs. For
example, in a sentence such as ‘She may think that you are cheating on her’, there
are two lexical verbs (think and cheating), and hence two clauses. The cheating
clause is that you are cheating on her, and the think clause is She may think that
you are cheating on her, so that the cheating clause is one of the constituents of
the think clause. More speciﬁcally, the cheating clause is the complement of the
think clause, and so is said to function as a complement clause in this type of

Glossary
441
sentence. Clauses whose predicate is not a verb (i.e. verbless clauses) are known
as small clauses: hence, in ‘John considers [Mary intelligent]’, the bracketed
expression is sometimes referred to as a small clause.
cleft sentence: a structure such as ‘It was syntax that he hated most’, where syntax
is said to occupy focus position within the cleft sentence.
clitic(isation): the term clitic denotes an item which is (generally) a reduced form
of another word, and which has the property that (in its reduced form) it must
cliticise (i.e. attach itself to) an appropriate kind of host (i.e. to another word or
phrase). For example, we could say that the contracted negative particle n’t is a
clitic form of the negative particle not which attaches itself to a ﬁnite auxiliary
verb, so giving rise to forms like isn’t, shouldn’t, mightn’t etc. Likewise, we could
say that ’ve is a clitic which attaches itself to a pronoun ending in a vowel, so
giving rise to forms like we’ve, you’ve, they’ve etc. When a clitic attaches to the
end of another word, it is said to be an enclitic (and hence to encliticise) onto
the relevant word. Clitics differ from afﬁxes in a number of ways. For example, a
clitic is often a reduced form of a full word, and has a corresponding full form (so
that ’ll is the clitic form of will, for example), whereas an afﬁx (like noun plural -s
in cats) has no full-word counterpart. Moreover, clitics can attach to phrases (e.g.
’s can attach to the president in The president’s lying), whereas an afﬁx typically
attaches to a word stem (e.g. the past-tense -ed afﬁx attaches to the verb stem
snow in snowed).
close/closer/closest: in structures in which a head X attracts a particular kind
of constituent Y to move to the edge of XP, X is said to attract the closest
constituent of type Y, in accordance with the Attract Closest Principle. On one
view of closeness, if X c-commands Y and Z, X is closer to Y than to Z if Y
c-commands Z. See also local.
cognition/cognitive: (relating to) the study of human knowledge.
common noun: see noun.
COMP: see complementiser.
comparative:thecomparativeformofanadjectiveoradverbistheform(typically
ending in -er) used when comparing two individuals or properties: e.g. ‘John is
taller than Mary’, where taller is the comparative form of the adjective tall.
competence: a term used to represent native speakers’ knowledge of the grammar
of their native language(s).
complement: this is a term used to denote a speciﬁc grammatical function (in
the same way that the term subject denotes a speciﬁc grammatical function).
A complement is an expression which is directly merged with (and hence is
the sister of) a head word, thereby projecting the head into a larger structure
of essentially the same kind. In ‘Close the door’, the door is the complement

442
Glossary
of the verb close; in ‘after dinner’, dinner is the complement of the preposition
after; in ‘good at physics’, at physics is the complement of the adjective good;
in ‘loss of face’, of face is the complement of the noun loss. As these examples
illustrate, complements typically follow their heads in English. The choice of
complement (and the morphological form of the complement) is determined by
properties of the head: for example, an auxiliary such as will requires as its
complement an expression headed by a verb in the inﬁnitive form (cf. ‘He will
go/∗going/∗gone’). Moreover, complements bear a close semantic relation to their
heads (e.g. in ‘Kill him’, him is the complement of the verb kill and plays the
semantic role of theme argument of the verb kill). Thus, a complement has a
close morphological, syntactic and semantic relation to its head. A complement
clause is a clause which is used as the complement of some other word (typically
as the complement of a verb, adjective or noun). Thus, in a sentence such as ‘He
never expected that she would come’, the clause that she would come serves as the
complement of the verb expected, and so is a complement clause. On complement
selection, see selection.
complementiser: this term is used in two ways. On the one hand, it denotes
a particular category of clause-introducing word such as that/if/for, as used in
sentences such as ‘I think that you should apologise’, ‘I doubt if she realises’,
‘They’re keen for you to show up’. On the other hand, it is used to denote the
pre-subject position in clauses (‘the complementiser position’) which is typically
occupied by a complementiser like that/if/for, but which can also be occupied
by an inverted auxiliary in sentences such as ‘Can you help?’, where can is said
to occupy the complementiser position in the clause. A complementiser phrase
(CP)isaphrase/clause/expressionheadedbyacomplementiser(orbyanauxiliary
or verb occupying the complementiser position).
complex sentence: one which contains more than one clause.
component: a grammar is said to have three main components: a syntac-
tic/computational component which generates syntactic structures, a semantic
component which assigns each such syntactic structure an appropriate seman-
tic interpretation, and a PF component which assigns each syntactic structure
generated by the computational component an appropriate phonetic form. See
§1.3.
compound word: a word which is built up out of two (or more) other words –
e.g. man-eater.
computational component: see component.
concord: a traditional term to describe an operation whereby a noun and any
adjectives or determiners modifying it are assigned the same values for features
such as number, gender and case.

Glossary
443
conditional: a term used to represent a type of clause (typically introduced by if
or unless) which lays down conditions – e.g. ‘If you don’t behave, I’ll bar you’,
or ‘Unless you behave, I’ll bar you’. In these examples, the clauses If you don’t
behave and Unless you behave are conditional clauses.
Condition on Extraction Domains: a constraint to the effect that only comple-
ments allow constituents to be extracted out of them, not speciﬁers or adjuncts.
conﬁgurational: positional – i.e. relating to the position occupied by one or
more constituents in a tree diagram. For example, a conﬁgurational deﬁnition
of a structural subject (for English) would be ‘an argument which occupies the
speciﬁer position in TP’. This deﬁnition is conﬁgurational in the sense that it tells
you what position within TP the subject occupies.
CONJ: see conjunction.
conjoin: to join together two or more expressions, usually by a coordinating
conjunction such as and/or/but. For example, in ‘Naughty but nice’, naughty has
been conjoined with nice (and conversely nice has been conjoined with naughty).
conjunct: one of a set of expressions which have been conjoined. For example,
in ‘Rather tired but otherwise alright’, the two conjuncts (i.e. expressions which
have been conjoined) are rather tired and otherwise alright.
conjunction/CONJ: a word which is used to join two or more expressions
together. For example, in a sentence such as ‘John was tired but happy’, the
word but serves the function of being a coordinating conjunction because it
coordinates (i.e. joins together) the adjectives tired and happy. In ‘John felt angry
and Mary felt bitter’, the conjunction and is used to coordinate the two clauses
John felt angry and Mary felt bitter. In traditional grammar, complementisers like
that/for/if are categorised as (one particular type of) subordinating conjunction.
constituent: a term denoting a structural unit – i.e. an expression which is one
of the components out of which a phrase or sentence is built up. For example,
the various constituents of a prepositional phrase (= PP) such as ‘Straight into
touch’ (e.g. as a reply to ‘Where did the ball go?’) would be the preposition
into, the noun touch, the adverb straight and the intermediate projection (P-bar)
into touch. To say that X is an immediate constituent of Y is to say that X
immediately contains Y (see contain), or equivalently that X is the mother of
Y: see §3.7.
constituent structure: the constituent structure (or phrase structure, or syn-
tactic structure) of an expression is (a representation of) the set of constituents
which the expression contains. Syntactic structure is usually represented in terms
of a labelled bracketing or a tree diagram. The Constituent Structure Con-
straint is a grammatical principle which speciﬁes that only a head can occupy a
head position, and that only a maximal projection can occupy a complement or
speciﬁer position.

444
Glossary
constrained: see restrictive.
constraint: a structural restriction which blocks the application of some process
in a particular type of structure. The term tends to be used with the rather more
speciﬁc meaning of ‘a principle of Universal Grammar which prevents certain
types of grammatical operation from applying to certain types of structure’.
contain: to say that one constituent X contains another constituent Y is to say
that Y is one of the constituents out of which X is formed by a merger operation
of some kind. In terms of tree diagrams, we can say that X contains Y if X occurs
higher up in the tree than Y, and X is connected to Y by a continuous (unbroken)
set of downward branches (the branches being represented by the solid lines
connecting pairs of nodes in a tree diagram). If we think of tree diagrams as a
network of train stations, we can say that X contains Y if it is possible to get from
X to Y by travelling one or more stations south. To say that one constituent X
immediately contains another constituent Y is to say that Y occurs immediately
below X in a tree and is connected to X via a branch (or, that X contains Y and
there is no intervening constituent Z which contains Y and which is contained
by X). See §3.7.
content: this term is generally used to refer to the semantic content (i.e. meaning)
of an expression (typically, of a word). However, it can also be used in a more
general way to refer to the linguistic properties of an expression: e.g. the expres-
sion phonetic content is sometimes used to refer to the phonetic form of (e.g.) a
word: hence, we might say that PRO is a pronoun which has no phonetic content
(meaning that it is a ‘silent’ pronoun with no audible form).
contentives/content words: words which have intrinsic descriptive content (as
opposed to functors, i.e. words which serve essentially to mark particular gram-
matical functions). Nouns, verbs, adjectives and (most) prepositions are tradi-
tionally classiﬁed as contentives, while pronouns, auxiliaries, determiners, com-
plementisers and particles of various kinds (e.g. inﬁnitival to, genitive of) are
classiﬁed as functors. See §2.4.
contraction: a process by which two different words are combined into a single
word, with either or both words being reduced in form. For example, by contrac-
tion, want to can be reduced to wanna, going to to gonna, he is to he’s, they have
to they’ve, did not to didn’t etc. See also cliticisation.
contrastive: in a sentence like ‘Syntax, I hate but phonology I enjoy’, the expres-
sions syntax and phonology are contrasted, and each is said to be contrastive in
use.
control(ler)/control predicate: in non-ﬁnite clauses with a PRO subject which
has an antecedent, the antecedent is said to be the controller of PRO (or to
control PRO), and conversely PRO is said to be controlled by its antecedent;
and the relevant kind of structure is called a control structure. So, in a structure

Glossary
445
like ‘John decided PRO to quit’, John is the controller of PRO, and conversely
PRO is controlled by John. The term control predicate denotes a word like try
which takes an inﬁnitive complement with a (controlled) PRO subject. Verbs like
try which take a complement containing a PRO subject controlled by the subject
of try are called subject-control predicates (see §4.2); verbs like persuade in
sentences like I persuaded him to take syntax which take an inﬁnitive complement
whose PRO subject is controlled by the object of the main verb (here, the him
object of persuade) are called object-control predicates (see §9.5).
converge(nce): a derivation converges (and hence results in a well-formed sen-
tence) if the resulting PF-representation contains only phonetic features, and the
associated semantic representation contains only (semantically) interpretable
features. The Convergence Principle is a UG principle requiring that when a
probe attracts a goal carrying some feature [F], it triggers movement of the small-
est constituent containing [F] which will lead to a convergent (hence well-formed)
derivation: see §6.7.
coordinate/coordination: a coordinate structure is a structure containing two
or more expressions joined together by a coordinating conjunction such as
and/but/or/nor (e.g. ‘John and Mary’ is a coordinate structure). Coordination
is the operation by which two or more expressions are joined together by a
coordinating conjunction.
copula/copular verb: a ‘linking verb’, used to link a subject with a non-verbal
predicate. The main copular verb in English is be (though verbs like become,
remain, stay etc. also have much the same linking function). In sentences such as
‘They are lazy’, ‘They are fools’ and ‘They are outside’, the verb are is said to
be a copula in that it links the subject they to the adjectival predicate lazy, or the
nominal predicate fools, or the prepositional predicate outside.
copy/copying: the Copy Theory of Movement is a theory developed by
Chomsky which maintains that a moved constituent leaves behind a (trace) copy
of itself when it moves, with the copy generally having its phonetic features
deleted and so being null: see §5.3, §6.3 and §7.2. Feature Copying is an oper-
ation by which the value of a feature on one constituent is copied onto another
(e.g. the values of the person/number features of a subject are copied onto an
auxiliary): see §8.3.
coreferential:twoexpressionsarecoreferentialiftheyrefertothesameentity.For
example, in ‘John cut himself while shaving’, himself and John are coreferential
in the sense that they refer to the same individual.
count/countability: a count(able) noun is a noun which can be counted. Hence,
a noun such as chair is a count noun since we can say ‘One chair, two chairs,
three chairs etc.’; but a noun such as furniture is a non-count/uncountable/mass
noun since we cannot say ‘∗one furniture, ∗two furnitures, ∗three furnitures etc.’

446
Glossary
The countability properties of a noun determine whether the relevant item is a
count noun or not.
counterexample: an example which falsiﬁes a particular hypothesis. For exam-
ple,anauxiliarylikeoughtwouldbeacounterexampletoanyclaimthatauxiliaries
in English never take an inﬁnitive complement introduced by to (e.g. ‘You ought
to tell them’).
CP: complementiser phrase: see complementiser.
crash: a derivation is said to crash (i.e. ‘fail’) if one or more features carried
by one or more constituents is illegible at either or both of the interface levels
(the phonetics interface and the semantics interface). For example, if the person
or number features of have remain unvalued in a sentence such as ‘He have
left’, the resulting structure will crash at the phonetics interface, since the PF
component will be unable to determine whether have should be spelled out as
have or has.
cross-categorial properties: properties which extend across categories, i.e.
which are associated with more than one different category. See §2.11.
cycle/cyclic: syntactic operations (like agreement and movement) are said to
apply in a cyclic fashion, such that each time a head H is merged with one or
more other constituents, a new cycle of operations begins (in the sense that any
operation affecting H and one or more other constituents which it c-commands
applies at this point). See §5.7.
D: see determiner.
Dat: an informal abbreviate for dative case. See case.
daughter: a node X is the daughter of another node Y if Y is the next highest
node up in the tree from X, and the two are connected by a branch (solid line).
declarative: a term used as a classiﬁcation of the force (i.e. semantic function)
of a clause which is used to make a statement (as opposed to an interrogative,
exclamative or imperative clause).
default: a default value or property is one which obtains if all else fails (i.e. if
other conditions are not satisﬁed). For example, if we say that -ø is the default
verbal inﬂection for regular verbs in English, we mean that regular verbs carry
the inﬂection -s in third-person-singular present-tense forms, -d in past, perfect or
passive forms, -ing if progressive or gerund forms, and -ø otherwise (by default).
defective: a defective item is one which lacks certain properties. For example, if
we suppose that T constituents generally carry person and number features, then
inﬁnitival to in all inﬁnitive structures except control inﬁnitives is a defective T
constituent in that (under Chomsky’s analysis) it carries person but not number.
Any clause containing a defective T constituent is a defective clause.

Glossary
447
deﬁnite: expressions containing determiners like the, this, that etc. are said to
have deﬁnite reference in that they refer to an entity which is assumed to be
known to the addressee(s): e.g. in a sentence such as ‘I hated the course’, the
DP the course refers to a speciﬁc (e.g. Minimalist Syntax) course whose identity
is assumed to be known to the hearer/reader. In much the same way, personal
pronouns like he/she/it/they etc. are said to have deﬁnite reference. By contrast,
expressions containing a determiner like a are indeﬁnite, in that (e.g.) if you
say ‘I’m taking a course’, you don’t assume that the hearer/reader knows which
course you are taking.
DEG: a degree word like so/too/how.
demonstrative: this is a term used to refer to words like this/that, these/those
and here/there which indicate a location relatively nearer to or further from the
speaker (e.g. this book means ‘the book relatively close to me’, and that book
means ‘the book somewhat further away from me’).
derivation: the derivation of a phrase or clause is the set of syntactic (e.g. merger
and movement) operations used to form the relevant structure. The derivation of
a word is the set of morphological operations used to form the word.
derivational morphology/sufﬁx: derivational morphology is the component of
a grammar which deals with the ways in which one type of word can be formed
from another: for example, by adding the sufﬁx -ness to the adjective sad we can
form the noun sadness, so that -ness is a derivational sufﬁx. See §2.2.
derivative: to say that the noun happiness is a derivative of the adjective happy
is to say that happiness is formed from happy by the addition of an appropriate
derivational morpheme (in this case, the sufﬁx -ness).
derive: to derive a structure it to say how it is formed (i.e. specify the operations
by which it is formed).
derived structure: a structure which is produced by the application of one or
more syntactic (e.g. merger, movement or agreement) operations.
descriptive adequacy: a grammar of a particular language attains descriptive
adequacy if it correctly speciﬁes which strings of words do (and don’t) form
grammatical phrases and sentences in the language, and correctly describes the
structure and interpretation of the relevant phrases and sentences. See §1.3.
DET/determiner: a word like the/this/that which is typically used to modify a
noun, but which has no descriptive content of its own. Most determiners can be
used either prenominally (i.e. in front of a noun that they modify) or pronominally
(i.e. used on their own without a following noun) – cf. ‘I don’t like that idea/I
don’t like that’). See §2.5.
determiner phrase: a phrase like the king (of Utopia) which comprises a deter-
miner the, and a noun complement like king or a noun phrase complement like

448
Glossary
king of Utopia. In work before the mid 1980s, a structure like the king of Utopia
would have been analysed as a noun phrase (= NP), comprising the head noun
king, its complement of Utopia and its speciﬁer the. Since Abney (1987), such
expressions have been taken to have the status of DP/determiner phrase.
direct object: see object.
direct theta-marking: see theta-mark.
discontinuous spellout: a phenomenon whereby part of a moved phrase is spelled
out in the position in which it originates, and the remainder in the position in which
it ends up – as in ‘How much do you believe of what he tells you?’, where the
wh-phrase how much of what he tells you moves to the front of the sentence, with
how much being spelled out in the position it moves to, and of what he tells you
being spelled out in the position in which it originates. See §6.3.
discourse: discourse factors are factors relating to the extrasentential setting in
which an expression occurs (where extrasentential means ‘outside the immediate
sentence containing the relevant expression’). For example, to say that the ref-
erence of PRO is discourse-determined in a sentence such as ‘It would be wise
PRO to prepare yourself for the worst’ means that PRO has no antecedent within
the sentence immediately containing it, but rather refers to some individual(s)
outside the sentence (in this case, the person being spoken to).
distribution/distributional: the distribution of an expression is the set of posi-
tions which it can occupy within an appropriate kind of phrase or sentence. Hence,
a distributional property is in effect a word-order property.
domain: the domain (or, more fully, c-command domain) of a head H is the set
of constituents c-commanded by H – namely its sister and all the constituents con-
tained within its sister. For example, the domain of C includes its TP complement
and any constituent of the relevant TP.
do-support: this refers to the requirement for the ‘dummy’ (i.e. meaningless)
auxiliary do to be used to form questions, negatives or tags in sentences which
would otherwise contain no auxiliary. Hence, because a non-auxiliary verb like
want requires do-support in questions/negatives/ tags, we have sentences such as
‘Does he want some?’, ‘He doesn’t want any’ and ‘He wants some, does he?’ See
§5.8.
double-object construction: see object.
DP: see determiner phrase.
DP hypothesis: the hypothesis that all nominal arguments have the status of
DPs – not just nominals like the president which contain an overt determiner, but
also ‘bare’ nominal arguments like politicians and promises (in sentences like
‘Politicians break promises’).

Glossary
449
D-pronoun: a pronoun like that in ‘I don’t like that’ which seems to be a pronom-
inal determiner.
Earliness Principle: a principle which says that linguistic operations must apply
as early in a derivation as possible.
Early Modern English/EME: the type of English found in the early seventeenth
century (i.e. at around the time Shakespeare wrote most of his plays, between
1590 and 1620), also known as Elizabethan English.
echo question: a type of sentence used to question something which someone
else has just said (often with an air of incredulity), repeating all or most of what
they have just said. For example, if I say ‘I’ve just met Nim Chimpsky’ and you
don’t believe me (or don’t know who I’m talking about), you could reply with an
echo question such as ‘You’ve just met who?’
ECM: see Exceptional Case-Marking.
economy: economy considerations require that (all other things being equal) syn-
tactic representations should contain as few constituents and syntactic derivations
involve as few grammatical operations as possible.
edge: the edge of a given projection HP is that part of HP which excludes the
complement of H (hence, that part of the structure which includes the head H and
any speciﬁer/s which it has).
Elizabethan English: the type of English found in the early seventeenth cen-
tury, during the reign of Queen Elizabeth I (i.e. at around the time Shakespeare
wrote most of his plays, between 1590 and 1620), also known as Early Modern
English/EME.
ellipsis/elliptical: ellipsis is a process by which an expression is omitted (in the
sense that its phonetic features are deleted and so unpronounced), e.g. in order to
avoid repetition. For example, in a sentence such as ‘I will do it if you will do it’,
we can ellipse (i.e. omit) the second occurrence of do it to avoid repetition, and
hence say ‘I will do it if you will’. An elliptical structure is one containing an
‘understood’ constituent which has undergone ellipsis (i.e. been omitted).
embedded clause: a clause which is positioned internally within another con-
stituent. For example, in a sentence such as ‘He may suspect that I hid them’, the
hid-clause (= that I hid them) is embedded within (and is the complement of)
the verb phrase headed by the verb suspect. Likewise, in ‘The fact that he didn’t
apologise is signiﬁcant’, the that-clause (that he didn’t apologise) is an embedded
clause in the sense that it is embedded within a noun phrase headed by the noun
fact. A clause which is not embedded within any other expression is a root clause
(see root).
EME: see Early Modern English.

450
Glossary
empiricalevidence:evidencebasedonobservedlinguisticphenomena.Insyntax,
the term ‘empirical evidence’ usually means ‘evidence based on grammaticality
judgments by native speakers’. For example, the fact that sentences like ∗‘Himself
likes you’ are judged ungrammatical by native speakers of Standard English
provides us with empirical evidence that anaphors like himself can’t be used
without an appropriate antecedent (i.e. an expression which they refer back to).
empty: a constituent is empty/null if it is ‘silent’ and hence has no overt phonetic
form. Empty categories include null subject pronouns like PRO and pro, null
relative pronouns (like the null counterpart of who in someone who I know well),
null determiners (like that in ‘ø John is tired’) and null trace copies of moved
constituents. See ch. 4.
enclitic/encliticise: see clitic.
entry: a lexical entry is an entry for a particular word in a dictionary (and hence
by extension refers to the set of information about the word given in the relevant
dictionary entry).
EPP: this was originally an abbreviation for the Extended Projection Principle,
which posited that every T constituent must be extended into a TP projection
which has a speciﬁer. In more recent work, the requirement for a T constituent
like will to have a speciﬁer is said to be a consequence of T carrying an [epp]
feature requiring it to project a speciﬁer. The EPP Generalisation speciﬁes the
conditions under which the [epp] feature carried by a head is deleted via use of
an expletive or via movement: see §8.6.
ergative: this term originally applied to languages like Basque in which the
complement of a transitive verb and the subject of an intransitive verb are assigned
the same morphological case. However, by extension, it has come to be used to
denote verbs like break which occur both in transitive structures like ‘Someone
broke the window’ and in intransitive structures like ‘The window broke’, where
the window seems to play the same semantic role in both types of sentences, in
spite of being the complement of broke in one sentence and the subject of broke
in the other. See §9.4.
Exceptional Case-Marking/ECM: accusative subjects of inﬁnitive clauses (e.g.
him in ‘I believe him to be innocent’) are said to carry exceptional accusative
case (in that the case of the accusative subject is assigned by the main-clause
verb believe, and it is exceptional for the case of the subject of one clause to
be assigned by the verb in a higher clause). Verbs (like believe) which take an
inﬁnitive complement with an accusative subject are said to be ECM verbs. See
§9.7 and §9.8.
exclamative: a type of structure used to exclaim surprise, delight, annoyance
etc. In English syntax, the term is restricted largely to clauses beginning with

Glossary
451
wh-exclamative words like What! or How! – e.g. ‘What a fool I was!’ or ‘How
blind I was!’ See §6.9 and §9.2.
existential: an existential sentence is one which is about the existence of some
entity. For example, a sentence such as ‘Is there any coffee left?’ questions the
existence of coffee. Consequently, the word any here is sometimes said to be an
existential quantiﬁer (as is some in a sentence like ‘There is some coffee in the
pot’).
experience: children’s experience is the speech input which they receive (or, more
generally, the speech activity which they observe) in the course of acquiring their
native language.
experiencer: a term used in the analysis of semantic/thematic roles to denote
the entity which experiences some emotional or cognitive state – e.g. John in
‘John felt unhappy’, or ‘John thought about his predicament’. See §7.5.
explanatory adequacy: a linguistic theory meets the criterion of explanatory
adequacy if it explains why grammars have the properties that they do, and how
children come to acquire grammars in such a short period of time. See §1.3.
expletive: a ‘dummy’ constituent with no inherent semantic content, such as the
pronoun there in existential sentences like ‘There is no truth in the rumour’, or
the pronoun it in sentences such as It is unclear why he resigned. See §8.5 and
§8.6.
expression: this word is used in the text as an informal term meaning a string
(i.e. continuous sequence) of one or more words which form a constituent.
Extended Projection Principle: see EPP.
external argument: see argument.
extract/extraction: extract(ion) is another term for move(ment), and so denotes
an operation by which one constituent is moved out of another. For example, in
a structure such as ‘Who do you think [he saw —]’ the pronoun who has been
extracted out of the bracketed clause (i.e. it has been moved out of the position
marked —), and moved to the front of the overall sentence. The extraction site
for a moved constituent is the position which it occupied before undergoing
movement.
extrapose/extraposition: a term used to denote a movement operation by which
an expression (usually one which is very long, or highlighted in some way)
is moved to the end of a given structure. For example, in a sentence like ‘He
bequeathed his priceless collection of Ming vases to Mary’ the italicised object
can undergo extraposition/be extraposed and thereby moved to the end of the
sentence in ‘He bequeathed to Mary his priceless collection of Ming vases.’

452
Glossary
F: this symbol is used as a convenient notational device to denote an abstract
functional head (or an abstract feature) of some kind.
feature: a device used to describe a particular grammatical property. For example,
the distinction between count and non-count nouns might be described in terms
of a feature such as [±count]. On Feature-Copying, see copying. Feature-
Deletion is an operation by which uninterpretable features are deleted: see §8.4.
The Feature Visibility Convention speciﬁes that deleted features are invisible in
the semantic component but remain visible in the syntactic and PF components:
see §8.4. The Feature Inactivation Hypothesis posits that an uninterpretable
feature becomes inactive in the syntax (and invisible to the semantic component)
immediately it is deleted: see §8.6.
feminine: this term is used in discussion of grammatical gender to denote pro-
nouns like she/her/hers which refer to female entities.
FHC: see Functional Head Constraint.
ﬁlled: to say that a given position in a structure must be ﬁlled is to say that it
cannot remain empty but rather must be occupied (usually by an overt constituent
of an appropriate kind).
Fin/ﬁnite/FinP: the term ﬁnite verb/ﬁnite clause denotes (a clause contain-
ing) an auxiliary or non-auxiliary verb which can have a nominative subject like
I/we/he/she/they. For example, compare the two bracketed clauses in:
(i)
What if [people annoy her]?
(ii) Don’t let [people annoy her]
The bracketed clause and the verb annoy in (i) are ﬁnite because in place of
the subject people we can have a nominative pronoun like they; by contrast, the
bracketed clause and the verb annoy are non-ﬁnite in (ii) because people cannot
be replaced by a nominative pronoun like they (only by an accusative pronoun
like them): cf.
(iii)
What if [they annoy her]?
(iv) Don’t let [them/∗they annoy her]
By contrast, a verb or clause which has a subject with accusative or null case in
English is non-ﬁnite; hence the bracketed clauses and italicised verbs are non-
ﬁnite in the examples below:
(v)
Don’t let [them annoy her]
(vi) You should try [PRO to help]
Non-ﬁnite forms include inﬁnitive forms like be, and participle forms like
being/been. In work by Luigi Rizzi on split CP projections (discussed in §9.3),
inﬁnitival complementisers like Italian di ‘of’ and English for are said to occupy
theheadFin(‘Finiteness’)positionwithinaFinP(‘FinitenessPhrase’)projection.
ﬁrst person: see person.

Glossary
453
ﬂoating quantiﬁer: a quantiﬁer which is separated from the expression which it
quantiﬁes. For example, in a sentence such as ‘The students have all passed their
exams’, all quantiﬁes (but is not positioned next to) the students, so that all is a
ﬂoating quantiﬁer here.
Foc/focus/focusing/FocP: focus position in a sentence is a position occupied by
a constituent which is highlighted in some way (usually in order to mark it as
containing ‘new’ or ‘unfamiliar’ information). For example, in a cleft sentence
such as ‘It’s syntax that they hate most’ or a pseudo-cleft sentence such as ‘What
they hate most is syntax’, the expression syntax is said to occupy focus position
within the relevant sentence. Focusing denotes a movement operation by which a
constituent is moved into a focus position at the beginning of a clause in order to
highlight it (e.g. to mark it as introducing new information). Thus, in a sentence
like ‘Nothing could they do to save her’, the expression nothing has been focused
by being moved to the front of the overall sentence from its underlying position
as the complement of the verb do. In work on split CP projections by Luigi Rizzi
(discussed in §9.2), preposed focused expressions are said to occupy the speciﬁer
position within a FocP (‘Focus Phrase’) projection which is headed by an abstract
Foc (‘Focus’) head.
foot: the foot of a (movement) chain is the constituent which occupies the lowest
position in the chain.
force: the complementisers that/if in a sentence such as I didn’t know [that/if
he was lying] are said to indicate that the bracketed clauses are declara-
tive/interrogative in force (in the sense that they have the force of a question/a
statement). In work on split CP projections by Luigi Rizzi (discussed in §§9.2–
9.3), complementisers are said to constitute a Force head which can project into
a Force Phrase.
formal: in an expression such as formal speech style, the word formal denotes
a very careful and stylised form of speech (as opposed to the kind of informal
colloquial speech style used in a casual conversation in a bar): in an expression
such as formal features, the word formal means ‘grammatical’ (i.e. features
which play a role in morphology/syntax).
fragment: an utterance which is not a complete sentence (in the sense that it
does not constitute a clause). So, a phrase such as ‘A new dress’ used in reply to a
question such as ‘What did you buy?’ would be a sentence-fragment. (By contrast,
a sentence such as ‘I bought a new dress’ would not be a sentence-fragment, since
it contains a complete clause.)
free relative clause: a clause containing a relative pronoun which has no overt
antecedent, like that italicised in ‘What you say is true.’ See relative.

454
Glossary
front/fronting: fronting is an informal term to denote a movement operation by
which a given expression is fronted – i.e. moved to the front of some phrase or
sentence.
function: expressions such as subject, speciﬁer, complement, object, head and
adjunct are said to denote the grammatical function which a particular expression
fulﬁls in a particular structure (which in turn relates to the position which it
occupies and certain of its grammatical properties – e.g. case and agreement
properties).
functional category/Functional Head Constraint/function word/functor: a
word which has no descriptive/lexical content and which serves an essentially
grammatical function is said to be a function word or functor (by contrast, a
word which has descriptive/lexical content is a content word or contentive). A
functional category is a category whose members are function words: hence,
categories such as complementiser, auxiliary, inﬁnitive particle, case particle, or
determiner are all functional categories – as well as the expressions they head (e.g.
C-bar/CP, T-bar/TP, D-bar/DP etc.). See §2.4. The Functional Head Constraint
is a grammatical principle which speciﬁes that the complement of a certain type
of functional head (including C and D) cannot be preposed on its own without
moving the functional head along with it: see §3.6.
gapping: a form of ellipsis in which the head word is omitted from one (or
more) of the conjuncts in a coordinate structure in order to avoid repetition. For
example, the italicised second occurrence of bought can be gapped (i.e. omitted)
in a sentence such as ‘John bought an apple and Mary bought a pear’, giving
‘John bought an apple, and Mary a pear.’
Gen: in one use, an abbreviation for genitive case; in another, an abbreviation
for gender.
gender: a grammatical property whereby words are divided into different gram-
matical classes which play a role in agreement/concord relationships. In French,
for example, nouns are intrinsically masculine or feminine in gender (e.g. pom-
mier ‘apple tree’ is masculine, but pomme ‘apple’ is feminine), and determiners
inﬂect for gender (as well as number), so that un ‘a’ is the masculine form of
the indeﬁnite article, and une is its feminine form. Determiners in French have to
agree in gender (and number) with the nouns they modify, hence we say un pom-
mier ‘an apple tree’, but une pomme ‘an apple’. In English, nouns no longer have
inherent gender properties, and adjectives/determiners don’t inﬂect for gender
either. Only personal pronouns like he/she/it carry gender properties in mod-
ern English, and these are traditionally said to carry masculine/feminine/neuter
gender respectively (though the term inanimate is sometimes used in place of
neuter).

Glossary
455
generate/generative: the syntactic component of a grammar is said to generate
(i.e. specify how to form) a set of syntactic structures. A grammar which does so
is said to be a generative grammar.
generic: to say that an expression like eggs in a sentence such as ‘Eggs are
fattening’ has a generic interpretation is to say that it is interpreted as meaning
‘eggs in general’.
genitive: see case.
gerund: when used in conjunction with the progressive aspect auxiliary be, verb
forms ending in -ing are progressive participles; in other uses they generally
function as gerunds. In particular, -ing verb forms are gerunds when they can be
used as subjects, or as complements of verbs or prepositions, and when (in literary
styles) they can have a genitive subject like my. Thus writing is a gerund (verb
form) in a sentence such as ‘She was annoyed at [my writing to her mother]’,
since the bracketed gerund structure is used as the complement of the preposition
at, and has a genitive subject my.
goal/goal: the term goal is used in the analysis of semantic/thematic roles to
denote the entity towards which something moves – e.g. Mary in ‘John sent Mary
a letter’: see §7.5. In a different sense, the term goal represents a constituent
which agrees with a higher head which serves as a probe: see §8.2.
gradable/ungradable: words are gradable if they denote a concept or property
which can exist in varying degrees. For example, tall is gradable since we can say
(e.g.) fairly/very/extremely tall; by contrast, dead is ungradable, since it denotes
an absolute property (hence it’s odd to say !very dead).
grammar: in traditional terms, grammar includes morphology and syntax. In a
broader Chomskyan sense, grammar includes phonology and structural aspects of
semantics: i.e. a grammar of a language is a computational system which derives
the Phonetic Form and Semantic Representation of expressions.
grammatical: an expression is grammatical if it contains no morphological or
syntactic error, and ungrammatical if it contains one or more morphological or
syntactic errors. Grammatical features are (e.g. person, number, gender, case
etc.) features which play a role in grammatical operations (e.g. in determining
case or agreement properties).
have-cliticisation: an operation by which have (in the guise of its contracted
clitic variant /v/) attaches to an immediately preceding word ending in a vowel
or diphthong, resulting in forms such as I’ve, we’ve, they’ve etc.
head: this term has two main uses. The head (constituent) of a phrase is the key
word which determines the properties of the phrase. So, in a phrase such as fond
of fast food, the head of the phrase is the adjective fond, and consequently the
phrase is an adjectival phrase (and hence can occupy typical positions associated

456
Glossary
with adjectival expressions – e.g. as the complement of is in ‘He is fond of fast
food’). In many cases, the term head is more or less equivalent to the term word
(e.g. in sentences such as ‘An accusative pronoun can be used as the complement
of a transitive head’). In a different use of the same word, the head of a movement
chain is the highest constituent in the chain.
headed/Headedness Principle: an expression is headed if it has a head. The
Headedness Principle speciﬁes that every constituent must be headed. So, for
example, an expression like fond of fast food is headed by the adjective fond and
so is an adjectival phrase. See head.
head-ﬁrst/-last: a head-ﬁrst structure is one in which the head of an expression
is positioned before its complement(s); a head-last structure is one in which the
head of an expression is positioned after its complement(s). See §1.6.
head movement: movement of a word from one head position to another (e.g.
movement of an auxiliary from T to C, or of a verb from V to T, or of a noun
from N to D). See ch. 5.
Head Movement Constraint/HMC: a principle of Universal Grammar which
speciﬁes that movement between one head position and another is only pos-
sible between the head of a given structure and the head of its complement.
See §5.5.
Head-Position Parameter: the parameter which determines whether a language
positions a given type of head before or after its complement. See §1.6.
Head-Strength Parameter: a parameter whose setting determines whether a
given kind of head is strong and can trigger movement of a lower head to attach
to it, or weak and so cannot attract a lower head to move to attach to it. See §5.5.
HMC: see Head Movement Constraint.
homophonous: two different expressions are homophonous if they have the same
phonetic form (e.g. we’ve and weave).
host: an expression to which a clitic or afﬁx attaches. For example, if n’t cliticises
onto could in expressions like couldn’t, we can say that could is the host onto
which n’t cliticises.
I: see INFL.
identiﬁcation/identify: in the relevant technical sense, we can say that the inﬂec-
tion -st identiﬁes (or enables identiﬁcation of) the null pro subject as second
person singular in a Shakespearean sentence such as ‘Hast pro any more of this?’
(Trinculo, The Tempest, II.ii). This is because -st in Elizabethan English is a
second-person-singular inﬂection, and since subjects agree with ﬁnite verbs in

Glossary
457
person and number, it follows that the null pro subject must also be second person
singular. See §5.5.
idiom: a string of words which has an idiosyncratic meaning (e.g. hit the roof in
the sense of ‘get angry’).
I-language: I-language is a linguistic system internalised (i.e. internally repre-
sented) within the brain. See §1.3.
illegible: see legible.
immediate constituent: see constituent.
immediately contain: see contain.
Imp: a symbol used to designate an (afﬁxal) imperative morpheme which occu-
pies the head C position of CP in imperatives: see ex. 5.2.
impenetrable: inaccessible. See Phase Impenetrability Condition.
imperative: a term employed to classify a type of sentence used to issue an order
(e.g. ‘Be quiet!’, ‘Don’t say anything!’), and also to classify the type of verb form
used in an imperative sentence (e.g. be is an imperative verb form in ‘Be quiet!’).
impoverished: poor (see rich).
inanimate: see animate.
Inclusiveness Condition: a grammatical principle proposed by Chomsky (1999,
p. 2) which ‘bars introduction of new elements (features) in the course of a
derivation’.
indeﬁnite: see deﬁnite.
indicative: indicative (auxiliary and main) verb forms are ﬁnite forms which
are used (inter alia) in declarative and interrogative clauses (i.e. statements and
questions). Thus, the italicised items are said to be indicative in mood in the
following sentences: ‘He is teasing you’, ‘Can he speak French?’, ‘He had been
smoking’, ‘He loves chocolate’, ‘He hated syntax.’ An indicative clause is a
clause which contains an indicative (auxiliary or non-auxiliary) verb. See mood.
indirect theta-marking: see theta-marking.
inﬁnitive: the inﬁnitive form of a verb is the (uninﬂected) form which is used
(inter alia) when the verb is the complement of a modal auxiliary like can, or
of the inﬁnitive particle to. Accordingly, the italicised verbs are inﬁnitive forms
in sentences like ‘He can speak French’, and ‘He’s trying to learn French.’ An
inﬁnitive clause is a clause which contains a verb in the inﬁnitive form. Hence, the
bracketed clauses are inﬁnitive clauses in: ‘He is trying [to help her]’, and ‘Why
not let [him help her]?’ (In both examples, help is an inﬁnitive verb form, and

458
Glossary
to when used with an inﬁnitive complement is said to be an inﬁnitive particle.)
Since clauses are analysed as phrases within the framework used here, the term
inﬁnitive phrase can be used interchangeably with inﬁnitive clause, to denote a
TP projection headed by the inﬁnitive particle to (or by a null counterpart of the
inﬁnitive particle to).
INFL: a category devised by Chomsky (1981) whose members include ﬁnite aux-
iliaries (which are INFLected for tense/agreement), and the INFinitivaL particle
to. In more recent work, T is used in place of INFL. See §2.8.
inﬂection/inﬂectional: an inﬂection is an afﬁx which marks grammatical prop-
erties such as number, person, tense, case. For example, a plural noun such as
dogs in English comprises the stem form dog and the plural number inﬂection -s.
Inﬂectional morphology is the grammar of inﬂections.
inherent case: see case.
initial grammar: the earliest grammar of their native language developed by
infants.
innateness hypothesis: the hypothesis that children have a biologically endowed
innate language faculty. See §1.4.
in situ: a constituent is said to remain in situ (i.e. ‘in place’) if it doesn’t undergo
a given kind of movement operation.
interfacelevels:levelsatwhichthegrammarinterfaces(i.e.connects)withspeech
and thought systems which lie outside the domain of grammar. Phonetic Form
is the level at which the grammar interfaces with articulatory-perceptual (speech)
systems, and Semantic Representation is the level at which it interfaces with
conceptual-intentional (thought) systems.
intermediate projection: see project(ion).
internal argument: see argument.
internalised grammar: a grammar which is internally represented within the
mind/brain.
interpretable: a feature is (semantically) interpretable if it has semantic content:
so, for example, a feature such as [Plural-Number] on a pronoun like they is
interpretable, but a phonetic feature like [+nasal] is uninterpretable, and so too
are many grammatical/formal features (e.g. case features). See §8.4.
interpretation: to say that an expression has a particular (semantic) interpretation
is to say that it expresses a particular meaning. So, for example, we might say that a
sentence such as ‘He loves you more than Sam’ has two different interpretations –
one on which Sam has a subject interpretation and is implicitly understood as the
subject of loves you, and a second on which Sam has an object interpretation and

Glossary
459
is implicitly understood as the object of he loves. The ﬁrst interpretation can be
paraphrased as ‘He loves you more than Sam loves you’, and the second as ‘He
loves you more than he loves Sam.’
interrogative: an interrogative clause or sentence is one which asks a question.
See question.
intervention constraint: a principle specifying that in a structure of the form
[. . . X . . . [. . . Y . . . [. . . Z . . .]]], X cannot attract Z if there is a constituent Y
of the same type as Z which intervenes between X and Z. See §6.4.
intransitive: see transitive.
intuitions: judgments given by native speakers about the grammaticality, inter-
pretation and structure of expressions in their language.
inversion/inverted: a term used to denote a movement process by which the
relative order of two expressions is reversed. It is most frequently used in relation
to the more speciﬁc operation by which an auxiliary (and, in earlier stages of
English, non-auxiliary) verb comes to be positioned before its subject, e.g. in
questions such as ‘Can you speak Swahili?’, where can is positioned in front of
its subject you. See ch. 5. An inverted auxiliary/verb is one which is positioned
in front of its subject (e.g. will in ‘Will I pass the syntax exam?’).
irrealis: an inﬁnitive complement like that italicised in ‘They would prefer (for)
you to abstain’ is said to denote an irrealis (a Latin word meaning ‘unreal’) event
in the sense that the act of abstention is a hypothetical event which has not yet
happened and may never happen.
island: a structure out of which no subpart can be extracted. For example, coor-
dinate structures like William and Harry are islands in this sense. Hence, in a
sentence like ‘I admire William and Harry’, we can topicalise the whole coordi-
nate structure William and Harry by moving it to the front of the overall sentence
(as in ‘William and Harry, I admire’), but we cannot topicalise Harry alone (as
we see from the ungrammaticality of ∗‘Harry I admire William and’).
K: case particle. See case.
label: a notational device used to represent linguistic properties of constituents.
For example, if we say that the word man belongs to the category N of noun, we
are using N as a label to indicate the categorial properties of the word man (i.e.
to tell us what grammatical category man belongs to).
labelled bracketing: see bracketing.
landing site: the landing site for a moved constituent is the position it ends up in
after it has been moved (e.g. the speciﬁer position within CP is the landing site
for a moved wh-expression).

460
Glossary
Language Faculty: Chomsky argues that humans beings have an innate Lan-
guage Faculty which provides them with an algorithm (i.e. set of procedures or
programme) for acquiring a grammar of their native language(s). See §1.4.
LBC: see Left Branch Condition.
learnability: a criterion of adequacy for linguistic theory. An adequate theory
must explain how children come to learn the grammar of their native languages
in such a short period of time, and hence must provide for grammars of languages
which are easily learnable by children. See §1.3.
Left Branch Condition: a constraint which speciﬁes that in languages like
English, the leftmost constituent of a nominal, adjectival or adverbial expression
cannot be moved out of the expression containing it.
legible: to say that syntactic structures must be legible at the semantics and pho-
netics interfaces is to say that the structures inputted to the semantic component
of the grammar must contain only features which contribute to semantic interpre-
tation, and that the structures inputted to the PF component must contain only
features which contribute to determining the phonetic form of an expression. Any
structure which is not legible at a given interface is said to be illegible to the
relevant interface.
level: in the sense in which this term is used in this book, constituents like T,
T-bar and TP represent different projection levels – i.e. successively larger types
of category (T being a minimal projection, T-bar an intermediate projection
and TP a maximal projection). See projection.
lexical/lexicon: the word lexical is used in a number of different ways. Since
a lexicon is a dictionary (i.e. a list of all the words in a language and their
idiosyncratic linguistic properties), the expression lexical item in effect means
‘word’, the expression lexical entry means ‘the entry in the dictionary for a
particular word’, the term lexical property means ‘property of some individual
word’, the term lexical learning means ‘learning words and their idiosyncratic
properties’ and the term lexical array means ‘the set of words out of which a given
expression is formed’. However, the word lexical is also used in a second sense, in
which it is contrasted with functional (and hence means ‘non-functional’). In this
second sense, a lexical category is a category whose members are contentives
(i.e. items with idiosyncratic descriptive content): hence, categories such as noun,
verb, adjective or preposition are lexical categories in this sense. So, for example,
the term lexical verb means ‘main verb’ (i.e. a non-auxiliary verb like go, ﬁnd,
hate, want etc.).
LF(-representation): (a representation of the) Logical Form (of an expression).
See representation. The LF-component of a grammar is the (semantic) compo-
nent which converts the syntactic structures produced by merger and movement
operations into LF-representations.

Glossary
461
light verb: this term is traditionally used to denote verbs (e.g. like take/make
in expressions like make fun of and take heed of) with relatively little semantic
content. However, in recent work on VP shells discussed in §§9.4–9.9, this term
is extended to denote an abstract afﬁxal verb (often with a causative sense like
that of make) to which a noun, adjective or verb adjoins. For example, it might
be claimed that the sufﬁx -en in a verb like sadden is an afﬁxal light verb which
combines with an adjective like sad to form the causative verb sadden (which has
a meaning loosely paraphraseable as ‘make sad’, or ‘cause to become sad’). This
type of analysis can be extended to verbs like roll as they are used in sentences like
‘He rolled the ball down the hill’, if we assume that roll here is used causatively
(and so has a meaning paraphraseable as ‘make roll’, or ‘cause to roll’), and hence
involves adjunction of the verb roll to an abstract light verb (which can be thought
of as a null verbal counterpart of -en).
link: a constituent (or position) which is part of a movement chain.
local: one constituent X can enter into a grammatical relation (e.g. an agreement
relation) with another constituent Y only if Y is in the local c-command domain
of X – i.e. only if Y is c-commanded by X and if Y is sufﬁciently close to X.
In recent work, Chomsky has deﬁned relative closeness (for syntactic operations
like agreement) in terms of the Phase Impenetrability Condition.
locative: this is a term which denotes the semantic/thematic function of a
constituent. A locative expression is one which denotes place. So, for example,
there/where are locative pronouns in sentences such as ‘Are you going there?’ or
‘Where are you going?’ See §7.5.
locus: to say that T is the locus of tense is to say that the tense property associated
with a tensed clause, or tensed auxiliary, or main verb originates as a tense feature
(or tense afﬁx) carried by the head T constituent of TP.
long-distance movement: a long-distance movement operation is one which
moves a constituent out of one clause (TP/CP) into another.
main clause: see root clause.
main verb: a non-auxiliary verb. See auxiliary.
masc(uline): This term is used in discussion of grammatical gender to denote
pronouns like he/him/his which refer to male entities.
mass noun: see count noun.
match: two constituents match in respect of some feature [F] either if one is
valued for [F] and the other unvalued for [F], or if both carry the same value for
[F]. See ch. 8.
matrix: in a sentence such as ‘I think he lied’, the (italicised) lied clause is an
embedded/complement clause (by virtue of being embedded as the complement

462
Glossary
of the verb think), and the think clause is the matrix clause, in the sense that it is
the clause immediately containing the lied clause.
maximal projection: see projection.
merge(r): an operation by which two constituents are combined together to form
a single larger constituent. See ch. 3.
MFCF: see Multiply Filled COMP Filter.
Minimalism/Minimalist program: a theory of grammar developed by Chomsky
whose core assumption is that grammars are minimally complex, perfect systems
of optimal design. See §1.3.
minimal projection: see projection.
MIT: The Massachusetts Institute of Technology (located in Cambridge, Mas-
sachusetts), where Chomsky has worked for the past ﬁve decades.
modal/modality: a modal auxiliary is an auxiliary which expresses modality
(i.e. notions such as possibility, futurity or necessity). The set of modal auxil-
iaries found in English is usually assumed to include will/would/can/could/shall/
should/may/might/must/ought, and need/dare when followed by a ‘bare’(to-less)
inﬁnitive complement.
modiﬁer/modify: in an expression such as tall men, it is traditionally said that
the adjective tall modiﬁes (i.e. attributes some property to) or is a modiﬁer of
the noun men. Likewise, in a sentence such as ‘Eat slowly!’, the adverb slowly is
said to modify the verb eat (in the sense that it describes the manner in which the
hearer is being told to eat).
module: an individual component of a larger system. For example, a grammar
might be said to contain a case module – i.e. a component which accounts for
the case properties of relevant constituents.
mood: this is a term describing inﬂectional properties of ﬁnite verbs. (Auxiliary
and non-auxiliary) verbs in English can be in the indicative mood, subjunc-
tive mood or imperative mood. Examples of each type of mood are given by
the italicised verb forms in the following: ‘He hates [= indicative] spaghetti’;
‘The court ordered that he be [= subjunctive] detained indeﬁnitely’; ‘Keep
[= imperative] quiet!’ The mood of the verb determines aspects of the inter-
pretation of the relevant clause, so that e.g. subjunctive verbs occur in irrealis
clauses.
morpheme: the smallest unit of grammatical structure. Thus, a plural noun such
as cats comprises two morphemes, namely the stem cat and the plural sufﬁx -s.
morphology/morphological: morphology studies how morphemes are com-
bined together to form words. Morphological properties are properties relating
to the form of words (i.e. relating to the inﬂections or afﬁxes they carry). For

Glossary
463
example, it is a morphological property of regular count nouns that they have a
plural form ending in -s.
morphosyntactic: a morphosyntactic property is a ‘grammatical’ property, i.e. a
property which affects (or is affected by) relevant aspects of morphology and syn-
tax. For instance, case is a morphosyntactic property in that (e.g.) pronouns have
different morphological forms and occupy different syntactic positions according
to their case: e.g. the nominative form of the ﬁrst-person-plural pronoun is we and
its accusative form is us; the two occupy different syntactic positions in that the
nominative form occurs as the subject of a ﬁnite verb, whereas the accusative form
occurs as the complement of a transitive verb or preposition: cf. ‘We disagree’,
‘Join us.’
mother: a constituent X is the mother of another constituent Y if X is the next
highest node up in the tree from Y, and the two are connected by a branch (solid
line). See §3.7.
multiple agreement: agreement between a probe and more than one goal. See
§8.6.
multiple speciﬁers: in his (1995) book and subsequent work, Chomsky suggests
that certain types of head may allow more than one speciﬁer (e.g. a light verb with
an external argument/subject as its inner speciﬁer may attract a wh-expression to
become its outer speciﬁer: see §10.5).
multiple wh-questions: questions containing more than one wh-word. See §6.4.
Multiply Filled COMP Filter: a constraint which speciﬁes that (in present-day
English) no overt complementiser (like that/if/for) can have an overt speciﬁer.
N: see noun.
natural language: a language acquired in a natural setting by human beings
(hence, excluding e.g. computer languages, animal communication systems etc.).
NEG: the head constituent of a NEGP (i.e. of a Negation Phrase constituent which
contains not as its speciﬁer). See §5.7.
negation: an operation or construction in which some proposition is said to be
false. Negation involves the use of some negative item such as not, n’t, nobody,
nothing, never etc. – though most discussions of negation tend to be about the
negative adverbs not/n’t. See §5.7.
negative evidence: in the context of discussions about the nature of the evidence
which children make use of in acquiring their native language(s), this term relates
to evidence based on the non-occurrence of certain structures in the child’s speech
input, or on correction of children by others (e.g. adults). See §1.8.
negative particle: this term typically denotes the negative adverbs not/n’t.

464
Glossary
NEGP: see NEG.
neuter: see gender.
neutralise/neutralisation: when a grammatical contrast (e.g. that between a sin-
gular noun like cat and a plural noun like cats) is not marked in some expression
(e.g. the singular/plural noun form sheep), the contrast is said to have been neu-
tralised or syncretised (in the relevant expression).
N-movement: movement of a noun to a higher position within a nominal expres-
sion. See §5.9.
node: a term used to denote each point in a tree diagram which carries a category
label. Each node represents a separate constituent in the relevant structure.
Nom: an abbreviation for nominative. See case.
nominal: this is the adjective associated with the word noun, so that in principle
a nominal (expression) is an expression containing a noun. However, the term
is sometimes extended to mean ‘expression containing a noun or pronoun’.
nominalisation/nominalising: nominalisation is a process by which some other
type of expression is converted into a nominal (i.e. noun expression). For example,
-ness is a nominalising (i.e. noun-forming) sufﬁx in that if we sufﬁx -ness to an
adjective like sad, we form the noun sadness.
nominative: see case.
non-argument: see argument.
non-auxiliary verb: a ‘lexical verb’ or ‘main verb’ (like want, try, hate, smell,
buy etc.) which requires do-support to form questions, negatives and tags.
non-constituent: a non-constituent string is a sequence of words which do not
together form a constituent.
non-count noun: see count noun.
no-negative-evidence hypothesis: the hypothesis that children acquire their
native language(s) on the basis of positive evidence alone, and do not make
use of negative evidence. See §1.8.
non-ﬁnite: see ﬁnite.
non-terminal: see terminal.
noun: a category of word (whose members include items such as boy/friend/
thought/sadness/computer) which typically denotes an entity of some kind. See
§2.2 and §2.3. In traditional grammar, a distinction is drawn between common
nouns and proper nouns. Proper nouns are names of individual people (e.g.
Chomsky),places(e.g.Colchester,Essex,England),dates(e.g.Tuesday,February,
Easter), magazines (e.g. Cosmopolitan) etc., whereas common nouns (e.g. boy,

Glossary
465
table, syntax etc.) are nouns denoting general (non-individual) entities. Proper
nouns have the semantic property of having unique reference, and the syntactic
property that (unless themselves modiﬁed) they generally can’t be modiﬁed by a
determiner (cf. ∗the London).
noun phrase/NP: a phrase whose head is a noun. In work prior to the mid 1980s, a
structure such as the king of Utopia was taken to be a noun phrase/NP comprising
the head noun king, its complement of Utopia and its speciﬁer the. In more recent
work, such expressions are taken to be determiner phrases/DPs comprising the
head determiner the and a noun phrase/NP complement king of Utopia, with the
NP in turn comprising the head noun king and its complement of Utopia. See §3.4
and §4.10.
NP: see noun phrase.
N-pronoun: a pronoun like one in ‘Mary bought a green one’ which has the
morphological and distributional properties of a (count) noun.
null: a null constituent is one which is ‘silent’ or ‘unpronounced’ and so has no
overt phonetic form. See ch. 4.
null case: the case carried by PRO (see case).
null subject: a subject which has grammatical and semantic properties but no
overt phonetic form. There are a variety of different types of null subject, including
the null pro subject which can be used in any ﬁnite clause in a language like
Italian, the null counterpart of you found in English imperative clauses like ‘Shut
the door!’, the null PRO subject found in non-ﬁnite control clauses like that
bracketed in ‘The prisoners tried [PRO to escape]’, and the null truncated subject
found in sentences like ‘Can’t ﬁnd my pen. Must be on my desk at home.’ See
§4.2.
null-subject language: this term is used to denote a language which allows any
ﬁnite clause of any kind to have a null pro subject. For example, Italian is a
null-subject language and so allows us to say ‘Sei simpatica’ (literally ‘Are nice’,
meaning ‘You are nice’); by contrast, English is a non-null-subject language in
the sense that it doesn’t allow the subject to be omitted in this type of structure
(hence ∗‘Are nice’ is ungrammatical in English).
null-subject parameter: a parameter whose setting determines whether a lan-
guage is a null-subject language or not. See §1.6.
Num: an abbreviation for the feature Number. In a different (but related) use,
a category label denoting a particular head which is claimed by some to be the
locus of number properties in noun expressions. It may correspond to the position
which a noun like invasione ‘invasion’ moves to in an Italian nominal such as
la grande invasione italiana dell’Albania (literally ‘The great invasion Italian
of.the Albania’, and more idiomatically ‘the great Italian invasion of Albania’).

466
Glossary
A Phrase headed by a Num constituent is labelled NumP ‘Number Phrase’. See
§5.9 and §10.9.
number: a term used to denote the contrast between singular and plural forms. In
English, we ﬁnd number contrasts in nouns (cf. ‘one dog’, ‘two dogs’), in some
determiners (cf. ‘this book’, ‘these books’), in pronouns (cf. it/they), and in ﬁnite
(auxiliary or main) verbs (cf. ‘It smells’, ‘They smell’).
object: the complement of a transitive item (e.g. in ‘Help me’, me is the object
of the transitive verb help; and in ‘for me’, me is the object of the transitive
preposition for). The term object is generally restricted to complements which
carryaccusativecase–i.e.tonominalorpronominalcomplements:hence,nothing
would be the object (and complement) of said in ‘He said nothing’, but the that-
clause would be the complement (but not the object) of said in ‘He said [that he
was tired]’ – though some traditional grammars extend the term object to cover
clausal complements as well as (pro)nominal complements. In sentences such
as ‘She gave him them’, the verb give is traditionally said to have two objects,
namely him and them: the ﬁrst object (representing the recipient) is termed the
indirect object, and the second object (representing the gift) is termed the direct
object; the relevant construction is known as the double-object construction.
Where a verb has a single object (e.g. nothing in ‘He said nothing’), this is the
direct object of the relevant verb.
object-control predicate: see control.
objective: another term for accusative. See case.
one-place predicate: a predicate which has only one argument. See argument.
operator: this term is used in syntax to denote (e.g.) interrogative and negative
expressions which have the syntactic properties that they trigger auxiliary inver-
sion (cf. ‘What have you done?’, ‘Nothing have I done’) and allow a polarity item
like partitive/existential any to occur in their scope (cf. ‘What can anyone do?’
‘Nothing can anyone do’).
orphaned: see stranded.
overt: an expression is overt if it has a non-null phonetic form, but null if it has
no phonetic content. Thus, him is an overt pronoun, but PRO is a null pronoun.
The term overt structure is used in this book (though not more generally) as an
informal expository term to refer to a simpliﬁed representation of the structure
of a given expression which shows only the overt constituents which it contains
(and hence excludes trace copies and other null constituents).
P: see preposition.
parameters: dimensions of grammatical variation within and across languages
(e.g. the Null-Subject Parameter, Head-Position Parameter, Wh-Parameter).
See §1.6.

Glossary
467
parameter-setting: the process by which children determine which setting of a
parameter is appropriate for the native language they are acquiring. See §1.7.
paraphrase: a paraphrase is an expression which has roughly the same meaning
as the expression which it is being used to paraphrase, but which brings out the
relevant meaning more clearly. For example, we can bring out the ambiguity of
a sentence like He loves you more than me by saying that it has two different
interpretations, one of which can be paraphrased as ‘He loves you more than he
loves me’, and the other of which can be paraphrased as ‘He loves you more than
I love you.’
partial: a labelled bracketing is partial if it shows only part of the structure of
a given sentence or expression (other parts being omitted to simplify exposition).
participle: a non-ﬁnite verb form which encodes aspect or voice. In European
languages, participles have no person properties but (in languages like Latin or
Icelandic which have a richer morphology than English) they may have num-
ber/gender/case properties. English has three types of participle: progressive
participles (ending in -ing) used in conjunction with the progressive-aspect aux-
iliary be in sentences like ‘It is raining’; perfect participles (generally ending in
-d or -n) used in conjunction with the perfect-aspect auxiliary have in sentences
like ‘He has gone home’; and passive participles (also generally ending in -d
or -n) used in conjunction with the passive-voice auxiliary be in sentences like
‘He was arrested by Percy Plodd.’
particle: this is an informal term used to describe a range of (typically monosyl-
labic) items which are invariable in form, and which don’t ﬁt easily into tradi-
tional systems of grammatical categories. For example, inﬁnitival to (e.g. ‘Try to
be nice’) is said to be an inﬁnitive particle; of as used in expressions like ‘loss of
face’ is sometimes said to be a genitive case particle; not and n’t are said to be
negative particles. The term is sometimes extended to include prepositions used
without a complement (e.g. down in ‘He fell down’).
partitive: a partitive quantiﬁer is a word like some/any which quantiﬁes over part
of the members of a given set (as in ‘Some students enjoy syntax’).
part of speech: see category.
passive: see active; see also passivisation.
passive participle: see active, participle.
passivisation:amovementoperationwherebyanexpressionwhichisthethematic
complement of a verb becomes the subject of the same clause (as in ‘The jewels
were stolen’) or the subject of another clause (as in ‘The minister was said to have
lied to Parliament’). See §§7.7–7.8.
past tense: see tense.

468
Glossary
patient: a particular type of theta-role, denoting an entity which suffers the
consequences of some action. For example, in a sentence such as ‘John killed
Harry’, Harry is the patient argument of the verb kill. The more recent term
theme is used in this book in place of the traditional term patient. See §7.5.
percolation: an operation by which a feature which is attached to one category
comes to be attached to another category higher up in the structure. See §6.7.
PERF: perfect-aspect auxiliary (e.g. have in ‘He may have left’). See aspect.
perfect: in one sense of the word, in a sentence like ‘He has gone home’, has is an
auxiliary marking perfect aspect, and gone is a perfect participle: see aspect,
participle. In a different sense, by claiming that language is a perfect system,
Chomsky means that grammars produce structures which are ‘perfect’ in that they
are precisely of the form required to interface with speech and thought systems.
performance: a term which denotes observed language behaviour – e.g. the kind
of things people actually say when they speak a language, and what meanings they
assign to sentences produced by themselves or other people. Performance can be
impaired by factors such as tiredness or drunkenness, giving rise to performance
errors. Performance is contrasted with competence (which denotes ﬂuent native
speakers’ knowledge of the grammar of their native language). See §1.3.
PERFP: phrase headed by a perfect-aspect auxiliary like have.
periphery: the periphery of a clause is that part of the clause structure which is
positioned above TP – in other words the edge of CP (or its counterpart in a split
CP system like that discussed in §§9.2–9.3).
Pers: an abbreviation of person.
person: in traditional grammar, English is said to have three grammatical per-
sons. A ﬁrst-person expression (e.g. I/we) is one whose reference includes the
speaker(s); a second-person expression (e.g. you) is one which excludes the
speaker(s) but includes the addressee(s) (i.e. the person or people being spo-
ken to); a third-person expression (e.g. he/she/it/they) is one whose reference
excludes both the speaker(s) and the addressee(s) – i.e. an expression which
refers to someone or something other than the speaker(s) or addressee(s).
personal pronouns: these are pronouns which carry inherent person properties –
i.e. ﬁrst-person pronouns such as I/we, second-person pronouns such as you, and
third-person pronouns such as he/she/it/they. See person.
PF(-representation): (a representation of the) Phonetic Form (of an expression).
See representation. The PF-component of a grammar is the component which
converts the syntactic structures generated by the computational component of
the grammar into PF-representations, via a series of morphological and phono-
logical operations. A PF-clitic is a clitic which attaches to another item in the

Glossary
469
PF-component (not in the syntax), so that the two form a single phonetic word,
but are not a single word in the syntax.
P-feature: a feature (e.g. a topic-, focus- or wh-feature) which attracts a con-
stituent to move to the periphery of a clause.
phase: in work outlined in ch. 10, Chomsky argues that syntactic structures are
built up in phases (phases including complementiser phrases and transitive verb
phrases), and that once a phase has been produced, the domain/complement of
the head of the phase undergoes transfer to the PF component and the semantic
component, and thereby becomes impenetrable to further operations in the syntax.
Phase Impenetrability Condition: a constraint on grammatical operations
which speciﬁes that the domain/complement of a phase head is impenetra-
ble/inaccessible to an external probe (i.e. to a probe which lies outside the relevant
phase). See §8.5 and §10.2.
phi-features/-features: person and number features (and, in languages which
have grammatical gender, gender features as well).
phonetic representation: see representation.
phonological features: features used to describe sound properties. For example,
the difference between nasal and oral sounds might be described in terms of the
feature [±nasal].
phrase: the term phrase is used to denote an expression larger than a word which
is a maximal projection: see projection. In traditional grammar, the term refers
strictly to non-clausal expressions (hence, ‘reading a book’ is a phrase, but ‘He is
reading a book’ is a clause, not a phrase). However, in more recent work, clauses
are analysed as types of phrases: e.g. ‘He will resign’ is a tense phrase (TP), and
‘That he will resign’ is a complementiser phrase (CP). See §3.3 and §3.4.
phrase-marker: a tree diagram used to represent the syntactic structure of a
phrase or sentence. See §3.7.
phrase structure: see constituent structure.
PIC: see Phase Impenetrability Condition.
pied-piping: a process by which a moved constituent drags one or more other
constituents along with it when it moves. For example, if we compare a sentence
like ‘Who were you talking to?’ with ‘To whom were you talking?’, we might say
that in both cases the pronoun who is moved to the front of the sentence, but that
in the second sentence the preposition to is pied-piped along with the pronoun
whom. See §6.7.
PL: see plural.

470
Glossary
plural: a plural expression is one which denotes more than one entity (e.g. these
cars is a plural expression, whereas this car is a singular expression).
P-marker: see phrase-marker.
polarity expression: a word or phrase (e.g. a word like ever or a phrase like
at all or care a damn) which has an inherent affective polarity, and hence is
restricted to occurring within the scope of an affective (e.g. negative, interrogative
or conditional) constituent. See affective.
positive evidence: In discussions of child language acquisition, this expression
denotes evidence based on the actual occurrence of certain types of structure in
the child’s speech input. For example, hearing an adult say Open it gives a child
positive evidence that verbs are canonically positioned before their complements
in English. See §1.8.
possessive: a possessive structure is one which indicates possession: the term is
most commonly used in relation to expressions like ‘John’s book’ or ‘his book’
(where the italicised expressions denote the person who possesses the book). The
italicised possessor in each structure is said to be genitive in case.
postposition: a type of word which is the counterpart of a preposition in lan-
guages which position prepositions after their complements. See adposition.
postulate: a postulate is a theoretical assumption or hypothesis; to postulate is to
hypothesise.
PP: see prepositional phrase.
PPT: see Principles-and-Parameters Theory.
pragmatics: the study of how non-linguistic knowledge is integrated with lin-
guistic knowledge in our use of language.
Pr: an abbreviation for the feature [present-tense]. See tense.
precede(nce): to say that one constituent precedes another is to say that it is
positioned to its left (on the printed page) and that neither constituent contains
the other. Precedence is left-to-right linear ordering.
preclausal: a preclausal expression is one which is positioned in front of a clause.
predicate: see argument, predicative.
Predicate-Internal Argument Hypothesis: the hypothesis that all the arguments
of a predicate originate within a projection of the predicate. See §7.4.
predication: the process by which a predicate is combined with a subject in
order to form a proposition. For example, in a sentence such as ‘Boris likes
vodka’, the property of liking vodka is said to be predicated of Boris.

Glossary
471
predicative: in structures such as ‘John is in Paris/very silly/a liar’, the italicised
expressions are said to be predicative in that they predicate the property of being in
Paris/being very silly/being a liar of John (i.e. they attribute the relevant property
to John). A nominal like a liar when used predicatively is also referred to as a
predicate nominal.
preﬁx: see afﬁx.
prenominal: a prenominal expression is one which is positioned in front of a
noun expression. For example, both a and red are prenominal in an expression
such as a red car.
preposing: an informal term to indicate a movement operation by which a con-
stituent is moved further to the left within a phrase or sentence.
preposition: a preposition is a word generally used to express location, man-
ner etc. – e.g. at/in/on/under/by/with/from/against/down etc. In English, it is a
characteristic property of prepositions that they are invariable, and that they can
generally be modiﬁed by straight/right. Where a preposition has a nominal or
pronominal complement, it is said to be transitive; where it has no complement,
it is said to be intransitive. Hence down is a transitive preposition in ‘He fell
down the stairs’, but an intransitive preposition in ‘He fell down.’
prepositional phrase: a phrase whose head is a preposition – e.g. in town, on
Sunday, to the market, for someone else etc.
preposition stranding: see stranding.
Pres/present tense: see tense.
principles: principles of Universal Grammar/UG principles describe poten-
tially universal properties of natural language grammars: the terms condition
and constraint are also used with much the same meaning as the term princi-
ple. Potential principles of Universal Grammar include the Headedness Prin-
ciple, Binary Principle, Attract Closest Principle and Phase Impenetrability
Condition.
Principles-and-Parameters Theory: this theory, developed in Chomsky (1981)
and much subsequent work, claims that natural language grammars incorporate
not only a set of innate universal principles which account for those aspects of
grammar which are common to all languages, but also a set of parameters which
account for those aspects of grammar which vary from one language to another.
See Principles and Parameters.
PRN: see pronoun.
PRO: a null-case pronoun (known informally as ‘big PRO’, because it is writ-
ten in capital letters) which represents the understood subject of an inﬁnitive

472
Glossary
complement of a control predicate, e.g. in a structure such as ‘John decided
PRO to leave.’ See §4.2.
pro: a null nominative-case pronoun (known informally as ‘little pro’, because it
is written in lower-case letters) which represents the understood null subject of a
ﬁnite clause in a null-subject language. A Shakespearean sentence such as ‘Wilt
come?’ (= ‘Will you come?’, Stephano, The Tempest, III.ii) could be argued to
have a null pro subject, and hence to have the structure ‘Wilt pro come?’, with pro
having essentially the same interpretation as the second-person-singular pronoun
thou. See §4.2.
probe: when a head is merged with its complement, it serves as a probe which
searches for a matching goal within its complement (i.e. an expression which it
can agree with). See §8.2.
proform: a proform is an expression (typically a word) which has no speciﬁc
content of its own, but which derives its content from its antecedent. For example,
in a sentence such as ‘Mary may have been tired, but she didn’t seem so’, the
antecedent of the word so is the adjective tired: hence so (in the use illustrated
here) can be said to be an adjectival proform.
PROG: progressive-aspect auxiliary (e.g. be in ‘He may be waiting for you’).
See aspect.
PROGP: progressive phrase – i.e. a phrase headed by a PROG/progressive aux-
iliary constituent – e.g. be waiting for you in ‘He may be waiting for you.’
progressive: see aspect.
project(ion): a projection is a constituent containing a head word. For example,
a noun phrase such as students of linguistics is a projection of its head noun stu-
dents (equivalently, we can say that the noun students here projects into the noun
phrase students of linguistics). A minimal projection is a constituent which is not
a projection of some other constituent: hence, heads (e.g. words) are minimal pro-
jections. An intermediate projection is a constituent which is larger than a word,
but smaller than a phrase (e.g. is working in ‘He is working’). A maximal pro-
jection is a constituent which is not contained within any larger constituent with
the same head. So, for example, in a sentence like ‘I’ve heard several accounts of
what happened’, the italicised noun phrase expression accounts of what happened
is a maximal projection, since it is a projection of the noun accounts but is not
contained within any larger projection of the noun accounts (if we assume that
several accounts of what happened is a quantiﬁer phrase headed by the quantiﬁer
several). By contrast, in a sentence such as ‘I’ve heard several accounts’, the
italicised noun accounts is both a minimal projection (by virtue of the fact that it
is not a projection of some other head) and a maximal projection (by virtue of the
fact that it is not contained within any larger structure which has the same head
noun). The Projection Principle is a UG principle suggested in earlier work by

Glossary
473
Chomsky (1981, p. 29) which requires that the properties of lexical items should
remain constant throughout the derivation: a related principle is the Inclusiveness
Condition.
pronominal: a pronominal (expression) is a non-anaphoric pronoun like him
which obeys Principle B of Binding Theory (and hence must not refer to any
higher expression within the closest TP most immediately containing it). See
ex. 3.2.
pronoun: the word pronoun is composed of two morphemes – namely pro (mean-
ing ‘on behalf of’) and noun: hence, a pronoun is traditionally said to be a word
used in place of a noun expression. Pronouns differ from nouns in that they have
no intrinsic descriptive content, and so are functors. There are a range of different
types of pronoun found in English, including the pronominal noun one(s) used
in sentences like ‘I’ll take the red one(s)’, pronominal quantiﬁers like any in
‘I couldn’t ﬁnd any’ and pronominal determiners like this in ‘This is hard’. The
term pronoun is most frequently used to indicate a class of items (like he/him/his)
traditionally referred to as personal pronouns (though analysed in much recent
work as pronominal determiners). See §2.6.
proper noun: see noun.
proposition: this is a term used to describe the semantic content (i.e. meaning)
of a sentence. For example, we might say that the sentence ‘Does John smoke?’
questions the truth of the proposition that ‘John smokes.’
pseudocleft sentence: a sentence such as ‘What he hated most was syntax’, where
syntax is said to occupy focus position within the overall sentence.
Q: in one use, an abbreviation for quantiﬁer; in another use, an abbreviation for
question particle.
quantiﬁer: a quantiﬁer is a special type of determiner used to denote quantity.
Typical quantiﬁers include the universal quantiﬁers all/both, the distributive
quantiﬁers each/every, the existential/partitive quantiﬁers some/any etc.
quantiﬁer ﬂoating: see ﬂoating quantiﬁer.
QP/quantiﬁer phrase: a phrase whose head is a quantiﬁer – e.g. an expression
such as many people, or few of the students.
Q-pronoun: a pronoun like many in ‘I don’t eat many’ which seems to be a
pronominal quantiﬁer.
question: this refers to a type of sentence which is used to ask whether something
is true, or to ask about the identity of some entity. See yes–no question and wh-
question.
question operator: the analysis of yes–no questions presented in §6.8 suggests
that they contain a null interrogative operator (i.e. a null counterpart of whether).

474
Glossary
quirky case: see case.
raising (predicate): the term raising is used in two senses. In its most general
sense, it denotes any movement operation which involves moving some con-
stituent from a ‘lower’ to a ‘higher’ position in a structure. However, it also has
a more speciﬁc sense, indicating a particular kind of A-movement operation by
which an expression is moved from being the subject of one clause to becom-
ing the subject of another. The term raising predicate denotes a word like seem
whose subject is raised out of subject position in a complement clause to become
subject of the seem clause. See §7.9 and §7.10.
reciprocal: see anaphor.
reduced: a reduced form is a form of a word which has lost one or more of
its segments (i.e. vowel/consonants), and/or which contains a vowel which loses
its deﬁning characteristics and is realised as a neutral vowel like schwa /ə/. For
example, the auxiliary have has the full (unreduced) form /hæv/ when stressed,
but has the various reduced forms /həv/, /əv/ and /v/ when unstressed.
reference/referential/referring: the reference of an expression is the entity (e.g.
object, concept, state of affairs) in the external world to which it refers. A ref-
erential/referring expression is one which refers to such an entity; conversely,
a non-referential expression is one which does not refer to any such entity.
For example the second there in a sentence such as ‘There was nobody there’ is
referential (it can be paraphrased as ‘in that place’), whereas the ﬁrst there is non-
referential and so cannot have its reference questioned by where? (cf. ∗‘Where
was nobody there?).
reﬂexive: see anaphor.
relative: in a sentence such as ‘He’s someone [who you can trust]’, the bracketed
clauseissaidtobearelativeclausebecauseit‘relatesto’(i.e.modiﬁes,orrestricts
the reference of) the pronoun someone. The pronoun who which introduces the
clause is said to be a relative pronoun, since it ‘relates to’ the expression some-
one (in the sense that someone is the antecedent of who). The Relative Pronoun
Spellout Condition/RPSC speciﬁes that a relative pronoun is given a null spell-
out if it occupies the speciﬁer position within CP (optionally in a ﬁnite clause,
obligatorily in a non-ﬁnite clause). See §6.10 and §6.11 for a general discussion of
relative clauses. On the distinction between appositive/free/restrictive relative
clauses, see the discussion of examples (127)–(131) in §6.11.
Remerger Constraint: a grammatical principle which speciﬁes that no head can
be remerged with a constituent with which it has already been merged.
representation: a syntactic representation (or structural representation) is
a notation/device (typically, a tree diagram or labelled bracketing) used to rep-
resent the syntactic structure of an expression: a semantic representation is

Glossary
475
a representation of linguistic aspects of the meaning of an expression; a PF-
representation is a representation of the phonetic form of an expression.
restrictive: a restrictive theory is one which imposes strong constraints on the
types of structures and operations found in natural language grammars. See §1.3.
In a different use of the word, the italicised clause in a sentence like ‘I saw the
man who they arrested on TV’ is a restrictive relative clause in the sense that it
restricts the class of men being referred to in the sentence to the one they arrested.
resultative: a verb such as paint in a sentence such as ‘John painted his house
pink’ is said to be a resultative verb in that the result of the action of painting is
that the house becomes pink. See §9.5.
R-expression: a referring expression containing a noun, like John or the man
next door. See ex. 3.2.
rich: to say that a language has a rich system of agreement inﬂections is to say
that it has a large number of inﬂectional afﬁxes which attach to verbs and distinc-
tively mark ﬁrst/second/third-person forms and singular/plural forms, with little
syncretism; to say that a language has an impoverished/poor system of agree-
ment inﬂections is to say that it has only a small number of such inﬂections, and
that these do not clearly and consistently differentiate ﬁrst/second/third-person
forms and singular/plural forms.
root: the root of a tree diagram is the topmost node in the tree. Hence, a root
clause is a free-standing clause, i.e. a clause which is not contained within any
other expression. In traditional grammar, a root clause is termed a principal
clause, independent clause or main clause. By contrast, an embedded clause
is a clause which is contained within some larger expression; and a complement
clause is an (embedded) clause which is used as the complement of some item. So,
in a sentence such as ‘I think he loves you’, the think clause (i.e. the expression I
think he loves you) is a root clause, whereas the loves clause (i.e. the expression he
loves you) is an embedded clause. Moreover, the loves clause is also a complement
clause, since it serves as the complement of the verb think.
RPSC: Relative Pronoun Spellout Condition. See relative.
S/S′/S-bar: category label used in work in the 1960s and 1970s to designate a
sentence or clause. See §3.3.
scope: the scope of an expression is the set of constituents which it modiﬁes
or which fall within (what we might call informally) its ‘sphere of inﬂuence’.
For example, a sentence like He cannot be telling the truth has a meaning para-
phraseable as ‘It is not possible that he is telling the truth’, and in such a sentence
the negative not is said to have scope over the modal auxiliary can (and con-
versely can is said to fall within the scope of not, or to have narrow scope with
respect to not). By contrast, a sentence such as You mustn’t tell lies has a meaning
paraphraseable as ‘It is necessary that you not tell lies’, and in such a sentence,

476
Glossary
the auxiliary must is said to have scope over (or to have wide scope with respect
to) the negative particle n’t.
SCP: see Strict Cyclicity Principle.
SE: Standard English.
second person: see person.
select(ion)/selectional: when a word has a particular type of complement, it is
said to select (i.e. ‘take’ or ‘allow’) the relevant type of complement (and the
relevant phenomenon is referred to as complement-selection). For example, we
can say that the word expect has the selectional property that it can select an
inﬁnitive complement (e.g. in structures like ‘They expect to win’).
semantics/semantic component: Semantics is the study of linguistic aspects of
meaning. The semantic component of the grammar is the component which
maps syntactic structures into semantic representations. See representation.
sentence: this term is usually used to denote a root clause – i.e. a free-standing
clause which is not contained within some larger expression. See root.
sentence fragment: see fragment.
SG: an abbreviation for singular.
Shakespeare:Shakespeare’splayswerewrittenbetween(around)1590and1620,
and are examples of Early Modern English/Elizabethan English (though some
have suggested that Shakespeare’s English is rather conservative, and hence is
more representative of a slightly earlier stage of English).
shell: this term is used in connection with the idea (discussed in §§9.4–9.8) that
verb phrases comprise two different projections, an outer vP shell headed by a
light verb, and an inner VP core headed by a lexical verb.
silent: see null.
simple sentence: one which contains a single clause.
singular: a singular expression is one which denotes a single entity (e.g. this car
is a singular expression, whereas these cars is a plural expression).
sister: two nodes are sisters if they have the same mother (i.e. if they are directly
merged with each other at some stage of derivation). See §3.7.
small clause: see clause.
source: a term used in the analysis of semantic/thematic roles to denote the entity
from which something moves – e.g. the italicised expression in ‘John returned
from Paris.’ See §7.5.

Glossary
477
spec: see speciﬁer. Terms like spec-CP/spec-TP/spec-VP (etc.) denote the spec-
iﬁer position within CP/TP/VP (etc.).
speciﬁcation: the speciﬁcation of an item is the set of features used to describe
its properties.
speciﬁer: the grammatical function fulﬁlled by certain types of constituent which
precede the head of their containing phrase. For example, in a sentence such as
‘John is working’, John is superﬁcially the speciﬁer (and subject) of is working.
In a sentence such as ‘What did John do?’ what is superﬁcially the speciﬁer of the
CP headed by a C constituent containing the inverted auxiliary did. In a phrase
such as ‘straight through the window’, straight is the speciﬁer of the PP headed
by the preposition through.
speciﬁer-ﬁrst: a speciﬁer-ﬁrst structure is one which has its speciﬁer positioned
in front of its head.
spellout: the point in a derivation at which part of a syntactic structure is sent
to the PF component to be mapped into a PF-representation (i.e. a representation
of its phonetic form). To say that an item has a null spellout is to say that it is
‘silent’ and so has a null phonetic form.
split CP/split NP/split VP: work by Luigi Rizzi discussed in §§9.2–9.3 has
suggested that CP can be split into a number of distinct projections, including a
Force Phrase, Focus Phrase, Topic Phrase and Finiteness Phrase. Similarly,
work by Larson, Hale and Chomsky outlined in §§9.4–9.8 has suggested that
verb phrases can be split into two different projections, an outer vP shell headed
by a light verb, and an inner VP core headed by a lexical verb. In §9.9, a
parallel split projection analysis of noun phrases is outlined. On split spellout,
see discontinuous spellout.
stack(ing): to say (e.g.) that prenominal adjectives can be stacked in front of
a noun is to say that we can have an indeﬁnitely large number of adjectives
positioned in front of a noun (e.g. ‘a big, red, juicy, ripe apple’).
star: an asterisk (∗) used in front of an expression to indicate that the expression
is ungrammatical.
stem: the stem of a word is the form to which inﬂectional afﬁxes are added. So,
a verb form like going comprises the stem go and the inﬂectional sufﬁx -ing.
strand/stranded/stranding: a stranded (or orphaned) preposition is one which
has been separated from its complement (by movement of the complement). For
example, in an echo question like ‘You’re waiting for who?’, the preposition
for has not been stranded, since it is immediately followed by its complement
who. But in ‘Who are you waiting for?’ the preposition for has been stranded
or orphaned, in that it has been separated from its complement who: the rele-
vant phenomenon is termed preposition stranding. The Stranding Constraint

478
Glossary
speciﬁes that in formal styles of English, a preposition cannot be separated from
its complement and thereby be stranded.
Strict Cyclicity Principle: a UG principle which speciﬁes that a cyclic operation
can only affect the overall head H of a structure and some other constituent within
the structure headed by H. See §5.7.
string: a continuous sequence of words contained within the same phrase or
sentence. For example, in the sentence ‘They hate syntax’, the sequences They
hate, hate syntax and They hate syntax are all strings – but They syntax is not.
Note that a string need not be a constituent.
strong: a strong head is one which can attract (i.e. trigger movement of) another
head; a weak head is one which cannot trigger movement. For example, C in
an interrogative main clause is strong in present-day English, and so attracts an
auxiliary to move from T to C – e.g. in sentences like Can you speak French? On
an entirely different use of these terms in the expressions weak/strong genitive
pronoun, see case.
structural: see case, representation.
structure: see constituent structure.
stylistic variation: variation correlated with stylistic factors. For example, whom
is used in formal styles and who in other styles in sentences like ‘He is someone
whom/who I admire greatly.’
subarray: see array.
subject: the (superﬁcial structural) subject of a clause is a noun or pronoun expres-
sion which is normally positioned between a complementiser and an (auxiliary
or non-auxiliary) verb. Syntactic characteristics of subjects include the fact that
they can trigger agreement with auxiliaries (as in ‘The president is lying’, where
the auxiliary is agrees with the subject the president), and they can be inverted
with auxiliaries in main-clause questions (as in ‘Is the president lying?’, where
the auxiliary is has been inverted with the subject the president).
subject control predicate: see control.
subjunctive: in a (formal-style) sentence such as ‘The judge ordered that he be
detained indeﬁnitely’, the passive auxiliary verb be is traditionally said to be
in the subjunctive mood, since although it has exactly the same form as the
inﬁnitive form be (e.g. in inﬁnitive structures such as ‘To be or not to be – that
is the question’), it has a nominative subject he, and hence is a ﬁnite verb form.
In present-day spoken English, constructions containing subjunctive verbs are
generally avoided, as they are felt to be archaic or excessively formal in style by
many speakers. See Mood.

Glossary
479
substantive: a substantive category is a category (like noun, verb, adjective,
adverb,preposition)whosemembersarecontentives(i.e.itemswithidiosyncratic
descriptive content). See §2.4.
substitution: a technique used to determine the category which a given expres-
sion belongs to. An expression belongs to a given type of category if it can be
substituted (i.e. replaced) in phrases or sentences like that in which it occurs by
another expression which clearly belongs to the category in question. For exam-
ple, we might say that clearer is an adverb in ‘John speaks clearer than you’
because it can be replaced by the adverbial expression more clearly. See §2.3.
successive-cyclic movement: movement in a succession of short steps. On the
claim that head movement is successive-cyclic, see §5.5. On the claim that A-
movement is successive-cyclic, see §8.9. On the claim that wh-movement is
successive-cyclic, see ch. 10.
sufﬁx: see afﬁx.
superiority: wh-questions are said to show a superiority effect in the sense that
in a question containing more than one wh-expression, it is the superior (i.e.
highest) wh-expression which moves to the front of the interrogative clause. See
§6.4.
superlative:thesuperlativeisaformofanadjective/adverb(typicallycarryingthe
sufﬁx -est) used to mark the highest value for a particular property in comparison
with others. For example, hardest is the superlative form of hard in ‘John is the
hardest worker because he works hardest.’
syncretise/syncretism: in work on split CP projections discussed in §9.3, Rizzi
has claimed that although Force and Finiteness are projected on separate heads
when some (topicalised or focused) constituent intervenes between them, they
are syncretised (i.e. collapsed/conﬂated) into a single head carrying both Force
and Finiteness features when no constituent intervenes between them.
syntactic representation: see representation.
syntax: the component of a grammar which determines how words are combined
together to form phrases and sentences.
T: a tense-marking constituent containing either a tensed auxiliary, or an abstract
tense afﬁx Tns, or a non-ﬁnite tense particle like inﬁnitival to. T-to-C movement
is movement of an auxiliary or non-auxiliary verb from the head T position of TP
into the head C position of CP – as with the italicised inverted auxiliary in ‘Is it
raining?’
tag: a string usually consisting of an auxiliary and a subject pronoun which is
‘tagged’ onto the end of a sentence. Thus, the italicised string is the tag in the

480
Glossary
following: ‘The president isn’t underestimating his opponents, is he?’, and the
overall sentence is known as a tag question/tag sentence.
taxonomy: a taxonomy is a classiﬁcatory system. A taxonomic theory of lan-
guage is one which classiﬁes constituents into different types. See §1.2.
tense: ﬁnite auxiliary and main verbs in English show a binary (two-way) tense
contrast, traditionally said to be between present-tense forms and past-tense
forms. Thus, in ‘John hates syntax’, hates is a present-tense verb form, whereas in
‘John hated syntax’, hated is a past-tense verb form. (An alternative classiﬁcation
which many linguists prefer is into [±past] verb forms, so that hated is [+past],
and hates [−past].) This present/past-tense distinction correlates (to some extent)
with time-reference, so that (e.g.) past-tense verbs typically describe an event
taking place in the past, whereas present-tense verbs typically describe an event
taking place in the present (or future). However, the correlation is an imperfect
one, since e.g. in a sentence such as ‘I might go there tomorrow’, the auxiliary
might carries the past-tense inﬂection -t (found on past-tense main verbs like left)
but does not denote past time.
tensed: a tensed (auxiliary or non-auxiliary) verb form is one which carries
(present/past) tense – e.g. is, can, could, hates, went etc. By extension, a tensed
clause is one containing a tensed auxiliary or main verb. See tense.
terminal node: a node at the bottom of a tree.
ternary: three-way. For example, person properties might be described in terms
of a ternary (three-valued) feature such as [1/2/3-Pers], with ﬁrst-person pronouns
like we being [1-Pers], second-person pronouns like you being [2-Pers] and third-
person pronouns like they being [3-Pers]. A ternary-branching constituent is one
which has three daughters.
thematic: on thematic role, see theta-role. On the Thematic Hierarchy which
speciﬁes where an argument carrying a given theta-role should be merged, see ex.
9.2. On the (different) Thematic Hierarchy which constrains how passivisation
works, see §7.5.
theme: the name of a speciﬁc theta-role (sometimes also termed patient) rep-
resenting the entity undergoing the effect of some action (e.g. Harry in ‘William
teased Harry’).
theory of grammar: a theory which speciﬁes the types of categories, relations,
operations and principles found in natural language grammars. See §1.3.
theta-criterion/-criterion: a principle of Universal Grammar which speciﬁes
that each argument should bear one and only one theta-role to a single predicate,
and that each theta-role associated with a given predicate should be assigned to
one and only one argument. See §7.5.

Glossary
481
theta-mark/-mark: to say that a predicate theta-marks its arguments is to say
that it determines the theta-role played by its arguments. A predicate is said to
directly theta-mark its complement(s), and to indirectly theta-mark its subject.
See §7.5.
theta-role/-role: the semantic role played by an argument in relation to its
predicate (e.g. agent, theme, goal etc.). For example, in a sentence like William
teased Harry, the verb tease assigns the -role agent to its subject William and
the theta-role theme to its complement Harry. See §7.5.
third person: see person.
three-place predicate: a predicate (typically a verb) which takes three argu-
ments – e.g. the verb give in ‘John gave Mary something’ (where the three argu-
ments of give are John, Mary and something). See argument.
Tns: an abstract afﬁx which carries tense and agreement properties. See §4.4.
Top/Topic/Topicalisation/TopP: In a dialogue such as the following:
speaker a: I’ve been having problems with the Fantasy Syntax seminar
speaker b: That kind of course, very few students seem to be able to get their
heads round
the italicised expression that kind of course can be said to be the topic of the sen-
tence produced by speaker B, in the sense that it refers back to the Fantasy Syntax
seminar mentioned by the previous speaker. An expression which represents ‘old’
or ‘familiar’ information in this way is said to be a topic. The movement oper-
ation by which the italicised expression moves from being the complement of
the preposition round to the front of the overall sentence is traditionally termed
topicalisation. In work by Luigi Rizzi on split CP projections discussed in §9.2,
topic expressions which occur at the beginning of clauses are said to be contained
within a TopP ‘Topic Phrase’ projection, headed by an abstract Top (= ‘Topic’)
constituent.
TP: tense projection/tense phrase – i.e. phrase headed by a tense-marked auxiliary
or an abstract tense morpheme Tns. See §§3.2–3.3.
trace (theory): a trace of a moved constituent is a null copy left behind (as a
result of movement) in each position out of which a constituent moves. Trace
theory is a theory which posits that moved constituents leave behind a trace copy
in each position out of which they move. See §5.3, §6.3 and §7.2.
transfer: see phase.
transitive: a word is traditionally said to be transitive (in a given use) if it assigns
accusative case to a noun or pronoun expression which it c-commands. So, likes
in ‘John likes him’ is a transitive verb, since it assigns accusative case to its
complement him. Likewise, inﬁnitival for is a transitive complementiser, since

482
Glossary
it assigns accusative case to the subject of its inﬁnitive complement (cf. ‘I’m
keen [for him to participate more actively]’) An intransitive head etc. is one
which has no complement, or which does not assign accusative case to (any
expression contained within) its complement; hence e.g. wait is an intransitive
verb in sentences like I’ll wait, and likewise in I’ll wait for you. See §4.9.
tree (diagram): A form of graph used to represent the syntactic structure of a
phrase or sentence.
truncate/truncation: truncation is an operation by which a sentence is shortened
by omitting one or more unstressed words at the beginning. For example, we can
truncate a question like Are you going anywhere nice on holiday? by omitting
are to form You going anywhere nice on holiday? and can further truncate the
sentence by omitting you to give Going anywhere nice on holiday?
T-to-C movement: see T.
two-placepredicate:apredicatewhichhastwoarguments–e.g.teasein‘William
teased Harry’ where the two arguments of the predicate tease are William and
Harry. See argument.
UG: see Universal Grammar.
unaccusative: an unaccusative predicate is a word like come whose apparent
‘subject’ originates as its complement. See §7.6.
unary-branching: a unary-branching node is one which has a single daughter.
unbound: a constituent is unbound if it has no appropriate antecedent in an
appropriate position within a given structure. For example, himself is unbound in a
sentence such as ∗‘She helped himself’, since she is not an appropriate antecedent
for himself, and there is no other appropriate antecedent for himself anywhere
within the sentence.
unergative: an unergative predicate is a verb like groan in a sentence such as ‘He
was groaning’ which has an agent subject but no overt object (though may have
an incorporated object: see §9.6).
ungradable: see gradable.
ungrammatical: see grammatical.
Uniformity of Theta Assignment Hypothesis/UTAH: a hypothesis (developed
by Baker 1988) which maintains that each theta-role assigned by a particular
(kind of) predicate is canonically associated with a speciﬁc syntactic position:
e.g. spec-vP is the canonical position associated with an agent argument.
uninterpretable: see interpretable.
Universal Grammar: those aspects of grammar which are universal, and which
are assumed by Chomsky to be part of the innate knowledge which a child is born
with.

Glossary
483
universality: a criterion of adequacy for a theory of grammar, requiring that the
theory be applicable to all natural languages. See §1.3.
unreduced: see reduced.
unspeciﬁed: to say that a constituent is unspeciﬁed for a given feature is to say
that it lacks the relevant feature.
unvalued: see value.
UTAH: see Uniformity of Theta Assignment Hypothesis.
V: see verb.
v: see light verb.
value: in relation to a feature such as [singular-number], number is said
to be an attribute (in the sense that it is the property being described) and sin-
gular its value. To value a feature is to assign it a value. For example, a ﬁnite
auxiliary enters the derivation with its person and number features unvalued (i.e.
not assigned any value), and these are then valued via agreement with the subject
in the course of the derivation. See §8.3.
variety: a particular (e.g. geographical or social) form of a language.
verb: a category of word which has the morphological property that it can carry
a speciﬁc range of inﬂections (e.g. the verb show can carry past-tense -d, third-
person-singular present-tense -s, perfect -n and progressive -ing, giving rise to
shows/showed/shown/showing), and the syntactic property that it can head the
complement of inﬁnitival to (e.g. ‘Do you want to show me?’) See §2.2 and §2.3.
On verb movement, see V-to-T movement.
verb phrase: a phrase which is headed by a verb – e.g. the italicised phrase in
‘They will help you.’ See ch. 3.
V-to-T movement: movement of a verb out of the head V position in VP into the
head T position in TP. See §5.4.
vocative: a vocative expression is one which is used to address one or more
individuals, and which is set off in a separate tone-group at the beginning or end
of the sentence (marked in the spelling by the use of a comma). So, for example,
Fred is a vocative expression in ‘Fred, can you give me a hand?’ and similarly,
you two is a vocative expression in ‘Come here, you two!’
voice: see active.
VP/VPISH: on VP, see verb phrase. A VP-adverb is an adverb (like perfectly)
which adjoins to a projection of a lexical verb (V). The VP-Internal Subject
Hypothesis/VPISH is the hypothesis that subjects originate internally within
VP/vP: see ch. 7.

484
Glossary
vP: a phrase (maximal projection) headed by a light verb. A vP-adverb is an
adverb which adjoins to a projection of a light verb (v).
weak: see strong.
wh: this is widely used as a feature carried by constituents which undergo wh-
movement (hence e.g. the relative pronoun who in someone who I think is lying
can be described as a wh-pronoun, as can the interrogative pronoun who in Who
are you waiting for? and the exclamative quantiﬁer what in What fun we had!).
wh-copying: a phenomenon whereby a moved wh-expression leaves behind an
overt copy of itself when it moves – as with movement of who in a Child English
question such as Who do you think who chased the cat?
wh-expression: an expression containing a wh-word (i.e. containing a word car-
rying a [wh] feature).
wh-island constraint: a constraint which speciﬁes that wh-clauses (i.e. clauses
beginning with a wh-expression) are islands, so that no constituent can be moved
out of a wh-clause. See island.
wh-movement: a type of movement operation whereby a wh-expression is moved
to the front of a particular type of structure (e.g. to the front of the overall sentence
in ‘Where has he gone?’). See ch. 6.
wh-parameter: a parameter whose setting determines whether wh-expressions
are (or are not) moved to the front of an appropriate type of clause (especially in
relation to wh-questions). See §1.6.
wh-phrase: a phrase containing a wh-word.
wh-question: a question which contains a wh-word, e.g. ‘What are you doing?’
wh-word: a word which begins with wh (e.g. who/what/which/where/when/why),
or which has a similar syntax to wh-words (e.g. how).
word order: the linear sequencing (left-to-right ordering) of words within a
phrase or sentence.
yes–no question: a question to which ‘Yes’ or ‘No’ would be an appropriate
answer – e.g. ‘Is it raining?’

References
Abney, S. P. (1987) ‘The English Noun Phrase in Its Sentential Aspect’, PhD diss., MIT.
Ackema, P. (2001) ‘On the relation between V-to-I and the structure of the inﬂectional
paradigm’, The Linguistic Review 18: 233–63.
Acquaviva, P. (2002) ‘The morphological dimension of polarity licensing’, Linguistics 40:
925–59.
Adger, D. (2003) Core Syntax: A Minimalist Approach, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Agbayani, B. (2000) ‘Wh-subjects in English and the Vacuous Movement Hypothesis’,
Linguistic Inquiry 31: 703–13.
Aissen, J. (1996) ‘Pied-piping, abstract agreement and functional projections in Tzotzil’,
Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 14: 447–91.
Akmajian, A. and Heny, F. (1975) An Introduction to the Principles of Transformational Syntax,
MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Alexiadou, A. and Anagnostopoulou, E. (2001) ‘The subject-in-situ generalization and the role
of case in driving computations’, Linguistic Inquiry 32: 193–231.
Alexopoulou, T. and Kolliakou, D. (2002) ‘On Linkhood, Topicalisation and Clitic Left
Dislocation’, Journal of Linguistics 38: 193–245.
Antony, L. and Hornstein, N. (2002) Chomsky and His Critics, Blackwell, Oxford.
Aronoff, M. (1976) Word Formation in Generative Grammar, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Aronoff, M. and Fuhrhop, N. (2002) ‘Restricting sufﬁx combinations in German and English:
closing sufﬁxes and the monosufﬁx constraint’, Natural Language and Linguistic Theory
20: 451–90.
Atkinson, M. (2003) Unpublished course handouts, University of Essex.
Authier, J.-M. (1991) ‘V-governed expletives, case theory and the projection principle’, Lin-
guistic Inquiry 22: 721–40.
Baker, C. L. (1970) ‘Notes on the description of English questions: the role of an abstract
question morpheme’, Foundations of Language 6: 197–219.
Baker, M. (1988) Incorporation, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Baltin, M. (1995) ‘Floating quantiﬁers, PRO and predication’, Linguistic Inquiry 26: 199–248.
Baltin, M. (2002) ‘Movement to the higher V is remnant movement’, Linguistic Inquiry 33:
653–9.
Baltin, M. and Collins, C. (eds.) (2001) The Handbook of Contemporary Syntactic Theory,
Blackwell, Oxford.
Barss, A. (2001) ‘Syntactic reconstruction effects’, in Baltin and Collins (eds.), pp. 670–96.
Basilico, D. (2003) ‘The topic of small clauses’, Linguistic Inquiry 34: 1–35.
Bejar, S. and Massam, D. (1999) ‘Multiple case checking’, Syntax 2: 65–79.
Belletti, A. (1988) ‘The case of unaccusatives’, Linguistic Inquiry 19: 1–34.
Belletti, A. and Rizzi, L. (1988) ‘Psych-verbs and θ-theory’, Natural Language and Linguistic
Theory, 6: 291–352.
Bernstein, J. B. (2001) ‘The DP hypothesis: identifying clausal properties in the nominal
domain’, in Baltin and Collins (eds.) pp. 536–61.
Bobaljik, J. (1995) ‘Morphosyntax: the Syntax of Verbal Inﬂection’, PhD diss., MIT.
485

486
References
Bobaljik, J. D. (2000) ‘The rich agreement hypothesis in review’, draft manuscript, McGill
University (http://www.msgill.ca/Linguistics/faculty/bobaljik/).
Bobaljik, J. (2002) ‘A-chains at the PF-interface: copies and “covert” movement’, Natural
Language and Linguistic Theory 20: 197–267.
Boeckx, C. (2000) ‘A note on Contraction’, Linguistic Inquiry 31: 357–66.
Boeckx, C. (2001) ‘Scope reconstruction and A-movement’, Natural Language and Linguistic
Theory 19: 503–48.
Boeckx, C. and Stjepanovi´c, S. (2001) ‘Head-ing towards PF’, Linguistic Inquiry 32: 345–55.
Borsley, R. (2002) ‘Wh-phrases in Minimalism’, unpublished paper, University of Essex.
Boˇskovi´c, ˇZ. (1997) ‘On certain violations of the superiority condition, AgrO and economy of
derivation’, Journal of Linguistics 33: 227–54.
Boˇskovi´c, ˇZ. (2001) On the Nature of the Syntax-Phonology Interface: Cliticization and Related
Phenomena, Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Boˇskovi´c, ˇZ. (2002a) ‘On multiple wh-fronting’, Linguistic Inquiry 33: 351–83.
Boˇskovi´c, ˇZ. (2002b) ‘A-Movement and the EPP’, Syntax 5: 167–218.
Bowerman, M. (1988) ‘The “no negative evidence” problem: how do children avoid an overly
general grammar?’, in J. Hawkins (ed.), Explaining Language Universals, Blackwell,
Oxford.
Bowers, J. (1993) ‘The syntax of predication’, Linguistic Inquiry 24: 591–656.
Bowers, J. (2002) ‘Transitivity’, Linguistic Inquiry 33: 183–224.
Braine, M. D. S. (1971) ‘Three suggestions regarding grammatical analyses of children’s lan-
guage’, in C. A. Ferguson and D. I. Slobin (eds.), Studies of Child Language Development,
Holt Rinehart and Winston, New York, pp. 421–9.
Branigan, P. (1992) ‘Subjects and Complementisers’, PhD diss., MIT.
Branigan, P. and MacKenzie, M. (2002) ‘Altruism, A-movement and object agreement in Innu-
aimˆun’, Linguistic Inquiry 33: 385–407.
Brody, M. (1995) A Radically Minimalist Theory, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Brown, K. (1991) ‘Double modals in Hawick Scots’, in P. Trudgill and J. K. Chambers (eds.),
Dialects of English, Longman, London, pp. 74–103.
Brown R., Cazden, C. and Bellugi, U. (1968) ‘The child’s grammar from I to III’, in J. P. Hill
(ed.), Minnesota Symposium on Child Development, vol. 2, pp. 28–73.
Brown, R. and Hanlon, C. (1970) ‘Derivational complexity and order of acquisition in child
speech’, in J. R. Hayes (ed.), Cognition and the Development of Language, Wiley, New
York, pp. 11–53.
Burton, S. and Grimshaw, J. (1992) ‘Coordination and VP-internal subjects’, Linguistic Inquiry
23: 305–13.
Burzio, L. (1986) Italian Syntax, Reidel, Dordrecht.
Carnie, A. (2000) ‘On the deﬁnition of X0 and XP’, Syntax 3: 59–106.
Carrier, J. and Randall, J. H. (1992) ‘The argument structure and syntactic structure of resul-
tatives’, Linguistic Inquiry 23: 173–234.
Carstens, V. (2000) ‘Concord in Minimalist Theory’, Linguistic Inquiry 31: 319–55.
Carstens, V. (2001) ‘Multiple agreement and case deletion: against -(in)completeness’, Syntax
4: 147–63.
Cheng, L. (1997) On the Typology of Wh-Questions, Garland, New York.
Cheng, L. and Rooryck, J. (2000) ‘Licensing Wh-in-situ’, Syntax 3: 1–19.
Chomsky, N. (1965) Aspects of the Theory of Syntax, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Chomsky, N. (1968) Interview with S. Hamshire in The Listener, May 1968.
Chomsky, N. (1970) ‘Remarks on nominalisation’, in R. A. Jacobs and P. S. Rosenbaum
(eds.), Readings in English Transformational Grammar, Ginn, Waltham, Mass, pp. 184–
221.
Chomsky, N. (1972) Language and Mind (enlarged edition), Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, New
York.

References
487
Chomsky, N. (1981) Lectures on Government and Binding, Foris, Dordrecht.
Chomsky, N. (1982) Some Concepts and Consequences of the Theory of Government and
Binding, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Chomsky, N. (1986a) Knowledge of Language: its Nature, Origin and Use, Praeger, New
York.
Chomsky, N. (1986b) Barriers, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Chomsky, N. (1993) ‘A minimalist program for linguistic theory’, in Hale and Keyser (eds.),
pp. 1–52 (reprinted as chapter 3 of Chomsky 1995).
Chomsky, N. (1995) The Minimalist Program, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Chomsky, N. (1998) Minimalist Inquiries: the Framework, MIT Occasional Papers in Linguis-
tics, no. 15 (also published in R. Martin, D. Michaels and J. Uriagereka (eds.) (2000)
Step by Step: Essays on Minimalism in Honor of Howard Lasnik, MIT Press, Cambridge,
Mass., pp. 89–155).
Chomsky, N. (1999) Derivation by Phase, MIT Occasional Papers in Linguistics, no. 18 (also
published in M. Kenstowicz (ed.) (2001) Ken Hale: a Life in Language, MIT Press,
Cambridge, Mass., pp. 1–52).
Chomsky, N. (2001) ‘Beyond Explanatory Adequacy’, unpublished manuscript, MIT.
Chomsky, N. (2002) On Nature and Language, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Chomsky, N. and Lasnik, H. (1977) ‘Filters and Control’, Linguistic Inquiry 8: 425–504.
Chomsky, N. and Lasnik, H. (1995) ‘The theory of principles and parameters’, in Chomsky
1995, pp. 13–127.
Chung, S. (1994) ‘Wh-agreement and “Referentiality” in Chamorro’, Linguistic Inquiry 25:
1–45.
Chung, S. (1998) The Design of Agreement: Evidence from Chamorro, University of Chicago
Press, Chicago.
Cinque, G. (1994) ‘Evidence for partial N-movement in the Romance DP’, in G. Cinque,
J. Koster, J.-Y. Pollock, L. Rizzi and R. Zanuttini (eds.), Towards Universal Gram-
mar: Studies in Honor of Richard Kayne, Georgetown University Press, Washington DC,
pp. 85–110.
Cinque, G. (1999) Adverbs and Functional Heads, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Citko, B. (2002) ‘(Anti)reconstruction effects in free relatives: a new argument against the
Comp account’, Linguistic Inquiry 33: 507–11.
Cole, P. (1982) Imbabura Quechua, North-Holland, The Hague.
Cole, P. and Hermon, G. (2000) ‘Partial wh-movement: evidence from Malay’, in Lutz, M¨uller
and von Stechow (eds.), pp. 101–30.
Collins, C. (1997) Local Economy, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Collins, C. and Branigan, P. (1997) ‘Quotative Inversion’, Natural Language and Linguistic
Theory 15: 1–41.
Contreras, H. (1986) ‘Spanish bare NPs and the ECP’, in I. Bordelois, H. Contreras
and K. Zagona (eds.), Generative Studies in Spanish Syntax, Foris, Dordrecht,
pp. 25–49.
Contreras, J. (1987) ‘Small clauses in Spanish and English’, Natural Language and Linguistic
Theory 5: 225–44.
Cormack, A. and Smith, N. (1999) ‘Where is a sign merged?’, Glot International 4, 6: 21.
Cormack, A. and Smith, N. (2000a) ‘Head Movement and negation in English’, Transactions
of the Philological Society 98: 49–85.
Cormack, A. and Smith, N. (2000b) ‘Fronting: the Syntax and Pragmatics of “Focus” and
“Topic”’, UCL Working Papers in Linguistics 20: 387–417.
Cornilescu, A. (2001) ‘Romanian nominalizations: case and aspectual structure’, Journal of
Linguistics 37: 467–501.
Costa, J. (2001) ‘Postverbal subjects and agreement in unaccusative contexts in European
Portuguese’, The Linguistic Review 18: 1–17.

488
References
Crain, S. and Pietroski, P. (2002) ‘Why language acquisition is a snap’, The Linguistic Review
19: 163–83.
Culicover, P. (1991) ‘Topicalization, inversion and complementiser in English’, in D. Delﬁtto,
M. Everaert, A. Evers and F. Stuurman (eds.), OTS Working Papers: Going Romance and
Beyond, University of Utrecht, pp. 1–45.
Culicover, P. and Jackendoff, R. (2001) ‘Control is not movement’, Linguistic Inquiry 32:
493–512.
Culicover, P. and Levine, R. D. (2001) ‘Stylistic Inversion in English: a reconsideration’,
Natural Language and Linguisitc Theory 19: 283–310.
Curtiss, S. (1977) Genie: a Psycholinguistic Study of a Modern Day ‘Wild Child’, Academic
Press, London.
Davies,W.andDubinsky,S.(2003)‘OnextractionfromNPs’,NaturalLanguageandLinguistic
Theory 21: 1–37.
Dayal, V. (2002) ‘Single-pair versus multiple-pair answers: wh-in-situ and scope’, Linguistic
Inquiry 33: 512–20.
D´echaine, R.-M. and Wiltschko, M. (2002) ‘Decomposing pronouns’, Linguistic Inquiry 33:
409–42.
den Dikken, M. (2001) ‘Pluringulars, pronouns and quirky agreement’, The Linguistic Review
18: 19–41.
den Dikken, M. and Giannakidou, A. (2002) ‘From hell to polarity: “Aggressively non-D-
linked” wh-phrases as polarity items’, Linguistic Inquiry 33: 31–61.
Denham, K. (2000) ‘Optional wh-movement in Babine-Witsuwit’en’, Natural Language and
Linguistic Theory 18: 199–251.
Dixon, R. M. W. (2000) ‘Categories of the Noun Phrase in Jarawara’, Journal of Linguistics
36: 487–510.
Drubig, H. N. (2003) ‘Toward a typology of focus and focus constructions’, Linguistics 41:
1–50.
Dukes, M. (2000) ‘Agreement in Chamorro’, Journal of Linguistics 36: 575–88.
du Plessis, H. (1977) ‘Wh-movement in Afrikaans’, Linguistic Inquiry 8: 211–22.
Embick, D. and Noyer, R. (2001) ‘Movement operations after Syntax’, Linguistic Inquiry
32: 555–95.
Epstein, S. and Seeley, D. (1999) ‘Specifying the GF “subject”, eliminating A-chains and the
EPP with a derivational model’, ms. University of Michigan.
Ernst, T. (1991) ‘On the scope principle’, Linguistic Inquiry 22: 750–6.
Fabb, N. (1988) ‘English sufﬁxation is constrained only by selectional restrictions’, Natural
Language and Linguistic Theory 6: 527–39.
Fanselow, G. and Mahajan, A. (2000) ‘Towards a minimalist theory of wh-expletives, wh-
copying and successive cyclicity’, in Lutz, M¨uller and von Stechow (eds.), pp. 195–230.
Fasold, R. (1980) ‘The relation between black and white speech in the south’, ms., School of
Languages and Linguistics, Georgetown University, Washington DC.
Felser, C. (1999a) Verbal Complement Clauses: a Minimalist Study of Direct Perception
Constructions, Benjamins, Amsterdam.
Felser, C. (1999b) ‘Perception and control: A Minimalist analysis of English direct perception
complements’, Journal of Linguistics 34: 351–85.
Felser, C. (2001) ‘Wh-copying, phases and successive cyclicity’, draft ms, University of Essex.
Fillmore, C. J. (1968) ‘The case for case’, in E. Bach and R. T. Harms (eds.), Universals in
Linguistic Theory, Holt Rinehart and Winston, New York, pp. 1–88.
Fillmore, C. J. (1972) ‘Subjects, speakers and roles’, in D. Davidson and G. Harman (eds.),
Semantics of Natural Language, Reidel, Dordrecht.
Fitzpatrick, J. M. (2002) ‘On Minimalist approaches to the locality of movement’, Linguistic
Inquiry 33: 443–63.

References
489
Fodor, J. D. and Crowther, C. (2002) ‘Understanding stimulus poverty arguments’, The Lin-
guistic Review 19: 105–45.
Fox, D. (2000) Economy and Semantic Interpretation, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Frampton, J. and Gutmann, S. (1999) ‘Cyclic computation, a computationally efﬁcient mini-
malist syntax’, Syntax 2: 1–27.
Frank, R. and Vijay-Shanker, K. (2001) ‘Primitive c-command’, Syntax 4: 164–204.
Freidin, R. and Vergnaud, J. R. (2001) ‘Exquisite connections: some remarks on the evolution
of linguistic theory’, Lingua 111: 639–66.
Fu, J., Roeper, T. and Borer, H. (2001) ‘The VP within process nominals: evidence from adverbs
and the VP anaphor do so’, Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 19: 549–82.
Goodall, G. (1999) ‘Accusative case in passives’, Linguistics 37: 1–12.
Green, L. (1998) ‘Semantic and syntactic patterns in African American English’, ms., Univer-
sity of Massachusetts.
Grewendorf, G. (2001) ‘Multiple wh-fronting’, Linguistic Inquiry 32: 87–122.
Grimshaw, J. (1993) ‘Minimal Projection, Heads, and Optimality’, draft ms., Rutgers
University.
Groat, E. and O’Neil, J. (1996) ‘Spell-out at the LF interface’, in W. Abraham, S. D.
Epstein, H. Thr´ainsson and C. J.-W. Zwart (eds.), Minimal Ideas, Benjamins, Amsterdam,
pp. 113–39.
Gruber, J. S. (1965) ‘Studies in Lexical Relations’, PhD diss., MIT.
Gruber, J. S. (1976) Lexical Structures in Syntax and Semantics, North-Holland, Amsterdam.
Guasti, M. T. (2002) Language Acquisition: the Growth of Grammar, Bradford Books, MIT
Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Guasti, M. T., Thornton, R. and Wexler, K. (1995) ‘Negation in children’s questions: the case
of English’, in B. MacLaughlin and S. McEwen (eds.), Proceedings of the 19th Annual
Boston University Conference on Language Development, Cascadilla Press, Somerville,
Mass, pp. 228–39.
Guilfoyle, E. (1983) ‘Habitual aspect in Hiberno-English’, McGill Working Papers in Linguis-
tics 1: 22–32.
Guilfoyle, E., Hung, H. and Travis, L. (1992) ‘Spec of IP and spec of VP: two subjects in
Austronesian languages’, Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 10: 375–414.
Haegeman, L. (1992) Theory and Description in Generative Syntax: a Case Study of West
Flemish, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Haegeman, L. (1994, 2nd edition) Introduction to Government and Binding Theory, Blackwell,
Oxford.
Haegeman, L. (1995) The Syntax of Negation, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Haegeman, L. (2000) ‘Inversion, non-adjacent inversion and adjuncts in CP’, Transactions of
the Philological Society 98: 121–60.
Hagstrom, P. A. (1998) ‘Decomposing Questions’, PhD diss, MIT.
Hale, K. and Keyser, S. J. (1991) On the Syntax of Argument Structure, Lexicon Project Working
Papers, MIT, Center for Cognitive Science, Cambridge, Mass.
Hale, K. and Keyser, S. J. (1993a) ‘On argument structure and the lexical expression of semantic
relations’, in Hale and Keyser (eds.), pp. 53–109.
Hale, K. and Keyser, S. J. (1993b) (eds.) The View from Building 20, MIT Press, Cambridge,
Mass.
Hale, K. and Keyser, S. J. (1994) ‘Constraints on argument structure’, in B. Lust, M. Su˜ner
and J. Whitman (eds.), Heads, Projections and Learnability, Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ
vol. 1, pp. 53–71.
Halle, M. and Marantz, A. (1993) ‘Distributed morphology and the pieces of inﬂection’, in
Hale and Keyser (eds.), pp. 111–76.
Han, C.-H. (2001) ‘Force, negation and imperatives’, The Linguistic Review, 18: 289–325.

490
References
Harris, J. (1986) ‘Expanding the superstrate: habitual aspect markers in Atlantic Englishes’,
English World-Wide 7: 171–99.
Hawkins, J. A. (2001) ‘Why are categories adjacent?’, Journal of Linguistics 37: 1–34.
Henry, A. (1995) Belfast English and Standard English: Dialect Variation and Parameter-
Setting, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Hiemstra, I. (1986) ‘Some aspects of wh-questions in Frisian’, North-Western European Lan-
guage Evolution (NOWELE) 8: 97–110.
Holmberg, A. (2000) ‘Am I unscientiﬁc? A reply to Lappin, Levine and Johnson’, Natural
Language and Linguistic Theory 18: 837–42.
Hornstein, N. (1995) Logical Form: from GB to Minimalism, Blackwell, Oxford.
Hornstein, N. (2000) ‘On A-chains: a reply to Brody’, Syntax 3: 129–43.
Hornstein, N. and Lightfoot, D. (eds.) (1994) Verb Movement, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.
Huang, C.-T. J. (1982) ‘Logical Relations in Chinese and the Theory of Grammar’, PhD diss.,
MIT.
Huang,C.-T.J.(1993)‘ReconstructionandthestructureofVP:sometheoreticalconsequences’,
Linguistic Inquiry 24: 103–38.
Hurford, J. (1991) ‘The evolution of the critical period for language acquisition’, Cognition
40: 159–201.
Hyams, N. (1986) Language Acquisition and the Theory of Parameters, Reidel, Dordrecht.
Hyams, N. (1992) ‘A reanalysis of null subjects in child language’, in J. Weissenborn, H.
Goodluck and T. Roeper (eds.), Theoretical Issues in Language Acquisition, Erlbaum,
London, pp. 249–67.
Ingham, R. (2000) ‘Negation and OV order in Late Middle English’, Journal of Linguistics 36:
13–38.
Jackendoff, R. S. (1972) Semantic Interpretation in Generative Grammar, MIT Press, Cam-
bridge, Mass.
Jaeggli, O. and Saﬁr, K. (1989) The Null Subject Parameter, Kluwer, Dordrecht.
Johnson, K. (1991) ‘Object positions’, Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 9: 577–636.
Johnson, K. (2002) ‘Restoring exotic co-ordinations to normalcy’, Linguistic Inquiry 33:
97–156.
Jones, M. A. (1994) Sardinian Syntax, Routledge, London.
Julien, M. (2001) ‘The syntax of complex tenses’, The Linguistic Review 18: 125–67.
Kathol, A. (2001) ‘Positional effects in a monostratal grammar of German’, Journal of Lin-
guistics 37: 35–66.
Kayne, R. S. (1984a) Connectedness and Binary Branching, Foris, Dordrecht.
Kayne, R. S. (1984b) ‘Principles of particle constructions’, in J. Gu´eron et al. (eds.) Grammat-
ical Representation, Foris, Dordrecht, pp. 101–40.
Kayne, R. S. (1989) ‘Facets of Romance past participle agreement’, in P. Beninc`a (ed.), Dialect
Variation and the Theory of Grammar, Foris, Dordrecht, pp. 85–103.
Kayne, R. S. (1994) The Antisymmetry of Syntax, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Kennedy, C. (2002) ‘Comparative deletion and optimality in syntax’, Natural Language and
Linguistic Theory 20: 553–621.
Kennedy, C. and Merchant, J. (2000) ‘Attributive comparative deletion’, Natural Language
and Linguistic Theory 18: 89–146.
Keyser, S. J. and Roeper, T. (1992) ‘Re: the abstract clitic hypothesis’, Linguistic Inquiry
23: 89–125.
Kimball, J. and Aissen, J. (1971) ‘I think, you think, he think’, Linguistic Inquiry 2: 241–6.
Kishimoto, H. (1992) ‘LF pied piping: evidence from Sinhala’, Gengo Kenkyu 102: 46–87.
Kishimoto, H. (2000) ‘Indeﬁnite pronouns and overt N-raising’, Linguistic Inquiry 31: 557–66.
Kitagawa,Y.(1986)‘SubjectsinEnglishandJapanese’,PhDdiss.,UniversityofMassachusetts.

References
491
Klima, E. S. (1964) ‘Negation in English’, in J. A. Fodor and J. J. Katz (eds.), The Structure of
Language, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, pp. 246–323.
Koeneman, O. (2000) ‘The Flexible Nature of Verb Movement’, PhD diss., University of
Utrecht.
Koizumi, M. (1993) ‘Object agreement phrases and the split VP hypothesis’, MIT Working
Papers in Linguistics 18: 99–148.
Koizumi, M. (1995) ‘Phrase Structure in Minimalist Syntax’, PhD diss., MIT.
Koopman, H. and Sportiche, D. (1991) ‘The position of subjects’, Lingua 85: 211–58.
Kuroda, Y. (1988) ‘Whether we agree or not’, Lingvisticae Investigationes 12: 1–47.
Labov, W. (1969) ‘Contraction, deletion and inherent variability of the English copula’,
Language 45: 715–62.
Landau, I. (1999) ‘Elements of Control’, PhD diss., MIT.
Landau, I. (2001) ‘Control and Extraposition: the case of Super-Equi’, Natural Language and
Linguistic Theory 19: 109–52.
Landau, I. (2002) ‘(Un)interpretable Neg in Comp’, Linguistic Inquiry 33: 465–92.
Lappin, S., Levine, R. D. and Johnson, D. E. (2000a) ‘Topic . . . comment: the structure of
unscientiﬁc revolutions’, Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 18: 665–71.
Lappin, S., Levine, R. D. and Johnson, D. E. (2000b) ‘The revolution confused: a response to
our critics’, Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 18: 873–90.
Lappin, S., Levine, R. D. and Johnson, D. E. (2001) ‘The revolution maximally confused’,
Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 19: 901–19.
Larson, R. (1988) ‘On the double object construction’, Linguistic Inquiry 19: 335–91.
Larson, R. (1990) ‘Double objects revisited: reply to Jackendoff’, Linguistic Inquiry 21: 589–
632.
Larson, R. (1991) ‘Promise and the theory of control’, Linguistic Inquiry 2: 103–39.
Lasnik, H. (1995) ‘Verbal Morphology: Syntactic Structures meets the Minimalist Program’,
in H. Campos and P. Kempchinsky (eds.), Evolution and Revolution in Linguistic Theory,
Georgetown University Press, Georgetown, pp. 251–75.
Lasnik, H. (1998) ‘Some reconstruction riddles’, in Penn Working Papers in Linguistics 5:
83–98, Penn Linguistics Circle, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.
Lasnik, H. (1999) ‘Chains of arguments’, in S. D. Epstein and N. Hornstein (eds.), Working
Minimalism, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., pp. 189–215.
Lasnik, H. (2000) Syntactic Structures Revisited: Contemporary Lectures on Classic Transfor-
mational Theory, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass. (with M. Depiante and A. Stepanov)
Lasnik, H. (2001) ‘A note on the EPP’, Linguistic Inquiry 32: 356–61.
Lasnik, H. and Saito, M. (1991) ‘On the subject of inﬁnitives’, Proceedings of the Chicago
Linguistic Society 27: 324–43, University of Chicago.
Lasnik, H. and Sobin, N. (2000) ‘The Who/Whom Puzzle: on the preservation of an archaic
feature’, Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 18: 343–71.
Lasnik, H. and Uriagereka, J. (2002) ‘On the poverty of the challenge’, The Linguistic Review
19: 147–50.
Lebeaux, D. (1991) ‘Relative clauses, licensing and the nature of derivation’, in S. Rothstein
(ed.), Syntax and Semantics 25: Perspectives on Phrase Structure, Academic Press, New
York, pp. 209–39.
Lebeaux, D. (1995) ‘Where does Binding Theory apply?’, University of Maryland Working
Papers in Linguistics 3: 63–88.
Lechner, W. (2001) ‘Reduced and phrasal comparatives’, Natural Language and Linguistic
Theory 19: 683–735.
Legate, J. A. (2002) ‘Some interface properties of the phase’, unpublished paper, MIT.
Legate, J. A. and Yang, C. D. (2002) ‘Empirical re-assessment of stimulus poverty arguments’,
The Linguistic Review 19: 151–62.

492
References
Lenneberg, E. (1967) Biological Foundations of Language, Wiley, New York.
Levin, B. and Rappaport Hovav, M. (1995) Unaccusativity at the Syntax-Lexical Semantic
Interface, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Longobardi, G. (1994) ‘Reference and proper names’, Linguistic Inquiry 25: 609–66.
Longobardi, G. (1996) ‘The syntax of N-raising: a minimalist theory’, OTS Working Papers
no. 5, Research Institute for Language and Speech, Utrecht.
Longobardi, G. (2001) ‘The structure of DPs: some principles, parameters and problems’, in
Baltin and Collins (eds.), pp. 562–603.
L´opez, L. (2001) ‘On the (non)complementarity of θ-Theory and Checking Theory’, Linguistic
Inquiry 32: 694–716.
Lutz, U., M¨uller, G. and von Stechow, A. (eds.) (2000) Wh-Scope Marking, Benjamins, Ams-
terdam.
Lyons, C. (1999) Deﬁniteness, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Martin, R. (2001) ‘Null case and the distribution of PRO’, Linguistic Inquiry 32: 141–66.
McCloskey, J. (2000) ‘Quantiﬁer Float and Wh-Movement in an Irish English’, Linguistic
Inquiry 31: 57–84.
McCloskey, J. (2001) ‘The morphosyntax of WH-extraction in Irish’, Journal of Linguistics
37: 67–100.
McDaniel, D. (1989) ‘Partial and multiple wh-movement’, Natural Language and Linguistic
Theory 7: 565–604.
McNally, L. (1992) ‘VP-coordination and the VP-internal subject hypothesis’, Linguistic
Inquiry 23: 336–41.
McNeill, D. (1966) ‘Developmental Psycholinguistics’, in F. Smith and G. A. Miller (eds.),
The Genesis of Language, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., pp. 15–84.
Marantz, A. (1984) On the Nature of Grammatical Relations, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Marcus, G. F. (1993) ‘Negative evidence in language acquisition’, Cognition 46: 53–85.
Moore, J. and Perlmutter, D. M. (2000) ‘What does it take to be a dative subject?’, Natural
Language and Linguistic Theory 18: 373–416.
Morgan, J. L. and Travis, L. (1989) ‘Limits on negative information in language input’, Journal
of Child Language 16: 531–52.
Moro, A. (1997) The Raising of Predicates: Predicative Noun Phrases and the Theory of Clause
Structure, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Murasugi, K. and Saito, M. (1994) ‘Adjunction and cyclicity’, Proceedings of the 13th West
Coast Conference on Formal Linguistics, pp. 302–17.
Nakajima, H. (2001) ‘Verbs in locative constructions and the generative lexicon’, The Linguistic
Review 18: 43–67.
Namai, K. (2000) ‘Gender features in English’, Linguistics 38: 771–9.
Nasu, N. (2001) ‘Associating EPP with ø-completeness’, Proceedings of the North Eastern
Linguistic Society 31: 351–67.
Nasu, N. (2002) ‘Aspects of the Syntax of A-Movement: a Study of English Inﬁnitival Con-
tructions and Related Phenomena’, PhD diss., University of Essex.
Nunes, J. (1999) ‘Linearization of chains and phonetic realisation of chain links’, in S. D.
Epstein and N. Hornstein (eds.), Working Minimalism, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.,
pp. 217–49.
Nunes, J. (2001) ‘Sideward movement’, Linguistic Inquiry 32: 303–44.
Nunes, J. and Uriagereka, J. (2000) ‘Cyclicity and extraction domains’, Syntax 3: 20–43.
Ochi, M. (1999) ‘Multiple spell-out and PF-adjacency’, Proceedings of the North-Eastern
Linguistic Society 29.
Oya, T. (2002) ‘Reﬂexives and resultatives: some differences between English and German’,
Linguistics 40: 961–86.
Parker, S. (1999) ‘On the behaviour of deﬁnite articles in Chamicuro’, Language 75: 552–62.

References
493
Pesetsky, D. (1987) ‘Wh-in-situ: movement and unselective binding’, in E. J. Reuland and
A. G. B. ter Meulen (eds.), The Representation of (In)deﬁniteness, MIT Press, Cambridge,
Mass., pp. 98–129.
Pesetsky, D. (1995) Zero Syntax: Experiencers and Cascades, MIT Press, Cambridge,
Mass.
Pesetsky, D. (1997) ‘Optimality Theory and Syntax: Movement and Pronunciation’, in
D. Archangeli and D. T. Langendoen (eds.), Optimality Theory: an Overview, Black-
well, Oxford, pp. 134–70.
Pesetsky, D. (1998) ‘Some optimality principles of sentence pronunciation’, in P. Barbosa,
D. Fox, P. Hagstrom, M. McGinnis and D. Pesetsky (eds.), Is the Best Good Enough?
MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., pp. 337–83.
Pesetsky, D. (2000) Phrasal Movement and Its Kin, MIT Press, Cambridge Mass.
Pesetsky, D. and Torrego, E. (2001) ‘T-to-C movement: causes and consequences’, in
M. Kenstowicz (ed.), Ken Hale: a Life in Language, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.,
pp. 355–426.
Phillips, C. (2003) ‘Linear order and constituency’, Linguistic Inquiry 34: 37–90.
Piattelli-Palmarini, M. (2000) ‘The metric of open-mindedness’, Natural Language and
Linguistic Theory, 18: 859–62.
Picallo, M. C. (1991) ‘Nominals and nominalization in Catalan’, Probus 3: 279–316.
Platzack, C. and Holmberg, A. (1989) ‘The role of AGR and ﬁniteness’, Working Papers in
Scandinavian Syntax 44: 101–17.
Polinsky, M. and Potsdam, E. (2001) ‘Long-distance agreement and Topic in Tsez’, Natural
Language and Linguistic Theory 19: 583–646.
Pollock, J.-Y. (1989) ‘Verb movement, Universal Grammar, and the structure of IP’, Linguistic
Inquiry 20: 365–424.
Postal, P. M. (1966) ‘On so-called pronouns in English’, in F. Dinneen (ed.), Nineteenth
Monograph on Language and Linguistics, Georgetown University Press, Washington DC
(reprinted in D. Reibel and S. Schane (eds.) (1969) Modern Studies in English, Prentice-
Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, pp. 201–24).
Postal, P. M. (1974) On Raising, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Potts, C. (2002) ‘The syntax and semantics of as-parentheticals’, Natural Language and
Linguistic Theory 20: 623–89.
Pullum, G. K. and Scholz, B. C. (2002) ‘Empirical assessment of stimulus poverty arguments’,
The Linguistic Review 19: 9–50.
Radford, A. (1981) Transformational Syntax, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Radford, A. (1988) Transformational Grammar, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Radford, A. (1993) ‘Head-hunting: on the trail of the nominal Janus’, in G. Corbett, N. M.
Fraser and S. McGlashan (eds.), Heads in Grammatical Theory, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, pp. 73–11.
Radford, A. (1994) ‘The syntax of questions in child English’, Journal of Child Language 21:
211–36.
Radford, A. (1997a) Syntactic Theory and the Structure of English, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.
Radford, A. (1997b) Syntax: a Minimalist Introduction, Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge.
Radford, A., Atkinson, M., Britain, D., Clahsen, H. and Spencer, A. (1999) Linguistics: an
Introduction, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Ramat, P. (1999) ‘Linguistic categories and linguists’ categorizations’, Linguistics 37: 157–80.
Reintges, C. H, LeSourd, P. and Chung, S. (2002) ‘Movement, wh-agreement and apparent wh-
in-situ’, paper presented to Workshop on Wh-Movement, University of Leiden, December
2002.

494
References
Reuland, E. (2000) ‘Revolution, discovery and an elementary principle of logic’, Natural
Language and Linguistic Theory 18: 843–8.
Reuland, E. (2001a) ‘Primitives of Binding’, Linguistic Inquiry 32: 439–92.
Reuland, E. (2001b) ‘Confusion compounded’, Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 19:
879–85.
Reuland, E. and Everaert, M. (2001) ‘Deconstructing Binding’, in Baltin and Collins (eds.),
pp. 634–70.
Richards, N. (1997) ‘What moves where when in which language?’ PhD diss., MIT.
Rickford, J. R. (1986) ‘Social contact and linguistic diffusion: Hiberno-English and New World
Black English’, Language 62: 245–89.
Ritter, E. (1991) ‘Two functional categories in noun phrases: evidence from Modern Hebrew’,
in S. Rothstein (ed.), Perspectives on Phrase Structure: Heads and Licensing, Academic
Press, New York, pp. 37–62.
Rizzi, L. (1992) ‘Early null subjects and root null subjects’, Geneva Generative Papers vol. 0,
pp. 102–14.
Rizzi, L. (1997) ‘The ﬁne structure of the left periphery’, in L. Haegeman (ed.), Elements of
Grammar, Kluwer, Dordrecht, pp. 281–337.
Rizzi, L. (2000) ‘Remarks on early null subjects’, in M.-A. Freidemann and L. Rizzi (eds.),
The Acquisition of Syntax, London, Longman, pp. 269–92.
Rizzi, L. (2001a) ‘Relativized minimality effects’, in Baltin and Collins (eds.), pp. 89–110.
Rizzi, L. (2001b) ‘On the position “Int(errogative)” in the left periphery of the clause’, in
G. Cinque and G. Salvi (eds.), Current Issues in Italian Syntax, Elsevier, Amsterdam,
pp. 287–96.
Rizzi, L. (2003) ‘Locality and Left Periphery’, to appear in A. Belletti (ed.), Structures and
Beyond: the Cartography of Syntactic Structures, vol. 2, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Roberts, I. (1993) Verbs and Diachronic Syntax, Kluwer, Dordrecht.
Roberts, I. (1994) ‘Two types of head movement in Romance’, in Hornstein and Lightfoot
(eds.), pp. 207–42.
Roberts, I. (1997) ‘Restructuring, head movement and locality’, Linguistic Inquiry 28: 423–60.
Roberts, I. (1998) ‘Have/Be Raising, Move F and Procrastinate’, Linguistic Inquiry 29: 113–25.
Roberts, I. (2000) ‘Caricaturing dissent’, Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 18: 849–57.
Roberts, I. (2001a) ‘Who has confused what? More on Lappin, Levine and Johnson’, Natural
Language and Linguistic Theory 19: 887–90.
Roberts, I. (2001b) ‘Head Movement’, in Baltin and Collins (eds.), pp. 113–47.
Roberts, I. (2002) Paper on Verb Movement presented at visiting speaker seminar, University
of Essex.
Rohrbacher, B. (1999) Morphology-Driven Syntax: a theory of V-to-I raising and pro-drop,
Benjamins, Amsterdam.
Romero, M. (1997) ‘The correlation between scope reconstruction and connectivity effects’, in
E. Curtiss, J. Lyle and G. Webster (eds.), Proceedings of the XVI West Coast Conference
in Formal Linguistics, CLSI, Stanford, pp. 351–65.
Rosen, S. T. (1990) Argument Structure and Complex Predicates, Garland, New York.
Ross, J. R. (1967) ‘Constraints on Variables in Syntax’, PhD diss., MIT (published as Inﬁnite
Syntax! by Ablex Publishing Corporation, Norwood, NJ, 1986).
Ross, J. R. (1970) ‘On declarative sentences’, in R. A. Jacobs and P. S. Rosenbaum (eds.),
Readings in English Transformational Grammar, Ginn, Waltham, Mass. pp. 222–72.
Runner, J. (1998) Noun Phrase Licensing and Interpretation, Garland, New York.
Rymer, R. (1993) Genie: a Scientiﬁc Tragedy, Harper Perennial, New York.
Sabel,J.(2002)‘Aminimalistanalysisofsyntacticislands’, TheLinguisticReview19:271–315.
Saddy, D. (1991) ‘Wh scope mechanisms in Bahasa Indonesia’, in L. Cheng and H. Demirdache
(eds.), MIT Working Papers in Linguistics 15: 183–218.

References
495
Sadock, J. M. (1984) ‘West Greenlandic’, in W. S. Chisholm (ed.), Interrogativity, Benjamins,
Amsterdam, pp. 189–214.
Saﬁr, K. (1986) Syntactic Chains, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Saﬁr, K. (1993) ‘Perception, selection and structural economy’, Natural Language Semantics
2: 47–70.
Sag, I. (1997) ‘English relative clause constructions’, Journal of Linguistics 33: 431–83.
Sampson, G. (2002) ‘Exploring the richness of the stimulus’, The Linguistic Review 19:
73–104.
Sauerland, U. (1998) ‘The Meaning of Chains’, PhD diss., MIT.
Sauerland, U. and Elbourne, P. (2002) ‘Total reconstruction, PF movement and derivational
order’, Linguistic Inquiry 33: 283–319.
Scholz, B. C. and Pullum, G. K. (2002) ‘Searching for arguments to support linguistic nativism’,
The Linguistic Review 19: 185–223.
Sch¨utze, C. (2001) ‘On the nature of default case’, Syntax 4: 205–38.
Sepp¨anen, A. and Trotta, J. (2000) ‘The wh+that pattern in present-day English’, in J. M.
Kirk (ed.), Corpora Galore: Analyses and Techniques in Describing English, Rodopi,
Amsterdam, pp. 161–75.
Shima, E. (2000) ‘A preference for Move over Merge’, Linguistic Inquiry 31: 375–85.
Sigurðsson, H. ´A. (1991) ‘Icelandic case-marked PRO and the licensing of lexical arguments’,
Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 9: 327–63.
Sigurðsson, H. ´A. (1996) ‘Icelandic ﬁnite verb agreement’, Working Papers in Scandinavian
Syntax 57: 1–46.
Sigurðsson, H. ´A. (2002) ‘To be an oblique subject: Russian vs. Icelandic’, Natural Language
and Linguistic Theory 20: 691–724.
Smith, N. (1998) ‘Jackdaws, sex and language acquisition’, Glot International 3, 7: 7.
Smith, N. (1999) Chomsky: Ideas and Ideals, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Smith, N. and Cormack, A. (2002) ‘Indeterminacy, inference, iconicity and interpretation:
aspects of the grammar-pragmatics interface’, in M. Makri-Tsilipakou (ed.), Selected
Papers on Theoretical and Applied Linguistics, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki,
pp. 38–53.
Sobin, N. (2002) ‘The Comp-trace effect, the adverb effect, and minimal CP’, Journal of
Linguistics 38: 527–60.
Sorace, A. (2000) ‘Gradients in auxiliary selection with intransitive verbs’, Language 76:
859–90.
Speas, P. (1986) ‘Adjunction and Projections in Syntax’, PhD diss., MIT, Cambridge, Mass.
Spencer, A. J. (1991) Morphological Theory, Blackwell, Oxford.
Sportiche, D. (1988) ‘A theory of ﬂoating quantiﬁers and its corollaries for constituent struc-
ture’, Linguistic Inquiry 19: 425–49.
Sportiche, D. (1998) ‘Movement, agreement and case’, in Partitions and Atoms of Clause
Structure, Routledge, London, pp. 88–243.
Stepanov, A. (2001) ‘Late adjunction and minimalist phrase structure’, Syntax 4: 94–125.
Stockwell, R., Schachter, P. and Hall Partee, B. (1973) The Major Syntactic Structures of
English, Holt Rinehart and Winston, New York.
Stowell, T. (1981) ‘Origins of Phrase Structure’, PhD dissertation, MIT.
Stowell, T. (1982) ‘The tense of inﬁnitives’, Linguistic Inquiry 13: 561–70.
Stroik, T. (1990) ‘Adverbs as V-Sisters’, Linguistic Inquiry 21: 654–61.
Stroik, T. (2001) ‘On the light verb hypothesis’, Linguistic Inquiry 32: 362–9.
Su˜ner, M. (1994) ‘V-movement and the licensing of argumental wh-phrases in Spanish’, Nat-
ural Language and Linguistic Theory 12: 335–72.
Su˜ner, M. (2000) ‘The syntax of direct quotes with special reference to Spanish and English’,
Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 18: 525–78.

496
References
Svenonius, P. (2002a) ‘Case is uninterpretable aspect’,
http://www.hum.uit.no/a/svenonius/paperspage.html.
Svenonius, P. (2002b) ‘Icelandic case and the structure of events’,
http://www.hum.uit.no/a/svenonius/paperspage.html.
Tallerman, M. O. (1993) ‘Case assignment and the order of functional projections in Welsh’,
in A. Siewierska (ed.), Eurotyp Working Papers, Programme in Language Typology,
European Science Foundation, pp. 1–41.
Taraldsen, T. (1990) ‘D-projections and N-projections in Norwegian’, in M. Nespor and
J. Mascar`o (eds.), Grammar in Progress, Foris, Dordrecht, pp. 419–31.
Ten Hacken, P. (2001) Review of Radford 1997a/b, Natural Language Engineering 7/1.
Thomas, M. (2002) ‘Development of the concept of “the poverty of stimulus” ’, The Linguistic
Review 19: 51–71.
Thornton, R. (1995) ‘Referentiality and Wh-Movement in Child English: juvenile D-
Linkuency’, Language Acquisition 4: 139–75.
Tieken-Boon van Ostade, I. (1988) ‘The origins and development of periphrastic auxiliary do:
a case of destigmatisation’, Dutch Working Papers in English Language and Linguistics
3: 1–30.
Traugott, E. C. (1972) A History of English Syntax, Holt Rinehart and Winston, New York.
Travis, L. (1984) ‘Parameters and Effects of Word Order Variation’, PhD diss., MIT.
Ura, H. (1993) ‘On feature-checking for wh-traces’, MIT Working Papers in Linguistics 18:
243–80.
Ura, H. (2001) ‘Local economy and generalized pied-piping’, The Linguistic Review 18: 169–
91.
Uriagereka, J. (1988) ‘On Government’, PhD diss., University of Connecticut.
Uriagereka, J. (1998) Rhyme and Reason, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Uriagereka, J. (2000) ‘On the emptiness of “design” polemics’, Natural Language and
Linguistic Theory 18: 863–71.
Uriagereka, J. (2001) ‘Cutting derivational options’, Natural Language and Linguistic Theory
19: 891–900.
Vainikka, A. and Levy, Y. (1999) ‘Empty subjects in Finnish and Hebrew’, Natural Language
and Linguistic Theory 17: 613–71.
Valois, D. (1991) ‘The Syntax of DP’, PhD diss., University of California, Los Angeles.
Vikner, S. (1995) Verb Movement and Expletive Subjects in Germanic Languages, Oxford
University Press, Oxford.
Vikner, S. (1997) ‘V0-to-I0 movement and inﬂection for person in all tenses’, in L. Haegeman
(ed.), The New Comparative Syntax, Longman, London, pp. 189–213.
Wakelin, M. F. (1977, 2nd edn.) English Dialects: an Introduction, Athlone, London.
Watanabe, A. (2001) ‘Wh-in-situ languages’, in Baltin and Collins (eds.), pp. 203–25.
Wexler, K. (1994) ‘Optional Inﬁnitives, Head Movement and the Economy of Derivations’, in
Hornstein and Lightfoot (eds.), pp. 305–50.
Williams, E. (1994) Thematic Structure in Syntax, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Willis, D. (2000) ‘On the distribution of resumptive pronouns and wh-trace in Welsh’, Journal
of Linguistics 36: 531–73.
Wiltschko, M. (2001) ‘The syntax of pronouns: evidence from Halkomelem Salish’, Natural
Language and Linguistic Theory 20: 157–95.
Wolfram, W. (1971) ‘Black-white speech differences revisited’, in W. Wolfram and N. H. Clark
(eds.), Black-White Speech Relationships, Center For Applied Linguistics, Washington
DC, pp. 139–61.
Woolford, E. (1991) ‘VP-internal subjects in VSO and nonconﬁgurational languages’, Linguis-
tic Inquiry 22: 503–40.

References
497
Xu, L. (2003) ‘Choice between the overt and the covert’, Transactions of the Philological
Society 101: 81–107.
Yang, C. D. (1999) ‘Unordered Merge and its linearization’, Syntax 1: 38–64.
Zagona, K. (1987) Verb Phrase Syntax, Kluwer, Dordrecht.
Zwart, C. J-W. (2001) ‘Syntactic and phonological verb movement’, Syntax 4: 34–62.
Zwicky, A. (2002) ‘I wonder what kind of construction that this kind of example illustrates’, in
D. Beaver, L. D. Casillas Mart´ınez, B. Z. Clark and S. Kaufmann (eds.), The Construction
of Meaning, CSLI Publications, pp. 219–48.

Index
A-bar
feature 420
head 392, 420
movement 235, 329, 393, 419–25, 432
position 234–5, 241, 432
Abney 46, 76, 79, 140, 369, 371
accusative case (assignment) 5, 38, 45, 67, 134–6,
255, 356–67
Ackema 168
Acquaviva 103
acquisition 10–13; see also children’s
language
active 432
feature/goal/probe 290, 353, 386, 392, 410, 432
voice 260
adequacy, criteria of 8–10, 447, 451
Adger 43
adjacency condition/effect/requirement 113, 126,
129, 433
adjectival phrase 81–2
adjective 34, 36–7, 433
attributive 37, 178–80
control 274
position of 180, 371
predicative 37
raising 274
adjoin see adjunction
adjunct 4, 341, 350, 359, 363, 433
adjunct clause 218
adjunction 341, 362, 417, 433
adposition 20, 433
adverb 36–7, 180, 251, 433
argument-oriented adverb 310
position of 340–3, 350, 359–62
VP adverb 343, 365, 483
vP adverb 484
see also deliberately, gently, how, perfectly,
personally, quickly, right, straight, very; and
see VP adverb, vP adverb
adverbial phrase 82
affective constituent 102, 433
afﬁx 34, 36, 433, 441
afﬁxal
head 153, 434
light verb 337, 339
tense feature on C 205
verb 344
Afﬁx Attachment 174–8, 434
Afﬁx Hopping 118, 161, 166, 168, 172, 174, 186,
208, 273, 434
African American English 114, 129, 236
Afrikaans 397
Agbayani 207, 208
agent (theta-role) 251, 434
agentive verb 342
agreement 73, 117, 164, 281–322, 434
and A-movement 281–309, 322
between complementiser and subject 413, 429
heads 363
in French participles 403–5
in transitive clauses 306–7
long-distance 294
morphology 164–6, 179, 475
multiple/simultaneous 304, 319, 381
projection 363
semantic agreement 284
wh-agreement 420
agreementless default form 283, 309
A-head 392, 434
Aissen 414, 429
Akmajian 183
Alexiadou 246
Alexopoulou 329, 336
allomorph 434
A-movement 241–74, 286
and agreement 281–309, 322
as a copying operation 259
Anagnostopoulou 246
anaphor 92–4, 434, 438; see also reﬂexive,
reciprocal
animate (gender) 435
antecedent 92, 108, 223, 245, 297, 435
antecedentless relative pronoun 233
anti-cyclic operation 173
Antony 13
antonym 40
any/anyone/anything 102, 237
appear 266
appositive relative clause 233, 435
A-position 434
498

Index
499
Arabic 127, 137, 289
array, lexical 158, 320, 407, 408, 435–6
arbitrary reference 111, 435
argument 3, 144, 435
external/internal 249, 272, 435–6
-oriented adverb 310
quasi-argument 297, 305
restrictions on choice of 274, 338, 346
structure 250, 435–6
Aronoff 36, 38
article (deﬁnite/indeﬁnite) 436
as 234
aspect 186, 436
as a syntactic head (Asp) 246
auxiliary 48, 166
see also habitual, progressive, perfect
Aspects of the Theory of Syntax 59, 140
associate 435–6
asymmetric c-command 103, 113, 126, 440
Atkinson xiii, 9, 294
attract/attraction 153, 199, 435–6
Attract Closest Principle 200, 206, 213, 258, 266,
272, 302, 319, 406, 435–6
attribute (of feature) 58
attributive adjective 37, 178–80, 436
Authier 359
auxiliariless clause 115–21
auxiliary 47–9, 168, 436–7
aspect(ual) auxiliary 48, 166
copying 156, 398, 437
inversion/movement of 6, 14, 48, 83, 127,
152–8, 328; see also T-to-C movement
modal auxiliary 48, 167, 173, 462
passive 432
perfect 119, 167, 246, 256
phrase/projection 112, 157, 166, 167, 436–7
progressive 246, 435–6
raising of 166–70
selection 256, 297, 349, 352, 437
tense auxiliary 48
voice auxiliary 48
Baker 153, 264, 338, 349
Baltin 206, 270, 309
bare
clause 124, 224–8, 437
inﬁnitive 121–4, 437
nominal/noun 140–4, 257, 437
phrase structure 94–6
bar notation 77, 81, 94, 437
Barss 395
base form of verb 34, 437
Basilico 124
be, raising of 166–70
Bejar 401, 431
Belfast English 149, 190, 236, 241–3, 256, 349,
399, 425
believe 131, 136, 265
Belletti 309, 395
Bellugi 24
Bernstein 140, 367
binarity/binary 17, 20, 21, 22, 438
Binarity Principle 70, 71, 154
binary-branching structure 86, 438
binary merger 68
binding 438
c-command condition on 92, 196
of a variable by an operator 196
principles A/B/C 101, 394
Bobaljik 164, 177, 194
Boeckx 206, 244, 310
Borer 370
Borsley xiii, 205, 219
Boˇskovi´c 19, 194, 202, 271, 314, 403,
405
bottom-up (derivation) 75, 172, 175, 438
bound anaphor 92, 438
Bowerman 24
Bowers 303, 304, 311, 343, 345, 348, 356, 359,
363, 366, 367, 382
bracketing, labelled 57–8
Braine 24
branch 91, 438
Branigan 245, 294, 403
Bristol English 47
British English 429
Brody 194
Brown 24, 168
Bulgarian 202
Burton 244
Burzio 257
by 260
canonical
clause 131, 136
nominal 141
Caribbean Creole 186
Carnie 205
Carrier 344
Carstens 370, 371
case 45, 46, 439
assignment/marking 134–40, 281–322, 415
dative 138, 283, 439
genitive 45, 101, 367, 368
inherent 283, 367, 439
nominative 5, 45, 136–7, 210, 256, 283–4, 286,
287
null 138, 311, 333
of subjects 134–40, 284
particle 101
partitive 309
quirky 138, 439
spreading 415
structural 134–40, 283–4, 286, 356–72

500
Index
caseless constituent 292, 295, 300, 349
categorial features 59
categorisation 38–40
category 1–2, 33–40, 61
functional 40, 41, 60, 79, 89, 454
lexical/substantive 41, 60, 79, 89
see also individual categories, e.g. noun
causative
verb 119, 337
light noun 368
light verb 339
Cazden 24
c-command 91–4, 134, 139, 244, 281, 310, 440
asymmetric c-command 103, 113, 126, 440
condition on binding 92, 196
scope correlating with 291
chain (in movement) 190, 440
chain uniformity 205
Chamicuro 210
Chamorro 401, 403
Chaucer 170, 180, 181, 229, 333
Cheng 19, 190
children’s language/utterances 10–11, 13, 22, 23,
26–9, 156, 183, 398, 399, 429
Chinese 18, 109, 198
Chomsky, N. see individual entries such as
agreement, bare phrase structure, cognitive
approach to grammar, EPP, innateness,
language faculty, Minimalism, null
determiner, theta-criterion, Universal
Grammar, etc.
Chung 195, 401, 403
Cinque 178, 179, 180, 367, 369, 371
citation form 2, 34
Citko 233
Clahsen 30
clause 2, 4, 71–6, 440
adjunct 218
auxiliariless 124, 224–8, 437
canonical 131, 136
comparative 234
complement 4, 442
declarative 53
defective 131–4, 265, 316
exceptional 131, 265
exclamative 222–3, 332
ﬁnite 5
independent/main/principal 4
inﬁnitive 5
irrealis 53, 312
non-ﬁnite 5
relative 192, 195, 223–34, 414, 474
S and S-bar analysis of 71, 74, 86, 103
small 123, 441
type 190, 425
cleft sentence 77, 441
clitic/cliticisation 112, 113, 129, 354, 398, 441
of have 113–14, 119–20, 123, 146, 157–8,
237, 401–3
of to 270
of null complementiser 126
PF clitic 399, 468
closeness 200, 407, 410; see also Attract Closest
Principle
cognition/cognitive approach to grammar 6
cognitive synonymy 273
Cole 401
Collins 245, 356
common noun 464
COMP see complementiser
comparative 35, 38, 39, 234, 400, 441
competence 7–8
complement 3, 19, 67, 69, 72, 83, 441
clause 4, 442
of passive participle 260
of unaccusative verb 255
complementiser 52–7, 74–5, 442
agreement with subject 413, 429
deletion 129–30, 132
phrase/CP 151–8, 188–234, 442
transitive/intransitive 137
wh-marking of 420
complete expression 72
completeness 289, 420
complex sentence 4
component (of a grammar)
computational/syntactic component 9
PF component 9, 117, 288, 382, 468
semantic component 9, 117, 288, 382
computational component 9
conceptual necessity 139
concord 415, 442
condition see Inclusiveness Condition,
Left-Branch Condition, Minimal Link
Condition, Passive Thematic Hierarchy
Condition, Phase Impenetrability Condition,
Relative Pronoun Spellout Condition
Condition on Extraction Domains 218, 255
conditional clause 102, 443
conjunc(tion) 443
constituent 1, 67, 84
discontinuous constituent 193–5, 259, 262, 448
constituent structure 9, 66–98
Constituent Structure Constraint 204, 216, 238
constrained (theory of grammar) 8, 70
constraint 20, 86, 88, 444; see also Constituent
Structure Constraint, Functional Head
Constraint, Head-Movement Constraint,
Improper Movement Constraint, Intervention
Constraint, Remerger Constraint, Stranding
Constraint, Wh-island Constraint; and see
condition, principle

Index
501
contain/containment 73, 91, 139, 444
immediate containment 91, 444
contentive/content word 40
contraction 444; see also cliticisation, wanna
contrastive focus/stress 73, 177, 241
Contreras 244, 257
control 108, 444
clause 108, 113, 130–1, 226, 333
compared to raising 268–74
object control 345–8, 445
predicate/verb 108, 445
subject control 445
controller 108, 111, 444
converge(nce) 308, 317, 445
Convergence Principle 216, 218, 219, 418, 445
coordination 85–7, 252, 445
copula/copular verb 445
copy/copying
auxiliary copying 156, 398, 437
copying of features 213, 214, 285, 445
copy deletion 192, 290
copy-merge 156
copy theory of movement 154–8, 190–7, 243–4,
259, 445
overt copy of moved constituent 195
preposition copying 192–3
wh-copying 195, 214
coreference 445
Cormack 173, 194, 329
Cornilescu 367
Costa 308
count/countable noun 2, 34, 42–3
counterexample 446
counting algorithm 201
covert see null
Crain 13
crash 288, 446
Cremona xiii
critical period 13
criteria
of adequacy 8–10
for categorising words 33–40
Crookston 156
cross-categorial property/symmetry 59, 367
Crowther 13
Culicover 272, 332
Curtiss 13
cycle/cyclic operation 163, 172, 175, 446
Danish 257
dare 102, 103, 237
dative case 138, 283, 439
daughter 91, 446
Davies 415
Dayal 199
D´echaine 44
declarative 6, 446
default form 283, 295, 309, 446
defective clause 131–4, 265, 316, 385–8, 446
deﬁnite expression 303, 411, 447
degenerate input to children 12–13
degree expression 78
deletion
of features 199, 287–91
of traces 290
marking for 305
deliberately 251, 342
demonstrative determiner 447
den Dikken 209, 284, 301, 403
Denham 19
derivation/derive/derived structure 75, 158, 447
derivational morphology 33–5, 447
Descartes 12
descriptive adequacy 8, 447
determiner 45, 140–4, 368, 447
phrase 78–9, 447, 465
direct
object 3, 67
theta-marking 253
discontinuous constituent/spellout 193–5, 259,
262, 448
discourse 448
identiﬁcation of null subject 166
distribution 36, 42, 448
Dixon 372
domain (of a head/phase) 293, 381, 448
Condition on Extraction Domains 218, 255
do-support 48–9, 173–8, 186, 207, 400
in Elizabethan English 186
double-object structure 345, 358
double there structure 271
DP hypothesis 143, 368, 448
D-pronoun 45, 46, 143
Drubig 329
Dubinsky 415
Dukes 403
dummy constituent 168, 174
Du Plessis 397
Dutch 257
Earliness Principle 135, 139, 172, 282, 285, 290,
292, 299, 306, 307, 313, 431
Early Modern English 158–66, 220, 352, 449;
see also Shakespeare
echo question 14, 189, 449
ECM see exceptional case-marking
economy 196, 303, 449
edge 307, 449
edge feature 205
Elbourne 284
Elizabethan English 158–66, 220, 352, 449;
see also Shakespeare

502
Index
ellipsis/elliptical structure 51, 112, 153, 155, 175,
449; see also gapping
embedded constituent/clause 53, 449
Embick 177, 206
EMP/emphasis marker 177
empty see null
enclitic(isation) 113, 441; see also clitic
enough 142
entry, lexical 450
EPP feature 73, 243, 450
as property of functional heads 364–5
on C 197–202, 205
on D 369, 415
on ECM verb 360, 362
on Foc 328
on T 73, 96, 110, 241, 243, 248, 249, 254, 258,
261, 262, 265, 267, 268–9, 270–1, 286, 298,
302, 313–22, 385
on Top 330
on transitive light verb 391
on Transitivity head 364–5
relation to phases 409–11
relation to phi-completeness 313
EPP Generalisation 302, 312, 317
Epstein 271
ergative predicate/structure 336–44, 351,
450
Ernst 244
Evans xiii, 298
Everaert 94
evidence
for categorising words 33–40
used in acquisition 23–5
exceptional case-marking (ECM) 131, 265, 315,
358–62, 401, 430, 450
exclamative 6
clause 222–3, 332
nominal 144
existential quantiﬁer 103
experience (in acquisition) 11, 23, 24
experiencer theta-role 251–2, 353, 451
experiential verb 119
explanatory adequacy 8, 451
expletive 73, 168, 174, 451
choice of 301–3
it 272
there 123, 241, 256, 260, 272, 298–307, 366
transitive expletive structure 304
explicit knowledge 7
Extended Projection Principle 73; see also EPP
external argument 249, 272, 435–6
external merge 199
extract(ion) 451
site 190, 451
Condition on Extraction Domains 218, 255
extraposition 233, 451
Fabb 33–40
Fanselow 398
Fasold 115
feature 58–60, 67
copying 213, 214, 285, 445
deletion 199, 287–91
inactivation 199, 202, 305, 307, 313
inheritance 213
interpretable 287
matching 198, 199, 286, 289, 461
percolation 213, 214, 215
phi-feature/-feature 283, 311, 314, 469
selectional 58–9, 68, 142, 149, 362, 476
uninterpretable 287–91
unvalued 285–7, 295
valuation 284–7
Valuation Correlation 288
Visibility Convention 289, 301
Felser 124, 397, 398
Fillmore 250, 251–2
ﬁnite clause/constituent 5, 27, 46, 51, 53, 452
FinP/Finiteness Projection 332–6
ﬁrst person see person
Fitzpatrick 201, 407
ﬂoating
quantiﬁer 137, 245, 255, 263, 310, 396, 453
reﬂexive 310
focalised/focus/focused/focusing 77, 129, 131,
132, 453
Focus Phrase 327–36
Fodor 13
foot (of movement chain) 191, 262, 453
for 53, 54–5, 64, 128, 134, 226, 230, 316, 333–4
deletion/null variant of (for) 129–30, 132
force 5, 53, 124, 126, 222, 301, 453
Force Phrase 327–36
formal/informal style 216, 223
Fox 244, 395
fragment 453
Frampton 303
Frank 139
free relative clause 233
Freidin 9, 143, 147
French 30, 140, 171, 257, 339, 403–5
Frisian 397
from 198
fronting see preposing
frozen constituent 389
Fu 370
Fuhrhop 38
function, grammatical 1, 3–6, 454
function word see functor
functional category 40, 41, 60, 79, 89, 454
Functional Head Constraint 89, 219, 454
functionality feature 60
functor 40, 46, 454

Index
503
gapping 112, 155, 454
Gaynor 94
gender 46, 179, 288, 295, 454
generate 196
generic quantiﬁer 142, 455
Genie 13
genitive case 45, 101, 367, 368
particle 101, 439
strong/weak form 46
gently 340–3
German 30–2, 87, 205, 232, 257, 288,
398
gerund 34, 50, 54, 455
Giannikidou 209
goal
for a probe 281, 282, 381, 455
theta-role (goal) 251, 455
gonna 270
Goodall 358
gradable adjectives 36, 455
grammar 1–6, 26
grammatical
categories 33–61
learning 16, 21
Greek 336
Green 236
Grewendorf 202
Grimshaw 220, 244
Groat 194
Gruber 250, 251
Guasti 25, 398
Guilfoyle 186, 244
Gutmann 303
habitual aspect 186
Haegeman 170, 257, 305, 329, 413
Hagstrom 206, 214
Hale 338, 349
Halle 177
Hamelin 212
Han 185
Hanlon 24
happen 255
Harris 186
Hattori 3
have 112, 119–21, 256
cliticisation 113–14, 119–20, 123, 146, 157–8,
237, 401–3
have/be raising 167
Hawkins 126
head
-ﬁrst/-last structure 19
of movement chain 190, 262, 456
of phrase 19, 34, 67, 68, 69, 94, 455
see also A-bar head, A-head
Headedness Principle 70, 71, 74–5, 154
Head Movement 151–66, 178–81, 182, 205
Head Movement Constraint 163, 171, 172, 206,
331, 334, 456
Head-Position Parameter 20, 30–2, 456
Head-Strength Parameter 164, 456
Henry 149, 190, 236, 241, 256, 349, 399,
425
Heny 183
Hermon 401
Hiemstra 397
hierarchical structure 73
highlighting expressions 62, 80, 88, 90,
100
HMC see Head Movement Constraint
Holmberg 9, 164
Hornstein 13, 102, 244
host 456
how 215, 239
Huang 218, 244, 255
Hung 244
Hungarian 401, 431
Hurford 13
Hyams 24, 27
Icelandic 137, 256, 283
identiﬁcation (of null constituent) 165, 166, 224,
456
idiom/idiomatic expression 246–8, 262, 265,
273
if 53, 56–7, 237
I-language 7–8
illegibility 288
immediate constituent 70, 91
immediate containment 91, 444
impenetrability see Phase Impenetrability
Condition
imperative structure 6, 27, 350, 457
in Belfast English 256
in Elizabethan English 185
negative 183
null subject in 27
impoverished agreement morphology 164, 179,
475
Improper Movement Constraint 429
inactivation (of feature) 199, 202, 305, 307, 313,
422; see also active
inanimate (gender) 435
Inclusiveness Condition 94, 287, 457
incomplete expression 72
incorporation 349
indeﬁnite expression/goal 260, 302, 318, 366, 412,
447
independent clause 4, 126
indicative mood 457
indirect object 466
indirect theta-marking 253

504
Index
inﬁnitival/inﬁnitive 5, 457
complementiser 53
INFL 51
null particle to 121–4
particle to 49–52, 68, 110, 168–70, 458
phrase/projection 68
verb form 69
see also control, exceptional case-marking,
raising
INFL 51
ﬁnite 51
inﬁnitival 51
inﬂectional morphology 33–5
informal see formal
Ingham 170
inherent case 283, 367, 439
inheritance 213
innateness hypothesis 11
Innu-aimˆun 403
in situ
expression 18
passive complement 281
subject 246, 355
unaccusative complement 257, 349
verb 165
wh-in-situ question 189, 194, 206, 404
instrument theta-role 251
interface 9, 143, 177
intermediate projection 72, 78, 80–4, 94, 203, 341,
350, 362, 472
internal argument 249, 435–6
internal merge 199
internalised linguistic system 7–8
interpret/interpretation 7, 290, 458
interpretable constituent/feature 143, 287
interrogative 6, 53, 196, 198–9; see also question
Intervention Constraint 201, 459
intransitive structure 385–8
complementiser 137, 333
light verb 409–11
verb/verb phrase 409–11
inversion (of auxiliary) 6, 14, 48, 83, 127, 152–8,
328
quotative inversion 244–6
see also T-to-C movement
invisibility see visibility
Irish 400
Irish English 186
irrealis clause/mood 312, 459
island constraints/islandhood 195, 225, 229, 459;
see also Wh-Island Constraint
it 272, 296
Italian 17, 27, 51, 106, 178–80, 181, 232, 257,
297, 333, 349, 354, 371
Jackendoff 250, 252, 272
Jaeggli 18
Japanese 166, 206
Jarawara 372
Johnson 9, 87, 345
Jones 257
J´onsson 256
Julien 52
Kathol 205
Kayne 70, 73, 359, 401, 403
Kennedy 234
Keyser 338, 344, 349
Kilega 403
Kimball 429
Kishimoto 180, 214
Kitagawa 244
Klima 102, 167
known 121–4, 133
Koeneman 164
Koizumi 363
Kolliakou 329, 336
Koopman 244
Korean 19, 166
Kuroda 244
labelled bracketing/tree diagram 57–8, 67
Labov 114
Landau 103, 111, 198
landing site 204, 459
for moved exclamative expression 332
for moved interrogative expression 330–2
for moved relative operator 330
for wh-movement 330–2
language faculty 10–13
Lappin 9
Larson 338, 345, 348
Lasnik 13, 138, 173, 177, 214, 230, 244, 303, 362,
431
last resort 320
Late Middle English 170
Latin 153
learnability 10, 16, 24, 25, 70, 460
learning 16
grammatical 16, 21
lexical 16, 21
see also acquisition, learnability
Lebeaux 244, 395
Lechner 234
Left Branch Condition 217, 460
Legate 13, 411
legibility (at interfaces) 10, 177, 460
Lenneberg 13
LeSourd 195
let 121–4, 134
level (of projection) 94, 460
Levin 355
Levine 9
Levins 356

Index
505
Levy 18
lexical 460
array 158, 320, 407, 408, 435–6
category 41, 60, 79, 89
entry 450
item 9, 51, 90
learning 16, 21
property 47
selection 407–9
subarray 408, 435–6
lexicon 9, 158
LF representation 196
light noun 368–72
light verb 339–67, 421, 461
linear word order 18, 73
local antecedent 109
local domain 461
local movement 321; see also successive-cyclic
Locality Principle 15, 292
locative expression/locative theta-role 241, 251,
304, 461
locative inversion 355–6
locus 117, 461
Logical Form 196
long-distance
agreement 294
head movement 163
passivisation 264–6, 315
wh-movement 398
Longobardi 46, 140, 144, 146, 180, 181,
367
L´opez 362
Lozano xiii, 409
Lyons 43, 46
MacKenzie 294, 403
Mahajan 398
main clause 4, 126
main verb 436–7
map/mapping 9, 196, 249
Marantz 177, 253
Marcus 24
marked for deletion 305
Martin 311
Massam 401, 431
mass/non-count noun 34
matching (of features) 198, 199, 286, 289,
461
matrix clause 108, 461
maximal projection 72, 78, 80–4, 87, 90, 94, 190,
203, 204, 212, 363, 472
McCartney 192
McCloskey 255, 263, 396, 400
McDaniel 398
McNally 244
McNeill 23, 24
memory 293, 381, 408
Merchant 234
merge/merger 66–98
external 199
internal merge 199
movement as a form of 199
preferred over Move 320, 326, 385, 407,
408
Middle English 170, 229, 333; see also Chaucer
Minimalism/Minimalist Program 9, 95, 462
Minimal Link Condition 200
minimal projection 94, 95, 203, 204, 472
modal auxiliary 48, 167, 173, 462
modiﬁer/modify 34, 77, 78, 462
mood 457, 462, 478
Moore 138
Morgan 24
Moro 304
morpheme 1
morphological structure 70
morphology 1
derivational 33–5, 447
inﬂectional 33–5
mother 91, 463
movement
and agreement 281–309, 322
as copying and deletion 154–8
as a form of merger 199
chain 190
explaining what moves where 202–6
see also A-movement, A-bar movement,
Attraction, EPP, Head Movement,
N-movement, T-to-C Movement, V-to-T
movement, Wh-Movement
multiple
agreement 304, 319, 381
speciﬁers 377, 391, 463
wh-movement 199–202, 331, 405–7, 409
Multiply Filled COMP Filter 230–1
Nakajima 356
Namai 46
narrow scope modal 167
Nasu 289, 313
Navajo 206
ne (in Italian) 257
need 102, 103, 167
negation 48, 170–3
in Elizabethan English 158–62
in Middle English 170
in present-day English 173–4
see also negative
negative
evidence in parameter-setting 23, 24
imperative 183
particle n’t 399
phrase/projection (NEGP) 170–3
preﬁx 35, 59

506
Index
negative (cont.)
quantiﬁer 103
question 173, 176–7
neutralisation 34, 464
new information 329
N-movement 178–81
node 67, 90
node counting 201
nominal expression 464
nominal phase 411
nominalisation 464
nominative case 5, 45, 136–7, 210, 256, 283–4,
286, 287
non-count noun 34
non-echo question 14
no-negative-evidence hypothesis 25
non-ﬁnite clause/constituent 5, 27, 68, 311, 452
non-null subject language 17, 465
non-terminal node 90
Northeastern American English 429
Norwegian 180, 205
notional criteria 33
not see negation/negative
noun 2, 34, 36, 464; see also common, count,
mass, proper
noun phrase 82, 465
Noyer 177, 206
N-pronoun/pronominal noun 44
n’t see negation/negative
null
auxiliary 111–15
case (assignment) 138, 311, 333
complementiser/C 124–31, 137
constituent 106–46
determiner 41–4, 140–4
ﬁnite subject 107
imperative subject 107
inﬁnitive participle 121–4
non-ﬁnite subject 107
quantiﬁer 140–4
question operator in yes–no questions 220, 331,
384, 423–4
question particle/Q 153
relative pronoun 224–8
spellout 107, 112, 123, 125, 129, 134, 143, 155,
224–8, 232, 383
subject 17, 27, 106–11, 465; see also pro, PRO
subject language 28, 164, 465
subject parameter 17, 106
T constituent 111–24
truncated subject 107
number
as a grammatical feature/property 34, 46, 466
as a syntactic head (Num) 179, 180, 412, 465
Number Phrase 371–2
Nunes 194, 218, 398
object 140, 466
Agreement Projection/AgrOP 363
control predicate/structure 345–8
direct object 3, 67
double-object structure 345, 358
indirect object 466
objecthood 139
Ochi 173
of 367, 439
O-feature 420
Okinawan 206
old information 329
one 44
O’Neil 194
one-place predicate 4
operator
binding a variable 196, 206
feature 420
interrogative 196
null (in yes–no questions) 220, 331, 384,
423–4
relative 224
optimal design 9
Optional Inﬁnitives stage (in acquisition) 28
orphaned preposition 212, 216, 397, 417–18
ought 168
Oya 344
parameter/parameter-setting/parametric variation
16–25, 26–9; see also Head-Position
Parameter, Head-Strength Parameter,
Null-Subject Parameter, Wh-Parameter
Parker 210
Partee 125
participial light verb (PRT) 386, 390
participle 466–7
agreement (in French) 403–5
passive 2, 34, 257, 260, 386, 432
perfect 2, 34, 246, 257, 436–7
progressive 2, 34, 435–6
particle 467
genitive case 101, 439
inﬁnitive 49–52, 68, 110, 168–70, 458
question (Q) 153
tense 68
partitive 467
case 309
quantiﬁer 102, 103, 142
parts of speech 2; see also category
passive structure 252, 260–6, 366–7, 386, 432
auxiliary 432
participle 2, 34, 257, 260, 386, 432
Thematic Hierarchy Condition 252
passivisation 132, 261, 303, 416
long distance 264–6
see also passive

Index
507
past tense 2, 34
percolation 213, 214, 215
perfect
aspect 436–7
auxiliary 119, 167, 246, 256
participle 2, 34, 246, 257, 436–7
system 9
perfectly 343, 365
performance 7
periphery 468
Perlmutter 138
person, grammatical 45, 53, 141, 468
ﬁrst/second/third 45
feature on of expletive there 300
feature on to in defective clauses 315
personal pronoun 45, 143
personally 251
persuade 347
Pesetsky 135, 172, 194, 195, 208–11, 282, 285,
287, 291–2, 298, 305, 345, 425
PF (Phonetic Form)
clitic 399, 468
component 9, 117, 288, 382, 468
movement operation 205, 367
representation 9, 288
P-feature 419, 469
phase 292, 321, 381–409, 411, 416–18, 425
Phase Impenetrability Condition 292–4, 306, 313,
319, 321, 353, 381, 411, 415, 416
phi-/-completeness 289, 302
and EPP 313
phi-feature/-feature 283, 311, 314, 469
on inﬁnitival to 314
phi-/-incompleteness 302
Phillips 76, 87
Phonetic Form 9, 288; see also PF
phonological structure 70
phrasal verb 417
phrase 3, 66–70; see also individual phrases, e.g.
noun phrase
phrase-marker 90
Piattelli-Palmarini 9
Picallo 179
pied-piping 211–20, 223, 227, 229, 230, 396, 397,
414, 469
Pietroski 13
Platzack 164
plural 2, 34
P-marker 90
polarity expression/item 102, 167, 237,
470
Polinsky 294
Polish 205, 219
Pollock 363
Portuguese 308
positive evidence (in parameter-setting) 23
possessive structure 46, 180, 181, 215, 370–2,
412, 414, 470
possessee (theta-role) 370
possessor (theta-role) 370
possessor agreement 372
Postal 46, 359, 362
postposition 20
Potsdam 294
PPT see Principles-and-Parameters Theory
pragmatics 470
precede(nce) 470
predicate 3, 248, 435; see also control, ergative,
one-place, raising, resultative, two-place,
three-place, unaccusative, unergative
Predicate-Internal Argument Hypothesis 249,
270
predicate nominal 110, 144, 471
predicative expression 37, 110, 144, 253, 436,
471
prefer 130
Prefer Merge over Move Principle 320, 326, 385,
407, 408
preﬁx 35, 59, 434
prenominal determiner/quantiﬁer 44, 45
preposing 54, 62, 64, 80, 87, 100
preposition 37–8, 471
adjoining to verb 417
copying 192–3
dropped before a clause 63
stranding of 212, 216, 397, 417–18
thematic function of 367
prepositional phrase 76–8, 80–1, 416–18
present tense 2, 34
principal clause 4, 126
principles of Universal Grammar/UG 13–16;
see Attract Closest Principle, Binarity
Principle, Binding Principles, Convergence
Principle, Earliness Principle, Headedness
Principle, Locality Principle, Strict Cyclicity
Principle; see also condition, constraint
Principles-and-Parameters Theory (PPT) 21, 471
PRN see pronoun
PRO 27, 108–11, 130, 137–9, 231, 269–70, 297,
305, 345; see also control
pro 17, 27, 165, 232, 471
probe 281, 282, 285, 381, 472
process nominal 367, 370
processing 293
proform 47, 472
progressive
aspect 435
auxiliary 246, 435–6
participle 2, 34, 435–6
projection 67, 69, 94, 472; see also agreement,
intermediate, maximal, minimal, split
Projection Principle 362, 472

508
Index
promise 348
pronominal
determiner 45, 46, 143
non-anaphoric pronoun 101
noun 44
quantiﬁer 44, 45, 189
pronoun 44–7, 473
D-pronoun 45, 46, 143
expletive 73
interrogative 189
N-pronoun/pronominal noun 44
personal 45, 143
Q-pronoun/pronominal quantiﬁer 45, 189
relative 223; see also relative clause
proper noun/name 180, 233, 464
proposition 248, 435, 473
PRT see participial light verb
pseudo-cleft sentence 129, 131, 132, 473
Pullum 13
Q see question particle/quantiﬁer
Q-feature 420
Q-pronoun 45, 189
quantiﬁer 41–4, 473
existential/partitive 102, 103, 142
ﬂoating/stranding 137, 245, 255, 263, 310, 396,
453
generic 142, 455
negative 103
null 140–4
prenominal 44
pronominal 44, 45, 189
universal 47, 103, 255, 396
quasi-argument 297, 305
question(s)
echo and non-echo 14, 189, 449
in Elizabethan English 159, 162
in present-day English 14–15
multiple wh-questions 199–202, 405–7
negative question 173, 176–7
particle (Q) 153
wh-in-situ question 189
wh-questions 196, 199–202
yes–no question 151, 175, 220–1
quickly 350
quirky case 138, 439
quotative inversion 244–6
Radford 1, 32, 60, 70, 82, 86, 87, 144, 205, 207,
363, 417, 418
raising predicate/structure 268, 352–4
compared to control 268–74
Ramat 60
Randall 344
rapidity of language acquisition 11
Rappaport Hovav 355
recursion 69
reduced form 55, 474
R-expression 101
reference, arbitrary 111
referential expression 101, 474
reﬂexive 92–4, 109, 197, 310, 314, 394
Reintges 195
relations, syntactic 90–4
relative
appositive relative clause 233, 435
clause 192, 195, 223–34, 414, 474
free relative clause 233
operator 224
pronoun 195, 223, 233, 474
Relative Pronoun Spellout Condition 227,
230
restrictive relative clause 232
that clauses 228–34
Remerger Constraint 204, 205, 237, 396, 415
representation 474
LF/semantic 9, 196, 288
PF representation 9, 288
restrictions on choice of arguments/subjects 274,
338, 346
restrictive relative clause 232
resultative predicate 344
Reuland 9, 94
R-expression see Binding Principles
rich agreement morphology 164–6, 179, 475
Richards 194, 403, 405
Rickford 186
right 37, 54, 77, 80
Ritter 179
Rizzi 232, 321, 328, 329, 330, 332, 395, 424
Roberts 9, 164, 167, 181, 194, 206, 220, 392
Roeper 344, 370
Rohrbacher 164
role see theta-role
Romani 398
Romanian 367
Romero 244
Rooryck 19
root/root clause 90, 126, 475
Rosen 244
Ross 127, 195, 212, 217, 225, 414
Runner 194
Russian 60
Rymer 13
Sabel 218, 225
Saddy 401
Saﬁr 18, 123, 292
Sag 213, 228
Saito 362
Sampson 13
S-analysis of clauses 71, 86, 103

Index
509
Sardinian 257
Sauerland 244, 284
S-bar analysis of clauses 74
Schachter 125
Scholz 13
Sch¨utze 415
scope 173, 475
ambiguity 244
narrow scope 167, 475
of inﬁnitival to 169
of quantiﬁer 243
wide scope 167, 476
Scots English 168
search (space) 293, 387
second person see person
second speciﬁer see multiple speciﬁer
see 121–4
Seeley 271
seem 266, 268–9, 274, 352–4
select/selection 58–9, 68, 476
auxiliary selection 256, 297, 349, 352, 437
selectional feature/property 58–9, 68, 142, 149,
362, 476
self-correction 24
semantic
agreement 284
component 9, 117, 288, 382
interpretation 290
properties 2
representation 9, 196, 288
role see theta-role
semantics interface 143
sentence 71; see also clause
Sepp¨anen 190
Shakespeare 122, 184, 192, 206, 236, 256,
476; see also Elizabethan English
shells
in noun phrases 367–72
in verb phrases 336–67
Shima 320
short verb movement 246
should 51, 68
Sigurðsson 138, 283, 304
simple sentence 4
simultaneous operations 305, 319, 387
singular 2, 34
Sinhala 206, 214
sister 74, 91, 476
small clause 123, 441
Smith xiii, 13, 173, 194, 329
Sobin 214, 336, 431
Sorace 257, 354
source theta-role 251, 476
Southern White American English 115
Spanish 257, 405–7, 409
Speas 244
spec–head relation see speciﬁer
speciﬁer 76–9, 477
–head relation 281, 305
of ADVP 82
of AP 81–2
of CP (spec-CP) 188–234, 394–401
of DP (spec-DP) 78–9, 215, 369–71, 414
of NegP 170–3
of NP 82, 178
of NumP 179, 371–2, 412
of PP 76–8
of QP 215
of root clause 232
of TP (spec-TP) 82–4, 243
of VP (spec-VP) 242, 243, 245, 339–67
of vP (spec-vP) 340–67, 391–4, 401–7, 409
multiple/second/additional speciﬁer(s) 377,
391, 463
speciﬁcity effect 405
speech systems 9
spellout 288, 477–81
discontinuous/split 193–5, 259, 262, 448
null 107, 112, 123, 125, 129, 134, 143, 155,
224–8, 232, 383
of complementiser 335
Spencer 60, 257
split
CP 327–36
projection 327–72, 477
spellout 193–5, 257, 259
VP 336–67
Sportiche 244, 403
stacked adjectives 42, 477
star 5
Stepanov 341
Stjepanovi´c 206
Stockwell 125
Stowell 59, 75, 311
straight 37, 54
stranding 477–8
Constraint 216, 477–8
of preposition 212, 216, 397, 417–18
of quantiﬁer 137, 245, 255, 263, 310, 396,
453
of reﬂexive 310
Strict Cyclicity Principle 173, 478
string 478
Stroik 340, 348
strong
afﬁx/head triggering movement 153, 328, 364
AUX-feature of T 168
genitive pronoun 46, 439
N-feature of Num 179
tense/T feature of C/Q 153, 176, 204
(V feature of) T in Elizabethan English 160, 164
structural case 439

510
Index
structure
hierarchical 73
morphological 70
phonological 70
syntactic 9, 66–98
tests for 84–90
stylistic variation 216, 223, 478
subarray 408, 435–6
subject 3, 72, 78, 134–40, 241–74, 441,
478
Agreement Projection/AgrSP 363
case-marking of 284
in Belfast English 241–3
in situ 246
VP-Internal Subject Hypothesis 244–74
wh-subject questions 206–11, 239
see also null subject
subjecthood 139
subjunctive mood 478
substantive category 41, 60, 79, 89
substitution 39, 55, 87, 479
successive cyclic
afﬁx lowering 173
A-movement 271, 321
head movement 163, 171
wh-movement 321, 389, 394–401
sufﬁx 118, 434
Su˜ner 245, 246, 405–7
superiority effect 201, 479
superlative 35, 39, 479
Svenonius 283
syncretism 34, 170, 335–6, 479
syntactic
component 9
relations 90–4
representation 196, 474
structure 9, 66–98
syntax 1
tacit knowledge 7
tag (sentence) 49, 115, 120, 479–80
T (Tense constituent)
defective 316
feature composition of 316
in control clauses 316
in defective clauses 316
T-agreement 282, 292
Tallerman 405
Taraldsen 180
taxonomy 1
Ten Hacken xiii
tense 52, 480–4
afﬁx 116–21, 160
auxiliary 48
copying 287
feature on subject 209
ﬁnite 52
-marker 52
non-ﬁnite 52, 311
particle 68
past 2, 34
phrase/projection 72
present 2, 34
terminal node 90
ternary-branching structure 71, 337, 346, 350,
480
testing structure 84–90
that 53, 55–6, 103, 136, 190, 292, 327–8, 334,
335, 389, 420
caseless nature of 292
deletion/null spellout of as that 124, 125–6
spelled out as what 399
Thematic Hierarchy 252, 377
thematic role see theta-role
theme theta-role 251, 476–80
there 123, 241, 256, 260, 272, 298–307, 366
double there structure 271
theta/
criterion/-criterion 252, 269, 480
marking 252–4
roles 250–4
role assignment 252–4
Uniform Theta Assignment Hypothesis
(UTAH) 264
third person see person
Thomas 13
Thornton 398, 399, 429
thought systems 9
three-place predicate 4, 336, 481
Tieken-Boon van Ostade 187
Tns afﬁx see tense afﬁx
to 49–52, 62, 68, 110, 168–70, 458
deletion/null counterpart of (to) 121–4
top-down 76
topic (structure)/topicalised
expression/topicalisation 329, 333, 481
Topic Drop 232
Topic Phrase 327–36
Torrego 208, 287, 305
tough 234
trace/trace theory 190, 290, 383, 481;
see also copy
traditional grammar 1–6
transfer 293, 382, 383, 384, 388, 390, 392, 393
transitive item/structure 3, 38, 46, 67, 134, 139,
351, 365, 382–5, 481–2
clauses, agreement in 306–7
clauses, wh-movement in 401–7
complementiser 137
expletive structure 304
light verb 356–67
verb phrase 306, 356–67

Index
511
Transitivity Phrase 362–7
Traugott 229
Travis 24, 163, 244
tree diagram 66, 67
Trotta 190
truncated null subject 27, 107
truncation 27, 107, 482
truth-functional equivalence 273
T-to-C movement 151–8
two-place predicate 4, 348, 482
type of clause 190, 425
Tzotzil 414
UG see Universal Grammar
UG principles see principles
unaccusative structure/predicate 254–9, 297, 304,
308, 349–52, 367, 385, 409, 482
unary-branching structure 154
unbound anaphor 92, 482
uncountable noun 34, 42–3
unergative predicate/structure 256, 348–9, 351,
482
ungradable adjective 36
Uniform Theta Assignment Hypothesis (UTAH)
264, 338, 483
uniformity (of chain) 205
uniformity of language acquisition 11
uninterpretable feature 287–91
Universal Grammar 6–10
Universal principles see principles
Universal quantiﬁer 47, 255, 396
universality (as a criterion of adequacy) 8
unlabelled tree 95
unreduced form 55
unvalued feature 285–7, 295
Ura 403, 405, 429
Uriagereka 9, 13, 96, 218, 395
UTAH see Uniform Theta Assignment
Hypothesis
Vainikka 18
Valois 371
valuation/value (of feature) 58, 284–7, 288, 295,
296, 483
variable 196, 424
verb 2, 34, 36, 483
causative 337
movement see V-to-T movement
short verb movement 246
see also auxiliary, main verb, light verb,
predicate
verb movement see V-to-T movement
verb phrase 67, 69
Vergnaud 9, 143, 147
very 36, 81
Vijay-Shanker 139
Vikner 164, 181
visibility 197, 290, 314
Feature Visibility Convention 289, 301
vocative expression/nominal 144, 180, 483
voice
active/passive 260
auxiliary 48
VP adverb 343, 365, 483
vP adverb 484
VP idiom 247
VP-Internal Subject Hypothesis (VPISH) 244–74,
483
VP shells 336–67
V-to-T movement 158–62
Wakelin 186
wanna/wanta contraction 191, 270, 309
want 128, 132, 268–74
Watanabe 195
weak
afﬁx/head 161, 330
genitive pronoun 46, 439
T in present-day English 164
unstressed pronoun 232
weather it 296
Welsh mutation 405
West Flemish 413
West Ulster English 255, 263, 396
Wexler 28, 398
what 399, 400
wh-agreement 420, 421
wh-copying 195, 214, 397
Whelpton 256
whether 220, 237, 423
null spellout of 232
wh-exclamatives 222–3
wh-expression 188, 220, 484
wh-feature on C 198–202
wh-in-situ question 189, 194, 206, 404
Wh-Island Constraint 225, 229, 484
wh-marking
of complementiser 399, 400, 420
of verb 403, 421
wh-movement 14, 18, 188–234, 330–2
as copying and deletion 190–7
multiple 199–202, 331, 405–7, 409
nature of 419–25
through intermediate spec-CP 388–91
through spec-vP 391–4, 401–7, 409
who/whom 211, 214, 223, 430
whose 215
Wh-Parameter 18, 30–2, 484
wh-percolation 215
wh-question 196
wh-subject question 206–11, 239
wh-word 14, 484

512
Index
wide-scope modal 167
Williams 297
Willis 405
Wiltschko 44, 144
Wolfram 115
Woolford 244
word order 18, 73
words, grammatical properties of 33–61
Xu 109
Yang 13, 73
yes–no question 151, 175, 220–1, 331, 423–4
Zagona 244
Zwart 206
Zwicky 190, 231

