Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
Technical Report
massachusetts institute of technology, cambridge, ma 02139 usa — www.csail.mit.edu
MIT-CSAIL-TR-2008-015
June 24, 2008
Trajectory Analysis and Semantic Region 
Modeling Using A Nonparametric 
Bayesian Model
Xiaogang Wang,, Keng Teck Ma,, Gee-Wah Ng,, and 
Eric Grimson

Trajectory Analysis and Semantic Region Modeling Using A Nonparametric
Bayesian Model
Xiaogang Wang1
Keng Teck Ma2
Gee-Wah Ng2
Eric Grimson1
1CS and AI Lab, MIT
Cambridge, MA, 02139, USA
{xgwang, welg}@csail.mit.edu
2DSO National Laboratories,
20 Science Park Drive Singapore 118230,
{mkengtec, ngeewah}@dso.org.sg
Abstract
We propose a novel nonparametric Bayesian model, Dual Hierarchical Dirichlet Processes (Dual-HDP), for trajectory
analysis and semantic region modeling in surveillance settings, in an unsupervised way. In our approach, trajectories are
treated as documents and observations of an object on a trajectory are treated as words in a document. Trajectories are
clustered into different activities. Abnormal trajectories are detected as samples with low likelihoods. The semantic regions,
which are intersections of paths commonly taken by objects, related to activities in the scene are also modeled. Dual-HDP
advances the existing Hierarchical Dirichlet Processes (HDP) language model. HDP only clusters co-occurring words from
documents into topics and automatically decides the number of topics. Dual-HDP co-clusters both words and documents.
It learns both the numbers of word topics and document clusters from data. Under our problem settings, HDP only clusters
observations of objects, while Dual-HDP clusters both observations and trajectories. Experiments are evaluated on two data
sets, radar tracks collected from a maritime port and visual tracks collected from a parking lot.
1. Introduction
Activity analysis has always been one of the foci of research in surveillance. Over the past decade signiﬁcant work has
been reported on this topic. Although some approaches [18, 11, 14] modeled activities by directly extracting motion and
appearance features from the videos without relying on tracking, most approaches [12, 3, 9, 16, 15, 17] assumed that objects
and/or their constituents were ﬁrst detected and tracked throughout the scene and activities were modeled as sequences of
movements of objects. Through tracking, an activity executed by a single object can be separated from other co-occurring
activities, and features related to the activity can be integrated as a track. In many far-ﬁeld surveillance settings, the captured
videos are of low resolution and poor quality or even no videos are available (e.g. in some maritime surveillance, only radar
signals are available). In these scenarios, it is difﬁcult to compute more complicated features, such as gestures, local motions,
or appearance of objects within the tracks. Usually only positions of objects are recorded along the tracks, which are called
trajectories. Although quite simple, the information encoded by trajectories can distinguish many different activity patterns,
especially in far-ﬁeld settings. The goal of this work is to model activities by trajectory analysis: clustering trajectories into
different activities, detecting abnormal trajectories, and modeling semantic regions.
We propose a framework using a nonparametric Bayesian model, Dual Hierarchical Dirichlet Processes (Dual-HDP), for
trajectory analysis. Dual-HDP advances the existing Hierarchical Dirichlet Processes (HDP) [13] language model. HDP is a
nonparametric Bayesian model. It clusters words often co-occurring in the same documents into one topic and automatically
decides the number of topics. Wang et al. [14], proposed an HDP mixture model to co-cluster both words and documents.
However, it required one to manually specify the number of document clusters. Our Dual-HDP also co-clusters words and
documents, but it automatically decides the numbers of both word topics and document clusters. Under our framework,
trajectories are treated as documents and the observations (positions and moving directions of objects) on the trajectories are
treated as words. Topics model the semantic regions, which are intersections of paths commonly taken by objects, in the
scene, and trajectories are clustered into different activities.
1

(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 1. Trajectories in the our two data sets. (a) Radar tracks collected from a port. (b) The background image of a parking lot. (c) Tracks
collected from a parking lot scene (only 4, 404 out of 40, 453 tracks are shown here).
We evaluate our approach on two data sets (see Figure 1): 577 radar tracks collected from a port in maritime surveillance
and 45, 453 video tracks collected from a parking lot scene. In maritime surveillance, trajectory analysis is a natural way to
analyze activities especially when only radar signals are available. Without expert knowledge, it is very difﬁcult for humans to
discover transportation structures on the sea, such as shipping fairways, since the appearance of the scene does not help. The
tracks from the parking lot scene are obtained from far-ﬁeld videos recorded by a ﬁxed camera. We use the Stauffer-Grimson
tracker [12].
2. Related Work
Most of the existing trajectory analysis approaches cluster trajectories and detect abnormal trajectories by deﬁning the
pairwise similarities between trajectories. The proposed trajectory similarities or distances include Euclidean distance [4],
Hausdorff distance and its different variations [5, 15], and Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) [7] etc. These similarity-based
approaches have several drawbacks. First, there is no global probabilistic framework to model activities happening in the
scene. They have an ad hoc nature especially on the deﬁnitions of distance measures. Abnormal trajectories are usually
detected as those with larger distance to other trajectories. The abnormality detection lacks a probabilistic explanation.
Second, they do not provide a solution to the number of clusters. They require that the cluster number is known in advance.
Third, they measure the spatial distance between observations on two trajectories. However, spatial distance do not reﬂect
the statistical nature of activities. For example, vehicles moving on two side by side lanes may be close in space, but their
trajectories represent different activities. Spatial distance is also sensitive to projective distortion. Fourth, calculating the
similarities between all pairs of samples is computationally inefﬁcient, with a complexity of O(N 2) in both time and space,
where N is the number of trajectories.
Trajectory clustering is also related to the problem of modeling semantic regions in the scene. The knowledge of the
structures of the scene (e.g. roads, paths, entry and exit points) can help not only the high-level description of activities [15],
but also low-level tracking and classiﬁcation [6]. It takes a lot of effort to manually input these structures. They cannot be
reliably detected based on the appearance of the scene either. In some cases, e.g. detecting shipping fairways on the sea,
there is no appearance cue available at all. It is of interest to detect these structures by trajectory analysis. Usually paths are
detected by modeling the spatial extents of trajectory clusters [3, 9, 15]. Semantic regions are detected as intersections of
paths [9]. Entry and exit points are detected at the ends of paths [15].

Figure 2. An example to explain the modeling of semantic regions and activities. See details in text.
Our framework differs from previous trajectory analysis approaches in several aspects:
• Different from prior similarity-based clustering approaches, it clusters trajectories using a generative model. There is
a natural probabilistic explanation for the detection of abnormal trajectories.
• Previous approaches ﬁrst clustered trajectories into activities and then segmented semantic regions. Our approach
simultaneously learns activities and semantic regions, which are jointly modeled in Dual-HDP.
• Using Dirichlet Processes, the number of activity categories and semantic regions are automatically learnt from data
instead of requiring manual deﬁnition.
• Instead of using a spatial distance measure uniformly over the scene, it models the spatial distributions of activities. It
separates activity-related structures close in space. It is more robust to projective distortion.
• The space complexity of our algorithm is O(N) instead of O(N 2) in the number of trajectories.
3. Modeling Trajectories
We treat a trajectory as a document and the observations on the trajectory as words. The positions and moving directions
of observations are computed as features which are quantized according to a codebook. The codebook uniformly quantizes
the space of the scene into small cells and the velocity of objects into several directions. A trajectory is modeled as a
bag of quantized observations without temporal order. In language processing, some topic models, such as HDP, cluster
co-occurring words into one topic. Each topic has a multinomial distribution over the codebook. A document is modeled
as a mixture of topics and documents share topics. If some words, such as “professor” and “education”, often but not
necessarily always occur in the same documents, a topic related to “education” will be learnt and its multinomial distribution
has large weights on these words. When these models are used to model trajectories, topics reveal semantic regions shared by
trajectories, i.e. many trajectories pass through one semantic region with common directions of motion. Semantic regions are
intersections of paths. Two paths may partially share one semantic region. A semantic region is modeled as a multinomial
distribution over the space of the scene and moving directions. If two trajectories pass through the same set of semantic
regions, they belong to the same activity. In our Dual-HDP model, each activity cluster has a prior distribution over topics
(semantic regions). It is learnt in an unsupervised way. All the trajectories clustered into the same activity share the same prior
distribution. Using Dirichlet Processes, Dual-HDP can learn the number of semantic regions and the number of activities
from data.
In Figure 2, an example is shown to explain the modeling. There are three semantic regions (indicated by different colors)
which form two paths. Both trajectories A and C pass through regions 1 and 2, so they are clustered into the same activity.
Trajectory B passes through regions 1 and 3, so it is clustered into a different activity.
Although with the “bag-of-words” assumption, our approach does model the ﬁrst order temporal information among
observations since the codebook encodes the moving directions. It can distinguish some activities related to temporal features.
For example, if objects visit several regions in opposite temporal order, they must pass through the same region in opposite
directions. In our model, that region splits into two topics because of the velocity difference. So these two activities can be
distinguished by our model, since they have different topics.
In Section 5 and 6, we will explain the HDP model proposed by Teh et al. [13] and our Dual-HDP model, which is actually
used for trajectory analysis. We will describe them as language models. However, remember that in our problem documents

are trajectories, words are observations, and topics are semantic regions. Clusters of trajectories (activities) are explicitly
modeled in Dual-HDP but not in HDP.
4. Dirichlet Process
A Dirichlet Process (DP) [2] is a nonparametric distribution whose domain is a set of probability distributions. A DP is
deﬁned by a concentration parameter α, which is a positive scalar, and a base probability measure H (for example H is a
Dirichlet distribution in our case). A probability measure G randomly drawn from DP(α, H) is always a discrete distribution
and it can be obtained from a stick-breaking reconstruction [10],
G =
∞
X
k=1
πkδφk,
(1)
where δφk is a Dirac delta function centered at φk, φk is a multinomial parameter vector sampled from Dirichlet distribution
H, φk ∼H, and πk is a non-negative scalar satisfying P∞
k=1 πk = 1, πk = π′
k
Qk−1
l=1 (1 −π′
l), π′
k ∼Beta(1, α). G is often
used as a prior for inﬁnite mixture models. When data points are sampled from G, there is no limit to the number of distinct
components which may be generated. Given a set of data points θ1, . . . , θN sampled from G, it turns out that the posterior of
sampling a new data point can be obtained by integrating out G,
θN+1|θ1, . . . , θN, α, H ∼
K
X
k=1
nk
N + αδθ∗
k +
α
N + αH
(2)
There are K distinct values {θ∗
k}K
k=1 (identifying K components) among the N data points. nk is the number of points with
value θ∗
k. The new data point θN+1 can be assigned to one of the existing components or can sample a new component from
H. These properties make DP ideal for modeling data clustering problems where the number of mixture components is not
well-deﬁned in advance.
5. HDP
HDP proposed by Teh et al. [13] is a nonparametric hierarchical Bayesian model used to cluster co-occurring words
in documents into topics (in our problem it clusters observations on the trajectories into semantic regions). The graphical
model of HDP is shown in Figure 3. There are M documents (trajectories) in the corpus. Each document j has Nj words
(quantized observations of positions and moving directions of objects). In HDP, a prior distribution G0 over the whole corpus
is sampled from a Dirichlet process, G0 ∼DP(γ, H). G0 = P∞
k=1 π0kδφk. φk is the parameter of a topic, which is modeled
as a multinomial distribution over the codebook. φk is sampled from Dirichlet prior H. All the words in the corpus will be
sampled from some topics {φk}. For each document j, a prior distribution Gj over all the words in that document is sampled
from Dirichlet process, Gj ∼DP(α, G0). Gj = P∞
k=1 πjkδφk share the same components φk as G0, i.e. all the documents
share the same set of topics. For each word i in document j, a topic θji, which is one of the φk’s, is sampled from Gj. The
word value wji is sampled from the topic θji, wji ∼Discrete(θji). The concentration parameters are sampled from some
gamma priors, γ ∼Gamma(a1, b1), α ∼Gamma(a2, b2). In HDP, all the documents share topics and the number of
topics, i.e. the number of non-zero elements of {πk} is learnt from data.
6. Dual-HDP
Unfortunately, HDP does not cluster documents (trajectories in our problem). We propose a Dual-HDP model to co-
cluster both words and documents. A document is modeled as a distribution over topics. Thus documents with similar
distributions over topics can be grouped into one cluster. There are two hierarchical Dirichlet processes modeling topics of
words and clusters of documents. The graphical model of Dual-HDP is shown in Figure 4.
In Dual-HDP, each document j is from one of the document clusters. All the documents in cluster c have the same prior
distribution eGc. eGc = P∞
k=1 eπckδeφck is an inﬁnite mixture of topics. Since the number of document clusters is not known in
advance, we model the clusters of documents as an inﬁnite mixture,
Q =
∞
X
c=1
ϵcδ e
Gc
(3)

Figure 3. The graphical model of HDP
Figure 4. The graphical model of Dual-HDP
When a DP was ﬁrst developed by Ferguson [2], the components (such as φk in Eq 1) could only be scalars or vectors.
MacEachern [8] generalized this to Dependent Dirichlet Process (DDP). In DDP, components could be stochastic processes.
In our model, the parameters {(eπck, eφck)}∞
k=1 of eGc can be treated as a stochastic process with index k. As shown in Figure 4,
Q is generated from DDP(µ, ρ, G0). In Eq 3, ϵc = ϵ′
c
Qc−1
l=1 (1 −ϵ′
l), ϵ′
c ∼Beta(1, µ), eGc ∼DP(ρ, G0). As explained
in Section 5, G0 ∼DP(γ, H) is the prior distribution over the whole corpus. { eGc}∞
c=1 all have the same topics in G0. i.e.
eφck = φk. However they have different mixtures {eπck} over these topics. Each document j samples a probability measure
eGcj from Q as its prior. Different documents may choose the same prior eGc, thus they form one cluster c. Then document j
generates its own probability measure Gj from Gj ∼DP(α, eGcj) where the base measure is provided by cluster cj instead
of the corpus prior G0 (as HDP did). The following generative procedure is the same as HDP. Word i in document j samples
its topic θji from Gj and samples its word value wji from Discrete(θji). The concentration parameters are also sampled
from gamma priors.
Gibbs sampling is used to do inference in three steps.
1. Given the cluster assignment {cj} of documents, sample the word topic assignment {zji} (zji = k indicates θji = φk),
topic mixtures {π0k} and {eπck}. Given {cj}, Dual-HDP is simpliﬁed as HDP, and thus the sampling scheme proposed
by Teh et al. [13] can be used. They showed that {φk} and {πjk} can be integrated out without being sampled.
2. Given {zji}, {π0k} and {eπck}, sample the cluster assignment cj of documents. cj can be assigned to one of the
existing document clusters or to a new cluster. We use the Chinese restaurant franchise for sampling. See details in the
appendix.
3. Given other variables, sample the concentration parameters using the sampling scheme proposed in [13].
In order to detect abnormal documents (trajectories), we need to compute the likelihood of document j given other doc-
uments, p(wj|w−j), where wj = {wji}Nj
i=1 is the set words in document j and w−j represents the remaining documents
excluding j. It can be approximated using the samples obtained during Gibbs sampling and a variational method. See details
in the appendix.

8th
1th
6th
15th
4th
2nd
3rd
5th
7th
9th
11th
13th
14th
12th
10th
16th
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5. Semantic regions at a maritime port learnt from the radar tracks. Distributions of the ﬁrst 16 semantic regions over space and
moving directions are shown (for easier comparison, they are not shown in order). Colors represent different moving directions: →(red),
←(cyan), ↑(magenta), and ↓(blue),. (a) Histogram of observations assigned to different semantic regions. (b) All of the radar tracks. (c)
Compare the 1st, 4th, 6th, 8th, and 15th semantic regions. (d) Compare the 7th, 11th, and 13th semantic regions (see details in text).
7. Results on radar tracks
There are 577 radar tracks in our maritime port data set. They were acquired by multiple collaborating radars along the
shore and recorded the locations of ships on the sea. 23 semantic regions are discovered by our model. In Figure 5, we
display the distributions of the ﬁrst 16 semantic regions (sorted by the number of observations assigned to semantic regions)
over space and moving directions. As shown in Figure 5, the 1st, 4th, 6th, 8th and 15th semantic regions are ﬁve side by
side shipping fairways, where ships move in two opposite directions. For comparison, we segment the ﬁve fairways using a
threshold on the density, and overlay them in Figure 5 (c) in different colors, green (1st), red (4th), black (6th), yellow (8th),
and blue (15th). Since they are so close in space, they cannot be separated using spatial distance based trajectory clustering
approaches. In Figure 5 (d), we compare the 7th, 11th, and 13th semantic regions also by overlaying the segmented regions
in red, green, and black colors. This explains the fact that ships ﬁrst move along the 7th semantic region and then diverge
along the 11th and 13th semantic regions.
Our approach groups trajectories into 16 clusters. In Figure 6, we plot the eight largest clusters and some smaller clusters.
Clusters 1, 4, 6 and 7 are close in space but occupy different regions. Clusters 3 and 5 occupy the same region, but ships in
the two clusters moves in opposite directions. Clusters 2 and 5 partially overlap in space. As shown in Figure 5(d), ships ﬁrst

cluster 1
cluster 2
cluster 3
cluster 4
cluster 5
cluster 6
cluster 7
cluster 8
cluster 10
cluster 15
cluster 1 (Euclidean distance) cluster 2 (Euclidean distance)
Figure 6. Clusters of trajectories. Random colors are used to distinguish individual trajectories. For comparison the last two sub-ﬁgures
show some trajectory clusters of the result using Euclidean distance and spectral clustering [4].
(a) Top 1 −10
(b) Top 11 −20
Figure 7. Top 20 abnormal trajectories are plotted in different colors. Other trajectories are plotted in cyan color.
move along the same way and then diverge in different directions. For comparison, in the last two sub-ﬁgures of Figure 6 we
also show two clusters of the result using Euclidean distance and sepctral clustering [4] and setting the number of clusters
as 16. Some ﬁne structures of shipping faiways cannot be separated using a spaitial distance based clustering method. One
of the advantages of our approach is that it learns the number of clusters from data. When spatial distance based clustering
methods are evaluated on this dat set, choosing an improper cluster number, say 8 or 25, the clustering performance sincerely
deteriorates.

1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
8th
9th
10th
11th
12th
13th
14th
15th
Figure 8. Some semantic regions learnt from the parking lot data set. The meaning of colors is the same as Figure 5.
In Figure 7, we display the top 20 abnormal trajectories based on their normalized log-likelihoods log(p(wj|w−j))/Nj.
There are two possible reasons for the abnormality. (1) The trajectory does not ﬁt any major semantic regions. Many examples
can be found in Figure 7. (2) The trajectory ﬁts more than one semantic region, but the combination of the semantic regions
is uncommon. The red trajectory in Figure 7 (a), and the red and green trajectories in Figure 7 (b) are such examples.
8. Results on tracks from a parking lot
There are N = 40, 453 trajectories in the parking lot data set collected over one week. Figure 1 plots 4, 404 trajectories
from one day. Because of the large number of samples, similarity based clustering methods require both large amounts of
space (6GB) to store the 40, 453×40, 453 similarity matrix and high computational cost to compute the similarities of around
800, 000, 000 pairs of trajectories. If spectral clustering is used, it is quite challenging to compute the eigenvectors of such
a huge matrix. It is difﬁcult for them to work on this large data set. The space complexity of our nonparametric Bayesian
approach is O(N) instead of O(N 2). The time complexity of each Gibbs sampling iteration is O(N). It is difﬁcult to provide
theoretical analysis on the convergence of Gibbs sampling. However, there is some empirical observations by plotting the
likelihoods of data sets over Gibbs sampling iterations. On the smaller radar data set, the likelihood curve converges after
1, 000 iterations. This takes around 1.5 minutes running on a computer with 3GHz CPU. On the parking lot data set, which
is 70 times large than the radar data set in the number of trajectories, the likelihood curve converges after 6, 000 iterations. It
takes around 6 hours. In our experiments, the time complexity of our approach is much smaller that O(N 2)
30 semantic regions and 22 clusters of trajectories are learnt from this data set. Some of them are shown in Figure 8 and 9.
The ﬁrst and third semantic regions explain vehicles entering and exiting the parking lot. Most other semantic regions are
related to pedestrian activities. Because of opposite moving directions, some region splits into two semantic regions, such as
semantic regions 2 and 7, 9 and 12, 5 and 14. Similarly objects on trajectories (see Figure 9) in clusters 2 and 3, 5 and 11
are moving in opposite directions. Many outlier trajectories are in small clusters, such as clusters 20, 21 and 22. The top 100
abnormal trajectories are shown in Figure 10.

cluster 1
cluster 2
cluster 3
cluster 4
cluster 5
cluster 6
cluster 7
cluster 8
cluster 9
cluster 10
cluster 11
cluster 12
cluster 20
cluster 21
cluster 22
Figure 9. Some clusters of trajectories from the parking lot data set.
Top 1 −20
Top 21 −40
Top 41 −60
Top 61 −80
Top 81 −100
Figure 10. Top 100 abnormal trajectories in the parking lot data set.
9. Conclusion
We propose a nonparametric Bayesian framework to cluster trajectories, learn the models of semantic regions, and detect
trajectories related to abnormal activities. Different from most of the existing spatial distance based trajectory clustering
approaches with ad hoc nature, we formulate these problem in a transparent probabilistic way. The number of semantic
regions and clusters of trajectories are learnt through the hierarchical Dirichlet processes. The space complexity of our
algorithm is O(N).
10. Acknowledgment
The authors wish to acknowledge DSO National Laboratory of Singapore for partially supporting this research.
11. Appendix
11.1. Gibbs sampling under the Dual-HDP model
We will explain how to do Gibbs sampling in the Dual-HDP model as described in Section 6 in our paper. The sampling
procedure is implemented in three steps. In the ﬁrst step, given the cluster assignment {cj} of documents ﬁxed, we sample
the word topic assignment z, mixtures π0 and eπc on topics. It follows the Chinese Restaurant Process (CRP) Gibbs sampling
scheme as described in [13], but adding more hierarchical levels. In CPR, restaurants are documents, customers are words

and dishes are topics. All the restaurants share a common menu. The process can be brieﬂy described as following (see more
details in [13]).
• When a customer i comes to restaurant j, he sits at one of the existing tables t and eat the dishes served on table t, or
take a new table tnew.
• If a new table tnew is added to restaurant j, it orders a dish from the menu.
Since we are modeling clusters of documents, we introduce “big restaurants”, which are clusters of documents. The label
of document cluster cj associates restaurant j to big restaurant cj. The CRP is modiﬁed as following.
• If a new table tnew needs to be added in restaurant j, we go to the big restaurant cj and choose one of the existing big
tables r in cj. tnew is associated with r, and serve the same dish as r.
• Alternatively, the new table tnew may take a new big table rnew in the big restaurant cj. If that happens, rnew orders a
dish from the menu. This dish will be served on both rnew and tnew.
Following this modiﬁed CRP, given {cj}, k, π0 and {eπc} can be sampled. It is a straightforward extension of the sampling
scheme in [13] to more hierarchical levels.
In the second step, in order to sample {cj} and generate the clusters of documents, given z, π0, and {eπc}, we add an extra
process.
• When a new restaurant j is built, it needs to be associated with one of the existing big restaurants or a new big restaurant
needs to be built and associated with j. It is assumed that we already know how many tables in restaurant j and dishes
served at every table.
Let mt
jk be the number of tables in restaurant j serving dish k and mt
j· be the number of tables in restaurant j. To sample
cj, we need to compute the posterior,
p(cj|{mt
jk}, c−j, {eπc}, π0)
∝
p({mt
jk}|cj, c−j, {eπc}, π0)p(cj|c−j, {eπc}, π0)
(4)
where c−j is the cluster labels of documents excluding document j. cj could be one of the existing clusters generated at the
current stage, i.e. cj ∈cold. In this case,
p(mt
jk|cj, c−j, {eπc}, π0)
=
p(mt
jk|eπcj)
=


mt
j·
mt
j1 · · · mt
jK


K
Y
k=1
eπ
mt
jk
cjk
(5)
where K is the number of word topics allocated at the current stage. And,
p(cj|{eπc}, c−j, π0)
=
ncj
M −1 + µ
(6)
where ncj is the number of documents assigned to cluster cj.
cj could also be a new cluster, i.e. cj = cnew. In this case,

p({mt
jk}|cj = cnew, c−j, {eπc}, π0)
=
Z
p({mt
jk}|πnew)p(πnew|π0)dππnew
=


mt
j·
mt
j1 · · · mt
jK


Z
K
Y
k=1
π
mt
jk
new,k
Γ(π0u + PK
k=1 π0k)
π0u
QK
k=1 π0k
ππ0,u−1
new,u
K
Y
k=1
ππ0k−1
new,kdπnew
=


mt
j·
mt
j1 · · · mt
jK


Γ(α)
QK
k=1 Γ(α · π0k)
·
QK
k=1 Γ(α · π0k + mt
jk)
Γ(α + mt
j·)
(7)
And,
p(cj = cnew|{eπc}, c−j, π0) =
µ
M −1 + µ
(8)
So we have,
p(cj = c|{mt
jk}, c−j, {eπl}, π0)
∝
uc
u· + µ
K
Y
k=1
eπ
mt
jk
ck , c ∈cold
µ
u· + µ
Γ(α)
QK
k=1 Γ(α · π0k)
·
QK
k=1 Γ(α · π0k + mt
jk)
Γ(α + mt
j·)
, c = cnew
(9)
In the third step, the concentration parameters are sampled given other random variables ﬁxed. The same sampling scheme
proposed in [13] can be used.
11.2. Compute the likelihood of a document
In order to detect abnormal documents (trajectories), we need to compute the likelihood of a document j given other
documents, p(wj|w−j), where wj = {wji}Nj
i=1 is the set words in document j and w−j represents the remaining documents
exclusing j. During the Gibbs sampling procedure, there are N samples {z−j(n), {ϵ(n)
c
}, {eπ(n)
c
}, π(n)
0
, α(n)}N
n=1 drawn
from distribution p(z−j, {ϵc}, {eπc}, {π0}, α|w) which is very close to p(z−j, {ϵc}, {eπc}, {π0}, α, |x−j), We approximate
p(wj|w−j) as
p(wj|w−j) = 1
N
X
n
X
cj
Z
πj
X
zj
X
i
ϵ(n)
cj p(πj|α(n) · eπ(n)
cj )
p(zj|πj)p(wji|zji, z−j(m), w−j)dπj
(10)
p(πj|α(n) · eπ(n)
cj ) is Dirichlet distribution. If H = Dirichlet(·; (u1, . . . , uT )), where T is the size of the codebook,
p(wji|zji, z−j(n), w−j) =
uwji + nwji,zji
PT
t=1(ut + nt,zji)
(11)
is a multinomial distribution, where nt,zji is the number of words in w−j with value t and being assigned to topic zji (see
[13]). The computation of
R
πj
P
zj p(πj|α(n) · eπ(n)
cj )p(zj|πj)p(wji|zji, z−j(m), w−j) is intractable, but can be approximated
by a variatoinal method as in [1].
References
[1] D. M. Blei, A. Y. Ng, and M. I. Jordan. Latent dirichlet allocation. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 3:993–1022, 2003.
[2] T. S. Ferguson. A bayesian analysis of some nonparametric problems. The Annals of Statistics, 1:209–230, 1973.
[3] J. Fernyhough, A. Cohn, and D. Hogg. Generation of semantic regions from image sequences. In Proc. of ECCV, 1996.

[4] Z. Fu, W. Hu, and T. Tan. Similarity based vehicle trajectory clustering and anomaly detection. In Proc. of ICIP, 2005.
[5] I. Junejo, O. Javed, and M. Shah. Multi feature path modeling for video surveillance. In Proc. of ICPR, 2004.
[6] R. Kaucic, A. Perera, G. Brooksby, J. Kaufhold, and A. Hoogs. A uniﬁed framework for tracking through occlusions and across
sensor gaps. In Proc. of CVPR, 2005.
[7] E. Keogh and M. Pazzani. Scaling up dynamic time scaling up dynamic time. In Proc. of ACM SIGKDD, 2000.
[8] S. MacEachern, A. Kottas, and A. Gelfand. Spatial nonparametric bayesian models. Technical report, Institute of Statistics and
Decision Sciences, Duke University, 2001.
[9] D. Makris and T. Ellis. Automatic learning of an activity-based semantic scene model. In Proc. of AVSBS, 2003.
[10] J. Sethuraman. A constructive deﬁnition of dirichlet priors. Statistica Sinica, 4:639–650, 1994.
[11] P. Smith, N. Lobo, and M. Shah. Temporalboost for event recognition. In Proc. of ICCV, 2005.
[12] C. Stauffer and E. Grimson. Learning patterns of activity using real-time tracking. In IEEE Trans. on PAMI, 2000.
[13] Y. W. Teh, M. I. Jordan, M. J. Beal, and D. M. Blei. Hierarchical dirichlet process. Journal of the American Statistical Association,
2006.
[14] X. Wang, X. Ma, and E. Grimson. Unsupervised activity perception by hierarchical bayesian models. In Proc. of CVPR, 2007.
[15] X. Wang, K. Tieu, and E. Grimson. Learning semantic scene models by trajectory analysis. In Proc. of ECCV, 2006.
[16] T. Xiang and S. Gong. Beyond tracking: Modelling activity and understanding behaviour. International Journal of Computer Vision,
67:21–51, 2006.
[17] Z. Zhang, K. Huang, T. Tan, and L. Wang. Trajectory series analysis based event rule induction for visual surveillance. In Proc. of
CVPR, 2007.
[18] H. Zhong, J. Shi, and M. Visontai. Detecting unusual activity. In Proc. of CVPR, 2004.


