Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
Technical Report
massachusetts institute of technology, cambridge, ma 02139 usa — www.csail.mit.edu
MIT-CSAIL-TR-2010-042
September 8, 2010
Conservative-Bayesian Mechanisms
Pablo Azar, Jing Chen, and Silvio Micali

Conservative-Bayesian Mechanisms
Pablo Azar
CSAIL, MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
azar@csail.mit.edu
Jing Chen
CSAIL, MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
jingchen@csail.mit.edu
Silvio Micali
CSAIL, MIT
Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
silvio@csail.mit.edu
September 8, 2010
Abstract
We put forward a new class of mechanisms. In this extended abstract, we exemplify our approach
only for single-good auctions in what we call a conservative-Bayesian setting. (Essentially, no common-
knowledge about the underlying distribution of the players’ valuations is required.) We prove that our
mechanism is optimal in this challenging and realistic setting.
1
Preliminaries
Single-Good Auctions.
In a single-good auction, a seller has one good. He wants to sell the good to
players. Individual players, denoted by 1, . . . , n, have valuations v1, ..., vn ∈R for the good, and player i gets
utility vi−p if he wins the good and pays price p. A mechanism consists of a message space Mi for each player
i, together with functions x(m1, ..., mn) ∈{1, . . . , n} and p(m1, ..., mn) ∈R that determine, respectively, who
gets the good and how much the winner pays for the good. 1 The revenue of the mechanism is p(m1, ..., mn).
Notation
We deﬁne the star player to be the player with the highest valuation, and denote him by ⋆.
Internal and External Information
For player i, we deﬁne the internal information about player i to be
what player i knows about himself. In this particular case, player i’s internal information is his own valuation
vi. We deﬁne the external information about player i as what can be deduced from player i’s type by looking
exclusively at the information held by others. The key concept is that the external information about player i
is out of player i’s control, and thus does not aﬀect his incentives to report the truth. As a concrete example,
take the Vickrey auction where player i is the winner. Given that player i wins, all other players know that
player i has a higher valuation than them. In particular, let player j have the second highest valuation vj.
Since player j didn’t win, he knows that vi ≥vj. The mechanism can extract this knowledge from player j
without changing player i’s incentives. By doing this, the auctioneer knows that if he charges a price of vj
to player i then it is still dominant strategy truthful for player i to report his own valuation.
2
The Conservative Bayesian Setting
In auctions of a single good, the traditional Bayesian setting assumes that
1. The valuation proﬁle v is drawn from a distribution D.
2. D is common knowledge to the players and to the mechanism designer.
1In a more detailed note, it should be proved that a mechanism that charges money to people who are not the winner cannot
be dominant strategy truthful.
1

3. Each player i privately knows his own vi and thus his conditional distribution Di = D|vi over the other
players’ valuation subproﬁle.
4. The only information available to each player i is that of items 2 and 3, together with common knowledge
of rationality.
(The last point is crucial. Should a player i gather additional information about v−i, then he may want to
deviate from a Bayesian Nash equilibrium.)
In a conservative Bayesian setting, the valuation proﬁle v is drawn from an underlying distribution D.
But D is possibly unknown to the players and the designer. Instead, each player i privately knows his own
valuation vi and his own knowledge Di, which is a distribution over the other players’ valuation subproﬁles,
obtained from D conditioned on vi and any other true signal observed by i.
True Types
For each player i, the pair (vi, Di) is called player i’s true type, denoted by θi. A mechanism
M is revealing if the message space for each player i, Mi, coincides with i’s type space, that is, R × ∆(Rn−1).
Notice that θi includes information both about i himself and others. A single-good auction context is uniquely
identiﬁed by the proﬁle of the players’ true types in that context.
3
Our revenue bound
Our upper bound on revenue works for all (mechanism, solution concept) pairs (M, S) that satisfy the
following weak requirements:
0. For any context with the proﬁle of true types θ, S(θ) = S1(θ1) × · · · × Sn(θn).
1. For any context, the proﬁle of the true types θ belongs to S(θ).
2. For any player i, no strategy in Si(θi) is strictly dominated over S(θ).
3. safe-truthfulness. E[ui(M(θi, m−i))] ≥0 for all m−i ∈S−i(θ−i).
Deﬁnition 1. We say a pair (M, S) is safe if it satisﬁes the above four requirements.
Intuitively, safe-truthfulness guarantees that “If players announce their true information, then they cannot
get negative utility.” In particular, it is safe for players to announce their true beliefs about others. This
property is implied, for example, by dominant strategy truthfulness, which speciﬁes that it should be a
dominant strategy to announce one’s true information.2
We prove a limit on the revenue obtained by any safe-truthful mechanisms for single-good auctions. We
show that this revenue cannot be higher than that obtained by only using the external information about
the winning player. A priori, one could imagine using the player’s own internal information as well to extract
some extra revenue. We show that if the winning player has enough information about the other players’
strategies, then this is impossible.
Deﬁnition 2. In single-good auctions, we say that
• a function r is a revenue benchmark if for any context with true-type proﬁle θ, r maps θ to a real number;
• a (mechanism, solution concept) pair (M, S) achieves a revenue benchmark r, if for any single-good
auction context with true-type proﬁle θ and any strategy proﬁle σ ∈S(θ), rev(M(σ)) ≥r(θ);
• (M, S) achieves r with ϵ bonus, if for any context with true-type proﬁle θ and any σ ∈S(θ), rev(M(σ)) ≥
r(θ) + ϵ whenever maxi vi ≥r(θ) + ϵ, and rev(M(σ)) ≥r(θ) otherwise; and
2This applies for mechanisms where a player can choose not to participate.
2

Intuitively, any auction that wants to generate a large amount of revenue should sell the good to this
player. Furthermore, any safe mechanism should not charge money to any of the players that do not get
the good. Thus, the revenue generated by the mechanism is exactly the price charged to the ⋆player. A
natural benchmark would be the maximum revenue we can obtain by using only external knowledge about
the winning player. In particular, we can deﬁne this benchmark as
rext(θ−⋆) = max
p
p · Prob[v1 > p|θ−⋆, Player ⋆won the auction ].
The corresponding price that achieves this expected revenue would be
pext(θ−⋆) = argmax
p
p · Prob[v1 > p|θ−⋆, Player ⋆won the auction ].
We now show that we cannot achieve a revenue higher than this benchmark.
Theorem 1. For single-good auctions, no safe (M, S) pair can achieve r with ϵ bonus, for any arbitrarily
small constant ϵ > 0.
Remark: This proof also works for the case where the mechanism designer has some information
θ0. This information can also be used to extract money from player ⋆.
Intuition.
Assume without loss of generality (after relabeling the players) that the players are numbered
according to their valuations. So v1 ≥v2 ≥... ≥vn, and ⋆= 1. We call player 1 the potential winner of
the auction. For each play of the auction, we denote by ∗the winner of the play, that is, the player who
actually gets the good. Note that player ∗needs not coincide with player ⋆. But if the mechanism is going
to generate a revenue higher than the second price, then it is necessary that ∗= ⋆.
Now we show the mechanism cannot achieve a revenue higher than rext.
Proceed by contradiction.
Suppose that the mechanism can guarantee revenue R > revext(θ2, ...., θn) + ϵ. The deﬁnition of revext was
the largest expected revenue that achievable using only external information about player 1. Thus, to achieve
a revenue of R, the mechanism must use some internal information about player 1. That is, player 1 must
make an announcement m1 such that M(m1, ..., mn) produces a revenue of R. Player 1’s utility will be
v1 −R.
In some cases, it is not rational for player 1 to do this. In particular, assume player 1 knows what θ2, ..., θn
are. Then player 1 does not maximize his utility by announcing m1. Instead he should announce the message
˜
m1:
• “My internal valuation is revext(θ2, ..., θn) + ϵ, and
• I have no information about others. ”
Because
˜
m1, θ2, ...., θn could be a truthful strategy proﬁle, the mechanism cannot make any player un-
happy. In particular, if player 1 wins the auction, he cannot be charged more than his announced valuation
revext(θ2, ..., θn) + ϵ. So his utility is larger than or equal to v1 −revext(θ2, ...., θn) −ϵ, which is larger than
or equal to v1 −R.
The contradiction arises from the assumption that the mechanism can guarantee revenue R regardless of
what player 1 announces. Thus, we have an upper bound on the revenue of revext(θ2, ..., θn)+ϵ, for arbitrary
ϵ.
4
Our Tight Mechanism
We now give a speciﬁc mechanism that achieves our revenue benchmark rext. This shows that this benchmark
is a tight bound on the revenue that an auctioneer can generate by selling a single good. In our mechanism,
valuations come from a bounded discrete domain. For concreteness we assume this domain is D = [0, K]∩Z.
3

• 1. Each player i secretly announces his own valuation vi to the auctioneer.
• a. The auctioneer announces a player, whom we call ∗, that has the highest valuation v∗.
• 2. Each player j ̸= ∗announces his information about ∗. This is a distribution P j whose support is the
set of integers between 0 and K. The number P j
v represents the probability (according to j’s beliefs)
that v∗= v.
• b. The auctioneer computes
• b1. CP = Second Price = maxj̸=∗vj.
• b2. KR = Knowledge Revenue = maxj̸=∗maxp∈[0,K]∩Z p · ProbV ←P j[V > p] = maxj̸=∗KRj
• b3. BIP = Best Informed Player = argmaxj̸=∗KRj
• b4. KP = Best Known Price = argmaxp∈[0,K]∩Z p · ProbV ←P BIP [V > p]
• c. The auctioneer allocates the item and decides ∗’s price with the following rule:
• c1. If CP ≥KR then ∗wins the item and pays CP.
• c2. Else, if v∗≥KP, then ∗wins the item and pays KP.
• c3. In the case that v∗< KP no one wins the item.
• d. Reward each j ̸= ∗with ϵ(2 −PK
k=1(δv∗,k −P j
k)2).
5
Analysis
We state some theorems about our mechanism, and give some intuition for their proofs.
Theorem 2. When the players are truthful, the mechanism obtains revenue rext(θ−∗).
Intuition.
When players are truthful, the mechanism generates an expected revenue equal to max{CP, KR}.
CP is the maximum revenue possible if there is no information whatsoever about player ∗’s valuation. KR
is the maximum revenue that the best informed player can extract from player ∗. If we do not aggregate
information, then the maximum of these two is the maximum revenue possible.
Remark: Our mechanism does not aggregate information. We leave as an extension for future
work to replace steps b2 through b4 by a step where the mechanism uses all the reported external
information to generate a composite distribution.
Notice that doing this, while keeping a
proper scoring rule as a reward, does not aﬀect the incentives of the players.
Theorem 3. Regardless of the announced external information, it is always dominant strategy for players
to announce their true valuations vi at step 1.
Intuition.
If a player believes he will win the auction, he gains nothing by overbidding. In particular,
announcing a higher vi does not change either the allocation or the price that the mechanism charges him.
Similarly, the player gains nothing by underbidding, since the price does not depend on the particular
announcement of vi. If a player believes he will not win the auction, he might be tempted to overbid in order
to win the good. However, if he overbids then he will get charged a price higher than CP, the second price.
Since the player believes he will not win the auction, he must believe the second price is higher than his own
valuation. Thus, the player gets negative expected utility from overbidding. His utility does not change if he
underbids.
Theorem 4. If the winning player is truthful in step 1, then it is strictly dominant for players to truthfully
report their beliefs about the winning player in step 2.
4

Intuition.
The players are rewarded for their information at step d of the mechanism. This reward only
depends on their announcement, and on the realization of the (uncertain) variable V∗.
Notice that the
reward is an increasing linear function of Brier’s quadratic scoring rule. This encourages players to report
their information truthfully.
6
Final Remarks
Our mechanism trivially accomodates the case when the designer himself has some distributional knowledge
about the star player, or the underlying distribution D itself. Our mechanism performs at least as well as all
previously known mechanisms. In particular, our mechanism gracefully degrades to the Vickrey mechanism
when the players only know their own types and have no external knowledge at all. It also matches Myerson’s
mechanism when the only information about the star player known to the other players is a prior, common-
knowledge to the players and the designer.
7
Extensions
In forthcoming papers we shall deal with generalizing our results to continuous valuations, aggregating the
external knowledge of all players, as well as considering other types of external knowledge, and extensions
beyond single-good auctions.
5


