 
 
  
 
BOOK REVIEWS Deana A. Rohlinger, editor 
 
 
Christopher Bail. Terrified: How AntiMuslim 
Fringe Organizations Became Mainstream. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2015. 
$35.00 (Hardcover). 
 
Sarah Sobieraj 
Tufts University  
 
 
In the decade following 9/11, anti-Muslim 
organizations that had previously been dismissed 
as extremists experienced a triumph any social 
movement organization leader would find envi-
able. During this time period, the narratives of 
fringe groups such as the Middle East Forum 
(MEF) and the Center for Security Policy (CSP) 
came to dominate the American conversation 
about Islam. This feat ultimately yielded them an 
influx of resources and extraordinary influence in 
the mass media, political circles, and the court of 
public opinion. In Terrified: How Anti-Muslim 
Fringe Organizations Became Mainstream, soci-
ologist Christopher Bail offers an explanation of 
how these former fringe groups managed to work 
their way to the center, as well as a vivid map of 
the cascading effects of their cultural visibility. 
Circulating the distorting arguments prof-
fered by fringe anti-Muslim organizations has had 
wide-reaching impact that could fill a book in and 
of itself, and Bail takes these outcomes seriously. 
But at its heart, this is a book about how col-
lective actors create cultural change. Its research 
design allows fresh insights for those grappling 
with such questions.  
Bail examines the successful anti-Muslim 
groups in the context of the cluttered organi-
zational terrain from which they emerged, a land-
scape rife with groups wrangling for media 
attention. Cleverly using plagiarism-detection 
software to compare the press releases of 120 or-
ganizations attempting to shape American under-
standings of Islam with journalists’ language 
used in their coverage of Islam, Bail demon-
strates that most organizations failed to influence 
coverage and those that succeeded were dis-
proportionately anti-Muslim and emotional in 
their appeals. In fact, he finds that organizations 
using fear or anger in their communications were 
almost ten times more influential than those who 
did not. The effect was magnified for anti-
Muslim groups; when they groups used fear or 
anger, their press releases were thirty times more 
likely to influence media conversations about 
Islam than the releases that did not. Overall, Bail 
finds that although more numerous, pro-Muslim/ 
antiterrorism messages were marginalized, while 
fringe anti-Muslim conspiracy theories and fear-
mongering gained entry. 
 
 
 
Bail argues that this complicates a common 
belief about movements and media: the notion 
that groups who succeed do so because they have 
messages that resonate. In Terrified, he finds that 
the groups in the spotlight are not there because 
their messages resonate with existing narratives. 
Indeed, American attitudes toward Muslims actu-
ally improved in the two years after 9/11—but 
rather that their messages come to resonate 
because they are in the spotlight. But how do they 
get there in the first place? Bail argues that fringe 
groups owe this media success to the presence of 
crisis, which he believes gave them an oppor-
tunity to exploit the emotional bias of the media.  
Bail’s findings press far beyond questions of 
media influence. Importantly, he uses social net-
work analysis to show the realignment of the  
organizational sector after 9/11, charting fringe 
anti-Muslim groups’ movement from the periph-
ery into more central positions over time. While 
in 2001, fringe organizations had no prominent 
board members, by 2007 they have key public 
figures providing them with valuable inter-
organizational ties. These mainstream links do not 
appear to domesticate the fringe; on the contrary, 
the ideas from the fringe appear to diffuse into the 
mainstream. The number of organizations pro-
ducing anti-Muslim messages increases over time.  
Drawing on social psychology, Bail sees 
shared emotions as central to the formation of 
these interorganizational networks. This is some-
what less persuasive than most of the assertions 
made in Terrified, but regardless of the driving 
force, fringe groups undoubtedly increase influ-
ence, supporters, social connections, and financial 
support between 2001 and 2008. This swelling 
helps fringe anti-Muslim organizations create and 
distribute their own media such as documentary 
films, television specials, websites etc. high-
lighting the looming threat of Islam. In time, this 
steady drumbeat created the impression that their 
once-fringe arguments were correct, helping the 
organizations gain the appearance of legitimacy. 
It also appears to have shaped public opinion. 
Bail uses big data to show that the shift in 
mediated public discourse on Islam coincides 
with a steady increase in negative posts on twitter 
and Facebook, as well as an increase in anti-
mosque activity.  
In a context where fringe groups have (1) 
driven the dominant narratives and, (2) established 
themselves as the presumptive experts, it makes 
sense that they would enjoy influence in the 
policy arena. But the extent of their political in-
fluence is worth a double take. Bail shows that 
anti-Muslim organizations managed to insert 
themselves so centrally into the national conver-
sation that between 2010 and 2012, lawmakers 
129

 
  
 
 
 
 
  Mobilization  
 
 
130 
introduced bills in 32 states opposing Islamic 
law, 29 of which included verbatim phrases sup-
plied by anti-Muslim organizations’ model legis-
lation. Not only are fringe organizations at the 
political center—in some cases, even receiving 
government funding—they successfully vilified 
mainstream Muslim organizations. Chapter six 
highlights a number of jaw dropping examples of 
anti-Muslim propaganda being taken seriously 
enough to land mainstream Muslim organizations 
in the crosshairs of criminal investigations. 
Terrified will be provocative for social move-
ments scholars, as he shows that anti-Muslim 
fringe organizations’ surge in resources, support, 
and influence cannot be dismissed as a logical-if-
jingoistic kneejerk reaction born of irrational fear 
nor a reasonable response to increased threat. In 
other words, their ascendance is not the result of 
an advantageous political opportunity structure 
born on September 11. Nor can differences in 
resources explain their dominance. Most main-
stream Muslim organizations had larger member-
ship rosters, more political connections, and fatter 
coffers than their anti-Muslim counterparts.   
Bail theorizes that this case illustrates an 
evolutionary process by which collective actors 
create cultural change. It is unclear whether this 
will prove true in other contexts; the 9/11 attacks 
were a unique crisis and these organizations were 
trying to shape narratives on a subject with which 
Americans had little familiarity. And social move-
ment organizations have made emotional appeals 
in the aftermath of other crises with less dramatic 
results. But regardless, Terrified is a methodo-
logically sophisticated, richly detailed, empirical 
account of a remarkable transition of great 
consequence. Bail’s effective analysis and descrip-
tion of the extent to which these organizations 
have shaped American (mis)understandings of 
Islam is, in and of itself, worth reading as a case 
study of media influence. It is reading that should 
not be missed by scholars interested in social 
movements, culture, media, religion, or politics. 
 
 
Hahrie Han. How Organizations Develop 
Activists: Civic Associations and Leadership in 
the 21st Century. New York: Oxford University 
Press, 2014. $27.95 (Paperback).  
 
 
Shannon Elizabeth Bell 
University of Kentucky 
 
 
Hahrie Han’s How Organizations Develop 
Activists is a wonderful example of scholarship 
that answers David Meyer’s (2005) call for re-
search that is conducted in “pursuit of answers to 
questions that are important to people trying to 
change the world” (p. 193, “Scholarship that 
Might Matter” in Crouteau, Hoynes, and Ryan, 
eds. Rhyming Hope and History: Activism and 
Social Movement Scholarship). The core question 
of Han’s book, why some civic organizations are 
“better than others at ‘getting’—and keeping—
people involved in activism,” is of critical impor-
tance to resource-strapped social movement organi- 
zations working to make the most out of their 
recruitment efforts. It is exciting to read an 
academic book that is of such direct usefulness to 
activists and students of social movements alike. 
This book advances both theory and practice.  
Han conducted her study in two phases. First 
was a series of comparative case studies of local 
chapters within two national civic organizations 
(one organization focused on the environment 
and the other focused on health care). In all, there 
were six matched pairs of local chapters, three 
that were demographically similar chapters from 
the environmental organization and three that 
were demographically similar chapters from the 
medical organization. The major difference be-
tween the paired chapters was their ability to 
inspire activism among would-be constituents 
and members. In other words, one chapter in each 
matched pair was a “high-engagement chapter” 
and the other was a “low-engagement chapter.” 
Han’s meticulous work controlling for extraneous 
factors that could have influenced the varying 
levels of success between the high-engagement 
and low-engagement matched pairs allowed her 
to conclude, with a good level of certainty, that 
the different approaches to recruitment and mem-
ber development she observed were responsible 
for the variation between the levels of engage-
ment. Phase 2 of the research consisted of field 
experiments with online activism in which she 
tested hypotheses generated from the first phase 
of the research to assess the effectiveness of the 
organizational strategies she observed.  
Through her case studies, Han found that the 
most effective chapters combined what she calls 
“transformational organizing” with “transactional 
mobilizing” (p. 8). The difference between these 
two approaches lies in the distinction between 
organizing and mobilizing. While mobilizers aim 
to expand the numbers in their group by focusing 
their efforts on those who “already have some 
latent interest,” they do not spend time trying to 
cultivate members’ aptitude for action (p. 7). In 
contrast, organizers seek to transform those they 
recruit into leaders and committed activists. The 
most successful chapters did both mobilizing 
(expanding numbers) and organizing (growing 
leaders).  The low-engagement chapters, on the 
other hand, either solely focused on mobilizing or 
acted as what Han calls “lone wolves”—activists 

Book Reviews 
 
 
131
who work to build the power of their organization 
“by leveraging information—through legal briefs, 
public comments, and other forms of research advo- 
cacy,” rather than building the power of the or-
ganization through the people they recruit (p. 10).  
Approaches that the high-engagement chap-
ters’ organizers took to nurture and build mem-
bers’ desire to become more deeply committed to 
and involved in the work of the organization 
included relationship-building, creating a sense of 
community among participants, and planning 
work activities that fostered dedication. I found 
this insight to be one of the most important from 
the book. Organizations that spend time creating 
bonds among their members have higher levels of 
participation because activists “develop commit-
ment not only to the chapter but also to the other 
individuals within it” (p. 160). In other words, as 
Han so clearly states, “The commitment to acti-
vism . . . is borne not only of commitment to the 
issue, but also of commitment to other people” 
(pp. 25-26). This insight resonates with the words 
of activists across a number of movements, such 
as the 1964 Mississippi Summer Project volun-
teers Doug McAdam interviewed for his book 
Freedom Summer, or the activist-women fighting 
irresponsible coal mining, whose stories are told 
in my (2013) book, Our Roots Run Deep as 
Ironweed: Appalachian Women and the Fight for 
Environmental Justice. Individuals such as these 
who become deeply imbedded in a network of 
like-minded people passionately working toward 
a common cause describe their experiences as 
being transformational and their fellow activists 
as “family.” Fostering these kinds of connections 
among members of an organization is critical to 
inspiring commitment.  
My one disappointment is that the book’s ex-
perimental design and findings (phase 2 of the 
research) were not reported completely. Han con-
veys that the experimental component of the 
project revealed that online campaigns that reached 
potential activists with messages that “reinforced 
their identities as activists” were more successful 
in recruiting people for action than campaigns that 
did not use such identity-reinforcing language (p. 
148). However, Han only briefly summarizes these 
findings, and points the reader to an unpublished 
manuscript for more detail on this phase of the 
research. I think this was a missed opportunity, as 
experimental designs are fairly uncommon in 
social movement research, and this component of 
the project could have broadened the appeal and 
reach of this book. However, even without the 
more complete version of the experimental phase, 
Han’s book is of great value.  
In sum, Hahrie Han’s How Organizations 
Develop Activists is an accessible, interesting, and 
important book that social movement scholars 
and activists will find compelling and worth-
while. The clear prose, careful research design, 
and valuable insights about the most effective 
strategies for recruitment and retention in civic 
organizations make it a book that is appropriate 
for both undergraduate and graduate-level classes, 
as well as social movement organizations seeking 
to improve the commitment and engagement of 
their members.   
 
 
Zizi Papacharissi. Affective Publics: Sentiment, 
Technology, and Politics. New York: Oxford, 
2015. $24.95 (Paperback). 
 
 
Karim Jetha 
University of Georgia 
 
 
As we hear more in the news about violent 
extremist groups in the Middle East successfully 
using social media to increase the reach of their 
recruitment efforts abroad, it is clear that under-
standing the role of emotion in online activity has 
become both theoretically and practically very 
significant. In writing Affective Publics: Senti-
ment, Technology, and Politics, Zizi Papacharissi 
introduces a theoretical model that helps us 
understand the relevance of sentiment to the 
mobilization of crowds. In so doing, she contri-
butes a valuable new lens through which re- 
activity. searchers can make sense of online 
political 
The book begins by contextualizing affect as 
a quasi-emotional driver of human action. In this 
first chapter, Papacharissi briefly introduces ante-
cedents and consequences of online affective 
delivery and explains how affect is constrained 
and enabled by audiovisual media and other af-
fordances of digital platforms. Here, she intro-
duces the idea of “affective publics,” which she 
defines as “those networked public formations 
that are mobilized and connected or disconnected 
through expressions of sentiment.” Papacharissi 
argues that new media technologies allow people 
to participate in and emotionally identify with 
political events in new ways and that this identi-
fication can have important implications on move-
ment outcomes. For example, people can now 
tell their own stories, share audiovisual content, 
and add to or transform existing online content.  
The next three chapters offer illustrations of 
the role of affective publics in the context of the 
Arab Spring movements, the Occupy movement, 
and everyday political activism. In each of these 
chapters, the author analyzes a sample of tweets 
with particular hashtags (#egypt, #ows, and daily 
trending hashtags) and uses a mixed methods 

 
  
 
 
 
 
  Mobilization  
 
 
132 
approach to carefully analyze each dataset. In her 
analysis of #egypt and #ows, Papacharissi uses a 
tweet frequency analysis to map the rhythms of 
storytelling over the course of the protest, a social 
network analysis to understand the role of crowd-
sourced elites in curating the flows of infor-
mation, and a qualitative discourse analysis to 
understand conversational patterns among users. 
In the aggregate, the author argues, the analysis 
suggests that the storytelling infrastructure of the 
platform and the framing practices of its users 
produce an affective news that connects users to 
each other and to the protest event. She follows 
her analysis of #egypt and #ows with a brief 
content analysis of tweets associated with various 
trending topics on Twitter to highlight the impor-
tance of play and performativity in everyday 
political action. 
Papacharissi concludes the book with a set of 
inductively derived characteristics of affective 
publics: First, affective publics are context depen-
dent; their sociomaterial qualities and digital 
footprints vary based on the features of the plat-
form and external events. Second, affective pub-
lics may not always consist of high-engagement, 
high-commitment activists—though, sometimes, 
they can be. Third, affective publics consist of a 
blend of fact, opinion, and emotion in a blended 
and effuse stream. Fourth, the democratic nature 
of many digital platforms suggests that affective 
publics may present viewpoints that are under-
represented in traditional media sources. Finally, 
the impact of affective publics is largely sym-
bolic and often represents a liminal step in acti-
vist activity.  
These five characteristics constitute the major-
ity of the book’s theoretical contribution and 
represent a rich set of propositions as to the role 
of affect, emotion, and storytelling in online acti-
vism. Although many of these propositions will 
be relatively intuitive for scholars of social move-
ments and online activism, future researchers will 
find Papacharissi’s investigation into her cases 
very useful as they seek to find further evidence 
of causal relationships involving affect. 
Understanding the drivers of online group 
behavior is an exceedingly complex endeavor and 
this book is a significant step forward in our 
understanding of the role of affect in this context. 
One limitation of its introduction of affect as a 
concept, however, is its underreliance on social 
psychology as a reference discipline in the first 
chapter. Within the last three decades, researchers 
in social psychology have advanced a number of 
models that link affect to behavior using medi-
ating mechanisms that would be implicated by 
those digital platforms used by online activists. 
Such a foundation would be of great assistance to 
scholars that wish to quantitatively test the theory 
Papacharissi introduces with this book. 
Isolating and measuring the effects of affect 
in online networks also requires researchers to 
carefully consider the affordances of the digital 
platform used by the movement; these features 
constrain and enable all of their users’ affective 
deliveries on the platform. Papacharissi focuses 
her examination of affect on Twitter because of 
its role as a contemporary storytelling medium 
and the useful affordances it provides activists 
(such as hashtags, for example). As a result, we 
are limited by the affordances of one platform 
(which operationalizes its messaging capabilities 
in a very specific way). While the author’s anal-
yses across the various case study contexts are 
both useful and relevant, they may have been 
more theoretically meaningful if the cases varied 
the available affordances to begin to understand 
what facets of the technology are relevant. 
Despite these critiques, Affective Publics is 
an important book for individual- and mesolevel 
scholars of online activism. Future researchers in 
many disciplines will certainly use Papacharissi’s 
theoretical groundwork to push forward our col-
lective understanding of online activism.  
 
 
Caroline W. Lee, Michael McQuarrie, and 
Edward T. Walker. Democratizing Inequalities: 
Dilemmas of the New Public Participation. New 
York: New York University Press, 2015.  
$30.00 (paper). 
 
 
Lynne M. Woehrle 
Mount Mary University 
 
 
The authors of Democratizing Inequalities set 
out to problematize the belief in public partici-
pation as a simplistic social good. With this col-
lection of research-based studies and theoretical 
assessments of the field of participation and 
democracy studies they have thoughtfully and 
thoroughly achieved their goal. Since the volume 
is designed to deconstruct contemporary policy-
making norms, it does not provide the reader with 
very many answers or alternate options. It does, 
however, effectively move to the forefront a much- 
needed conversation regarding the relationship 
between political participation and democracy. 
As multiple contributors to the volume show, 
scholars need to more carefully assess their as-
sumptions about how “good” and “effective” 
change is made in communities. Just bringing 
people into a conversation, for example, does not 
mean that the outcome will truly address the 
problems faced by a given community. In fact, 
this volume clearly illustrates that participation 

Book Reviews 
 
 
133
that is orchestrated from the top-down can actu-
ally increase inequality and ensure that the least 
powerful members of society are excluded from 
the process. 
This collection of interesting research studies 
does a good job of exploring the paradoxes of 
participatory approaches to community change. 
For example, the chapters raise important ques-
tions such as: Is the rise of deliberative processes 
a sign that the state is more interested in power 
sharing, or is it a mechanism for conflict avoid-
ance by the state when it comes to resource 
allocation decisions? Is democracy functioning 
better in a time when people in a community are 
invited to participate in planning sessions, en-
visioning sessions, and opinion forums? Is the 
state increasingly swayed by the citizens who 
attend these events? If so, then how might access 
to power be skewed to citizens who are educated, 
politically engaged, and have time to attend? 
How as researchers are we to identify the “good” 
participatory processes and the ones that have 
“failed?” The contributors offer interesting in-
sights into how individuals and elites understand 
participatory processes. Indeed, it is clear that 
people appreciate being asked for their input. The 
chapters, however, also underscore the fact that 
whether (or how) citizen input affects outcomes 
at the end of the day remains a mystery.  
The volume’s strength—and weakness—is 
that the editors and contributors emphasize the 
need for a more critical analysis of participatory 
processes. The authors provide important and, at 
times, provocative questions for the field of de-
liberative participation to consider. For example, 
the volume echoes a growing chorus of prac-
titioners who question the value of “giving voice” 
to citizens, when voice is all they are given. The 
focus on the problems of participatory processes, 
however, is also a weakness of the book. Because 
it overwhelmingly emphasizes the down sides of 
public deliberation as a means of change, the 
volume obscures the well-established positives of 
participatory processes.  
While a few of the studies do discuss the 
potential positives of participatory processes, the 
volume would be richer—and more classroom 
friendly—if it had included one or two case studies 
focused on how disempowered people effect 
meaningful change through a deliberative pro-
cess. The volume also would have benefited from 
a more global approach. It would have been nice 
to see research from scholars outside the United 
States and Europe, particularly since this might 
raise interesting questions regarding the impact of 
gender norms, social conflict, colonialism, and 
nondemocratic political systems on deliberative 
methods of change. Finally, and relatedly, the 
volume would be improved with a discussion of 
whether this move to more participation is really 
anything new. Several authors in the volume 
allude to Western traditions around dialogue, but 
the volume does not unpack these traditions or 
what they mean for participatory processes over 
time. Integrating research on non-Western tra-
ditions would be very helpful in this regard. In 
traditional social and political structures before 
colonialism, deliberation was a common method 
of community decision making. In fact, some 
traditional societies were very nonhierarchical and 
highly collaborative. Using crosscultural analyses 
would be a useful way to systemtically unpack 
and assess the perceived rise in participatory pro-
cesses. 
Overall, this volume is well worth the read.  
Scholars who practice and research public partici-
pation will be interested in the collection. That 
said, researchers studying the role of social move-
ments in policy shifts or how institutional struc-
tures expand and limit change will find plenty to 
like about this volume too. The volume clearly 
illustrates the complexities of democracy and 
deliberative politics. It shows us that, despite par-
ticipatory processes, we have yet to perfect dem-
ocracy. The book challenges us consider whether 
deliberative processes achieve what we want 
them to.   
 
 
Christina Dunbar-Hester, Low Power to the 
People: Pirates, Protest, and Politics in FM 
Radio Activism. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
2014. $36.00 (Hardback). 
 
 
Peter Hart-Brinson 
University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire  
 
 
Although sociologists dominate the study of 
social movements, other disciplinary perspectives 
are essential because they engage theoretical ques-
tions sociologists typically ignore and call our 
attention to interesting cases that might otherwise 
manage to escape it. Christina Dunbar-Hester’s 
ethnography of a low-power radio advocacy organ-
ization does precisely this. Dunbar-Hester engages 
theoretical questions about the relationships among 
technologies, politics, and activism through a 
descriptive analysis of her fieldwork with the 
Prometheus Radio Project; in the process, her 
case touches on questions about what social 
movement organizations do when they win 
significant policy victories and how activists 
negotiate identities as political opportunity struc-
tures change. 
Contemporary social movement scholarship 
understandably focuses on how communication 

 
  
 
 
 
 
  Mobilization  
 
 
134 
media (especially new digital media) shape the 
dynamics of contention, function as a re-
source for activists and their opponents, and 
communicate movement frames to elites and by-
stander publics. By contrast, Dunbar-Hester’s 
book offers social movement scholars a different 
way to think about the relationships among com-
munication technologies, politics, and activism. 
Her case not only focuses on the old medium of 
radio—and a deliberately low-power (note the 
dual technical and political meanings) version of 
an old medium—it also examines how communi-
cation technologies themselves become the ob-
jects of contestation and meaning making. Of 
course, media are often the subject of political 
contestation, as recent mobilizations around “net 
neutrality” illustrate; but the case of low-power 
radio brings our typical assumptions about the 
significance of media technologies into much 
starker relief. 
Dunbar-Hester studies two groups of media 
activists in Philadelphia between 2003 and 2006, 
focusing mainly on Prometheus Radio Project, a 
nonprofit group whose work spanned two fronts: 
they both advocated for the cause of low-power 
FM (LPFM) radio in the Federal Communi-
cations Commission (FCC) and U.S. Congress, 
and also travelled the country helping community 
groups start their own LPFM radio stations. 
Dunbar-Hester terms them “propagators” (xi), the 
veritable Johnny Appleseeds of low-power radio, 
who saw themselves as planting both radio 
stations and the seeds of a new democratic social 
order. For them, LPFM was not just a technical 
artifact or a means to disseminate information, 
much less a government policy program; it was a 
way to democratize technology and create egali-
tarian social relationships in small communities. 
In the first chapter, Dunbar-Hester master-
fully traces the political and cultural heritage of 
the group, from the ham radio tinkerers of the 
early twentieth century to the microradio move-
ment of the 1990s, and situates the debate over 
LPFM in the context of previous radio policy 
debates. In the ethnographic heart of the book, 
she analyzes how group participants enact “geek” 
and “activist” identities, articulate a set of ideo-
logical beliefs and values about technology-
centered activism, and negotiate collective and 
organizational boundaries through different kinds 
of work. Woven throughout the book is a critical 
account of the various paradoxes of the group’s 
work: how the group’s effort to democratize 
technology reproduced gender, racial, and class 
inequalities, despite their reflexive striving to 
prevent it; and how they simultaneously viewed 
LPFM technology as liberating and yet refused to 
work with religious groups. 
 
The case of the group itself is extraordinary. 
The Prometheus Radio Project emerged from a 
previous social movement group, Radio Mutiny, 
which was part of a national movement of un-
licensed pirate radio broadcasters; but a combin-
ation of repression (which shut down their radio 
station) and preemption (which created a new 
legal outlet for it) caused them to change their 
tactics. It is striking to read how activists simul-
taneously maintained their countercultural, leftist, 
and sometimes-anarchist tendencies, while at the 
same time walking the halls of Congress, work-
ing with FCC regulators, and winning U.S. 
Supreme Court cases. Even more shocking, per-
haps, is that the group helped win significant 
policy victories for their cause. Similarly, des-
criptions of the continual tinkering of “geek 
group” and the communal “barnraisings” of new 
LPFM radio stations conjure an image of hypo-
thetical Amish hackers—a twenty-first century 
incarnation of the appropriate technology move-
ment.  
To her credit, Dunbar-Hester does not let the 
unique case get in the way of analysis. She is not 
blind to the group’s shortcomings and in fact uses 
one of them to highlight what is theoretically so 
important about the case. In the final chapter, she 
documents the group’s brief, but unsuccessful 
foray into the community wireless movement. 
They were lured, in part, by the analogical simi-
larities between FM radio and Wi-Fi technol-
ogies, but they abandoned efforts to work co-
operatively with other groups after it became 
clear that the political meanings that they had 
vested in radio technologies did not translate into 
the realm of the internet and were not shared by 
others. The ethnography therefore demonstrates 
clearly how the impact of communication tech-
nologies are never settled, how old and new 
technologies coexist dialogically with each other, 
and how we attach symbolic and political mean-
ings to technological artifacts. 
Although Dunbar-Hester does not engage 
deeply with the core theoretical concepts and de-
bates that most social movement scholars have 
come to expect, she nonetheless makes a sig-
nificant contribution by showing that technol-
ogies are not just means to ends and that political 
contests surrounding technology are ongoing and 
fertile grounds for activism. As social movement 
scholarship on the internet and social media 
advances, showing us how movement dynamics 
are shifting in the twenty-first century, we may 
gain unexpected insights by examining twentieth- 
century technologies and how social movements 
continue to give them life. 
 
 
 

Book Reviews 
 
 
135
 
Michael T. Heaney and Fabio Rojas.  Party in 
 the Street: The Antiwar Movement and the 
Democratic Party after 9/11. New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 2015.  
$29.99 (Paperback).  
 
 
Lisa Leitz 
Chapman University 
 
 
Most definitions of social movements involve 
distinguishing movements from political parties 
and advocacy groups or PACs. This holds true 
even though movements and these other political 
entities often engage in the same tactics (such as 
lobbying and voter registration), movements re-
quire parties to make state-level changes, and 
many participants work within both of these two 
fields. Understanding the ways that movements 
affect and are affected by formal politics is at the 
crux of much of the work examining political 
process/opportunity theories. Little of this work, 
however, has examined individuals (and organi-
zations) as simultaneously identified with both 
types of organizations. Those who identify with a 
political party and a social movement constitute 
the “party in the street.” By considering move-
ments and parties as identities, Heaney and Rojas 
examine these fields as not only competing over 
resources and issues, but also over loyalties from 
their shared members. Party in the Street puts 
forward 
“partisan 
mobilization 
theory” 
to 
illuminate why the election of elites supportive of 
movement goals leads to movement decline rather 
than success as political opportunity theory would 
suggest. 
By examining the case of the antiwar move-
ment in the United States after the terrorist 
attacks of September 11, 2001, Heaney and Rojas 
demonstrate the important role of Democratic 
Party affiliation in the growth and decline of anti-
war activism. While the antiwar movement agenda 
and Democratic Party interests allied during the 
years of a Republican controlled Congress and 
President Bush’s presidency, Democrats’ gains 
beginning in 2006 led to a dramatic drop in both 
protest events against American military force 
used abroad and in the numbers of people who 
engaged in the antiwar movement. Movement 
leaders later used broad tactics and mobilization 
strategies during the “surge” in Iraq. However, 
political polarization about issues, candidates, 
and parties had reduced the proportion of 
Republicans in the antiwar movement and the 
ability of liberals to work with conservatives, 
even if they agreed about opposition to the war. 
All this led to movement decline. This was true 
even as public opinion about the war deteriorated. 
Heaney and Rojas demonstrate the decline occur-
red because individuals and organizations closely 
aligned with the Democrats left the movement 
and the activists that remained were divided 
between giving the Democrats a chance to make 
good on their promises about Iraq and a more 
radical element, whose messaging was less palat-
able to the public. 
The sheer volume of hypotheses tested and 
the many methods used to address Party in the 
Street’s research questions are impressive. Heaney 
and Rojas expertly utilize interviews, participant 
observations, media and organizational materials, 
and surveys that allowed network and regression 
analyses to make the case that while people care 
about issues and their identification with social 
movements matter, so do their connections to tra-
ditional politics. As the authors explain, in the 
U.S. the strong two-party system limits the ef-
fects of movements, and many people have their 
feet in both party politics and movement activism 
in an effort to forward change. While the bulk of 
the analysis focuses on the antiwar movement in 
the U.S., they also provide suggestive evidence of 
links between movement mobilization levels for 
the Occupy Movement and the Tea Party that 
coincide with political party power variations. 
Early chapters demonstrate that those in-
vested in particular social or political issues have 
a right to be tired of the duplicity of politicians 
and party elites. The data presented here sadly 
demonstrates that, although many Democratic 
politicians professed an opposition to the Iraq 
War, their actions when in power were not dif-
ferent from Republicans on foreign policy. This 
supports a pessimistic view of politics where 
politicians lie to get votes, are incapable, due to 
bureaucratic and policy intricacies, to do any-
thing on an issue, or simply unwilling to waste 
their political capital on the issue. Political opti-
mists have reason to take heart in at least some of 
the books conclusions as well. While voter par-
ticipation has declined in the U.S., people see 
their political actions as going beyond the ballot 
box and elections and are using the additional 
range of tactics, typically used by movements, to 
make their voices heard. 
Heaney and Rojas are careful to address a 
wide variety of alternative explanations for many 
of their conclusions. However, there are a few 
places where critical readers may leave with more 
questions than answers. One of the questions that 
stayed with me, is whether they really have the 
data to conclude that identity salience was the 
deciding factor for declining attendance at and 
existence of antiwar actions. In their analysis of 
people who at any point identified as both peace 
activists and Democrats, the variables to repre-

 
  
 
 
 
 
  Mobilization  
 
 
136 
sent each identity, declining involvement in anti-
war activities and whether a person remains in 
the Democratic Party, are not equivalent. A de-
cline in actions may or may not correspond with 
a decline in identity salience. Like research that 
breaks new ground, Party in the Street highlights 
issues worthy of further study. The defining con-
clusion of this book is that authors looking to 
examine social movements should not attempt to 
understand mobilization/demobilization—and likely 
most other movement factors—without examining 
organizational, coalitional, and individual ties to 
political parties (and other intersectional identity 
categories).   
The compelling questions and clear, engaging 
style of this book could appeal to a wide audience 
of activists, politicos, and students in addition to 
scholars investigating social movements, democ-
racy, and American politics. Individuals seeking 
political or cultural change must grapple with the 
competing allegiances that develop due to inter-
sectional identities, an area still ripe for further 
research. This book suggests the need to further 
develop and test nuanced social psychological 
theories of mobilization and political decision 
making.  
 
 
Jessica Beyer. Expect Us: Online Communities 
and Political Mobilization. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 2014. $29.95 (Paperback). 
 
 
Austin Choi-Fitzpatrick  
University of San Diego 
 
 
Social movement research is still wrestling 
with the ways new technology has upended social 
relations and transformed politics. There is no 
doubt that it has changed how people engage in 
collective action. Websites are new platforms and 
spaces for groups to spread the word. Mobile 
phones and social media are new channels for 
awareness raising, witness bearing, and political 
mobilizing. Along the way we have tended to 
focus on technological affordances as a move-
ment resource, with less attention to online mob-
ilizations themselves.  
In other words, there is much to learn about 
where collective action emerges. This is exactly 
where Jessica Beyer’s new book makes its 
greatest contribution. Data from a four-year online 
ethnography yields a comparative assessment of 
political mobilization in four apolitical online com-
munities: Anonymous’s campaign against the 
Church of Scientology, The Pirate Bay’s leader-
ship in support of file sharing, World of Warcraft’s 
ability to secure cooperation while reducing mobil-
ization, and IGN.com’s facilitation of conver-
sation while reducing mobilization.  
Expect Us is motivated by a deceptively sim-
ple observation: people gather online to play, but 
they stick around to talk about life and politics, 
and to do things together, including politicized 
collective action. This fact raises a number of 
questions, the most central of which involves the 
role of rules. A political online emerges in cases 
like Anonymous and The Pirate Bay because of 
site features that allow for collective discussions.  
Case studies across all four spaces suggest 
political mobilization occurs under particular 
conditions: when anonymity is high; when infor-
mal regulation is high (but formal regulation of 
speech is low); when opportunities for small-
group interactions are low; and when conflicts 
between online and offline social and legal norms 
emerge. These factors obtain for both The Pirate 
Bay and Anonymous, both of which see mobil-
ization during the study. These factors are mis-
sing in both World of Warcraft and IGN.com, 
neither of which saw any mobilization.  
The lesson is clear: not all online spaces are 
created equally. The discussion of the factors 
contributing to nonmobilization are thoroughly 
convincing—Beyer’s ethnographic data leave the 
reader convinced that mobilization is nearly 
impossible in the online game platform World of 
Warcraft (WoW), for example. There are no 
conflicts between online and offline norms, and if 
there were, small groups to discuss this conflict 
are structurally unavailable, direct communica-
tion is monitored, and there is no anonymity. 
Taken together, site structure reduces political 
risk taking. These are the very factors that make 
WoW a civil place appropriate for broad use. 
They are also the factors that eliminate dissent.  
The implications for regulators, service pro-
viders, and movements cut two ways. It appears 
that in order to have a genuine digital public 
square we might have to put up with a digital 
back alley in which all manner of unsavory 
activities transpire. Similarly, in order to have a 
vibrant movement society at work in new digital 
worlds we must put up with a host of uncivil pol-
itical projects. The specter of awkward move-
ments—as Francesca Polletta and colleagues put 
it a decade ago (Mobilization 11: 475)—is raised 
to the power of online anonymity.  
This book is recommended for its empirical 
data and theoretical observations, but also for its 
methodological approach. In an illuminating ap-
pendix Beyer describes her online ethnographic 
style as “deep holistic watching” while acknowl-
edging that online ethnographies have been more 
accepted in communications and internet studies 
than in political science (and sociology, I might 
add). The study treats each of these four com-

Book Reviews 
 
 
137
munities as cases amenable to comparative anal-
ysis. Beyer clearly describes the process through 
which she coded her key conceptual frames, es-
pecially in relation to anonymity, regulation, and 
spatial divisions online. This appendix should be 
of considerable use to those interested in de-
signing similar studies. 
Expect Us convincingly shows that online 
spaces have an architecture that shapes political 
communication online. The question remains, how-
ever, how these online factors intersect with the 
kind of offline mobilization that moves the 
needle politically. It is unclear if we are witnes-
sing a “coalescing into a transnational social 
movement focused on freedom of information” or 
the occasionally coordinated efforts of trollers 
who do it for the lulz. Beyer recognizes this 
quandary, pointing out that Anonymous’ suc-
cessful 2010 protests over WikiLeak servers were 
followed by a failed effort to analyze WikiLeak’s 
data (Operation Leakspin). The reason for this is 
that “political mobilization depends on both . . .  
participation [and] entertainment value.”  
Expect Us makes an important contribution to 
movement scholarship. In particular it upends the 
notion that mobilization relies on close and pre-
existing social networks. It also bears witness to 
the enduring political potential that lies within 
everyday social and cultural practices (here video 
games and chat rooms). The next step will be for 
a fresh round of social movement scholarship to 
build on these observations in order to ask 
compelling questions about the conditions under 
which new digital spaces and technologies take 
the crucial next step politically.  
 
 
Emily Beaulieu. Electoral Protest and 
Democracy in the Developing World.  
New York: Cambridge University Press, 2014.  
$29.95 (Paperback).  
 
 
Michael Biggs 
University of Oxford 
 
 
Elections can provoke protest when the pro-
cess or the outcome is deemed illegitimate. A 
significant step in the emergence of the modern 
social movement in the eighteenth century was 
the campaign for “Wilkes and Liberty.” John 
Wilkes, a radical Member of Parliament, was 
eventually expelled for opposing the government 
and the king; support from London’s populace 
forced Parliament to accept his reelection. In 
recent decades, especially since the end of the 
Cold War, elections have become fundamental 
for a state’s legitimacy. This has produced gen-
uine democratization; it has also led authoritarian 
rulers to clothe themselves in the trappings of 
democracy. Protest against manipulated elections 
is therefore common. Occasionally it even over-
turns the results, as happened in Georgia’s “Rose 
Revolution” in 2003 and Ukraine’s “Orange 
Revolution” in 2004. 
Beaulieu’s book presents original data on 
multiparty elections in 118 developing countries 
over three decades, from 1975 to 2006. It ex-
amines two facets of electoral protest: boycotts of 
the election, and demonstrations following the 
vote. Of the 765 elections, 7% were boycotted by 
most of the opposition, while 9% were followed 
by mass demonstrations organized by opposition 
parties. 
The book theorizes a bargaining game 
between the incumbent and the opposition. A 
sequence of decision points follow the incum-
bent’s decision to hold an election. The oppo-
sition decides whether to participate in the 
election or to boycott it, depending on the degree 
of manipulation they expect. The incumbent then 
decides how much to manipulate the result. After 
the election, the opposition decides whether to 
accept the outcome or to hold demonstrations. 
Finally, the incumbent decides whether to reform 
the electoral system; reform can be designed to 
either enhance or undermine electoral democracy. 
This bargaining game has the virtue of clarity and 
parsimony. It is commendable for explicitly 
modeling the decision of state elites as well as 
potential protesters. 
The empirical analysis begins with the causes 
of electoral protest. A major boycott most likely 
occurs in states where the executive is less con-
strained and in countries with lower literacy 
rates, controlling for per capita GDP. Beaulieu 
interprets literacy as measuring the information 
available to both sides: with less information, 
they find it harder to reach a tacit agreement over 
the degree of manipulation that the opposition 
will tolerate. Mass demonstrations are more 
likely after the incumbent won, of course, but 
also respond to several other factors. Demon-
strations are most likely where the opposition 
holds few legislative seats (in the year before the 
election) and is fragmented (no one party has a 
majority of the opposition seats). They are least 
likely where the opposition holds many seats and 
is fragmented. The presence of international ob-
servers increases the probability of demonstra-
tions. 
The book then turns to the immediate con-
sequences of electoral protest. According to 
logistic regression, major boycotts do not reduce 
voting turnout. The author advances two hypoth-
eses that could explain this puzzle. First, the in-
cumbent may inflate the number of recorded 

 
  
 
 
 
 
  Mobilization  
 
 
138 
voters. Secondly, the opposition may treat the 
boycott as a means to undermine the election’s 
legitimacy in the eyes of international audiences 
rather than to dissuade citizens from voting. 
Demonstrations after the election are subject only 
to bivariate analysis. Where the opposition initi-
ated demonstrations, the probability of the incum-
bent leaving power increases from 16% to 28%. 
The lack of multivariate analysis, however, is 
curious, because the “Color Revolutions” in the 
former Soviet bloc have attracted so much atten-
tion from social scientists and policymakers. 
Beaulieu’s data could be used to situate these 
famous cases within a more extensive context. 
Do they represent an increasing trend or are they 
exceptional? 
The book concludes by analyzing the longer-
term consequences of electoral protest, on legis-
lative reforms of the electoral system. Author-
itarian and democratic reforms are each treated as 
separate binary variables for logistic regression; 
multinomial logistic regression would seem more 
appropriate. Democratic reform is more likely 
after a boycott accompanied by “international 
reaction,” defined as comments on the election by 
a Western “democracy-promoting state” or an 
international organization like the European Union. 
Authoritarian reform is more complex. It res-
ponds to many variables, including interactions 
between boycott and demonstration, and between 
demonstration and international reaction. 
The book’s quantitative analyses are inter-
spersed with brief case studies. Lengthy appen-
dices document the coding of boycotts, post- 
electoral demonstrations, and electoral reforms. 
The list of postelectoral demonstrations strangely 
omits the protest in Yugoslavia in 2000 that 
ousted Milosevic and inspired subsequent Color 
Revolutions. The author should be congratulated 
on presenting the underlying data, which will en-
able other social scientists to build on the results 
reported in the book. 
Further analysis could overcome the limita-
tions of the analytical framework, which treats 
every election as an independent event. The data-
set contains, on average, half a dozen elections in 
each country. This longitudinal structure could be 
exploited to examine change over time. For ex-
ample, one could analyze the change in turnout 
between one election without a boycott and the 
next one that is boycotted. This follows the logic 
of Beaulieu’s theoretical model, because the 
interaction between incumbent and opposition 
does not start anew at each election; each side 
knows how the other has acted in previous 
rounds. Longitudinal analysis would still treat 
states as independent. Mark Beissinger shows 
how the Color Revolutions were connected in his 
article, “Structure and Example in Modular Pol-
itical Phenomena: The Diffusion of Bulldozer/ 
Rose/Orange/Tulip Revolutions,” Perspectives on 
Politics, 2007—not cited in the book). Oppo-
sition parties emulated success elsewhere. They 
were also aided by foreign activists —like those 
from the Serbian Otpor!—sponsored by the 
United States. To fully understand electoral 
protest, it will be necessary to trace diffusion 
across states as well as interactions within them. 
 
 
 
 

