
Dedication
Title Page
Copyright
Model I
Chapter 1: A Foolish Consistency
MODELS THAT FAILED I: ECONOMICS
THEORIES, MODELS, AND INTUITION
OF TIME AND DESIRE
MODELS THAT FAILED II: POLITICS
MODELS THAT FAILED III: THE MOVEMENT
A LOOK AHEAD
TWO IMPOSSIBLE THINGS BEFORE BREAKFAST
Chapter 2: Metaphors, Models, and Theories
THE DIRAC SEA
ANALYTIC CONTINUATION
DIG WE MUST
A MODEL AIRPLANE: THE ZIPPY
TYPES OF MODELS
THE NATURE OF MODELS
THE NATURE OF THEORIES
MONOCULAR DIPLOPIA
MAKING THE UNCONSCIOUS CONSCIOUS AGAIN
ADDENDUM: GOETHE ON SYMBOLISM
Model II

Chapter 3: The Absolute
THE TETRAGRAMMATON
THE NAME OF THE NAME OF THE NAME
THE IRREDUCIBLE NONMETAPHOR
A THEORY OF THE EMOTIONS
FIAT MONEY
LOVE AND DESPERATION
HOW TO LIVE IN THE REALM OF THE PASSIONS
THE FOUR QUESTIONS
SPINOZA’S ANSWERS
Chapter 4: The Sublime
THE BIRDS OF THE AIR
THE PHENOMENA: ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM
QUALITIES: POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE
QUANTITIES: COULOMB’S LAW OF FORCE BETWEEN
STATIC CHARGES
VOLTA’S ITALIAN INSIGHT: CHEMISTRY IS BETTER
THAN FRICTION
OERSTED: ELECTRIC CURRENTS BEHAVE LIKE
MAGNETS
AMPÈRE: A LAW FOR THE FORCE BETWEEN
CURRENTS
A SYMPATHETIC UNDERSTANDING
FARADAY: MOVING MAGNETS CREATE ELECTRIC
CURRENTS
FARADAY IMAGINES FORCE-TRANSMITTING LINES
MAXWELL MODELS THE LINES
MAXWELL REIFIES THE LINES
MAXWELL MODIFIES AMPÈRE’S EQUATIONS

MAXWELL’S THEORY: THE FIELD ITSELF
MAXWELL’S EQUATIONS: THE FIELD’S GEOMETRY—
CURLS AND DIVERGENCES
THE GREAT CONFIRMATION: LIGHT IS THE
PROPAGATION OF ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES
REALITY = PERFECTION; FACT = THEORY
THE BEASTS OF THE FIELD
ELECTROMAGNETISM AS METAPHOR
EPILOGUE
Model III
Chapter 5: The Inadequate
FINANCE IS NOT MATHEMATICS
PRICE, VALUE, UNCERTAINTY
THE EFFICIENT MARKET MODEL
UNCERTAINTY VERSUS RISK
RISK DEMANDS A POSSIBLE REWARD
A MODEL FOR RISK
RISK AND RETURN
THE ONE LAW OF FINANCE
THE CONCLUSION: EXCESS RETURN IS
PROPORTIONAL TO RISK
AN ASIDE: THE PLEASURE PREMIUM
THE EMM AND THE BLACK-SCHOLES MODEL
THE CAPITAL ASSET PRICING MODEL
THE UNBEARABLE FUTILITY OF MODELING
Chapter 6: Breaking The cycle
THE PERFECT CAGE
THE MYSTERIES OF THE WORLD

MODELS THAT FAILED
WHAT IS TO BE DONE?
THE FINANCIAL MODELERS’ MANIFESTO
AN ETHICAL COROLLARY
MARKETS AND MORALS
TAT TV AM ASI
Appendix
Acknowledgments
Notes
Index
About the Author

ALSO BY EMANUEL DERMAN
My Life as a Quant: Reflections on Physics and Finance


This edition first published in 2011 Copyright © 2011 by Emanuel Derman
Registered office
John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex,
PO19 8SQ, United Kingdom
For details of our global editorial offices, for customer services and for
information about how to apply for permission to reuse the copyright material in
this book please see our website at
www.wiley.com.
The right of Emanuel Derman to be identified as the author of this work has
been asserted in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
First published in the United States by Free Press, A Division of Simon &
Schuster, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, except as permitted by the
UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, without the prior permission of
the publisher.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content
that appears in print may not be available in electronic books.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed
as trademarks. All brand names and product names used in this book are trade
names, service marks, trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective
owners. The publisher is not associated with any product or vendor mentioned in
this book. This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative
information in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold on the
understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering professional
services. If professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services
of a competent professional should be sought.
Grateful acknowledgment is made to the following for permission to reprint
previously published material:
"The Precision of Pain and the Blurriness of Joy: The Touch of Longing is
Everywhere" from Open Closed Open copyright © 2000 by Yehuda Amichai,
English translation copyright © 2000 by Chana Bloch and Chana Kronfeld,

reprinted by permission of Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Publishing Company and
Georges Borchardt, Inc., on behalf of Chana Bloch, Chana Kronfeld, and the
Estate of
Yehuda Amichai.
John Maynard Keynes, Essays in Biography, published 2010, reproduced with
permission of Palgrave Macmillan.
"This Be the Verse" from Collected Poems by Philip Larkin. Copyright © 1988,
2003 by the Estate of Philip Larkin. Reprinted by permission of Farrar, Straus
and Giroux, LLC.
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
ISBN 978-1-119-96716-3 (hardback) ISBN 978-1-119-94468-3 (ebook) ISBN
978-1-119-94469-0 (ebook) ISBN 978-1-119-94470-6 (ebook)
Text design by Erich Hobbing

I. MODELS

Chapter 1

A Foolish Consistency
Models that failed • Capitalism and the great financial crisis • Divining the
future via models, theories, and intuition • Time causes desire •
Disappointment is inevitable • To be disappointed requires time, desire, and
a model • Living under apartheid • Growing up in “the movement” • Tat
tvam asi
Pragmatism always beats principles. . . . Comedy is what you get when
principles bump into reality.
—J. M. Coetzee, Summertime
MODELS THAT FAILED I: ECONOMICS
“All that is solid melts into air, all that is holy is profaned, and man is at last
compelled to face, with sober senses, his real conditions of life, and his relations
with his kind,” wrote Marx and Engels in The Communist Manifesto in 1848.
They were referring to modern capitalism, a way of life in which all the
standards of the past are supposedly subservient to the goal of efficient, timely
production.
With the phrase “melts into air” Marx and Engels were evoking sublimation,
the chemists’ name for the process by which a solid transmutes directly into a
gas without passing through an intermediate liquid phase. They used sublimation
as a metaphor to describe the way capitalism’s endless urge for new sources of
profits results in the destruction of traditional values. Solid-to-vapor is an apt
summary of the evanescence of value, financial and ethical, that has taken place
throughout the great and ongoing financial crisis that commenced in 2007.
The United States, the global evangelist for the benefits of creative destruction,
has favored its own church. When governments of emerging markets complained
that foreign investors were fearfully yanking capital from their markets during
the Asian financial crisis of 1997, liberal democrats in the West told them that
this was the way free markets worked. Now we prop up our own markets
because it suits us to do so.
The great financial crisis has been marked by the failure of models both
qualitative and quantitative. During the past two decades the United States has

suffered the decline of manufacturing; the ballooning of the financial sector; that
sector’s capture of the regulatory system; ceaseless stimulus whenever the
economy has wavered; taxpayer-funded bailouts of large capitalist corporations;
crony capitalism; private profits and public losses; the redemption of the rich and
powerful by the poor and weak; companies that shorted stock for a living being
legally protected from the shorting of their own stock; compromised yet
unpunished ratings agencies; government policies that tried to cure insolvency
by branding it as illiquidity; and, on the quantitative side, the widespread use of
obviously poor quantitative security valuation models for the purpose of
marketing.
People and models and theories have been behaving badly, and there has been
a frantic attempt to prevent loss, to restore the status quo ante at all costs.
THEORIES, MODELS, AND INTUITION
For better or worse, humans worry about what’s ahead. Deep inside, everyone
recognizes that the purpose of building models and creating theories is
divination: foretelling the future, and controlling it.
When I began to study physics at university and first experienced the joy and
power of using my mind to understand matter, I was fatally attracted. I spent the
first part of my professional life doing research in elementary particle physics, a
field whose theories are capable of making predictions so accurate as to defy
belief. I spent the second part as a professional analyst and participant in
financial markets, a field in which sophisticated but often ill-founded models
abound. And all the while I observed myself and the people around me and the
assumptions we made in dealing with our lives.
What makes a model or theory good or bad? In physics it’s fairly easy to tell
the crackpots from the experts by the content of their writings, without having to
know their academic pedigrees. In finance it’s not easy at all. Sometimes it looks
as though anything goes. Anyone who intends to rely on theories or models must
first understand how they work and what their limits are. Yet few people have
the practical experience to understand those limits or whence they originate. In
the wake of the financial crisis naïve extremists want to do away with financial
models completely, imagining that humans can proceed on purely empirical
grounds. Conversely, naïve idealists pin their faith on the belief that somewhere
just offstage there is a model that will capture the nuances of markets, a model

that will do away with the need for common sense. The truth is somewhere in
between.
In this book I will argue that there are three distinct ways of understanding the
world: theories, models, and intuition. This book is about these modes and the
distinctions and overlaps between them. Widespread shock at the failure of
quantitative models in the mortgage crisis of 2007 results from a
misunderstanding of the difference between models and theories. Though their
syntax is often similar, their semantics is very different.
Theories are attempts to discover the principles that drive the world; they need
confirmation, but no justification for their existence. Theories describe and deal
with the world on its own terms and must stand on their own two feet. Models
stand on someone else’s feet. They are metaphors that compare the object of
their attention to something else that it resembles. Resemblance is always partial,
and so models necessarily simplify things and reduce the dimensions of the
world. Models try to squeeze the blooming, buzzing confusion into a miniature
Joseph Cornell box, and then, if it more or less fits, assume that the box is the
world itself. In a nutshell, theories tell you what something is; models tell you
merely what something is like.
Intuition is more comprehensive. It unifies the subject with the object, the
understander with the understood, the archer with the bow. Intuition isn’t easy to
come by, but is the result of arduous struggle.
What can we reasonably expect from theories and models, and why? This
book explains why some theories behave astonishingly well, while some models
behave very badly, and it suggests methods for coping with this bad behavior.
OF TIME AND DESIRE
In “Ducks’ Ditty,” the little song composed by Rat in Kenneth Grahame’s The
Wind in the Willows, Rat sings of the ducks’ carefree pond life:
Everyone for what he likes!
We like to be
Heads down, tails up,
Dabbling free!
Doubtless the best way to live is in the present, head down and tail up, looking
at what’s right in front of you. Yet our nature is to desire, and then to plan to

fulfill those desires. As long as we give in to the planning, we try to understand
the world and its evolution by theories and models. If the world were stationary,
if time didn’t pass and nothing changed, there would be no desire and no need to
plan. Theories and models are attempts to eliminate time and its consequences,
to make the world invariant, so that present and future become one. We need
models and theories because of time.
Like most people, when I was young I couldn’t imagine that life wouldn’t live
up to my desires. Once, watching a TV dramatization of Chekhov’s “Lady with a
Lapdog,” I was irritated at the obtuse ending. Why, if Dmitri Gurov and Anna
Sergeyevna were so in love, didn’t they simply divorce their spouses and go off
with each other?
Years later I bought a copy of Schopenhauer’s Essays and Aphorisms. There I
read an eloquent description of time’s weary way of dealing with human
aspirations. In his 1850 essay “On the Suffering of the World” Schopenhauer
wrote:
If two men who were friends in their youth meet again when they are old,
after being separated for a life-time, the chief feeling they will have at the
sight of each other will be one of complete disappointment at life as a whole,
because their thoughts will be carried back to that earlier time when life
seemed so fair as it lay spread out before them in the rosy light of dawn,
promised so much—and then performed so little. This feeling will so
completely predominate over every other that they will not even consider it
necessary to give it words, but on either side it will be silently assumed, and
form the ground-work of all they have to talk about.
Schopenhauer believed that both mind and matter are manifestations of the
Will, his name for the substance of which all things are made, that thing-in-itself
whose blind and only desire is to endure. Both the world outside us and we
ourselves are made of it. But though we experience other objects from the
outside as mere matter, we experience ourselves from both outside and inside, as
flesh and soul. In matter external to us, the Will manifests itself in resilience. In
our own flesh, the Will subjects us to endless and unquenchable desires that,
fulfilled or unfulfilled, inevitably lead to disappointments over time.
You can be disappointed only if you had hoped and desired. To have hoped
means to have had preconceptions—models, in short—for how the world should
evolve. To have had preconceptions means to have expected a particular future.
To be disappointed therefore requires time, desire, and a model.

I want to begin by recounting my earliest experiences with models that
disappoint.
MODELS THAT FAILED II: POLITICS
I grew up in Cape Town, South Africa, in a society where most white people had
Coloured servants, sometimes even several of them. Their maids or “boys” lived
in miserably small rooms attached to the outside of the “master’s” house. Early
in my childhood the Afrikaner Nationalist Party government that had just come
to power passed the Prohibition of Mixed Marriages Act of 1949. The name
speaks for itself. Next came the Immorality Act of 1950, which prohibited not
just marriage but also adultery, attempted adultery, and other “immoral” acts
between whites and blacks, thereby trying to deny, annul, or undo 300 years of
the miscegenation that was flagrantly visible. In South Africa there were
millions of “Cape Coloureds,” people of mixed European and African ancestry,
who lived in the southern part of the country, their skin tone ranging from
indistinguishable-from-white to indistinguishable-from-black and including
everything in between.
In South Africa we all became expert at a social version of chromatography, a
technique chemists use to separate the colors within a mixture. I learned how to
do it in my freshman chemistry course at the University of Cape Town. You
place a drop of black ink on a strip of blotting paper and then dip the end of the
strip into water. As the water seeps through the paper, it transports each of the
different dyes that compose black through a different distance, and, as if by
magic, you can see the colors separate. How convenient it would have been for
the government to put each person into a device that could have reported his or
her racial composition scientifically. But the authorities came as close to that as
they could: the Population Registration Act of 1950 created a catalogue in which
every individual’s race was recorded. South Africa didn’t just categorize people
into simple black and white; there were whites, natives (blacks), Coloureds, and
Indians. Racial classification was a tortuous attempt to impose a flawed model
on unruly reality:

A white person is one who in appearance is, or who is generally accepted as, a
white person, but does not include a person who, although in appearance
obviously a white person, is generally accepted as a Coloured person.
    A native is a person who is in fact or is generally accepted as a member of
any aboriginal race or tribe of Africa.
    A Coloured person is a person who is not a white person nor a native.
Note the pragmatic combination of objectivity and subjectivity: if you are
objectively white but accepted as Coloured, then you’re not white.
In disputed cases a board made decisions that determined not only who you
could sleep with but which beaches you could swim at, where you could work
and live, which buses you could take, and which cinemas you could attend.
Given South Africa’s history of miscegenation, it was not uncommon for
members of the same family to end up with different chromatography profiles.
Some Coloureds attempted to be reclassified as white, and some blacks applied
to be reclassified as Coloured. Evidence involved keen discussions of texture of
bodily hair, nose shape, diet, and ways of earning a living, the latter two being
taken as racial characteristics rather than matters of socialization or opportunity.
Most Chinese, who were difficult for officials to define or even to distinguish
from other Asians, were classified as nonwhite, but Chinese from Taiwan and all
Japanese, for trade and economic reasons, were declared honorary whites.
The Group Areas Act of 1950 institutionalized apartheid by specifying the
regions in which each race could live and do business. Nonwhites were forcibly
removed from living in the “wrong” areas, thereby superimposing a legal
separation over the less formal physical separation of the races that had already
existed.1 Those domestics who didn’t “live in” had to commute long distances to
work. In Cape Town the government razed District 6, its Coloured Harlem, and
moved the entire community of inhabitants to the Cape Flats, a desolate sandy
region outside the city, well described by its name. When I was at university I
trekked out there several times as a volunteer on behalf of the Cape Flats
Development Association to help persuade poor Coloured families to feed their
children milk rather than the cheaper mashed-up squash that, though stomach-
filling, had virtually no nutritional value. It was a bleak area with sparse
vegetation and no running water, a gulag whose inhabitants lived in makeshift
shanties constructed of corrugated iron, plywood, and cardboard. Barefoot
children were everywhere. Many parts of South Africa are still like that, despite
the end of apartheid.

By 1951 nonwhites were being stripped of whatever voting rights they had
possessed. Though I knew all this was wrong, I grew up with it as normality. The
air you breathe, once you grow accustomed to it, has no smell at all.2
When I was ten years old our neighbor down the block, a Jewish businessman
in his forties with two sons a little older than I, was found on the floor of his
downtown office in flagrante delicto with a young black girl. His doctor testified
that he had prescribed pills for our neighbor’s heart condition that might have
had aphrodisiac side effects. The black girl apparently didn’t need pills to
provoke her desire, and I don’t recall what sentence, if any, either of them
received.
Several years later an acquaintance of my sister’s was arrested. The police had
seen him driving in his car at night with a Coloured woman seated beside him.
They trailed him to his house, watched through the window, and later testified to
observing the sexual act. His stained underwear was presented in court as
evidence. The initial giveaway was the fact that the woman sat in the front seat,
beside him. White men who gave their maids a ride somewhere commonly made
them sit in the backseat to avoid suspicion.
But even white women (the “madams”) often made their maids sit in the
backseat. The unarticulated aim was the avoidance of even innocuous physical
intimacy. (Of course, if it had to be avoided, it wasn’t innocuous.) A native’s
lack of whiteness made him or her untouchable. To avoid contamination, white
families often had two sets of knives, forks, and plates: one for the family to use
and one for their maids and “boys.” When I read Portnoy’s Complaint in 1969, a
few years after I arrived in New York, the following passage reminded me of the
visceral sense of defilement that many South African whites had been taught to
feel:
Once Dorothy chanced to come back into the kitchen while my mother was
still standing over the faucet marked H, sending torrents down upon the knife
and fork that had passed between the schvartze’s thick pink lips. “Oh, you
know how hard it is to get mayonnaise off silverware these days, Dorothy,”
says my nimble-minded mother—and thus, she tells me later, by her quick
thinking has managed to spare the colored woman’s feelings.
—
The Nationalist Party government that came to power in 1948 hated and feared
Communism, not because the Nationalists were lovers of the individual freedom
threatened by totalitarianism, but because they were totalitarian themselves.

They denounced “radicals,” but as a student leader at a University of Cape Town
rally once pointed out to great applause, it was the Nationalists who were the
true radicals, intent on wiping out age-old conservative democratic principles.
Their government periodically declared a state of emergency, which allowed for
arbitrary detention. They put opponents and suspects in jail without trial for 180
days, renewable. Eventually they banned the Communist Party. Then they
proceeded to ban the more gentlemanly Liberal Party, whose slogan was “One
man, one vote.” Fearful people made an effort to say they were “liberal with a
small l.”
When I was seventeen and spending the summer working and touring in Israel,
I bought a copy of Atlas Shrugged and hid it in my luggage on my return,
successfully slipping it through Customs like a copy of Playboy or Tropic of
Cancer. The South African prism had shifted the political spectrum so far to the
dictatorial right that Ayn Rand’s defense of the individual and of libertarian
capitalism seemed to me and my friends to be subversive. At the extremes, left
could not be distinguished from right. I thought of this later, when I first learned
the theory of complex numbers: in the complex plane, the points at plus and
minus infinity coincide, and again far left and far right become indistinguishable.
South Africa’s models were rife with internal contradictions. The most severe
was the government’s policy of race separation that pretended to grant blacks
independence in their supposed homelands while still keeping them available to
provide the labor that kept the country running. There were smaller hypocrisies
too. As young white teenagers in the 1950s, we spent the entire summer in the
sun on Fourth Beach at Clifton or in the crowded Snake Pit at Muizenberg,
applying fish oil or Skol so as to get as dark as possible.3 A girl I knew who
devoted her time to acquiring a magnificent tan grew indignant when the train
conductor mistook her for a Coloured and instructed her to go to the train
carriage reserved for that race.
Coloureds were treated better than natives but much worse than whites. Their
facilities weren’t separate but equal; they were vastly inferior or nonexistent. In
downtown Cape Town, where I worked in a department store one summer in the
early 1960s, I don’t think there was a single restaurant a black person could enter
to sit down and eat. All the salesladies behind the counter, even in down-market
OK Bazaars, were white.
From birth I knew no other society, and though I knew apartheid was wrong,
individual blacks were pretty much invisible to me. Once, soon after I learned to

drive, I took my parents’ car to the garage to get petrol. In those distant days of
luxury all garages were full service, and the “boys” bustled around your car
when you drove up. They pumped petrol; checked the oil, water, battery, and
brake and clutch fluids; cleaned the windows; and measured the tires’ pressure
and put in air if necessary. When you left, you tipped the attendant who had
served you. That day, my nervous first time dealing with a garage on my own,
there were three or four attendants hovering around the several cars at the petrol
pumps, and as I drove away I realized with minor horror that I had mistakenly
tipped the wrong man. When you weren’t used to seeing blacks as individuals,
they truly did all look the same.
Enforced racial separation hadn’t always been the norm. I spent my first seven
years in Salt River, a poor mixed-race suburb that was home to many immigrant
Jews who hadn’t yet made it. (I remember fondly Mr. Jenkins, our Coloured
plumber, who lived in the neighborhood. He spoke Yiddish, and once, when he
arrived at our front door while I was in bed with a bad cold, I fearfully mistook
his voice and intonation for that of our doctor, who also made home visits.)
Apartheid as a legal policy reached peak efficiency only in the late 1950s and
1960s, my formative years, when I became accustomed to racism. My sisters, 9
and 12 years older than I, grew up in a less formally prejudicial world and were
less racist than I was. My nephews and nieces, 16 or more years younger, grew
up as the apartheid regime was collapsing, and it left a milder indentation on
them.
It was only when I left to study in New York in the late 1960s that I had the
chance to socialize informally with people that South Africa classified as
nonwhites. One day, kidding around physically with some Indian friends in the
common room of the graduate student dormitory where we all lived, I suddenly
realized that I was doing what I’d never done before, and was grateful for it.
—
When I was ten I spent the winter vacation with my parents about 100 miles
northeast of Cape Town, in Montagu, a small town reached by steep switchbacks
that crossed a deep ravine called DuToit’s Kloof. Founded by British settlers in
the mid-1800s, Montagu was a faded winter retreat, a Jewish immigrant’s
colonial-style Bath or Evian, but with a local population of Coloureds and
Afrikaners. The town’s main attraction was a nearby thermal spring that was
reputedly good for arthritis. The refined hotel on the main street was called The
Avalon. We stayed in The Baths, set in the countryside a few miles out of town.
The Baths was fun but run-down. There was one toilet and bathroom at the end

of each wing, and because it was a long, cold walk down the outdoor passage
that connected the rooms, there was a heavy white enamel chamber pot beneath
your bed in case you needed to urinate during the night. The Coloured maids
emptied it in the morning, when they made up the room.
Baboons roamed the small kloof that separated The Baths from the business
center of tiny Montagu. Sometimes they came onto the hotel grounds, emptying
trash cans and even entering rooms. An older boy I knew climbed the hills above
the hotel to shoot the baboons with an air gun, which I coveted.
The adults used to take a constitutional every morning, hiking into town
through the kloof to The Avalon, to take tea and Scottish scones with local
strawberry jam, butter, and thick whipped cream, but we children stuck to the
grounds of The Baths, furiously socializing. My father babied me whenever I
allowed him to and embarrassed me by forcing apples on me while I was with
my friends. I fell in love with a twelve-year-old girl who scorned me, thanks to
my father’s constant attention. It was in Montagu that someone, I don’t recall
who, explained to me where babies come from. And it was in Montagu a few
years later that I briefly met Adrian Leftwich.
—
Each year seasonal crazes swept through our school. One month it was
silkworms that we bought and collected, keeping them in shoeboxes with
airholes and feeding them mulberry or cabbage leaves until they grew into
fabric-wrapped armatures. A season later came marbles. And then, outdoing all
previous crazes, came hypnosis.
The sovereign of hypnosis in Cape Town was Max Collie, a professional
entertainment hypnotist who had emigrated to South Africa from Scotland. His
son and I went to the same school. Every year or so Mr. Collie did a couple of
shows in Cape Town, some of them on our school’s premises. He began by
testing the audience for suggestibility, attempting to talk their outstretched right
arms into floating up into the air while their eyes were closed.4 “Your arm wants
to rise up into the air. It feels light, like a balloon, so light it wants to float up
towards the ceiling. Don’t resist, let it go, let it go.” Occasionally some
hypersuggestible soul whose arm had spontaneously risen up would already be
in a trance as a result of the test, and would fail to open his eyes at its
conclusion, even before he had been officially hypnotized. Those suggestibles
who were uninhibited enough to agree to participate in the show then went
onstage to be hypnotized in front of the entire audience, including their own

children. Soon adult men and women were under Mr. Collie’s command, shyly
attending their first day at school, asking the teacher for permission to go to the
washroom, scratching as though there were itching powder in their clothes, lying
rigidly across two separated chairs. Finally, there was the post-hypnotic
suggestion: “When you wake up and are back in the audience, whenever you
hear me say ‘It is very warm in here tonight,’ you will feel as though you are
sitting on a hot electric plate and jump up screaming.” Then he woke them: “As I
count backwards from ten to one, you will slowly start to feel wider and wider
awake. Ten, nine, eight . . . you feel light and cheerful, your eyes are beginning
to open . . . seven, six, five, four . . . you are almost ready to wake up, you feel
very good and full of energy . . . three, two, one, wake up! Thank you very
much, ladies and gentlemen.”
It was awe-inspiring to see people under Max Collie’s power, and soon we
were all trying to hypnotize each other. I bought books on hypnosis and self-
hypnosis written by the aptly named Melvin Powers. The covers had
mesmerizing diagrams of vertigo-inducing centripetal spirals, and some of the
books included “the amazing hypnodisk,” which you could use to hypnotize
yourself and your friends. My cousin and I spent hours trying to put each other
under.5
In Montagu that winter of the hypnosis craze I first met the equally aptly
named Adrian Leftwich, several years older than the rest of us and not really a
part of our more childish circle. I didn’t see him again until a few years later, in
the early 1960s, when I went to the University of Cape Town. By then Leftwich
was the charismatic head of the National Union of South African Students, or
Nusas, a principled anti-apartheid group. He was one in a series of Nusas student
leaders who were in outspoken opposition to the government, and I admired his
leadership and courage. And it truly did take courage: many student leaders of
Nusas, like other foes of apartheid whom the government despised and even
feared, were frequently arrested and eventually “banned,” legally forbidden to
attend any public meetings or even go to the cinema or theater. A more extreme
punishment was house arrest. Most of the banned had had their passports
revoked, so if they chose to leave the country they had to do so on a one-time

permit into permanent exile. Anti-apartheid rallies were monitored by policemen
and plainclothes agents of the Special Branch, who took photographs, and even
those who merely signed anti-apartheid petitions worried about getting their
names on a blacklist.
As the government clamped down on all forms of legal protest, violent
opposition emerged. In 1963 there were sabotage attacks on power pylons and
FM transmitters in the vicinity of Cape Town. In 1964 the security police carried
out nighttime searches of the houses of known anti-apartheid activists, Leftwich
among them. They found him in bed with his girlfriend, his flat carelessly filled
with detailed plans that incriminated him as the hitherto anonymous leader of the
African Resistance Movement, which had taken responsibility for the sabotage.
The police arrested Leftwich and kept him in solitary confinement. Perhaps
fearful of being sentenced to death, he quickly turned state’s evidence and, in his
own words in a later written reminiscence, “named the names” of his
collaborators and recruits and gave testimony for the prosecution at their trial. I
attended court on the day of the sentencing, where the presiding judge said that
to call Leftwich a rat would be an insult to the genus Rattus.
I never had much political courage and had admired Leftwich for his bravery
as head of Nusas. I don’t judge him now. Like most of us, he wasn’t what he
thought he was. But thankfully, for most of us, comprehension of the disparity
between who we think we are and who we truly are comes gradually and with
age. We are lucky to avoid a sudden tear in our self-image and suffer more easily
its slow degradation. For Leftwich the apparent union between personality and
character ruptured like the fuselage of the early De Havilland Comet, in an
instant, in midair, unable to withstand the mismatch between external and
internal pressure. How do you ever forgive yourself for a betrayal like that?
But we have all committed acts that surprise us and are hard to forgive. You
can count yourself lucky if your model of yourself survives its collision with
time.
MODELS THAT FAILED III: THE
MOVEMENT
I was the accidentally conceived last child of Jewish parents who emigrated from
Poland (now Belarus) to Cape Town in the mid1930s to get away from what they
saw as the anti-Semitic Poles. My parents’ departure from Poland turned out to

be a fortuitous escape from the concentration camps, but my maternal
grandparents and many of the uncles and aunts I never knew stayed behind and
weren’t as fortunate. Had my mother been certain her father was dead by 1945, I
would have been named Nahum Zvi. Sixteen years later, in Jewish tradition, my
nephew was given his name.
When I was four years old, in late 1949, our family took a six-week trip to
Israel. My mother hadn’t seen her only two surviving sisters and one brother
since 1935, when she had embarked for South Africa and they had emigrated to
Palestine. We took a propeller-driven DC Skymaster from Cape Town to Lydda
Airport in Israel, stopping in Johannesburg, Nairobi, Entebbe, Juba, Khartoum,
Wadi Halfa, Cyprus, and several other places I don’t now recall. An enormously
fat man on our plane had a heart attack after eating some pickled meat
somewhere over the Sudan. Officials met us on the tarmac when we next
touched down, escorted us into the shade of a shack, and took him away. We had
left summer behind in Cape Town; in Israel it was the now famously cold winter
of 1949-1950. It snowed in Tel Aviv that year—it hasn’t happened since—and
unprepared for the severity of the cold, we wore pajamas underneath our clothes
all day long. It was the aftermath of the Israeli War of Independence, and food
was being rationed. I recall going with my aunt to the coupon bureau, where she
pleaded for an extra banana for me. I remember everything quite vividly, the
rooster-shaped red lollipops they sold in the stores, the corn on the cob scooped
out of steaming pots by street vendors, the grapefruit my sister and cousin and I
stole off the trees of an orchard. I remember too the blood-red eyeballs of my
little Israeli cousin, two years old, whose perambulator had been struck by a
runaway truck.
One afternoon some friends of my parents took us for a sightseeing drive.
Somewhere along the way I heard one of them point out a nearby building to my
father and remark that it was a jail.
“But why is there a jail here?” I asked. “Isn’t everyone Jewish?”
The adults chuckled. It must have embarrassed me because I remember it after
almost 60 years. My mental model of Jews, formed by conversations at home,
didn’t contain scenarios in which we committed crimes.
—
In my 1950s childhood South African Jewish adults were mostly immigrants, a
zeroth generation with heavy, embarrassing foreign accents. They had begun
their new lives in the poorer mixed-race suburbs and worked hard in small

businesses. My father, who arrived in 1934, soon began running Union Service
Station, a garage that sold petrol, oil, and batteries, as well as secondhand axle-
and-wheel sets for the donkey carts that many peddlers still used. He was
ambitious and inventive. During the Second World War there was a shortage of
imported car batteries in South Africa, and so he set about learning how to
manufacture batteries in a room behind his garage. He obtained molds, melted
down solid lead, and cast his own thin flat plates, then immersed them inside
black Bakelite battery casings containing a solution of dilute sulfuric acid. These
he sold under his own brand with his own warranty. I recall the plates clearly,
each a silvery grille you could see through, the glossy lead perforated so as to
increase the surface area in contact with the acid. In those days batteries were
unsealed, and the garage attendants who filled your gas tank would unscrew the
battery tops, check the acid concentration with a glass hydrometer, and then top
it up as necessary. I have a clear picture of my father’s white lab coat riddled
with the brownedged holes of acid burns. Later, when I studied chemistry in high
school, he told me that the correct method of dilution was to pour concentrated
acid into water rather than water into concentrated acid, a water splash-back
being infinitely preferable to an acid one.
Some of my parents’ friends had been in concentration camps and bore the
proof of it on their arms. The wife of my bar mitzvah teacher had had her tattoo
surgically removed, and you could see the skin discoloration that resulted. Her
husband kept his number. Most people I knew had lost close relatives in the
Holocaust. Just about everyone was a Zionist, and almost all of these people had
relatives who had emigrated to Palestine from Europe. I remember what must
have been the 1948 Cape Town celebrations accompanying the establishment of
the state of Israel. My Israeli cousin who lived with us for a year lifted me up
onto a festive float that was part of an Independence Day parade at the Rosebank
fairgrounds. I can still feel her hands in my armpits as she raised me.
I grew up in what amounted to a voluntary Jewish ghetto. Traditionally, Jewish
kids in the Diaspora attended daily secular schools and then, several times a
week, went to a cheder for late-afternoon Hebrew and Jewish studies. My
parents sent me instead to the recently founded Herzlia Day School, a full-time
school that combined both a secular and a Jewish education under the same roof.
The school was named after Theodor Herzl, the worldly Viennese Jewish
journalist who organized the first Zionist Congress in Basel and proposed the
creation of a Jewish state 50 years before it finally came into existence in 1948.
Our school’s motto was from Herzl: “If you will it, it is no legend.” In addition

to learning Jewish history and reading parts of the Bible in classic Hebrew, we
learned to speak, read, and write modern Hebrew, expertly taught by a series of
visiting teachers from Israel who rotated through South Africa for a few years at
a time.
Though most of our parents adopted the Zionist model, their Zionism came in
various political flavors. My parents and many of their friends belonged to
Poalei Zion (Workers of Zion), also called the Zionist Socialist Party, which
supported David Ben-Gurion and his political Labor movement in Israel in the
1950s. Parents of other friends were Revisionists, so named by Ze’ev Jabotinsky
in the 1920s, when he invented his own brand of right-wing Zionism. The
Revisionists’ slogan, which I heard often, was “A Jewish state with a Jewish
majority on both sides of the Jordan,” a view that seemed pointless and funny to
me in the 1950s and early 1960s, but became much less so after the Six Day War
of 1967. The Revisionists were affiliated with the right-wing Herut (Freedom)
Party in Israel, led by Menachem Begin, who, before Israeli independence, had
led Jewish terrorists against the British colonizers of Palestine. According to my
mother, Begin had dated her sister, one of my Israeli aunts, back in Poland when
they were both young.
“Socialist” taken seriously would have been a loaded adjective in apartheid-era
South Africa. The Cape Town Zionist Socialists were not really Socialist at all;
they were not putting themselves on the front line for justice and equality in
South Africa. They were petit bourgeois businessmen and their wives, political
and intellectual descendants of the prewar echt European Zionist Socialists.6
They held evening teas or fund-raisers once a month in someone’s living room,
where they all addressed each other as Chaver (Comrade). Sitting upstairs in my
bedroom while they held a meeting in our living room, my teenage friends and I
chuckled condescendingly to hear them call my businessman father “Chaver
Derman.” We referred to the whole bunch of them half-affectionately, half-
mockingly as the chaverim.
—
But from age eight to nineteen or twenty I was a junior chaver myself. I
belonged to Habonim (the Builders), a coeducational Zionist youth movement.
Habonim was Lord Baden-Powell’s colonial Boy Scouts with the Mowgli
mythology replaced by an evangelical pioneering leftish political Zionism,
overlaid with the back-to-nature romanticism of the German Wandervögel
movement of the early twentieth century. The organization was founded in 1929

in England, whence it spread rapidly around the world. We called it “the
movement,” and it now seems remarkable to me that we let so politically
ambitious a phrase fall so easily from our lips.
The movement’s aim was that its members fulfill chalutzik aliyah. The Hebrew
word aliyah means “ascension,” a metaphorical expression for going to live in
Israel, a spiritually higher place. Aliyah is also the religious term for ascending
to the bimah, the platform in the center of the synagogue from which one reads
directly from the Torah on Saturday morning, a privilege given to seven people
each week. Chalutzik is a bastardized adjectival form of chalutz, a “pioneer.”
Chalutzik aliyah therefore means a pioneering emigration to Israel. Pioneers set
out into new territory to prepare the way for others to follow, which is indeed
what the early Jewish immigrants from Europe to Palestine did in the late 1800s.
The movement wanted us to do the same: go to Israel and live on a kibbutz in a
communal Socialist framework.
Habonim was merely one of five Jewish youth movements in the Diaspora in
general, and in South Africa in particular. Similar to Habonim, but more left and
therefore smaller, was Bnei Zion (Sons of Zion). The two groups eventually
merged. Even more admirably and rigorously left was Hashomer Hatzair (The
Youthful Guard), founded in Galicia in 1913, another movement in the
communal Socialist mold but much more severe and radical than Habonim. On
the right of Habonim was reactionary Betar, its name an acronym for Brit Yosef
Trumpeldor (the Covenant of Joseph Trumpeldor). Trumpeldor, we learned at
Herzlia High School, was a one-armed Jewish hero who fell fighting the Arabs
in the battle of Tel Hai in Palestine in 1920, exclaiming as he died, “It is good to
die for one’s country” Just as Habonim was the youth movement allied to Ben-
Gurion’s Israeli Labor Party, so Betar, founded by Ze’ev Jabotinsky in Riga,
Latvia, in the 1920s, was the youth wing of Begin’s Herut. Orthogonal to the
entire left-to-right political spectrum was Bnei Akiva (Sons of Akiva), a Zionist
youth movement whose members were religiously observant, named in honor of
the Jewish martyr Rabbi Akiva.
Habonim was highly structured and, most impressively, run entirely by boys
and girls in their late teens. There must have been several thousand members
countrywide, divided into three age groups: eightto twelve-year-olds were called
Shtilim (saplings); thirteento sixteen-year-olds belonged to Bonim (builders);
and those sixteen and older were called Shomrim (guards) and administered and
headed the movement. They organized the business side of it, coordinated
weekly group meetings, planned winter and summer camps, arranged

educational trips to Israel to work on kibbutzim, held annual youth congresses,
and more, with virtually no adult help. The movement held weekly group
meetings for kids in each suburb that had enough attendees to support one. Each
group was run by an older teenage madrich (guide) or madricha (the feminine
version).
Some more idealistic members would spend a year or two working full-time
for the movement, on salary, in our downtown office. “I’m going to Office,”
someone might remark when he or she went in to do some work, as though there
were only one office in the entire universe. Office was also a good place to
socialize. We typed articles and manifestos on waxed stencils and printed copies
of songbooks, syllabi, and literary magazines on rotary Gestetner machines.
I was deeply involved in Habonim for my entire life in South Africa. As a
child I attended Sunday morning meetings of our local Shtilim group, where I
learned classic Boy Scout British Empire skills: tying knots, pitching tents,
making fires, building camp furniture out of felled saplings lashed together with
string and rope, signaling with semaphore flags. We learned Jewish songs and
Jewish history and Israeli geography. We attended outdoor camps for three
weeks in the summer and indoor seminars in old up-country hotels for ten days
in the winter, drinking hot cocoa boiled in a cauldron and singing around the
campfire. We were not so subtly indoctrinated with a goto-Israel-when-you-
grow-up theme, a message that became more explicit as I moved into the group
of twelveto sixteen-year-olds. After that, if you still belonged to the movement
and hadn’t totally succumbed to the obligations of study, the challenge of South
African politics, and the attractions of serial dating, you became a member of the
highest age group, the Shomrim. That’s the route I took.
Just as the Boy Scouts had Mowgli-related archetypes for elements of its
framework, so Habonim had its own Hebrew pioneer words for everything
official and ideological. The movement’s motto was Aleh U’vneh, “Go up and
build,” and the appropriate response was Aloh Na’aleh, “We will indeed go up.”
The first line of the movement’s archaic-sounding song was “Habonim, strong
builders, we lads have become,” the lads being a nice Scottish Jewish touch.7 I
recall a couplet somewhere in the song that went “We pause not for laggards but
build, brick by brick, / A mighty foundation with shovel and pick.” Being mostly
normal lads and lassies despite all of the ideology, we invariably sang the last
phrase as “shovel and prick.”
Like middle-class adolescents everywhere, in the final years of high school we

concentrated on studies, social life, dances, and the opposite sex. We went to
birthday parties, invited dates to see Doris Day and Rock Hudson in Pillow Talk,
took dancing lessons at Arthur Murray to prepare for school dances (as we called
our proms), quickstepped to “It Happened in Monterey,” and rock-and-rolled to
“A Taste of Honey.” British-style, we decided at age seventeen what we (thought
we) would do for the rest of our lives and then applied to university to do it.
Mostly male would-be doctors went directly from high school to medical school,
at age eighteen or nineteen dissecting corpses and examining the insides of
women. Regular kids after graduating from high school ignored idealism and
proceeded to adulthood along conventional routes; the more politically
conscious worked against apartheid. My friends and I, though we participated in
many activities outside Habonim, remained in the movement.
Our reasons were many. Some small number of us were truly Zionists, intent
on going to Israel. An even smaller subset were Zionist and Socialist, intending
to live on a kibbutz. A substantial fraction of the rest of us, socially immature
and uncomfortable with the complexities of late adolescence, sought, in the
warm womb of the movement, sublimation and a respite from the stresses of
social life. The benefits were twofold: we gained shelter from dating and from
the perilous thrills of sexual experimentation, and we avoided having to take a
stand in an unjust South Africa.
The sexual revolution came to white South Africa later than Philip Larkin’s
annus mirabilis of 1963, and to the members of Habonim perhaps a little later
still. I don’t mean to say that no one was interested in sex, but Habonim mores
were tinged with a left-wing puritanical morality that developed in the 1940s and
persisted through the mid-1960s, at which time I finally left South Africa for the
United States. There wasn’t much one-on-one dating, which was vaguely
discouraged; social life was focused on groups, though some couples did form
within them.
But somewhere inside us we scorned what we thought of as bourgeois
pursuits. We were taught Wandervögelish slogans and principles from the 1930s
or earlier. “A member of Habonim is close to nature and simple in his ways” was
one of the more memorable ones. There was an unwritten prejudice against
makeup for girls; it wasn’t natural. We sanctimoniously looked down on normal
interests and ambitions. The movement’s highest aspiration was to upend the
traditionally Jewish social structure of labor, which, we were taught, was an
unfortunate inverted triangle, its top disproportionately heavy with professionals
and brain workers and its bottom too light with the agricultural and manual

laborers that should have provided a stable societal base. There should be more
workers and fewer luftmenschen, said the luftmenschen. Labor was noble. The
best thing you could do was emigrate to Israel, live on a kibbutz, and earn your
keep by manual labor in a communal setting. Some young men of my generation
chose to become fitters and turners or plumbers rather than go to university. For
several years the movement ran a hachsharah (preparation camp), a communal
kibbutz-style farm in South Africa where you could live and learn agricultural
skills in order to prepare for kibbutz life in Israel. We debated the merits of
bringing up children in a unit separate from their parents, as happened on some
kibbutzim. It was all serious, admirable stuff. While we sublimated we debated
ideology, and it was stimulating.
Chalutzik aliyah wasn’t as unreasonable as it may sound now, 50 years later;
hundreds of Habonim members eventually emigrated to Israel, and many went to
live on a kibbutz. We were living shortly after the Germans had exterminated six
million Jews who didn’t have a homeland. Furthermore, Jews were
disproportionately prominent and active as white foes of the Afrikaner
government, some of whose leaders had been pro-German during World War II.
As a result it wasn’t illogical to think about leaving South Africa, a racist
country apparently destined to undergo a bloody final act to its drama of white
domination. Trying to sidestep the next Holocaust was a logical move, especially
if you had escaped the previous one. As for Socialism, it sounded fair and
attractive.
For me this cloistered and romantic haven came to a crisis during my final
years at university. Since high school my social life had revolved largely around
Habonim. In 1962-1963, when I was seventeen, I spent six weeks touring Israel
on an educational program, having fun while learning Zionist ideology and
working on Kibbutz Yizre’el in the Galilee, where many of the members were
South African. I spent winter and summer vacations working so hard and so
happily as a madrich that I was too pleasantly exhausted to ponder personal
problems. The years flew by; weekends involved Friday night discussions
among contemporaries, Saturday night folk dancing and parties with our own
entertainment and skits, Sunday mornings or evenings running a weekly meeting
for a group of younger kids. Late at night we went to drive-in restaurants for
toasted cheeses, chips, and milk shakes and sat in cars talking about intellectual
stuff, morality, and girls. It was fun.
And yet I wasn’t at all sure that I wanted to emigrate to Israel, and I certainly
didn’t want to give up studying physics in order to live on a kibbutz. The leaders

of the movement, though, had no doubt about what was right. They instituted an
aliyah register, an oath you had to sign in order to continue to be a member of
the movement, your signature certifying that you intended to fulfill chalutzik
aliyah or, failing that, at least some kind of bourgeois aliyah. They argued with
members who wouldn’t sign it, scorned those who didn’t agree with them, were
willing to shame them. Late one night, as we sat in a car, a male friend of mine
couldn’t hold back a burst of frustrated tears after being humiliated by their
confident judgments.
“Give me a girl at an impressionable age and she is mine for life.”8 I wouldn’t
be writing about the movement now if it hadn’t left its marks on me, many of
them good. But I took all the moral issues seriously, and I very much resented
being judged. So somewhere around the age of nineteen, a little bitter, I departed
the movement, opening up a deep hole in my social life. What bothered me most
was the self-righteous, I-know-what-you-should-do attitude of the few people at
the head of Habonim. They were scornful of people with different aspirations,
accusing them of wrong thinking or hypocrisy; they were certain of the future
and the justness of their arguments, sufficiently so to humble anyone who didn’t
think their way.
—
Ten years later I had completed a PhD in the United States and was now a
postdoc at Oxford University. I reconnected with some old South African
Habonim friends in London. My plumber friend who had indeed gone to a
kibbutz had shortly thereafter abandoned both kibbutz and Israel in order to
marry a woman who wanted to live in London. The head of the movement had
left the kibbutz too and was also in London, working on a PhD in sociology.
None of them seemed to have any compunction about having changed their
minds.
A LOOK AHEAD
Though we tend to rely on them, models fail and theories are almost never
perfect. This book is therefore about models and theories: their nature, what to
expect of them, how to differentiate between them, and how to cope with their
inadequacies. Chapter 2, “Metaphors, Models, and Theories,” introduces and
analyzes two ways of understanding the functioning of the world. As mentioned
at the start of the present chapter, models, like metaphors, tell us merely what

something is like; theories, in contrast, attempt to tell us what something actually
is.
Chapter 3, “The Absolute,” focuses on the nature of theories, which I illustrate
by using Baruch Spinoza’s analysis of human passions and the pain they bring.
The work of Spinoza, a seventeenth-century philosopher, bears a close
relationship to geometry and to the twentiethcentury theory of financial
derivatives.
Chapter 4, “The Sublime,” recounts the development of the most accurate
theory in physics: the theory of the electromagnetic field. I show that intuition
plays a major role in the discovery of nature’s truths.
Chapter 5, “The Inadequate,” returns to models, in particular the Efficient
Market Model of finance, which has been cited as one of the causes of the
financial crisis. I analyze the metaphorical nature of the model’s assumptions
and point to the places where they fall short. Theories can sometimes be perfect,
but models are always inadequate, and financial models especially so.
Chapter 6, “Breaking the Cycle,” suggests ways to cope with the shortcomings
of models. To work around their inevitable flaws requires a clear understanding
of their precepts; it also requires common sense and, especially, ethical
principles. I have reprinted a part of The Financial Modelers’ Manifesto,
developed several years ago with a colleague, which proposes a set of principles
for financial analysts to live by. An Appendix, “Escaping Bondage,” provides a
short diagrammatic summary of how Spinoza’s theory of the emotions leads to
his philosophy for escaping the painful confines of the passions.
TWO IMPOSSIBLE THINGS BEFORE
BREAKFAST
The longer you live, the more you become aware of life’s contradictions and of
the inability of reason to reconcile them. A therapist friend told me that when she
treats patients who radiate negative energy she places 10 cc of water in a glass
between her and them in order to protect herself. The physical nature of water
molecules, she explained, allows them to absorb negative energy. When her
patient leaves, she flushes the water down the toilet. It’s an appealing notion,
albeit an entirely fanciful one, in my opinion. But my friend believes it’s genuine
physics and recommended the same strategy to me.
I have a hard time being patient when people confuse metaphor with fact. How

do you respond to someone who sincerely believes what she says, and who is
trying to help you, but who can’t see the boundary between reality and fiction?
In Nabokov’s Lolita, Humbert Humbert violates boundaries much more
dangerous than that. Humbert is a self-described vile creature who craves Lolita
for her nymphet body and soul. After she’s escaped him, five or more years later
he tracks her down and discovers that she is no longer a nymphet at all, but a
grown-up, practical and matter-of-fact, worried about money, thickened and
pregnant with the child of a simple, almost stupid, unglamorous man. Humbert
observes of her:
There she was with her ruined looks and her adult, rope-veined narrow hands
and her goose-flesh white arms, and her shallow ears, and her unkempt
armpits, there she was, hopelessly worn at seventeen, with that baby . . . and I
looked and looked at her, and knew as clearly as I know I am going to die,
that I loved her more than anything I had ever seen or imagined on earth, or
hoped for anywhere else.
How can one integrate these contradictions? You have to judge Humbert as
responsible for his actions, and yet undoubtedly he’s been in the grip of forces
beyond his control. Somehow these two irreconcilables—his perversity, which
he knows is wrong, and his inability to sublimate it—become partially
transmuted, at least in literature, by love.
In life there isn’t always such an easy resolution. One has to treat people as
responsible for their actions, and yet also recognize that they can’t help what
they do. It’s always easier to regard others from the outside. But one can also try
to imagine them as they experience themselves, as we all do, from the inside.
Then it becomes possible to see that we all deserve mercy. Tat tvam asi. Thou art
that.

Chapter 2
Metaphors, Models, and Theories
Language is a tower of metaphors • The hole in the Dirac sea • Metaphors
become real: the discovery of the positron • Absence is a presence • Analytic
continuation • Every fact is a theory • Building a model airplane • Why is a
model a model? • Why is a theory a theory? • A puzzling case of monocular
diplopia • Making the unconscious conscious again
THE DIRAC SEA
The Metaphorical Rests on the Physical
Sleep is the interest we have to pay on the capital which is called in at death;
and the higher the rate of interest and the more regularly it is paid, the
further the date of redemption is postponed.
So wrote Arthur Schopenhauer, comparing life to finance in a universe that
must keep its books balanced. At birth you receive a loan, consciousness and
light borrowed from the void, leaving a hole in the emptiness. The hole will
grow bigger each day. Nightly, by yielding temporarily to the darkness of sleep,
you restore some of the emptiness and keep the hole from growing limitlessly. In
the end you must pay back the principal, complete the void, and return the life
originally lent you.
By focusing on the common periodic nature of sleep and interest payments,
Schopenhauer extends the metaphor of borrowing to life itself. Life and
consciousness are the principal, death is the final repayment, and sleep is la
petite mort, the periodic little death that renews.1 Life is a temporary
nonblackness.
Schopenhauer’s metaphor is striking, but less obvious metaphors are
everywhere. Most of the words we use to describe our feelings are metaphors. To
say you are “elated” is to say you feel as though you have been lifted to a high
place. “Feeling high” is an out-of-control version of elation. But why is there

something good about being elevated? Because in the Earth’s gravitational field2
all nonfloating animals recognize the physical struggle necessary to rise, and
when you rise you can see the world spread out beneath you. Being elated is
feeling as though you have overcome gravity. Conversely, when we feel
depressed we feel as though we have been pushed down to a low place. Things
are looking up, we say, or looking brighter, or less dark. These are metaphors
too, rooted in our physical senses. Some metaphors are nested, traveling through
several layers to their base. When we say the economy is depressed we are
comparing the economy’s spirits (another metaphor) to those of a person who
feels as though he or she were pulled down by gravity.
Language is a tower of metaphors, each “higher” one resting on “lower” ones
that preceded it. Not every word can be a metaphor; you cannot sensibly define
every word in terms of other words, or else language would be meaningless. At
the base of the tower are words like push and down, two of the nonmetaphorical
words and concepts on which the tower rests. Push and down are understood
with our bodies, because we are wetware, an amalgam of chemicals rather than
silicon chips and computer code, and we experience the world through the
sensations that chemicals are capable of. You cannot have lived without knowing
what it is to have struggled against gravity or felt the insecurity of darkness. That
is how we know that down and dark are bad and up and light are good.
Had life arisen3 in outer space, free of gravity and light, there would be no
perceptible up or down, and hence no depression or elation. You could be
disheartened, perhaps, but not depressed. You could feel full or empty but not
light or heavy, bright or dark. And you couldn’t take a dim view of your
surroundings.
The Discovery of the Positron: Metaphors Become
Real
Just as life can be viewed as a hole in the sea of darkness, so, almost a century
later, Paul Dirac showed that the positron is a hole in another invisible sea. The
Dirac equation, proposed in 1928, was intended to describe the essential nature
of electrons in a manner consistent with both Einstein’s Special Theory of
Relativity of space and time and Erwin Schrödinger’s nonrelativistic wave
mechanics of matter, the two then recently discovered theories that together
described4 the nature of matter, space, and time. Electrons, the tiny particles that

orbit the nucleus of atoms, have negative electric charge and are responsible for
all the chemical properties of matter. Dirac’s equation represented electrons as
fast-moving relativistic objects (thereby getting their space-time properties
correct) described by a probability wave (thus matching the quantum nature of
their matter). Once he solved his equation, out fell mathematical solutions that
miraculously accounted for the previously unexplained fact that electrons had
been observed to spin about their own axes. Dirac’s equation also explained
various small but significant subtleties in the spectrum of light radiated by an
excited electron in a hydrogen atom as it emits a quantum of light and drops to a
lower energy state.
But that’s not all! as TV salespeople say. Also emerging from Dirac’s equation
were solutions that corresponded to electrons that had negative energy. Negative
energy is what Wall Street would call a deal breaker, because it implies that the
world we know is unstable: if an electron is permitted to have negative energy,
then any ordinary electron with positive energy is in an excited state relative to
one with negative energy, and can therefore emit a quantum of light as it drops
down into a negative-energy state. All electrons in the world would therefore
cascade downward into states with arbitrarily large negative energy and radiate
their way out of visible existence. But the world isn’t unstable, so something is
amiss here.
——
When computer programmers are confronted with a misbehaving program, they
like to argue, tongue in cheek, that it’s not an unintended bug but rather a
feature. To circumvent the instability of his theory, Dirac came up with a bit of
jujitsu, an ingenious argument that turned his bug into a feature, his weakness
into a strength. He assumed that the void we live in, what physicists call the
vacuum, is not empty, but is instead filled to the brim with negative-energy
electrons, an infinite number of them at all possible negative energies between
zero and minus infinity.5 This jam-packed void, the background against which
we live and act, is the metaphorical Dirac sea. It’s the vacuum, but it’s not really
empty. It’s full of invisible negative-energy electrons, waiting, he realized, to
emerge and manifest themselves as soon as someone or something gives them a
large enough jolt.

That jolt is a bolt of light. When a photon with enough momentum hits a
negative-energy, negatively charged electron in the Dirac sea, it can impart
sufficient energy to it so that the struck electron will pop out above the surface of
the sea and become visible as a normal electron with positive energy. Having
emerged, it leaves behind a hole in the sea, like the hole made by an empty
square in a magic number puzzle. As you move the numbered squares around, it
is the hole, the absent square, that seems to do the moving. Similarly this
absence of an electron, this hole, moves around in the sea, and it is the hole itself
of which we are aware. Just as an empty square behaves like a square, so this
absence of a negatively charged electron behaves almost exactly like an electron,
except that, by virtue of its absence, it appears to have positive charge. It is an
antiparticle.
Renowned physicists at the time were highly skeptical of Dirac’s sea. Then, in
1932, Carl Anderson at CalTech discovered a positively charged particle in
cosmic rays that, except for the sign of its charge, behaved exactly like an
electron. He wasn’t looking for it, but it was Dirac’s antiparticle, the positron,
the jewel in the theoretical crown and the hole in the sea. Dirac received the
1933 Nobel Prize in Physics, sharing it with Schrödinger, and Anderson received
his in 1936, sharing it with Victor Hess, who discovered the cosmic radiation
that became the source of many soon-to-be-discovered additional particles.
Absence Is a Presence
Schopenhauer’s notion of eternal sleep as normality and life as brief temporary
periods of punctuated antisleep corresponds to Dirac’s picture of the positron as
a brief fluctuation in the vacuum. Schopenhauer saw the bad things in life—
sickness and pain—as positive, in the sense that they are primary. He saw the
good things—health and pleasure—as the mere secondary absence of the bad:
Just as we are conscious not of the healthiness of our whole body but only of
the little place where the shoe pinches, so we think not of the totality of our
successful activities but of some insignificant trifle or other which continues

to vex us. On this fact is founded what I have often before drawn attention to:
the negativity of well-being and happiness, in antithesis to the positivity of
pain.
    I therefore know of no greater absurdity than that absurdity which
characterizes almost all metaphysical systems: that of explaining evil as
something negative. For evil is precisely that which is positive, that which
makes itself palpable; and good, on the other hand, i.e. all happiness and all
gratification, is that which is negative, the mere abolition of a desire and
extinction of a pain.
    This is also consistent with the fact that as a rule we find pleasure much
less pleasurable, pain much more painful than we expected.
    A quick test of the assertion that enjoyment outweighs pain in this world,
or that they are at any rate balanced, would be to compare the feelings of an
animal engaged in eating another with those of the animal being eaten.
——
Good as the absence of evil suggests a certain boredom that may not be tolerable
for long.
Is good the opposite of evil, the absence of evil, or simply independent of evil?
Schopenhauer’s perception of the primary status of the negative was reflected
again a century and a half later by the Israeli poet Yehuda Amichai:
The Precision of Pain and the Blurriness of Joy
The precision of pain and the blurriness of joy. I’m thinking
how precise people are when they describe their pain in a doctor’s
office. Even those who haven’t learned to read and write are precise:
This one’s a throbbing pain, and this one’s
a wrenching pain, and this one gnaws, this one burns and
this is a sharp pain and this
is a dull one. Right here. Precisely here, yes, yes.
Joy blurs everything. I’ve heard people say
after nights of love and feasting, It was great,
I was in seventh heaven. And even the space man who floated
in outer space, tethered to a space ship, could only say, Great,
wonderful, I have no words.
The blurriness of joy and the precision of pain—
I want to describe with a sharp pain’s precision

happiness and blurry joy. I learned to speak among the pains.6
Leszek Kolakowski, the Polish philosopher and historian who lived through
Stalinism and died in 2009, also regarded evil as a positive quality:
The Devil is part of our experience. Our generation has seen enough of it for
the message to be taken extremely seriously. Evil, I contend, is not
contingent, it is not the absence, or deformation, or the subversion of virtue
(or whatever else we may think of as its opposite), but a stubborn and
unredeemable fact.
G. K. Chesterton experienced goodness as more than the mere absence of
badness. In his essay “A Piece of Chalk” he wrote:
Virtue is not the absence of vices or the avoidance of moral dangers; virtue is
a vivid and separate thing, like pain or a particular smell. Mercy does not
mean not being cruel, or sparing people revenge or punishment; it means a
plain and positive thing like the sun, which one has either seen or not seen.
    Chastity does not mean abstention from sexual wrong; it means something
flaming, like Joan of Arc. In a word, God paints in many colours; but He
never paints so gorgeously, I had almost said so gaudily, as when He paints in
white.
Goethe, who conducted his own experiments on the perception of color,
noticed that when white light is split by a prism or a diffraction grating, the
colors of the rainbow arise at the boundaries between light and darkness. Just as
electric charges can be positive and negative, and as magnetic poles can be north
or south, so, according to Goethe, darkness is the polar opposite of light rather
than its absence, and colors arise from the interaction between the poles.
As I recounted in chapter 1, the apartheid government saw white as the
positive quality and blackness as the lack of it. In modern disagreement, a
Broadway musical whose billboard I walked by a few days ago near Times
Square advertises Spider-Man, Turn Off the Dark. Which of these views is
correct? All, probably. Metaphors are analogies, focused on one quality of a
phenomenon but not the entire phenomenon itself. Hence in Schopenhauer’s
analysis of sleep, it is sleep’s periodicity that resembles the coupons of a bond.
Like adages, metaphors capture only partial truths, not entireties. As schoolboys
in love we used to revel in the conflicting adages “Absence makes the heart
grow fonder” and “Out of sight, out of mind,” recognizing the partial truth of
both of them.
Spinoza, as we will see one chapter hence, is more evenhanded. His theory of

emotions regards both pleasure and pain as independent qualities of human
experience, neither one being either the reflection or the absence of the other. If
Spinoza is correct, it must be possible to experience both pleasure and pain
simultaneously rather than as opposites. I think I can.
Abandoned lovers and lapsed believers can testify only too well that absence is
indeed a presence.
The Positron as Metaphor, Fact, and Theory
Dirac began with an equation, simple and elegant: -iћγμ ∂μ ψ + mcψ = 0
Making it work correctly required its interpretation as a metaphor: the sea.
This combination, theory plus metaphor, successfully predicted the existence of
a particle no one had seen before. A metaphor grounded in a theory can have
more power than either alone.
Dirac found the positron to be a hole in the sea of electrons. He could, had he
started with positrons, have found the electron to be a hole in a sea of positrons.
Either view works. The key notion is that of symmetry, the absence of one
requiring the presence of the other.
The later development of quantum field theory, also pioneered by Dirac,
treated electrons and positrons more evenhandedly and less picturesquely,
describing both of them as the oscillations of a quantum field that extend
throughout space and time, and led to the same results as those of the Dirac sea,
but with less need for imaginative effort. Theories discovered by great leaps of
individual insight eventually become transformed into formulas anyone can
learn.
ANALYTIC CONTINUATION
Schopenhauer viewed sleep as the metaphorical interest on a loan because of
their similar regularities. Taking an analogy based on matching regularities and
then extending it into distant regions is a time-honored trick of mathematicians.
It’s called analytic continuation.7
Physicists love to extend their theories too, and to impose their extended

definitions on us without drawing attention to the subtle transformation. We
measure household distances with a ruler or tape measure, but how do you
measure the distance to faraway galaxies that the science sections of newspapers
so merrily quote as being 100 million light years away? You can’t lay out
measuring sticks across the universe.
The distance to a galaxy is also an unspoken kind of analytic continuation.
One of the ways galactic distances are measured is by observing Cepheid
variables, stars whose visible brightness varies. Their true luminosities
(“luminosity” is the technical term for their light output, or brightness) have
been found to pulsate in a predictably regular way, so that the frequency of their
pulsation depends on their luminosity. By measuring the frequency, you can tell
something about the true luminosity of these stars. I say “true” luminosities
because I want to distinguish between true and apparent luminosities. The true
luminosity is the actual light emitted by the star; the apparent luminosity is how
bright the star looks, as determined by the light that enters your eye. The farther
away a star is, the less light from it reaches your eye. Because the light from a
star a distance R away radiates out over a sphere of surface 4πR2 , the apparent
luminosity decreases with distance inversely proportional to R2 . When you look
at a Cepheid variable in a distant galaxy through a telescope, you see its apparent
luminosity, but the frequency of the pulsation tells you its absolute luminosity.
From the ratio of the true and apparent luminosities you can calculate the
distance R to the star.8
What an indirect way this is of measuring something as apparently simple and
intuitive as distance! The distance to a galaxy has been determined by making
use of a regularity of these weird stars that links the quantity of light emitted to
the frequency of their pulsation, a “law” that is believable because it can be
explained by plausible models of stellar evolution. This measurement of distance
makes use of advanced physics rather than Pythagorean geometry. Intergalactic
light-years, the circumference of the Earth, the gap between my head and the
screen on my laptop, and the separation between atoms—each of these distances
is “measured” rather than observed by different methods. Most of these
measurements involve the analytic continuation of the notion of distance through
the use of models and theories.
I like this observation:
The ultimate goal would be: to grasp that everything in the realm of fact is
already theory.

—Goethe, Maxims and Reflections
DIG WE MUST
Why models? Because the inanimate world is filled with quasi-regularities that
hint at deeper causes. We need models to explain what we see and to predict
what will occur. We use models for envisioning the future and influencing it.
The world of people is unpredictable and begs for divination as well. At every
moment we face choices with uncertain outcomes. Each decision, even one
made on the spur of the moment, involves, just beneath the surface, some
imagined model for how the future may evolve and how our choices will affect
it. We are always weighing the odds, estimating the relative importance of
causality and chance. Without time, there is no need for action.
As time passes, possibilities narrow. Because our lifetime is finite, time,
choice, risk, and reward are of the essence. Unless you can live in the perpetual
present, you need theories and models to exert some control. Theories and
models are a kind of magic, and the builders of successful ones, like Dirac, are
shamans bridging the visible and invisible worlds.
A MODEL AIRPLANE: THE ZIPPY
My earliest recollection of models is of the scaled-down airplanes we used to
build from model kits in grade school. When I was eight my mother let me take
the bus on my own down to Jack Lemkus in St. George’s Street in Cape Town
and choose a kit to take home. Some kits were too difficult and time-consuming
for an eight-year-old’s patience and skills, requiring days of careful assembly;
others, the simple gliders, were too unsatisfyingly easy to piece together, taking
only a few minutes. One had to find a level of challenge that was difficult and
yet surmountable.
The only plane I built successfully was a Zippy. The kit contained long thin
strips of lightweight balsa wood used to create the frame of the plane. It also
included flat sheets of the same wood with preprinted cross-sectional inserts that

prevented the frame from collapsing. (Tropical balsa is so strong, light, and
flexible that the De Havilland Mosquito, a genuine full-size World War II British
combat aircraft, was partially constructed of this wood.) A block of balsa had to
be carved and sanded and then glued into the nose to hold the propeller. You
pinned the plan to your mother’s bread-kneading board and used dressmakers’
pins to force the long balsa strips to curve along the preprinted arcs that defined
the struts. Then you cemented them to each other with airplane glue. When the
glue dried, you removed the pins and relied on the cement to maintain the
curvature of the stressed beams. Then you glued the sides of the frame to the
cross-sectional inserts.
The fuselage was translucent tissue paper cemented to the balsa frame,
trimmed, then dampened with water to shrink it taut. When it was dry, you
lacquered and painted it to make it stiff and realistic. The engine was merely a
long rubber band that ran the internal length of the fuselage, from the propeller
block at the nose to a hooked pin inserted into the tail. You rotated the propeller
many times to wind up the rubber band and then let it loose. The propeller
accelerated and spun as the band unwound, and the plane, it you were lucky,
took a brief flight of perhaps ten seconds at best. If you were really ambitious
about airplane models—I wasn’t, though I admired such ambition in some of my
friends—you followed every instruction very carefully, especially sanding off
any excess glue on the frame before overlaying the tissue so as to leave no
imperfections at all.
I assume that somewhere in the universe of actual airplanes there was or had
been a Zippy. My model Zippy was smaller and lighter than the putative actual
Zippy; it lacked seats, ailerons, and functioning windows and doors; it was made
of totally different materials. Why did they call it a model?
TYPES OF MODELS
I’m very well acquainted, too, with matters mathematical,
I understand equations, both the simple and quadratical,
About binomial theorem I’m teeming with a lot o’ news
With many cheerful facts about the square of the hypotenuse.
I’m very good at integral and differential calculus;
I know the scientific names of beings animalculous;
In short, in matters vegetable, animal, and mineral,

I am the very model of a modern Major-General.
So sang Gilbert and Sullivan’s Major General Stanley in The Pirates of
Penzance of 1879. The mathematical expertise he sings of is remarkably
thorough, not only for 130 years ago but for contemporary financial modelers
too. Stanley claims to be what we now call a role model or exemplar, a particular
specimen that exemplifies the ideal qualities of a class. That’s one use of the
word model. Model airplanes are another. We also refer to the Model T, fashion
models, artists’ models, a weather model, an economic model, the Black-Scholes
Model, the Standard Model. What do we mean when we call something a
model?
The Model T
The Model T is a type of Ford, one of a class of things belonging to the Ford
category. The Model T is an instance, not everything a Ford can be.
Fashion Models
A fashion model displays clothing or cosmetics. What’s important about a
fashion model is the exterior: looks, physique, aura. The rest is more or less
irrelevant, except insofar as auras and exteriors reflect interior qualities. My
daughter was once a hand model in a web advertisement. When you’re a model,
only parts of you are important. A person is the real thing.9
Artists’ Models

An artist’s model is a proxy for the real thing. A mannequin is a proxy for a
proxy, two degrees of separation. The work of art that uses the proxy is its own
real thing, complete in its own way and no longer a proxy at all.
A Weather Model
A computer model of the weather tries to predict the future weather from the
weather today. “Weather” is an abstraction for a collection of an indefinite
number of qualities and quantities and the way they vary over the short term,
among them temperature, pressure, humidity, and wind speed. A weather model
specifies the relevant variables and links them through a set of dynamical
equations from physics and chemistry that represent the effects of sunshine,
clouds, heat, moisture, evaporation, and air and water currents as they propagate
through the atmosphere and along the surface of the Earth as it rotates about its
axis and about the sun.
A weather model is much more clearly not the weather than the Zippy model is
not the airplane. The Zippy is instantly recognizable as a representation of the
airplane. The weather model is recognizable as a model of the weather only for
someone with the right education.
A weather model’s equations are a limited and partial representation of a
limitlessly complex system. One cannot model the physics, chemistry, and
biology of all the chemicals in the atmosphere and their effect on every species
on Earth. There is always the danger that one has omitted something ostensibly
negligible whose tail effects over long times are crucially important. This is what
makes the predictions of global warming the subject of legitimate debate.
Economic Models
An economic model aims to do for the economy what the weather model does

for the weather. It too embodies a set of equations to represent the interactions of
people and financial institutions. But an economy is an even more abstract
concept than the weather. Supply, demand, and investors’ utility, to name just a
few of many possible variables in the model, are much harder to define (let alone
quantify) than temperature and pressure. When you model “the economy” and
“the market” you are modeling high-level abstractions.
Friedrich Hayek, the Austrian economist who received the 1974 Nobel
Memorial Prize in Economics, pointed out that in the physical sciences we know
the macroscopic through concrete experience and proceed to the microscopic by
abstraction. For example, the first theories of gases dealt with volume, pressure,
temperature, and heat, all directly accessible to our senses. Centuries later we
understand pressure as the kinetic energy of invisible microscopic atoms. The
atoms, though we consider them real, are more abstract than the pressure and
temperature that we perceive directly. In economics, Hayek argued, the order of
abstraction should be reversed: we know the individual agents and players from
concrete personal experience, and the macroscopic “economy” is the abstraction.
If the correct way to proceed is from concrete to abstract, he argued, in
economics we should begin with agents and proceed to economies and markets
rather than vice versa.
The difficulties one encounters in modeling economic abstractions are
illustrated by attempts to deal with the notion of market liquidity. Liquidity is the
metaphorical quality that makes trading possible; it connotes the easy
availability of counterparties to buy something you want to sell or sell something
you want to buy, and its disappearance in states of fear causes the great damage
that characterized the recent global financial crisis. Everyone thinks he knows
what liquidity means, yet no one has yet adequately defined and quantified it.
The Black-Scholes Model
Black-Scholes, as it’s commonly referred to by financial practitioners, is the
most celebrated and widely used model in all of economics. I spent 17 years of
my professional life at Goldman Sachs & Co. extending the Black-Scholes
option pricing model in a variety of directions.
A stock option is a kind of lottery ticket you can buy whose future payoff
depends on the future moves of the stock price, up or down. It provides reward
(if you guess the direction of the move correctly) in exchange for risk (the
chance that you guess wrong and lose the price of the ticket). The Black-Scholes

Model tells you how to estimate the value of an option in terms of the stock
price’s risk.
Risk versus reward is the overwhelming issue in finance: how much potential
future reward does it take to justify the risk of losing your money when you
make an investment? Risk connotes the possibility of harm, and so financial
theory is intimately bound up with the mathematical theory of probability, which
originated centuries ago in connection with the attempt to estimate gambling
odds. Buying a stock is a symmetrically risky endeavor: if its market price goes
up after purchase, you make money; if the price goes down, you are
proportionately harmed. A call option is an investment in only the upside of the
stock. If the stock price has risen by some amount at expiration, the option will
have made you that many dollars, but if the stock price has dropped, you receive
no payoff and lose only the price you paid for the option. The Black-Scholes
Model tells you what the value of the option is.
An option is a complex conceptual machine. Its value rises when the stock
price rises and falls when the stock price falls. Black-Scholes provides a recipe
for manufacturing a call by borrowing money to buy shares of the stock. The
model tells you exactly how many shares to buy initially and then, at every
future instant of time and at every future stock price, how much additional stock
to buy or sell so that the stock you own will replicate the payoff of the option
contract. The value of the option is the total cost of its manufacture, the cost of
all the required trading with borrowed money. The Black-Scholes formula
explains how the option value—the estimated cost of trading— depends on the
stock price, the interest charged for borrowing, and the riskiness of the stock
itself.
Just as a weather model makes assumptions about how fluids flow and how
heat undergoes convection, just as a soufflé recipe makes assumptions about
what happens when you whip egg whites, so the Black-Scholes Model makes
assumptions about the riskiness of stock prices, that is, about how stock prices
fluctuate. Black-Scholes assumes that stock prices move smoothly but randomly
with a definite volatility, a fixed degree of fluctuation. Given the assumptions,
you can figure out the net cost of manufacture. That cost is the fair price of the
option, assuming the validity of the model. Just as my father could figure out
what to charge for homemade batteries by estimating the cost of lead, casting,
labor, sulfuric acid, and Bakelite, just as a dessert chef can figure out how much
to charge for a soufflé based on ingredients, labor, and waste, so Black and
Scholes could estimate how much it would cost to manufacture an option.

But there is a crucial difference between the assumptions made by the Black-
Scholes Model and the assumptions made by a soufflé recipe. Our knowledge
about the behavior of stock markets is much sparser than our knowledge about
how egg whites turn fluffy. Fluids and egg protein don’t care what people think
about them; markets and stock prices do. Like a weather model (but even more
so), Black-Scholes is an ingeniously clever mental model of a complex system,
an elegant mechanism that, in trying to reflect the actual world in a short
description, must reduce its intricacy. That reduction makes the model usable but
simultaneously limits its usefulness.
The Standard Model
The Standard Model, for which Sheldon Glashow, Abdus Salam, and Steven
Weinberg received the 1979 Nobel Prize in Physics, is a unified description of
quarks and leptons, the smallest elementary particles, and the forces between
them. The description incorporates into one coherent framework James Clerk
Maxwell’s nineteenthcentury theory of electromagnetism, the 1928 Dirac theory
of the electron, and Enrico Fermi’s 1934 theory of radioactive beta decay, a
framework in which all of these apparently disparate forces are merely
superficially different aspects of a single, more general force. I spent the first
part of my professional life as a theoretical physicist, working on tests of the
Standard Model.
The Standard Model is not really a model at all; it is a description, and hence a
theory. A theory attempts to provide an accurate portrayal of the nature of things,
unifying the outward with the inward, not just saving the appearances but
identifying their essence. I say “attempts” because a theory can be right or
wrong. What makes something a theory is the way it tries to depict and explain.
When someone proposes a model, you can ask “Why?” and expect arguments
that make the analogy plausible. When someone proposes a theory, “Why?” is
less important. A model is the construction of an analogy. A theory is the linking
of the outer with the inner.
The process of unifying several previously disparate theories is a bit like
confirming the existence of a never-observed bird from a small fragment of its
birdsong. From the song fragment you deduce a morphology; from the
morphology you predict the entire song. To confirm the existence of the bird you
must then find more fragments of the same bird’s song, as predicted. If you hear

them, you confirm the theory. The bird itself is never seen.
From fragmentary evidence Glashow, Weinberg, and Salam figured out the
entire song; one of its predicted disharmonies was small amounts of parity
violation, the technical name for a phenomenon in which more particles move to
the left than to the right. While up and down are absolute directions in a
gravitational force field, directly perceptible by the human body, until the mid-
1950s left and right had seemed to be conventions of speech rather than physical
realities. My left is your right, but our ups and downs are the same. Then in the
1950s physicists discovered that radioactive beta decay, a force whose
consequences are also perceptible by the body, does distinguish left
preferentially from right. One can absolutely define left and right by the
direction of the asymmetry in the distribution of particles produced in beta
decay. That’s a fact.
The Standard Model predicted additional, previously unobserved left-right
asymmetries in nature. My PhD thesis of 1973 proposed an experiment to detect
these asymmetries in highenergy electron-proton scattering, an experiment in
which one smashes spinning electrons into stationary protons and then observes
the distribution of the electrons as they bounce off the target. I calculated the size
of the predicted asymmetry in the Standard Model. An asymmetry of the
appropriate size was finally observed, as predicted, at the Stanford Linear
Accelerator Center in 1978. The experiment provided the final stamp of approval
and converted the standard model into the Standard Model. The results were
welcomed as “the long elegiac salute given to the end of an age.”10 The elegy
was the full melody of the Standard Model. The age was the period of pell-mell
discovery of new subatomic particles, from the electron in 1898 through
neutrons, pi mesons, and their siblings, culminating in the discovery of the
quarks inside them and the W-Sand Z-bosons that mediated their interactions.
We are now more than 30 years into the age beyond that. Though physicists can
invent many new orchestras consistent with the fragmentary music of gravity
and cosmology, none of their instruments has yet been discovered.
THE NATURE OF MODELS
There Is Always a Gap

My Zippy wasn’t the actual airplane itself, though it bore some similarity to the
plane. Similarity lies in the eyes of the beholder and creator.11 My model Zippy
was created with the intention of reproducing some small number of important
features on a smaller scale. My Zippy looked like an airplane. Its construction—
frame, struts, and fabric to create a light yet strong structure—was sound from
an engineering point of view and similar in style (though not in size and
material) to the real Zippy. And it could (briefly) fly.
The realistic appearance, the structure beneath the skin, and the ability to fly
made the Zippy a suitable model for me at age eight. The structure was
important, though reproducing it was hard work. At age three or four I would
have been happy with a rudimentary wooden airplane that I could have zoomed
through the air with my hand while making throaty airplane noises. If I had been
a few years older, I would have wanted a combustion engine and radio control.
Had I been an aircraft designer, the ability to test the aerodynamic lift and
stability would have been critically important. But, however complex, all of
these models are limited when compared with the real thing. There is a gap
between the model and the object of its focus. The model is not the object,
though we may wish it were.
A dreamed-of counterexample is the model created by Pygmalion: a statue of a
woman so beautiful that he fell in love with it. This is a not uncommon
occurrence in the worlds of finance and nutrition, both of which abound with
experts reluctant to abandon their models in the face of evidence of their
unreality. Pygmalion was lucky; Aphrodite granted his request to bring the statue
to life, he called her Galatea, and they lived happily ever after.
An Analogy, a Caricature, a Fetish
A model is a metaphor of limited applicability, not the thing itself. Calling a
computer an electronic brain once cast light on the function of computers;
nevertheless a computer is not an electronic brain. Calling the brain a computer
is a model too. In tackling the mysterious world via models we do our best to
explain the thus far incomprehensible by describing it in terms of the things we
already partially comprehend. Models, like metaphors, take the properties of
something rich and project them onto something strange.
A good example is the collective model in nuclear physics, for which Aage
Bohr (the son of Niels Bohr), Ben Mottelson, and James Rainwater received the
Nobel Prize in Physics in 1975. The collective model regards the core of the

nucleus as a drop of dense incompressible fluid that interacts with a small
number of so-called valence protons and neutrons outside the core. Of course,
the core itself really12 consists of protons and neutrons held together very tightly
by their mutual attraction, but if you think of it as a liquid drop that, when
excited, can oscillate, vibrate, and rotate, then you can figure out the energy of
its collective excitations and their interaction with the protons and neutrons
outside the core. With this model that combined a fluid core with an external
shell, Bohr, Mottelson, and Rainwater were able to explain the excited states of
uranium and other heavy nuclei
The picture of the nucleus as a drop of water is a limited analogy. Regarding
the nucleus as a liquid drop is very different from describing the electron using
the Dirac equation. The Dirac equation, even if it eventually turns out to be not
quite the absolute truth, will still have been an attempt to intuit the essential
nature of the electron. The collective model merely compares the nucleus to a
drop of water.
A model is a caricature that overemphasizes some features at the expense of
others. It focuses on parts rather than the whole. It is a fetish in which the
importance of one key part of the object of interest is obsessively exaggerated
until it comes to represent the object’s quintessence, such as a shoe or corset
standing in for a woman. (Is that perhaps why most modelers are male?) But the
shoe or corset isn’t the woman; it is just the most important part of the woman
for this model user. Once you understand that a model isn’t the thing but rather
an exaggeration of one aspect of the thing, you will be less surprised at its
limitations.
Let Someone Else’s Fingers Do the Walking
Thinking for yourself is hard work, and models save mental labor. Like the
vacuum cleaner and washing machine that promised to liberate suburban
housewives of the 1950s from drudgery, models provide easy and automated
ways of letting other people do the thinking for you.

When I worked on my PhD thesis to test the Weinberg-Salam Model in the
early 1970s, I carried out each calculation using Feynman diagrams, the
cartoonlike representations invented by Richard Feynman in the late 1940s to
systematize and enumerate the ways particles interact during collisions. Using a
formal set of rules that Feynman developed with his inimitable blend of
mathematics and intuition, rules that were later justified by the more rigorous
mathematics of Freeman Dyson,13 I elaborated and drew all the possible
diagrams that could occur in the Standard Model, and then, using Feynman’s
rules, translated each picture into a mathematical formula and evaluated it. The
calculations were carried out with pen and paper and took hundreds of pages. To
check the accuracy I repeated each calculation at least twice, the second time
without looking at the first.
Feynman’s diagrams and rules are bookkeeping by picture, a Tinkertoy
algorithm that miraculously captures all the details of quantum mechanical
forces in the Standard Model via a series of stickand-vertex diagrams; they allow
people less talented than Feynman to use his pictures to perform the most
complex calculations carefully and correctly. Like all great advances in physics,
they codify and make routine what was formerly almost impossible to think
about. Only Feynman could have invented it; now wet-behind-the-ears graduate
students can churn out page after page of accurate calculations. Indeed, by the
time I stopped doing physics in 1980 I knew two professors in Wisconsin who
had programmed computers to generate the diagrams in the Standard Model,
translate them into formulas, evaluate them, and mechanically calculate the
magnitude of the effects predicted. All that remained was to write the paper.
Einstein similarly made calculations easier for lesser physicists when he
discovered the theory of special relativity. Hendrik Lorentz, for whom the
Lorentz-Fitzgerald relativistic contraction of rapidly moving rods was named,
had more or less come to the same conclusions as Einstein. But he did so by
carrying out difficult and complex calculations using elaborate models of the
atoms within rods, determining what happened to the forces between them as
they moved. Einstein replaced these struggles with simple but deep analyses of
what it means to talk about the length of a rod. Now high school students can
calculate the changing size of objects and the changing periods of clocks as they

move. Lorentz’s model needed justification. Einstein’s theory is exact fact.
In both physics and finance the first major struggle is to gain some intuition
about how to proceed; the second struggle is to transform that intuition into
something more formulaic, a set of rules anyone can follow, rules that no longer
require the original insight itself. One person’s breakthrough thus becomes
everybody’s possession.
A Model Is a Little Language
It takes hard work to master a model. In Zen in the Art of Archery, Eugen
Herrigel describes his repetitive, initially futile struggles with the Japanese bow
and arrow, until finally he was able to transcend the battle for conscious
competence and achieve unconscious skill, pulling back the string and launching
the arrow mindlessly, carelessly, and accurately at the target. Anyone who plays
tennis only occasionally will have noticed that, after a hiatus, one often does
better the first time on the court than the second. As one tries to try to make
improvements, one gets worse. As Spinoza wrote, “The body can by the sole
laws of its nature do many things which the mind wonders at.”
The most valuable knowledge is that which has become unconscious and
intuitive. Focusing one’s eyes, grasping, manipulating, chewing, crawling,
walking, or speaking—one begins by struggling to do these things and ends by
doing them without thinking or struggling. Practice to the point of automaton-
like competence is necessary. Until you can do something without thinking, you
can’t progress further up the hierarchy of linguistic or modeling metaphors. If
you eschew the help of the mental machines or models created by your
intellectual forebears, you have to think through everything for yourself, every
time. There are occasions when the capacity to think from scratch is important,
but most of the time it’s best to take your foundation for granted.
So many of our acquired abilities move from conscious struggle to
unconscious achievement that some writers have theorized, implausibly but
fascinatingly, that every unconscious human ability (even digestion, to take an
extreme example) was first learned by conscious efforts of the will, and that it is
the failure to achieve unconscious automation that leads to various kinds of
mental ailments.14 Suffice it to say that when you have digested a model or
language well—and a model is, like language, a framework for communication
—then, with it inside you, you gain power.

Models Reduce the Number of Dimensions
The world is impossible to grasp in its entirety. We can focus on only a small
part of its vast confusion. Models project multidimensional reality onto smaller,
more manageable spaces where regularities appear and then, in that smaller
space, allow us to extrapolate and interpolate from the observed to the unknown.
At some point, of course, the extrapolation will break down. What’s amazing is
how well this strategy of reduction can work, especially in the physical sciences.
Models in finance use the same strategy. Companies that issue stock are
multidimensional. You can evaluate them with respect to many metrics:
management, earnings, debt, credit quality, patents generated, and so forth. The
stock market’s job is to collapse all of these qualities and quantities into one
number, the stock price, measured on a one-dimensional scale of dollars. But
price alone doesn’t indicate relative value: Who knows which is a better deal,
apples at $2 a pound or oranges at $3? IBM at $100 per share or Microsoft at
$250? Financial models attempt to answer these questions. To do so they project
the company onto an axis that measures value more usefully than dollars do.
Though price is a fact, value depends on the observer. For office space, value
might be price per square foot. For fruit it could be taste, or the quantity of
vitamins and fiber, depending on who the model serves. For stocks, value can be
measured by the ratio of price to earnings; for bonds, by the yield to maturity.
All of these axes represent a view on the source of value, and hence a model.
The Dangers of Extrapolation
Models project a detailed and complex world onto a smaller subspace. But
extrapolation in the smaller space can be unreliable. The supposed benefits of
estrogen supplements for postmenopausal women and the advantages of
margarine over butter for preventing arterial plaque have turned out to be
dubious. Estrogen can slow osteoporosis, but it’s associated with an increase in
various kinds of cancer. Cholesterol intake from food isn’t directly equivalent to
cholesterol output into plaque, though it is plausible that they are linked. Eggs
and butter contain many substances that are good for you, whereas margarine
contains many that aren’t. Models are simplifications, and simplification can be
dangerous.

THE NATURE OF THEORIES
A weather model’s equations are a model, but the Dirac equation is a theory.
What is a theory, and why do I call the Dirac equation one? The Online
Etymological Dictionary lists a definition of the word theory dating from 1638
as “an explanation based on observation and reasoning.” Wikipedia cites Francis
Cornford, an English scholar, suggesting that the practitioners of the Greek
religion Orphism used the word theory to mean “passionate sympathetic
contemplation.” Both phrases are well chosen.
Models are analogies; they always describe one thing relative to something
else. Models need a defense or an explanation. Theories, in contrast, are the real
thing. They need confirmation rather than explanation. A theory describes an
essence. A successful theory can become a fact.
The ultimate goal would be: to grasp that everything in the realm of fact is
already theory. . . . Let us not seek for something behind the phenomena—
they themselves are the theory.
—Goethe, Maxims and Reflections
——
In Science and Reflection, Martin Heidegger comments on the contemplative
nature of theoretical insight:
The word “theory” stems from the Greek verb theorein. The noun belonging
to it is theoria. Peculiar to these words is a lofty and mysterious meaning. The
verb theorein grew out of the coalescing of two root words, thea and horao.
Thea (cf. theater) is the outward look, the aspect, in which something shows
itself. . . . The second root word in theorein, horao, means: to look at
something attentively, to look it over, to view it closely. Thus it follows that
theorein is thean horan, to look attentively on the outward appearance
wherein what presences becomes visible and, through such sight—seeing—to
linger with it.
The related Greek word aletheia means “the state of not being hidden,” and
suggests that theater (thea) hides, and that the role of theory is to make evident
what is hidden. That’s the way I have felt whenever I’ve done research, in
physics or finance. The creator of a theory is attempting to discover the invisible
principles that hide behind the appearances. Evolution is a theory; so are the
theory of dreams, Newton’s laws of motion, and the Standard Model. A theory is
(potentially) deep; a model, even when efficacious, is shallower. Theories

describe absolutes, like Moses descending from the mountain with the Ten
Commandments, or like God commanding, “Let there be light!”
You can see why intuition, the union between object and subject, bears such a
close relationship to theories. A theory doesn’t simplify. It observes the world
and tries to describe the principles by which the world operates. A theory can be
right or wrong, but it is characterized by its intent: the discovery of essence. A
theory is an absolute nonmetaphorical insight, and this is why the abstractions of
mathematics are often more suitable than words for formulating theories.15
When I wrote papers in physics, I dreamed of discovering a theory that would be
true and transcendental and would survive my lifetime. Newton, Lagrange,
Hamilton, Darwin, Maxwell, Freud, Einstein, Bohr, Schrödinger, and Gell-
Mann, to name just a few, accomplished this. Therefore it’s possible.
Newton’s Universal Law of Gravitation is a theory. It postulates that the force
between any two masses (the moon and the Earth, the Earth and an apple) is
proportional to the product of their masses and inversely proportional to the
square of the distance between their centers. Newton’s Second Law of Motion, a
theory too, dictates that the gravitational force accelerates each particle inversely
proportional to its mass. Solving these equations, Newton deduced that planets
must traverse elliptical paths around the sun, thereby justifying Johannes
Kepler’s empirical laws of planetary motion.
Newton’s theory is general and precise. The gravitational force is inversely
proportional to exactly the square of the distance between the planets; Newton
was confident that the power of the distance is precisely 2. Had he been a social
scientist performing statistical regressions in psychology, economics, or finance,
he would probably have proposed a power of 2.05 ± 0.31.
A theory is not a fetish; when it is successful (see the quantum theory of
electricity and magnetism in chapter 4) it describes the object of its focus so
accurately that the theory becomes virtually indistinguishable from the object
itself. Maxwell’s equations are electricity and magnetism; the Dirac equation is
the electron; the Weinberg-Salam model of weak and electromagnetic
interactions matches the electrons and quarks in almost every detail, as closely
as one can measure. You can layer metaphors on top of the equation, but the
equation is the essence.16
A theory doesn’t have to be complete or unmodifiable. Now, more than 106
years after Einstein’s Special Theory of Relativity and 96 years after his General
Theory, we know that Newton’s laws are not quite accurate. But there is still

something recognizably absolute about their intent, and they have not been
relegated to the status of a model despite their limitations. They are theories that
are not exactly right, but they are not models.
Models splinter when you look at them closely. Theories are irreducible, the
foundations on which new metaphors can be built. Theories are the thing itself;
when you look closely, there isn’t anything more to see. The surface and the
object, the outside and the inside, are one.17
MONOCULAR DIPLOPIA
Twenty-five years ago I accepted the offer of a free group tennis lesson while on
vacation at a Caribbean resort. The coach put six of us onto a single court and
made us practice volleying in pairs with our partners across the net. I was in the
pair on the extreme right. The gentleman diagonally across the net from me, on
the extreme left, decided to be a hero and slammed the ball at his partner as hard
as he could. Instead it flew diagonally across the net and directly into my right
eye. I fell to the ground and tried to figure out what was happening.
It hurt, but not too badly, and in the end I ignored it and assumed that the black
floaters I saw were just what you should expect to see if you got hit in the eye. A
week later, when I returned to New York, I realized that things around me were
beginning to look as though I were living in an aquarium. I went to an eye doctor
and, just in time, discovered that my retina had a “horseshoe” tear and was
beginning to detach, like Scotch tape starting to peel from one corner. An eye
surgeon resealed the retina to the back of my eye by welding it with lasers
beamed through the front and with liquid nitrogen applied to the back. I still go
for regular checkups to make sure my retina stays in place and have been warned
to watch out for sudden changes in vision.
One morning 23 years later, in early 2008, I woke up and took a cab to work.
Looking at the meter, I realized something wasn’t quite in order. Used to testing
my vision, I shut my left eye. Everything looked okay. Then I shut my right eye
and immediately realized that all the LED digits on the taxi meter were doubled.
Uh-oh, I thought. My retina again. I told the taxi to turn around and take me
directly to my retinal specialist.
A careful man, the specialist tested my vision, measured the pressure inside
my eye, dilated my pupils, visually examined my retina from all angles, had a
technician do an ultrasound scan of my retina and the layers below it, and finally

had another technician inject a fluorescent green dye into my bloodstream and
then film the back of my retina to check the state of its capillaries. He saw
nothing awry.
Monocular diplopia, the fancy name for seeing double in one eye, is a rare
phenomenon. It cannot be a problem of accommodation or so-called squintness
that occurs owing to a muscular imbalance between both eyes. My doctor sent
me to an ophthalmic neurologist, who, after carefully checking that I could walk
in a straight line, stand on one leg, and follow his index finger with my eyes,
concluded that I had no neurological problems and told me to go away and not
come back.
Nevertheless the diplopia persisted, waxing and waning inexplicably,
sometimes almost disappearing for a few hours and then returning with full
force. I had trouble reading. I tested my vision constantly, closing one eye and
then the other while trying to read distant street signs. I used my thumb and
index finger to create a small pinhole through which I peered. When I did so the
signs became sharp, which told me that my retina was working well and that the
trouble was therefore with the diffraction. Light from each letter in a distant sign
reaches your retina along many parallel paths through your lens and the vitreous
fluid, and somehow the paths weren’t converging to one retinal point, hence the
doubling. My retinologist could see nothing especially wrong with my retina and
had no further suggestions for treatment or diagnosis, and so, perforce, I became
my own general contractor.
I subcontracted parts of myself out to different specialists, trying to figure out
what was happening. I read the package insert on a medicine I had been taking
and saw that it listed double vision as a rare side effect. Eventually I learned that
almost all drugs list double vision as a possible side effect, but when it occurs
it’s usually binocular diplopia. A very good optometrist I knew for years found
that my astigmatism changed even during the course of a brief visit in which he
tested my vision. He told me it might be due to stress. But neither of us could
understand how stress could affect the curvature of my lens.
Years earlier I had had a cataract removed from my left eye; its lens was
replaced by a plastic one that worked fine. But, I reasoned, a plastic disk floating
inside the capsule behind the cornea might have suddenly shifted or tilted a
small amount the day the double vision began, and so caused my problem. It
might still be loose and moving about each day, hence the fluctuations.
I visited doctors recursively, one doctor suggesting the next. The nth doctor
was the cataract surgeon who had originally inserted my artificial lens, and I

asked him to check whether it had shifted. It hadn’t. But he could theorize too:
most likely, he said, there were some small, undetectable distortions in the rods
and cones of my retina, deformations too small to show up on any retinal scan.
The rods, which should have pointed straight up, were most likely askew, blades
of plastic grass on trampled Astroturf. Nothing anyone can do about it, he said.
Once he had delivered this diagnosis, something impelled him to measure the
curvature of my cornea, a test no one had done in the preceding months. A small
optical device shines perfectly circular concentric rings of light onto your cornea
and photographs the reflections; their deviation from perfect circles indicates the
contours of the cornea. Mine was badly buckled on the nasal side. He informed
me curtly and concisely that my problem was not the retina. I had keratoconus, a
disease in which the cornea progressively thins and ultimately bulges under its
own weight, tugged at by the Earth beneath it. (In that case, I reasoned, I should
see better in outer space or in free fall, a diagnostic test I must remember to
recommend when space flight becomes cheaper.) The resultant bulges in the
cornea refract light improperly and cause the diplopia. I didn’t like the name
keratoconus, which reminded me of calluses and rough heels, and much
preferred the fluid sound of monocular diplopia. Then he washed his hands of
me and told me to see a corneal specialist.
Before being examined by the corneal doctor I was prepped by his technician,
who took my medical history and carried out preliminary examinations. Agitated
by my long search for a diagnosis, I told him about my many months with
monocular diplopia.
“Anyone ever look under your eyelid?” he asked me.
“No, never,” I said.
Another technician repeated the corneal topography on both my eyes. Then I
went into the examining room of the corneal man, who reconfirmed the
anomalous bulges and the diagnosis of keratoconus, though he admitted that it
was a little peculiar that the bulge was on the nasal side of the cornea: gravity
would have demanded a bulge at the bottom. The short-term solution was to
wear a hard glass contact lens. Tears would fill the gap between the outside of
my distorted cornea and the inside of the rigid glass lens, thereby restoring a
perfectly spherical surface for light to enter. If it worked, it would also confirm
the diagnosis. The longer-term solution, since the cornea would progressively
thin and weaken, was either a corneal transplant or the implanting of a
scaffolding of plastic circular struts into the cornea to support it.
Before I left I told my corneal specialist what his technician had said about

looking under my left eyelid. He shrugged. A week later I went back to his office
to be fitted for contacts. Agitated as usual, I told a different technician my whole
story as she prepared to try a hard contact on me to see if it improved my vision.
I also told her what the technician had said.
“I can look under your eyelid,” she said. She had me lean back and she rolled
up my eyelid like a window blind.
“There’s a chalazion there,” she said. That’s a fancy word for a tiny hard lump
on the inside of the upper eyelid, a sort of chronic stye. I didn’t like the word
chalazion either; it reminded me of both a venereal disease and a Spanish pork
sausage. “It pushes on the cornea every time you blink or close your eyes, like
someone sticking a finger into a balloon, and distorts your vision,” she
explained.
Retina, brain, lens, keratoconus. Everyone I consulted had tried, within and
sometimes outside the confines of his specialty, to find some explanation for my
symptoms, ignoring the obvious. It took a technician with no preconceptions to
offer a commonsense explanation. My specialists were quite unabashed at their
misdiagnoses. Because I had had a retinal problem in the past, everyone, myself
included, refused to imagine any other cause, especially a simple, mechanical,
and easily observable cause, like pressure on the cornea from a bump on the
inner eyelid.
I tried the conservative treatment for the chalazion first: hot compresses and
antibiotic creams to soften up and shrink the bump. But it had been around too
long, and so a few weeks later another specialist cut it out and I’ve been okay
since. Which leads me to the following section.
MAKING THE UNCONSCIOUS
CONSCIOUS AGAIN
We cannot be forever examining our foundations; we look particularly to
those places where it is reported to us that they are insecure.
—A. S. Eddington, The Mathematical Theory of Relativity

We become expert at the models and theories we use, unconscious of how we
use them. This unconscious grasp then serves as a framework for further
conscious advancement. One progresses from grasping an object to pitching a
baseball to juggling, each accomplishment starting out as a conscious attempt
and ending up as unconscious mastery. Conscious and unconscious play
leapfrog, the conscious vaulting over the unconscious to then serve as a new
unconscious foundation itself.
Faced with crises, the unconscious must become conscious again. When
models produce paradoxes or conflicts, it becomes necessary to expose the
taken-for-granted assumptions, reculer pour mieux sauter. That’s what my clever
eye technician did. When I later asked one of the doctors I had visited why he
had never thought of looking for a bump on my eyelid, he told me that he had
assumed that a bump large enough to dent my cornea every time I blinked would
have been visible from the outside. It wasn’t true. Only the technician was able
to hear the facts as I explained them.
Einstein exposed the unconscious when he examined the foundations of
classical physics. Physicists before him had unthinkingly assumed that
simultaneity was a self-evident notion: to say that two events happened at the
same time seemed a simple thing. Einstein made explicit how one would
confirm that two events happen at the same time. This reexamination of
fundamentals led him to the Theory of Special Relativity, whereby he discovered
that, if the speed of light is the same for all observers, then length and time
themselves must vary from one observer to another. When you say it like that, it
sounds obvious: How can the speed of light possibly be the same for everyone
no matter what speed each observer is traveling at, unless length and time
themselves change with motion? It wasn’t obvious before Einstein.
When the unconscious assumptions of everyday living begin to conflict with
each other, it’s time to bring them to the surface. Psychoanalysis aims to make
the unconscious visible by talking and introspection. Tibetan Buddhists try to
achieve the same result by observing the thoughts bubbling out of the mind.
Dropping back is sometimes a good idea. The revision of fundamentals often

marks great leaps forward.
ADDENDUM: GOETHE ON SYMBOLISM
I recently came across some remarks by Goethe in an essay on symbolism that
reflect on the limitations of words and metaphors in approaching what he calls
nature’s inner relationships:
Neither things nor ourselves find full expression in our words.
    Something like a new world is created through language, one consisting of
the essential and the incidental.
    Verba valent sicut numi.18 But there are different sorts of money: gold,
silver, and copper coins, or paper money. The coins are real to a degree; the
paper money is only convention.
    We get by in life with our everyday language, for we describe only
superficial relationships. The instant we speak of deeper relationships,
another language springs up: poetic language.
    In speaking of nature’s inner relationships, we need many modes of
description. I will mention four here:
Symbols
1. which are physically19 and really identical with the object: e.g., we have
learned to express magnetic effects, and now apply this terminology to related
phenomena;
2. which are aesthetically19 and really identical with the object. All good
metaphors belong in this category, but we must guard against a display of wit
which seems to relate the unrelated instead of finding true relationships;
3. which express a connection which is somewhat arbitrary rather than fully
intrinsic; such a symbol, however, points to an inner relationship between
phenomena. I would say these symbols are mnemonic in a higher sense, for
ordinary mnemonics uses wholly arbitrary notation;
4. which are derived from mathematics. Because they are founded on intuitive
perceptions, they can become identical with the phenomenon in the highest
sense of the word.
We find instances of the first three symbols in language:

1. when, for example, the word expresses a sound (like the noun bang).
2. when the sound expresses an identical feeling (this often happens in inflected
forms: banging).
3. when related words have a similar sound (like mine and thine); such words
might be dissimilar (I and thou), but moi and toi are related in this way.
The fourth type, based on intuitive perceptions alone, cannot occur in language.

II. MODELS BEHAVING

Chapter 3
The Absolute
The Tetragrammaton • The name of the name of the name • The irreducible
nonmetaphor • Spinoza’s theory of the emotions • Fiat money • How to live
in the realm of the passions
Theories aim to describe essences and must therefore deal with absolutes, the
traditional province of religion, philosophy, and mathematics. The best and most
accepted absolutes are the theories of inanimate matter—Newtonian mechanics,
electromagnetic theory, relativity, and quantum mechanics—that require
mathematics for their exposition. Indeed the development of much of
mathematics has been triggered by the needs of physicists elaborating their
theories. But although mathematics is the most value-free way to formulate it, a
theory doesn’t have to be mathematical, and it doesn’t have to confine itself to
the inanimate. A theory, as long as it makes no analogies, can deal with anything.
This chapter therefore deals with the idea of God, who represents the ultimate
ground beneath all metaphors, the literally incomparable. In particular I present
Spinoza’s profound analysis of the structure of human emotions, the agonies
they cause us, and their link to the nature of Being and God. Spinoza’s
description is absolute, not relative; it stands on its own two feet, and is a perfect
and accessible emodiment of what I call a theory.
THE TETRAGRAMMATON
At an early age I was taught to pray in Hebrew, though no one took the trouble to
tell me what the prayers meant. In kindergarten we mindlessly learned to chant
the Modeh, a children’s prayer to be recited on waking that, I now understand,
thanks God for restoring your soul after its disappearance during the night:
Translated it reads:
I give thanks before you, living and eternal king, that you have returned

within me my soul with compassion; how abundant is your faithfulness.
Schopenhauer regarded the void as positive and life as its interim negation.
Not so, according to the Modeh, which views each person’s soul or spirit,
nishmati in the transliteration above, as the positive substance that God returns
to your zombie body each morning. Neshamah, the Hebrew word for “soul,” is
also the word for “breath.”
For Schopenhauer, life ends when God asks for His money back, perhaps to
recapitalize someone else. As long as He doesn’t come knocking at the door to
repossess it, life continues. For the Modeh, in contrast, sleep is soulless and life
doesn’t continue unless God acts to reinstill it each morning.
Who is this Jewish God of action, and what are His qualities? Note that
nowhere in the short Modeh does the Hebrew word for God actually appear. The
prayer refers to Him only metaphorically, as the living and eternal king.
But God does have a name, and His name has a name too. The
Tetragrammaton1 is the formidable and fancy name of the name of God.
Glorious with gravitas, the Tetragrammaton is the majestic way of referring
indirectly to God’s name as it appears in the Bible, as a sequence of four Hebrew
consonants, 
, read from the right to the left.2 Sequentially transliterated,
the four consonants correspond approximately to the English letters YHVH, as
follows: 
. The first letter, Y in English, corresponds to the Hebrew letter
yod, . Written left to right, as they would be in English, the letters form the word 
, pronounced Yahweh. A single name, with no patronymic, as in Prince
and Madonna, is grand. A single name with its own name is even grander. 
is a bit like HRM, a Triagrammaton for the king or queen of England.
If you are familiar with Hebrew you will recognize the sense of awe that
accompanies a glimpse of the Hebrew word 
. It is the letters alone that
produce the awe, not their pronunciation, as I will shortly explain. To
approximate their aura, I write the English letters of God’s name in white on
black:
Throughout the 12 years in school in which I learned to read and speak
Hebrew and to recite prayers by heart, I saw the word 
 printed innumerable
times in Bibles and prayer books. Yet I never once heard the word pronounced
Yahweh. Everyone I knew pronounced as though it were the entirely different
Hebrew word 
, pronounced Adonai, as though the letters YHVH were in
reality the letters ADNY. The words ADNY and 
 barely resemble each

other. It was as though I was taught to say “HRM” whenever I saw the word
“Elizabeth.”
I have written the letters ADNY in a workmanlike sans serif typeface to
contrast their mundanity with the extraordinariness of 
. There is nothing
fancy or glorious about the word ADNY. It’s simply the possessive plural of
Adon, the Hebrew word for “lord,” or “master,” and is therefore roughly
equivalent to the respectful “Milord.” In the British-style high school I attended
we addressed our English teacher as “Sir” and our Hebrew teacher as “Adon,”
equivalent terms that acknowledge authority but lack awe.
ADNY is one of God’s many aliases in the book of Genesis. The Bible
sometimes also refers to God as ADNY ADNM, pronounced Adonai Adonim, a
vocative “My Lords of Lords,” more wondrous than Adonai alone by virtue of
its recursion. Surprisingly, God’s aliases in the Bible precede the appearance of
His real name. God as Yahweh is absent throughout the first chapter of Genesis,
whose first line reads “In the beginning Elohim created the skies and the earth.”
Elohim is the plural of El, a generic god, and means simply gods in the sense of
a royal pluralized divinity.
The Tetragrammaton 
 makes its first appearance in Genesis 2:4, only
after God has perfected the Creation and can finally rest:3 “These are the
generations of the heavens and of the earth when they were created, in the day
that 
 Elohim made earth and the skies.” Even here He carries a double
moniker.
To this day when I see the letters 
 I hear in my head the word ADNY. So
deep and thorough is this conflation that not until I was far into adulthood did I
realize that the letters YHVH did not literally spell ADNY. I looked at the
Hebrew letters for 
 and my mouth and mind said ADNY. My classmates
too, I discovered, suffered from the same confusion, even to this day. We saw
one word and uttered the other. No one ever mentioned that the actual
pronunciation of YHVH was not ADNY.4
No observant Jew ever utters the name Yahweh. By custom rather than
commandment, God’s name is not pronounced aloud or even under one’s breath.
Being brought up customarily, my friends and I were never told not to say His
name. We didn’t know He had one.
THE NAME OF THE NAME OF THE

NAME
A few of my more observant school friends went a step further: not only did they
avoid uttering the name 
, but they also avoided uttering the alias ADNY.
Instead they pronounced Adonai as AdoShem. The reason was as follows. The
Vyod, the last (leftmost) Hebrew letter of 
, is also the first (rightmost) letter
of the word 
 Thus the alias ADNY incorporates one letter of God’s true
name, too close for comfort. Therefore some Jews replace the ^/yod in ADNY
with the entire Hebrew word Shem (meaning “name”), pronouncing ADNY as
ADoShem. It’s as though the normal honorific HRM used to refer to the queen
becomes uncomfortably familiar when it refers to Queen Mary, because of the
shared letter M, so that, just for Queen Mary, the alias HRM is replaced by
HRName.
Orthodox Jews carry this to extremes and avoid pronouncing anything
reminiscent of the Tetragrammaton. Thus even the word Elohim is pronounced
Elokim, so that the shared H of 
 and EloHim is replaced by the cognate but
symbolically insignificant K.
Many go numerologically further. In ancient Hebrew one uses the letters of the
alphabet to represent numbers. The tenth letter of the alphabet is 
 and the fifth
letter is 
 so that the number 15 is represented in base 10 by the letters YH.
But Y and H are the first two letters of God’s name, and so no one writes YH for
15. Instead 15 is written as TV, because the numbers corresponding to the ninth
letter, T, and the sixth letter, V also add to 15 but don’t seem to reference God. (It
seems to me that replacing YH with TV makes the combination TV even more
reminiscent of God, the unignorable avoidance indicating a presence. One could
go one step further and replace 9 + 6 with 8 + 7, but that would cause the same
problem.) Similarly the number 16, 10 + 6, which should be written in base 10 as
the Hebrew letters YV, shares two letters with 
 and is therefore written TZ,
9 + 7. Some don’t know where to stop, and write G-d rather than God, as though
“God” were God’s name. It isn’t.
THE IRREDUCIBLE NONMETAPHOR
Moses, tending the flock of his father-in-law, Jethro, near the mountain of
Horeb, saw a burning bush whose flame could not consume it. God, from within
the bush, declared Himself to Moses and commanded him to deliver the
Israelites from Pharaoh.

“Who shall I tell them sent me?” asks Moses.
“Tell them: I am that which I am,” answers 
Yahweh is the antimetaphor, the ultimate ground, for whom no analogies are
possible and no similes adequate. He is what He is. Yahweh is the name of
something that isn’t a model of reality, but reality itself.
The excommunicated Jewish philosopher Baruch Spinoza, who was interested
in the nature of reality, defined wonder as “the conception of anything, wherein
the mind comes to a stand, because the particular concept in question has no
connection with other concepts.” Yahweh has no connection with other concepts;
He has no qualities; He is beyond intelligence and beauty; He is beyond good
and evil; He cannot be categorized. He is precisely what He is, and He tells us
so.
When He says, “I am that which I am,” sometimes translated as “I will be that
which I will be,” God is riffing on His true name: the Hebrew for “I will be” is 
. Its root is HVH, the last three letters of God’s name. HVH means
“being” and is also the name of the present tense in Hebrew grammar. Presence
and Being necessarily precede everything. 
 is the irreducible substance out
of which everything else is constructed. “Yah Weh” is the sound identical with
the object, an inhalation Yah followed by an exhalation Weh, the sound of
panting while running, the vocalization of a woman in bed. You can’t ask
“Why?” about 
 you can only attest to His existence.
Like God, the electron is precisely what it is and equally wondrous. About it
too you can ask only “What?” not “Why?” For the electron, the wonder is the
Dirac wave function ψ, the so-called four-component relativistic spinor that
satisfies the Dirac equation. The spinor ψ is the alter ego of the physical electron,
the idea that corresponds to its material states. Two of its four components
describe the state of its internal magnetization (north or south), and the
remaining two describe the positron—the electron’s antiparticle—and its two
magnetizations.
A THEORY OF THE EMOTIONS
I first began to read Schopenhauer in 1979. I had been willfully ambitious with
regard to physics and was just beginning to realize that my passion for it was
depriving me of air. Still ambitious, but aware now of the repercussions, I found
solace in Schopenhauer’s description of the miseries the Will inflicts on all of us.

That led me to Spinoza’s Ethics, published posthumously in 1677, and his
analysis of human behavior.
In part 3 of Ethics, entitled “Of the Affects,” Spinoza tried to do for human
emotions what Euclid did for geometry. In the rest of this chapter I want to cast
light on Spinoza’s theory in order, ultimately, to contrast theories with models.
Because all of us experience feelings, exploring a theory of them seems like a
good place to start.
Euclid used primitives, ingredients everyone is familiar with, as his raw
material. Geometric primitives include points and lines, which Euclid defined as
follows:
A point is that which has no part.
A line is a breadthless length.
The extremities of lines are points.
A straight line lies equally with respect to the points on itself.
The definitions are ingenious but obscure. If you didn’t know what points and
lines were by having had them shown to you, these definitions wouldn’t help
you envision them. We are embodied and begin with our senses.
To his primitives Euclid added axioms, the apparently self-evident logical
principles that no one would argue with, stating, for example, “If equals are
added to equals, then the wholes are equal.” Since 3 = 3 and 2 = 2, then 3 + 2 = 3
+ 2. This is indisputable, but not all axioms are as unquestionable as they appear.
Finally, he proceeded to theorems, the interesting and often unexpected
deductions he could prove by applying the axioms to the primitives to construct
a chain of reasoning. The most famous is Pythagoras’s theorem that relates
triangles to squares: the sum of the squares of the two perpendicular sides of a
right-angled triangle is equal to the square of its hypotenuse. This method,
beginning with primitives and proving propositions by deduction, is called
axiomatization and has become the classic method of mathematics.
In geometry there are no causes, only inviolable relationships. Spinoza
believed that the same was true of human beings. He approached what he called
“the affects”—essentially all human emotions—the way Euclid approached
triangles and squares, aiming to understand their interrelations by means of
principles, logic, and deduction. His larger aim, culminating in part 5 of Ethics,
entitled “Of the Power of the Intellect, or On Human Freedom,” was to find a
method to escape the violent sway of emotions on human beings caught in their
grip.

Ethics is more a worldview than a tightly reasoned argument. Nevertheless I
call what Spinoza created a theory. He makes no analogies; his primitives live in
their own space; he doesn’t attempt to explain how humans behave by
comparing them to some other system. He employs observation, experience,
introspection, and intuition to those human experiences familiar to everyone.
The Primitive Sensations
Spinoza’s primitives are pain, pleasure, and desire. Every adult with a human
body knows by direct experience what these sensations are, though Spinoza,
following Euclid, attempts to define them. He begins with desire, which he terms
man’s essence, all of “man’s strivings, impulses, appetites and volitions . . .
which are not infrequently so opposed to one another that the man is pulled in
different directions and knows not where to turn.” “Desire,” he summarizes, “is
appetite conscious of itself.” The consequences of desire are pleasure and pain:
Pleasure is the transition of a man from a less to a greater perfection. Pain is
the transition of a man from a greater to a less perfection.
Note that perfection is not pleasure and imperfection is not pain. Pleasure and
pain are associated with transitions between states, not the states themselves.
These seventeenth-century insights are in agreement with recent studies in
psychology that find that people who obtain something they always wanted
quickly become accustomed to their new possession or status and are soon no
longer satisfied with it.
For now, assume that we know what we mean by pleasure, pain, and desire.
They lie beneath all the other emotions and can conveniently be thought of as
closer to organic conditions than psychic ones. That pain is fundamental is borne
out by the fact that doctors test comatose patients for signs of life by looking for
a response to pain. It is, of course, much more difficult to cause pleasure than to
cause pain. Nevertheless, for Spinoza, pain and pleasure bear equal weight and
can exist independently of each other; the absence of one doesn’t indicate the
presence of the other.
Spinoza distinguishes precisely between local and global sensations. “Pleasure
and pain,” he writes, “are ascribed to a man when one part of him is affected
more than the rest, whereas cheerfulness and melancholy are ascribed to him
when all are equally affected.” Suffering, therefore, is localized pain, while
melancholy is globalized pain.

His definitions of good and bad are pragmatic: “By good I here mean every
kind of pleasure . . . especially that which satisfies our longings, whatsoever they
may be. By evil, I mean every kind of pain, especially that which frustrates our
longings.” Good brings pleasure, and bad brings pain. Moral good is identical to
sensual good; it’s good to feel good and it’s bad to feel bad.
The Derivative Emotions
Just as the value of a stock option depends on the underlying stock price, so the
more complex human emotions depend, via one or more degrees of separation,
on the three underlying primitive sensations. Spinoza’s entire theory resembles
the structure of contingent claims in modern finance, whose Efficient Market
Model I describe in chapter 5. The following are paraphrases of some of
Spinoza’s definitions.
Love is pleasure associated with an external object. It is an emotion one step
removed from simple pleasure.
Hate is pain associated with an external object.
Hope is the expectation of future pleasure when the outcome is uncertain and
doubtful.
Joy is the pleasure we experience when that doubtful expectation is fulfilled.
Disappointment is the pain opposed to joy.
Pity is pain arising from another’s hurt. Expanding on this, he writes,
“Pity is pain accompanied by the idea of evil, which has befallen someone
else whom we conceive to be like ourselves.”
Pity involves two evils: the pain we experience as well as someone else’s pain.
Correspondingly there should be an emotion involving two goods: our own
pleasure and someone else’s. “What term we can use for pleasure arising from
another’s gain, I know not,” Spinoza writes, adding that there are many
derivative emotions that don’t yet have names.5
Like convertible bonds, modern-day corporate securities that have both debt
and equity characteristics, there are emotions that depend on two underlying
primitives. Thus envy is pain at another’s pleasure. Conversely, though the
concept appeared long after Spinoza’s death, Schadenfreude is pleasure at
another’s pain.

Cruelty links all three primitives: Spinoza defines it as the desire to inflict pain
on someone we love or pity.6 Financially speaking, cruelty is analogous to a
convertible bond whose debt and equity depend on three economic underliers:
the stock price, the level of interest rates, and the credit worthiness of the
company’s debt.7
I call Spinoza’s analysis a theory because it is an attempt to describe the nature
of emotions rather than compare emotions to something else. You can get a feel
for the scope and thoughtfulness of his categorization by looking at a few more
of his many subtle decipherings:
We will call the love towards him who confers a benefit on another,
Approval; and the hatred towards him who injures another, we will call
Indignation.
Honour is pleasure accompanied by the idea of some action of our own,
which we believe to be praised by others.
Regret is the desire or appetite to possess something, kept alive by the
remembrance of the said thing, and at the same time constrained by the
remembrance of other things which exclude the existence of it.
I shall call him intrepid who disdains an evil I usually fear.
Repentance is sadness accompanied by the idea of oneself as cause, and self-
esteem is joy accompanied by the idea of oneself as cause. Because men
believe themselves free, these affects are very violent.
Three Meta-affects
To span the complexity of human emotions, Spinoza adds to his theory three
additional primitives that are closer to meta-affects than affects themselves. The
first is vacillation, a state of oscillation between two emotions. Thus jealousy, he
explains, is the vacillation between hate and envy toward an object of love in the
presence of a rival. Jealousy depends on envy, and envy, as we have seen,
depends on pleasure and pain. If we follow the links far enough, every affect
terminates at pain, pleasure, or desire.
The second meta-affect is wonder. Wonder is what we experience when
confronted by something that fills the mind to the exclusion of all else,
something unrelated to anything else we know. Wonder is what Moses
experienced at the burning bush, in the presence of Yahweh, who is what He is.

Spinoza expands on wonder:
But if it be excited by an object of fear, it is called Consternation, because
wonder at an evil keeps a man so engrossed in the simple contemplation
thereof, that he has no power to think of anything else whereby he might
avoid the evil. . . .
    Otherwise, if a man’s anger, envy, &c., be what we wonder at, the emotion
is called Horror. . . .
    If it be the prudence, industry . . . of a man we love, that we wonder at, our
love will on this account be the greater, and when joined to wonder or
veneration is called Devotion.
I will illustrate wonder in chapter 4, when I recount the miraculous
development of quantum electrodynamics, a theory that exemplifies better than
anything else the triumph of the mental over the physical.
Spinoza’s final meta-affect is contempt, the feeling we have when we
contemplate something that most forcibly reminds us of the qualities it lacks,
their absence a palpable presence. He links contempt to derision and scorn:
As devotion springs from wonder at a thing which we love, so does Derision
spring from contempt of a thing which we hate or fear, and Scorn from
contempt of folly, as veneration from wonder at prudence. Lastly, we can
conceive the emotions of love, hope, honour, &c., in association with
contempt, and can thence deduce other emotions, which are not distinguished
one from another by any recognized name.
Wonder, vacillation, and contempt lie not so much beneath all affects as to the
side of them.
I have created a map of Spinoza’s verbal definitions in Figure 3.1. At the
center of the diagram is the primitive pain. The solid black arrows emanating
from pain lead to its derivative affects. To the lower right is pleasure, whose
dashed arrows lead to pleasure-related emotions. Thus pride is the pleasure
derived from thinking too highly of oneself. In the upper right is desire, the
driver of all action, whose heavy black arrows of cupidity point to its
dependents. Thus emulation is “the desire of something engendered in us by our
conception that others have the same desire,” a type of inauthenticity in that the
cause of our desire is someone else’s desire. Mass-market advertising depends
on it.
Figure 3.1. The emotions in Spinoza’s Ethics. The diagram links familiar

emotions to Pain, Pleasure, and Desire.
 

In the map you can examine the link between the hybrid emotions and the
primitives. Courtesy is the desire to please people and to refrain from displeasing
them, linked to both pleasure and desire. Revenge is the desire through mutual
hatred to bring pain on someone who has brought us pain. Regret, the saddest of
emotions, is the desire to possess something, tinged with the recollection of a
past that made it impossible. Who hasn’t known it?

FIAT MONEY
I have used Spinoza’s framework to look at the idea of money, a topic fraught
with a variety of emotions.
Once upon a time money was gold coinage; later it was paper representing a
claim on gold deposits; nowadays it’s fiat money, a medium of exchange and
value that is purely conventional, freely created, and anchored by nothing except
authority. “Money,” wrote Schopenhauer, looking a little deeper, “is human
happiness in the abstract; he then who is no longer capable of enjoying human
happiness in the concrete devotes himself utterly to money.”
But genuine money is more than crystallized pleasure. It doesn’t come easy,
except to those who print it. “By the sweat of your brow will you eat bread,” said
God to Adam and Eve after the Fall. Genuine money is crystallized work, and
work is pain in the service of the desire to survive. Genuine money is also
security, the expectation of future pleasure and freedom from pain. It combines
in one object all three of Spinoza’s primitives, as illustrated in Figure 3.2.
Fiat money, unlike genuine money, incorporates only pleasure and desire.
Without work, it lacks the connection to pain that gives it value and respect. By
virtue of this lack, it induces contempt.8
Figure 3.2. Genuine money in Spinoza’s theory

LOVE AND DESPERATION
It seems to me that love can be more complex than Spinoza’s simple pleasure
associated with an external object. Sometimes love can be the desperate pleasure
of giving in to desire and abandoning control. Madame Bovary, Humbert
Humbert, Charles Swann, Anna Karenina—for all of them love was mingled
pain and pleasure. This kind of love is as much the longing for the cessation of
the pain of longing as it is the longing for the commencement of pleasure. It
vacillates between desire, hope, and despair. It is fibrillation, and the love of it is
a death wish.
But people seem to need the desperate side of love. The citizens of Aldous
Huxley’s Brave New World had easy access to unemotional physiological
lovemaking. As a result every few years they had to undergo a VPS (Violent
Passion Surrogate). The synthetic passions of a periodic biochemical love affair
were necessary to keep their bodies functioning smoothly.
HOW TO LIVE IN THE REALM OF THE
PASSIONS
Spinoza spent most of his life working on his Ethics. His theorizing was aimed
at practice; he intended it to provide a cure for the passions and a practical
blueprint for living. The word passion originates from the Latin word for
suffering, as in the Passion of Christ. Passion sweeps across us from the outside,
destroying our capacity to reason. Spinoza’s cure for the bondage of the passions
is to understand ourselves both from within and from without.9 The result will
be action based on understanding rather than passion driven by emotions.
Understanding leads to autonomous action, the capacity to be an underlier rather
than a derivative.
Parts of Ethics are so cryptic as to seem impenetrable. But, as Gilles Deleuze
writes:
There is a double reading of Spinoza; on the one hand, a systematic reading in
pursuit of the general idea and the unity of the parts, but on the other hand
and at the same time, the affective reading, without an idea of the whole,
where one is carried along or set down, put in motion or at rest, shaken or
calmed according to the velocity of this or that part.10

What follows is my affective reading, riven with complications, discrepancies,
and contradictions, which I hope will seem reconciled by chapter’s end.
THE FOUR QUESTIONS
1. Why Do We Treat Ourselves Differently from Others?
I tend to treat other people as though they are responsible for their deeds and
misdeeds. When they do something that hurts me, I regard them as free agents
who could have done otherwise. But what about the harmful things I do? In my
case I often feel as though I’m in the grip of tidal pulls that make me do things I
wish I hadn’t done. I tend to excuse myself with the understanding that I can’t
help it.
Observing others from outside, I hold them responsible. Observing myself
from inside, I can always think of good excuses for my behavior. In their case
it’s Will; in my case I call it circumstance. Why one explanation for their
behavior, another for mine?
2. How Can We Control Ourselves?
We are filled with desires whose origins we don’t understand. When we act on
them, we imagine we are behaving freely. But as Spinoza wrote:
Men are conscious of their own desire, but ignorant of the causes whereby
that desire has been determined.
    But experience teaches all too plainly that men have nothing less in their
power than their tongue, and can do nothing less than moderate their
appetites. . . . So the madman, the chatterbox, the child, and a great many
people of this kind believe they speak from a free decision of the mind, when
really they cannot contain their impulse to speak.
Our apparent freedom is only the freedom to do what we want. Our volition
drives us. What drives our volition? “You can do what you want, but you cannot
want what you want,” wrote Schopenhauer on the same topic.
Madame Bovary, Anna Karenina, Humbert Humbert—couldn’t they have
stopped themselves?
3. What Is the World Made Of?
Since Descartes or even before, we have regarded some parts of the world as
matter and other parts as mind. Why are there two apparently distinct
substances? What, if any, is the connection between them?

4. Why Does the Material World Have Laws While the Human World Has
Explanations?
Matter satisfies Newton’s laws, Maxwell’s equations, the Dirac theory of the
electron. Matter has no freedom of action. You can’t ask the falling ball “Why?”
The human world, on the other hand, has explanations for its behavior:
Why did you hang up on me?
Because you insulted me. Why can’t you at least be civil?
Because you enjoy provoking me. Why do you take everything to
extremes?
Because . . .
Such explanations can be endlessly recursive, searching hopelessly for a first
cause.
SPINOZA’S ANSWERS
Spinoza divided knowledge of the world into three categories: adequate
knowledge, inadequate knowledge, and intuition.
ADEQUATE KNOWLEDGE
When my son was a little less than two years old, I used to play a game he liked,
bouncing him up and down on my knee while chanting a nursery rhyme:
Half a pound of tuppeny rice
Half a pound of treacle
Mix them up and make them nice
Pop goes the weasel!
On “Pop goes the weasel!” I would sharply drop my knee all the way down
and let him bump to the floor. He always chortled. He liked the game so much
that one day he asked me to repeat it over and over again, laughing at each bump
except the final one, when he turned to me in surprise and asked, “Why it’s not
funny anymore?” From outside himself, he understood something within
himself. He had discovered that something repeated over and over again
becomes progressively less funny until it’s not funny at all. This is an example of

adequate knowledge.
Adequate knowledge is an apprehension that is self-contained, that leans on
nothing else. The Dirac equation, the theory of evolution, Freud: these are
adequate explanations. There is no need to ask “Why?” when something is
adequately explained. The explanation is sufficient; the theory is the fact. Dirac
discovered that electrons satisfy the Dirac equation. My son discovered that
funniness fades with repetition. That’s how God’s world works.
Adequate knowledge is global: it transcends a single individual or a singular
occurrence. It is always-true knowledge rather than ad hoc knowledge. Adequate
knowledge is a comprehension of relationships rather than causes. In Spinoza’s
words:
I call that cause adequate whose effect can be clearly and distinctly perceived
through it. But I call it partial, or inadequate, if its effect cannot be understood
through it alone.
Theories are adequate knowledge. Models are inadequate.
INADEQUATE KNOWLEDGE
When we truly understand an occurrence, we have adequate knowledge of it;
when we don’t, when we are unable to explain an occurrence in generality, we
have inadequate knowledge. For example:
The financial crisis of 2007-2008 was caused by the global savings glut.
What caused that?
The Asian currency crisis of 1997-1998: Asian countries came out of that
wanting to run net surpluses rather than net deficits.
But what caused that?
. . .
Each explanation, reasonable though it sounds, provokes a request for another.
Each explanation is inadequate and local because it displaces the ultimate cause
one degree further from the final effect.
Extending the Scope of Adequate Knowledge
As time passes we understand more things adequately. To take an example given
by Stuart Hampshire in his book on Spinoza, humans may once have thought

that lightning indicated that the gods must be angry; now we know that lightning
is caused by a difference in electric potential, as described by Maxwell’s
equations. In similar fashion, while people used to cite “evil” as the mysterious
source of criminal behavior, we now often blame it on “parental neglect.”11 In
this way we progress from inadequate understanding in terms of the arbitrary
volition of the gods to understanding via more general laws.
Similarly, claims Spinoza, human volition is an inadequate explanation for
human actions, and it must be replaced by a deeper understanding via laws of
human behavior: “To conceive a thing as free can be nothing else than to
conceive it simply, while we are in ignorance of the cause whereby it has been
determined to action.” Saying we have acted freely is tantamount to saying we
don’t understand why we acted. When we follow our passions “freely” we are in
fact behaving deterministically, according to the well-known laws of physics and
the poorly known laws of mind. We understand the laws of matter well, and
know that it is futile to complain about the behavior of electrons. Man’s behavior
is also subject to laws. The better we understand them, the more tolerant we will
be. The Dirac equation is a more profound explanation of reality than “I did this
because you did that.”
Hegel wrote that “the history of the world is none other than the progress of
the consciousness of freedom.” Spinoza’s claim is that the history of the world is
none other than the progress of the consciousness of our lack of freedom.
If there are laws of the universe governing human behavior, how can we learn
them?
From the Particular to the General, from Reason to
Intuition
According to Spinoza, there are a variety of ways to attain understanding of the
world:
• Via particulars
• Via generalities
• Via intuition
Particulars are diverse and confusing, but they provide the basis for
understanding everything else: “The more we understand particular things, the
more do we understand God,”12 that is, Nature, in its entirety. Applying reason

to particulars, we obtain adequate ideas about the regularities common to all
things. A step beyond that, according to Spinoza, is the deepest kind of
knowledge:
The highest endeavor of the mind, and the highest virtue is to understand
things by the intuitive kind of knowledge.
INTUITION
It takes intuition to discover theories. Intuition may sound casual, but it emerges
only from intimate knowledge acquired after careful observation and painstaking
effort. Before you can move one level higher in the pyramid of understanding,
before you can attain intuition in some domain, you have to struggle with the
particulars of that domain until knowledge of its details is second nature to you.
A cyclist develops physical intuition about the correct angle to tilt body and
bicycle to a curved track so as to maximize stability; the builder of a velodrome
can calculate the correct banking angle to ensure the cyclist remains in
equilibrium; together biker and builder combine visceral and theoretical
knowledge. Intuition is learning to ride a bicycle without thinking. You have to
incorporate the laws of the world into your body.
Feynman’s insight into the parallel evolution of quantum mechanical paths,
Dirac’s grasp of the essence of electrons, Newton’s understanding of mass and
its motion—all are instances of the external world joining with the internal.
Intuition is a merging of the understander with the understood. In the words of
the Upanishads, Tat tvam asi, Thou art that.
Perfection via Intuition
“Pleasure is the transition of a man from a less to a greater perfection,” wrote
Spinoza. No one achieved greater advances in our levels of perfection than Isaac
Newton, born in 1642, only ten years later than Spinoza. John Maynard Keynes
wrote a speech about Newton for the tercentenary of his birth, celebrated
belatedly by the Royal Society in 1946, after World War II. By then Keynes had
died, and his brother Geoffrey delivered the speech. It was based on Keynes’s
reading of a box of Newton’s notes, many of them cryptic and mystical,
concerning his attempts to understand not just the physical but the entire world.

Newton came to be thought of as the first and greatest of the modern age of
scientists, a rationalist, one who taught us to think on the lines of cold and
untinctured reason. I do not see him in this light. Newton was not the first of
the age of reason. He was the last of the magicians, the last of the
Babylonians and Sumerians, the last great mind which looked out on the
visible and intellectual world with the same eyes as those who began to build
our intellectual inheritance rather less than 10,000 years ago. . . .
    I believe that the clue to his mind is to be found in his unusual powers of
continuous concentrated introspection. . . . His peculiar gift was the power of
holding continuously in his mind a purely mental problem until he had seen
straight through it. I fancy his pre-eminence is due to his muscles of intuition
being the strongest and most enduring with which a man has ever been gifted.
Anyone who has ever attempted pure scientific or philosophical thought
knows how one can hold a problem momentarily in one’s mind and apply all
one’s powers of concentration to piercing through it, and how it will dissolve
and escape and you find that what you are surveying is a blank. I believe that
Newton could hold a problem in his mind for hours and days and weeks until
it surrendered to him its secret. Then being a supreme mathematical
technician he could dress it up, how you will, for purposes of exposition, but
it was his intuition which was pre-eminently extraordinary—“so happy in his
conjectures,” said De Morgan, “as to seem to know more than he could
possibly have any means of proving.”
    There is the story of how he informed Halley of one of his most
fundamental discoveries of planetary motion. “Yes,” replied Halley, “but how
do you know that? Have you proved it?” Newton was taken aback—“Why,
I’ve known it for years,” he replied. “If you’ll give me a few days, I’ll
certainly find you a proof of it”—as in due course he did. . . .
    Certainly there can be no doubt that the peculiar geometrical form in which
the exposition of the Principia is dressed up bears no resemblance at all to the
mental processes by which Newton actually arrived at his conclusions.
    His experiments were always, I suspect, a means, not of discovery, but
always of verifying what he knew already.
    Why do I call him a magician? Because he looked on the whole universe
and all that is in it as a riddle, as a secret which could be read by applying
pure thought to certain evidence, certain mystic clues which God had laid
about the world to allow a sort of philosopher’s treasure hunt to the esoteric

brotherhood. He believed that these clues were to be found partly in the
evidence of the heavens and in the constitution of elements (and that is what
gives the false suggestion of his being an experimental natural philosopher),
but also partly in certain papers and traditions handed down by the brethren in
an unbroken chain back to the original cryptic revelation in Babylonia. He
regarded the universe as a cryptogram set by the Almighty—just as he
himself wrapt the discovery of the calculus in a cryptogram when he
communicated with Leibniz. By pure thought, by concentration of mind, the
riddle, he believed, would be revealed to the initiate.
    He did read the riddle of the heavens. And he believed that by the same
powers of his introspective imagination he would read the riddle of the
Godhead, the riddle of past and future events divinely foreordained, the riddle
of the elements and their constitution from an original undifferentiated first
matter, the riddle of health and of immortality. All would be revealed to him
if only he could persevere to the end, uninterrupted, by himself, no one
coming into the room, reading, copying, testing—all by himself, no
interruption for God’s sake, no disclosure, no discordant breakings in or
criticism, with fear and shrinking as he assailed these half-ordained, half-
forbidden things, creeping back into the bosom of the Godhead as into his
mother’s womb. “Voyaging through strange seas of thought alone,” not as
Charles Lamb “a fellow who believed nothing unless it was as clear as the
three sides of a triangle.”
Keynes saw Newton’s explanations as merely a means of verifying what he
had already discerned more directly. This was also James Clerk Maxwell’s
impression of André-Marie Ampère, who in 1820 discovered the connection
between electricity and magnetism. Referring to him as the “Newton of
electricity,” Maxwell wrote:
We can scarcely believe that Ampère really discovered the law of action by
means of the experiments which he describes. We are led to suspect, what,
indeed, he tells us himself, that he discovered the law by some process which
he has not shown us, and that when he had afterwards built up a perfect
demonstration, he removed all traces of the scaffolding by which he had built
it.
For Spinoza, God’s understanding of the world is like that of the cyclist
banking on a curve, perfectly stable without his having to think, in unison with
the road. God’s is the ultimate intuition, so encompassing that there is no

boundary between the creator and the created.
PERFECTION
Pleasure is the transition to a greater perfection, but what is perfection itself?
Early in Ethics, Spinoza defines it: “Reality and perfection I use as synonymous
terms.”
How can reality be perfection? Our world is not a Panglossian best of all
possible worlds. Nevertheless, I observe that our language reveals a sense in
which the real and the perfect are synonymous:
    Perfect means completed: The perfect tense in grammar refers to actions
that have been completed.
    Completed means successfully realized: Only that which has been
completed is actual and realized. (A quarterback “completes a pass.”)
    Therefore perfect means real: Only that which has been completed as its
author intended, whose realization matches the mental model that preceded it,
is perfect.
A True Theory Is Perfection
An idea, as we will shortly see, is always inseparably associated with matter;
each is a side of one larger thing. Thus truth, according to Spinoza, is a harmony
between an object and its idea.
An idea that corresponds with its object is a very good definition of a correct
theory.
Levels of Perfection
Spinoza understood that our fundamental desire is to remain integral, to survive:
“No virtue can be conceived prior to the virtue of striving to preserve oneself.”
Pleasure and goodness are conducive to survival, while pain and evil promote
disintegration, a change of state. As Spinoza writes:
The emotion of pain is an . . . activity of transition from a greater to a less

perfection. In other words, it is an activity whereby a man’s power of action is
lessened or constrained.
Spinoza is not naïve about pleasure; he knows that it is not an unmitigated
good, and that it is best when it is balanced. He distinguishes pleasure from
stimulation (Latin titillatio), a pleasure that is focused more on some parts of the
body than others. Localized pleasure, he writes, can exert an obsessive power
“that can overcome other actions of the body, and may remain obstinately fixed
therein, thus rendering it incapable of being affected in a variety of other ways:
therefore it may be bad.” Who could disagree?
Because stimulation accompanied by the idea of an external cause is, by his
definition, a kind of love, love may be excessive too. Generalized pleasure,
though, is always good:
Mirth is pleasure, which . . . consists in all parts of the body being affected
equally: that is, the body’s power of activity is increased or aided in such a
manner, that the several parts maintain their former proportion, therefore
Mirth is always good, and cannot be excessive.
SUBSTANCE, MIND, AND MATTER
Everything we are aware of manifests itself as either matter or mind. In
Spinoza’s view, these manifestations are the features of only one Substance.
Substance has many attributes, but we humans can perceive only two of them: a
mind-quality (Thought) and a matterquality (Extension). The word substance
originates in the Latin substare, “to stand beneath.” In the language of finance,
substance is the ultimate underlier, and everything else is its derivative.
Mind and matter are simultaneous attributes of Substance. Mind is not an
epiphenomenon of matter, nor is matter an epiphenomenon of mind.
Neurophysiology doesn’t explain psychology, and psychology doesn’t replace
neurophysiology. Both are different views of the same underlier.
Things made out of Substance obey the deterministic laws of the universe, but
it’s not easy to deduce those general laws when you observe only particulars.
Lest you think it naïve to assume that there are laws behind everything, recall
how many centuries of observing the lights in the night sky it took to discover
that Newton’s three laws of motion and his law of gravity could explain the
motions of the planets, the stars, and objects on earth. Tycho Brahe had to map
the planetary motions and Johannes Kepler had to intuit that they described
mathematical ellipses, each planet sweeping out equal areas in equal times; only

then could Newton step into the picture with dynamics.
With time, what more may we still discover?
Mysterious Materialism
Spinoza is a materialist, but not a naïve materialist. Since Newton we think of
matter as dull, inanimate stuff that must obey laws. But Spinoza points out that
the matter we inhabit is full of mysterious possibilities:
However, no one has hitherto laid down the limits to the powers of the body,
that is, no one has as yet been taught by experience what the body can
accomplish solely by the laws of nature. . . . Nor need I call attention to the
fact that many actions are observed in the lower animals, which far transcend
human sagacity, and that somnambulists do many things in their sleep, which
they would not venture to do when awake: these instances are enough to
show, that the body can by the sole laws of its nature do many things which
the mind wonders at.
The brain, after all, is part of the body too. One of the lessons of twentieth-
century physics—of relativity, quantum mechanics, and cosmology—is that the
more we learn about matter, the more enigmatic it seems.
There is a “mind” way of looking at things and there is also a “matter” way. In
his book I Am a Strange Loop, Douglas Hofstadter imagines a digital computer
built out of chains of dominoes constructed to divide the prime number 641 by
all the numbers less than it. You begin the program by knocking over the first
domino. The logic of the chains is such that if no number can divide 641 without
a remainder, then the final domino in the chain will fall. The domino computer
begins its computation, and the final domino falls a few seconds later. Why did
the domino fall? Answer 1: Because the domino preceding it in the chain pushed
it over. And why did that domino fall? Because the domino preceding it fell and
pushed it over. Et cetera. But there is also Answer 2: Because 641 is a prime
number. Both of these answers are simultaneously true, the first in the realm of
matter, the second in the realm of mind. The dominoes don’t know about primes,
and primes don’t know about dominoes.
Each explanation is separately valid. But the logical chains that drive each
explanation—falling dominoes in the matter realm, division by primes in the
mind realm—cannot be independent of each other. It makes no sense, says

Spinoza, to have two different causes for the same single sequence of events.
Instead, according to Spinoza, there is one unique sequence of events, and there
is one unique causal chain that accounts for both explanations.
Stuart Hampshire sharpens this argument and thereby makes it even harder to
accept. Suppose you become embarrassed and turn red. You might say, “I
blushed because I became embarrassed.” A strict Spinozist would not claim that
embarrassment was the cause of blushing, because embarrassment is the mental
description of the physical blush, a crisscrossing of causal chains. We should not
jump from one style of explanation to another. We must explain physical things
by physics and psychological things by psychology. It is of course very difficult
to give up the notion of psychic causes for physical states. But, as Spinoza says,
no one knows by what means the mind moves the body.
Ethics argues that every manifestation of Substance must appear as both
Thought and Extension. (In Hebrew, the word for word is the same as the word
for thing.) Mind and the emotions, like matter, are not extraordinary; they lie
within, not outside, Nature and its laws. From this point of view, the body and
the mind are reciprocal: “The body is the object of the mind. The object of the
idea constituting the human mind is the body.”
It is tempting to assume that there is an idea corresponding to everything, and
hence, recursively, an idea of an idea too. To which Spinoza preemptively
answers, “This idea of the mind is united to the mind in the same way as the
mind is united to the body.” That is, the idea of the mind is the mind itself. The
circle closes.
Emotions Are the Link
Why does Spinoza place so much importance on the emotions? Because mind
and body proceed in parallel disconnected paths, and emotions are the only
perceptible link between them. The passions are the wormhole between the two
sides of our little piece of dream-stuff:
The human mind has no knowledge of the body, and does not know it to exist,
save through the ideas of the modifications whereby the body is affected.
    The mind does not know itself, except in so far as it perceives the ideas of
the modifications of the body.
By the “modifications of the body” Spinoza means the affects or emotions.

The only way the mind can know the body is through the emotions, which tie the
two spheres together. The idea side of our physical responses to external
interactions are the emotions, hence their critical importance.
Though the dominoes don’t know about primes, and the primes don’t know
about dominoes, the body and the mind know each other through the affects.
Our Understanding of Our Body Is Unclear
Like most people, I function pretty well without understanding anything about
my physiology. It may even be a distraction to know too much about one’s
internal structure. From Spinoza’s viewpoint, this ignorance is to be expected: it
is only through the passions that we can know our body, and since the passions
are caused by interactions with other bodies, we cannot form a clear idea of our
own body in isolation.
THE CURE: UNDERSTANDING THE ADEQUATE
CAUSES
Our passions, properly understood, are reactions to something outside us. If we
had a clear idea of the laws that constrain us, we would adequately understand
the causes of our passions. They are passions only as long as we don’t
understand them. Once we do, proceeding with understanding becomes an
action, and we become an independent underlier rather than a dependent
derivative.
We can, Spinoza claims, convert our passions into actions by understanding
their true causes: “If we can be the adequate causes of any of these affections, I
understand by the affect an action; otherwise a passion.” Spinoza’s cure is in
keeping with contemporary notions: we need to lay bare the subconscious
drivers of our feelings. When you understand yourself from inside and out, you
know yourself. Freedom is the unification of understanding and volition, of
reason and desire. Will and Understanding are one and the same. Understanding
is merely Will perceived from the inside.
With this understanding, you become close to Spinoza’s God, who does not
think about what to do. He operates with intuition. He does not consider the
possibilities and then do the right thing. There is no need for Him to act. He is
complete and perfect. He does what He does and He is what He is. He’s the
Understander and the Understood. He’s not a metaphor.13

Chapter 4
The Sublime
The birds of the air • The best theory in the world • No logical path to it •
Electricity and magnetism • Their qualities • Their quantitative laws •
Ampère’s sympathetic understanding of the phenomena • Faraday’s
imaginary lines of force • Maxwell’s factual field • Dodging the beasts of the
field • Quantum dreams
There is a delicate empiricism which makes itself utterly identical with the
object, thereby becoming true theory. But this enhancement of our mental
powers belongs to a highly evolved age.
—Goethe, Maxims and Reflections
One of the points I have laboured in this book is the unitary source of
mystical and scientific modes of experience.
—Arthur Koestler, The Sleepwalkers
The ultimate goal would be: to grasp that everything in the realm of fact is
already theory.
—Goethe, Maxims and Reflections
THE BIRDS OF THE AIR
In his essay “Frogs and Birds,” the introduction to a collection of papers by the
Russian mathematician Y. Manin, Freeman Dyson wrote:
Some mathematicians are birds, others are frogs. Birds fly high in the air and
survey broad vistas of mathematics out to the far horizon. They delight in
concepts that unify our thinking. . . . Frogs live in the mud below and see only
the flowers that grow nearby. They delight in the details of particular objects,
and they solve problems one at a time. I happen to be a frog, but many of my
best friends are birds.
Dyson’s metaphorical classification of mathematicians applies to physicists
too. I was mostly a clumsy sort of frog physicist, elaborating or testing other

people’s ideas, but I was a bird manqué. I studied the work of birds, among them
Newton, Ampère, Maxwell, Einstein, Schrödinger, Feynman, Gell-Mann, and
Weinberg—men who had intuited and discovered wonderful, astonishing things
about the world. Perhaps I could do it too. Deep inside, every physicist dreams
of glory and believes it is attainable, or once did so; otherwise he or she
wouldn’t be in the field.
As long as I was immersed in doing physics, the discovery of its laws seemed
a natural and obvious process. Now when I look at the field and realize that I can
no longer recall the origin or proof of some facts I once knew as second nature, I
am awed that anyone was ever able to penetrate through the phenomena to the
laws. In a speech on the principles of research, given in 1918 in honor of Max
Planck, the discoverer of the quantum, Einstein captured the mystery of the
birds’ accomplishments: “There is no logical path to these laws; only intuition,
resting on sympathetic understanding of experience, can reach them.”
Of all theories, the best in the world is quantum electrodynamics, appropriately
called QED. QED is the quantum theory of the electron and its interaction with
light, and it determines just about everything relevant to the physics and
chemistry of the atoms and molecules that compose us and the world around us.
We trust it because it predicts the values of measured properties of the atom so
precisely as to strain belief. Any successful theory in physics is amazing; QED is
a miracle.
As I’ll show in the next chapter, the creation of QED runs in counterpoint to
the development of the Efficient Market Model in finance. The development of
QED is a tight intertwining of data, facts, experiments, failures, and successes;
the development of the Efficient Market Model is coupled to the world much
more loosely, driven as much by ideology as by facts. QED predicts atomic
properties to an accuracy of more than 10 significant figures; the best models in
finance are not accurate to even one. More to the point, no one in finance knows
how to specify exactly what “accurate” means, because so many of its variables
are related to human sentiment.
In this chapter I want to provide a glimpse of the crooked paths that culminate
in theories, to give a sense of the role of intuition in the discovery of a theory
and in the sweep of that discovery. I want to recount in stylized fashion some of
the prodigious feats that birds and frogs have achieved as they created the best
theory in the world. Here, then, is an attenuated trip through the history of
classical and quantum electromagnetic theory, a triumph of mind over matter.

THE PHENOMENA: ELECTRICITY AND
MAGNETISM
First the facts. The ancient Greeks knew that rubbing amber, the fossilized tree
resin called elektron in Greek, empowered it to pick up tiny scraps of straw or
feather. We now call this static electricity, the buildup of a stationary electric
charge on the surface of objects, a terminology that prefigures the later discovery
that what we call an electric current is the dynamic flow of charge. The Greeks
were also familiar with lodestones, naturally occurring magnets that they
discovered in Magnesia in the province of Thessaly.
Then the theories. Lodestones pointed north, but why? Some thought the
attractor was the polestar in the heavens; others imagined a small magnetic
island located at the north pole itself. Then, in 1600, William Gilbert, an English
physician, proposed that the Earth itself is a giant magnet with an iron core.
Proof was his experiment on the angles at which freely suspended needles “dip”
in the vicinity of a spherical lodestone, which he noticed was similar to the way
compass needles incline to the surface of the Earth. His theory is now a fact.
QUALITIES: POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE
Yet electromagnetic theory was slow to take flight. More than 50 years after
Newton began applying the calculus to the motion of the planets, at about the
same time (1738) that Daniel Bernoulli published his seminal book on
hydrodynamics, the theory of electricity and magnetism was just beginning to
incorporate facts.
That there are two kinds of charge was a discovery made by the French
chemist Charles Du Fay in 1734. He found that he could create two different
types of electricity by friction: vitreous by rubbing glass-like materials, and
resinous by rubbing resin-like materials. Furthermore the small pieces of
charged glass that repelled each other attracted pieces of charged amber. Some
years later Benjamin Franklin replaced Du Fay’s empirically inspired adjectives
by the moral descriptors positive and negative.
Note that electrical charge didn’t have to come with a positive or negative
sign. In gravitation everything is positively charged and masses never repel each
other. The electron’s antiparticle, even though it has the opposite electric charge,
has the same gravitational mass. Masses carry no + or -.

QUANTITIES: COULOMB’S LAW OF
FORCE BETWEEN STATIC CHARGES
In 1788, inspired by Newton’s law of gravitation, Charles Coulomb published
what is now called Coulomb’s law: the attractive or repulsive force between
small point-like charges is proportional to the magnitude of their charge and
diminishes in proportion to the inverse square of the distance between them. But
take no discovery for granted: though it sounds simple, it took ingenious
experimentation to accurately measure both the quantity of charge on objects and
the forces between them.
No one thought much about the transmission of forces. People believed, even
took for granted, that both the gravitational force and the electrostatic force were
transmitted through space instantaneously by so-called action at a distance.
VOLTA’S ITALIAN INSIGHT:
CHEMISTRY IS BETTER THAN
FRICTION
Facts accumulate. Until this moment the only way to produce electric charge was
by means of friction, scraping charge off objects and storing it in small quantities
in a reservoir, a Leyden jar for example. Electric currents fueled by such
capacitors were consequently brief and transient. Then, in 1800, Alessandro
Volta invented the first chemical source of electric charge, the voltaic pile, a
battery consisting of alternating disks of copper and zinc separated by cardboard
soaked in salt water.
It wasn’t immediately obvious to anyone that what flowed out of the battery
was electric charge, but its effects were soon identified with those caused by the
brief flow of charge produced the old-fashioned, frictional way. Large voltaic
piles produced powerful, steady, longlived currents suitable for experimenting
with. The discovery that running a current through water separated it into its
component parts, hydrogen and oxygen, soon followed. Thus electrochemistry
was born.
OERSTED: ELECTRIC CURRENTS

BEHAVE LIKE MAGNETS
More observations. Until now electricity and magnetism had seemed to be two
disparate phenomena. Then, in 1820, Hans Christian Oersted discovered a
crossing of boundaries: he observed that electric currents could deflect compass
needles.
AMPÈRE: A LAW FOR THE FORCE
BETWEEN CURRENTS
If electric currents deflect compass needles, then currents behave like magnets,
and must therefore interact with other magnet-like currents. Hearing of Oersted’s
discovery, André-Marie Ampère immediately began his own series of much
more thorough and quantitative investigations.
First, he found that pairs of electric currents moving in the same direction
attract, whereas pairs moving in opposite directions repel, as shown in Figure
4.1. Then, after using a voltaic pile to drive current through a helical loop of
wire, he noticed that the force exerted on a compass needle by the loop was
much like the force exerted by a magnet. He concluded that magnets themselves
might be small solenoidal currents (see Figure 4.2)
Figure 4.1. Ampère: Currents moving in the same direction attract. Currents
moving in opposite directions repel.
This was qualitative, and relatively simple. Ampère’s theoretical tour de force
was his discovery of the mathematical formula for the magnetic force between
two isolated current elements, tiny imaginary bits of current that are the
magnetic analogues of point-like electric charges. I say “imaginary” because it is
impossible to isolate small steady current elements. Currents from batteries can
flow only in finite closed loops from one terminal to another.

Figure 4.2. Ampère: Small current loops behave like little north-south bar
magnets.
Ampère’s law for the force between two imaginary bits of wire, as illustrated
in Figure 4.3, was vastly more complex and subtle than the Coulomb force
between two point charges, because charges have location but no orientation,
whereas currents necessarily point in some direction. Ampère’s force therefore
varied not only with distance between the current elements but also with the
orientation of each element, and is much more difficult to describe or visualize.
Its discovery was a triumph of imagination and intuition.
Using his law Ampère was able to mathematically sum up the forces from
each infinitesimal segment of current to determine the forces between entire
circuits. His theory shifted the foundations of electricity and magnetism,
transforming the field from a largely descriptive subject into a quantitative
discipline in which one could employ the calculus to tackle realistic engineering
problems.
Figure 4.3. Ampère’s Law: The magnetic forces that two current elements, I1 of
length dl1 and I2 of length dl2, separated by a distance r21 , exert on each other.
Each element can point in an arbitrary direction, and they can be separated by an
arbitrary distance. Ampère’s formula is shown boxed.

A SYMPATHETIC UNDERSTANDING
Ampère titled his paper “Theory of Electrodynamic Phenomena, Uniquely
Deduced from Experience.” But as Henri Poincaré remarked in 1905 about
“Ampère’s immortal work,” Ampère’s laws could not have been deduced from
experience, because he had no infinitesimal currents to experiment with. Only
what Einstein called intuition or a “sympathetic understanding of experience”
could have led him from observations of entire circuits to a law for infinitesimal
current elements. In his encyclopedic A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism,
James Clerk Maxwell later wrote:
The experimental investigation by which Ampère established the laws of the
mechanical action between electric currents is one of the most brilliant
achievements in science.
    The whole, theory and experiment, seems as if it had leaped full grown and
full armed from the brain of the “Newton of Electricity.” It is perfect in form
and unassailable in accuracy, and it is summed up in a formula from which all
the phenomena may be deduced, and which must always remain the cardinal
formula of electrodynamics.
    The method of Ampère, however, though cast into an inductive form, does
not allow us to trace the formation of the ideas which guided it. We can
scarcely believe that Ampère really discovered the law of action by means of
the experiments which he describes. We are led to suspect, what, indeed, he
tells us himself, that he discovered the law by some process which he has not
shown us, and that when he had afterwards built up a perfect demonstration,
he removed all traces of the scaffolding by which he had built it.
Maxwell, who performed his own magic, recognized that miraculous
discoveries seem to leap out of the mind’s invisible Dirac sea, elicited by
intuition.
FARADAY: MOVING MAGNETS CREATE
ELECTRIC CURRENTS
Back to the phenomena. Michael Faraday, impressed by Oersted’s discovery that
one current could push on another, became convinced that one current alone
should be able to produce another current too. In 1831 he ran a steady current

through one circuit and watched for a steady current in another. Disappointed at
observing nothing, he switched off the current in the first circuit—and
unexpectedly observed a flicker of current in the second. The change of current
in the first wire induced an electric current in the second.
Because he knew that currents behave like magnets, Faraday conjectured and
then demonstrated that moving a magnet near a closed loop of wire could induce
an electric current in it too, as illustrated in Figure 4.4. Well acquainted with the
force that magnets exert on currents, Faraday quickly figured out how to build
the first electric motor by surrounding a loop of current-carrying wire with
magnets, which made it rotate. Then he did the inverse: by rotating a loop of
wire in the vicinity of a magnet he produced a current in the loop and created the
first electric generator. The discovery of phenomena and the development of
theory have played leapfrog in the history of electromagnetism, a fruitful
progression missing in the development of models of financial markets.
Figure 4.4. Faraday’s discovery of induction: a moving magnet induces an
electric current in a circuit.
FARADAY IMAGINES FORCE-
TRANSMITTING LINES
Until Faraday everyone assumed that charges and currents pushed on each other
across empty space without any delay. All interactions were thought to reside
purely within the objects that felt them. Faraday knew little mathematics beyond
algebra, but he was adept at thinking spatially. In a Spinozan act of identification
with the object, Faraday dreamed up lines of force. He pictured every charge
exuding electric lines of force that flowed though space to create an invisible
web, transmitting and exerting electric forces on charges in other locations. He
visualized magnetic lines of force similarly pervading space to attract iron filings

and to influence distant currents. Figure 4.5 shows the schematic lines of electric
and magnetic forces necessary to account for the distant electrical influences of
charges and magnets.
Faraday recast all the relationships between electric and magnetic forces
known at that time in terms of equivalent dynamic relationships between the
lines, so that the laws of electromagnetic interactions became laws of interacting
lines. Thus, for example, his own discovery that “magnets in motion induce
electric currents in circuits” was transformed into the more abstract proposition
“A change in the number of magnetic lines of force creates electric lines of
force.”
Figure 4.5 (a) Electric lines of force from two positive charges. (b) Electric lines
of force from one positive and one negative charge. (c) Magnetic lines of force
emanating from a bar magnet.
In a paper he published in 1846, almost 60 years ahead of its time, Faraday
presciently began to regard electromagnetic radiation as existing in its own right,
without the need for a medium to flow through:
The view which I am so bold to put forth considers, therefore, radiation as a
kind of species of vibration in the lines of force which are known to connect

particles and also masses of matter together. It endeavors to dismiss the
aether, but not the vibration.
The lines originated as metaphor; Faraday began to liberate them; shortly
thereafter, Maxwell set them free.
MAXWELL MODELS THE LINES
From a long view of the history of mankind—seen from, say, ten thousand
years from now—there can be little doubt that the most significant event of
the 19th century will be judged as Maxwell’s discovery of the laws of
electrodynamics. The American Civil War will pale into provincial
insignificance in comparison with this important scientific event of the same
decade.
—Richard Feynman, Lectures on Physics
The historic achievement of James Clerk Maxwell, a Scottish mathematician
and theoretical physicist with a very practical streak, was the unification of
electricity and magnetism into a consistent set of equations for electromagnetic
theory. Feynman, no mean achiever himself, is accurate about the magnitude of
Maxwell’s discovery, which was the midpoint on the trajectory from Newton’s
discovery of the laws of mechanics to Einstein’s theories of relativity. Maxwell
was a bird who flew from branch to branch and field to field, not only
developing electromagnetic theory but also playing a major role in the creation
of thermodynamics, statistical mechanics, and the theory of controlling
engineering devices.1
Maxwell made his first assault on electromagnetism in 1856, in a paper
entitled “On Faraday’s Lines of Force” Faraday’s imaginary electric and
magnetic lines of force reminded Maxwell of the streamlines in the flow of a
fluid. By the mid-1850s the theory of fluid flow, or hydrodynamics, was
mathematically sophisticated and powerful. Maxwell, inspired by Faraday’s
vision, decided to model Faraday’s lines of force as “the motion of an imaginary
fluid,” hoping to get some insight from what he thought of as only an analogy
rather than reality. It was a warm-up exercise for Maxwell, who clearly
understood the difference between a theory and a model. Working by analogy, he
explicitly hoped to “avoid the dangers arising from a premature theory
professing to explain the cause of the phenomena.” Maxwell’s tentative model
for electromagnetism was based on the better-understood theory of fluid flow

and was meant to suffice until “a mature theory, in which the physical facts will
be physically explained, will be formed.” The result was a set of differential
equations for the interactions between the still imaginary fluid lines of electric
and magnetic force filling space.
MAXWELL REIFIES THE LINES
Until now Maxwell had merely translated Faraday’s intuition about imaginary
lines of force into the more formal language of differential equations, using
analogies with fluid flow as an aid to thinking. Then he crossed the threshold: in
1861, in a paper entitled “On Physical Lines of Force,” he began to regard the
lines as genuine stresses in a space-filling ether. In Maxwell’s hands, Coulomb’s
law, Ampère’s laws, and Faraday’s law all became propositions about the
dynamics of lines of force. Here are two examples of how the laws of forces on
visible objects were rewritten as laws of invisibly interacting lines of force:
1. Ampère’s law of force specified how two current elements pushed against
each other. It was a statement about observable effects. Rephrased by Maxwell
it became:
Ampère’s law: An electric current creates magnetic lines of force.
In Maxwell’s view, one electric current element produces magnetic lines of
force that permeate the space around it. These lines, like a magnet, push on the
other current element.
2. Faraday’s law of induction stated that the fluctuation of an electric current in
one circuit induces a current in another. Rephrased by Maxwell, it stated:
    Faraday’s law: A change in the magnetic lines of force creates electric
lines of force.
    A fluctuating electric current in the first circuit produces a corresponding
fluctuation in the number of magnetic lines of force that fill the space around
it. This fluctuation in turn creates electric lines of force that impel the charges
in the second circuit to flow; hence an induced current. Charges and current
no longer act on each other directly. Now their actions are mediated by the
lines.
MAXWELL MODIFIES AMPÈRE’S

EQUATIONS
There is a glaring asymmetry between Ampère’s law and Faraday’s law.
Whereas Faraday’s law states that electric lines of force are created by a change
in magnetic lines, Ampère’s law says that magnetic lines are created only by
electric currents. Why shouldn’t changes in electric lines similarly induce
magnetic lines? Guided by intuition and a sense of symmetry, Maxwell added an
entirely new law for the production of lines of force, a law obtained by switching
the words magnetic and electric in Faraday’s law in (2) above, transforming it
into:
3. Maxwell’s addition to Ampère’s law: A change in the electric lines of force
creates magnetic lines of force.
Experiment didn’t demand this law, and historians of science still disagree
about the impetus that led Maxwell to make the addition. But what matters most
is that, without experimental evidence, he perceived the necessary existence of a
phenomenon that hadn’t yet been observed.
MAXWELL’S THEORY: THE FIELD
ITSELF
Since Maxwell’s time, physical reality has been thought of as represented by
continuous fields, and not capable of any mechanical interpretation. This
change in the conception of reality is the most profound and the most fruitful
that physics has experienced since the time of Newton.
—Albert Einstein, “Maxwell’s Influence on
the Development of the Conception of Physical
Reality,” in James Clerk Maxwell: A Commemorative
Volume 1831–s1931 (1931), 71.
Why the extreme praise? Because Maxwell changed the way physicists do
physics. He examined the equations obeyed by the visible world, saw a pattern
with something missing, completed it, and deduced the existence of
electromagnetic waves. The imposition of an apparently missing symmetry has
become the classic modus operandi of theoretical physics. The discovery of the
Dirac equation, the unveiling of quarks, and the elucidation of the Standard
Model all proceeded in similar style.

In 1864 Maxwell published “A Dynamical Theory of the Electromagnetic
Field.” In this paper he christened the lines of force the field, writing, “The
electromagnetic field is that part of space which contains and surrounds bodies
in electric or magnetic conditions.” The lines of force, once an aid to thinking,
became a theory.
I like the phrase “a dynamical theory.” Maxwell’s equations describe
interactive movement, the shapes of the electric and magnetic fields as they twist
and curl through space and influence each other. Like most things and ideas, the
field is observable only indirectly, via its effects, but no one doubts its reality.
MAXWELL’S EQUATIONS: THE FIELD’S
GEOMETRY—CURLS AND
DIVERGENCES
As shown in Figure 4.6, a field in general can diverge like a fountain or curl like
a halo.2 Maxwell’s equations elegantly describe the causes of the
electromagnetic field’s curls and divergences, which can be understood
pictorially.
I shall denote the electric field by the symbol E and the color black, and the
magnetic field by the symbol B and the color gray. The arrow above each field’s
symbol indicates that it is a vector, meaning that at each point in space the field
has not only a magnitude but also a direction, like a force, or a fluid flowing.
Maxwell’s four famous equations concisely specify what causes E and B to
diverge or curl, as illustrated in Figures 4.7-4.10.
Figure 4.6. The configurations of fields: divergences and curls.
To summarize, electric charges produce divergent E fields; electric currents
produce curling B fields; time-varying E fields produce curling B fields; time-
varying B fields produce curling E fields.

Figure 4.7. Maxwell’s first equation: A positive electric charge is the source of a
divergent electric field E. Similarly a negative charge is the sink of a convergent
E field. The number of electric lines of force is proportional to the charge.
Figure 4.8. Maxwell’s second equation: Magnetic fields B never diverge or
converge, because there are no single magnetic poles found in nature to serve as
their source.3 Thus every line that flows into a closed surface must flow out
again.
Figure 4.9. Maxwell’s third equation: Since B lines cannot diverge, they can
only curl. There are two independent ways to generate a curling magnetic field :
(a) via a steady electric current (corresponding to Ampères law), and (b) via a
time-varying electric field (corresponding to Maxwell’s modification of
Ampère’s law).

Figure 4.10. Maxwell’s fourth equation: Electric fields can curl as well as
diverge. Fluctuating magnetic fields produce curling electric fields
(corresponding to Faraday’s law).
THE GREAT CONFIRMATION: LIGHT IS
THE PROPAGATION OF
ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES
How did Maxwell know that his addition to Ampère’s law was correct? Because
that addition made it possible for waves of E and B fields to propagate
indefinitely through empty space.
By combining the equations depicted in Figures 4.9a, 4.9b, and 4.10, you can
see how waves can be produced and then propagate, as illustrated in Figure 4.11.
It begins with an oscillating electric current, which, by Figure 4.9a, generates an
oscillating curling magnetic field. The oscillation in time is crucial, because it is
the magnetic field’s oscil-
Figure 4.11. The generation and propagation of electromagnetic waves via
Maxwell’s equations.

Step 1: An oscillating electric current in the wire (an antenna)
Step 2: Produces an oscillating magnetic field via Ampère’s law;
Step 3: Which, via Maxwell equation 4, produces a curling oscillating electric
field.
Step 4: The extra term in Maxwell’s equation 3 guarantees that the oscillating
electric field will induce a fresh oscillating curling magnetic field.
Step 5: Which produces a curling oscillating . . .
The diagram is meant to be schematic. Only parts of the field are shown. The
wiggles in the loops are meant to indicate the oscillatory nature of the fields.
lations, according to Figure 4.10, that induce a similarly oscillating curling
electric field, which in turn, according to Figure 4.9b, induces another oscillating
curling magnetic field, which . . . This is, precisely, a wave! Waves of electric
and magnetic fields propagate through space by leapfrogging, an oscillating E
leading to an oscillating B leading to an oscillating E ad infinitum. You can think
of the current-bearing wire in the center of the figure as an antenna that initiates
the radiation, which then continues to re-create itself recursively.
Working out the mathematics of the leapfrogging, Maxwell discovered that the
theoretical speed with which the waves propagated through space was about
186,000 miles per second, the measured speed of light. Therefore, he deduced,
the light we see is in fact an electromagnetic wave whose frequencies happen to

be visible to our eyes.4 Heat, ultraviolet rays, radio waves, and X-rays are
merely the same Maxwellian fields, differing from each other only in their
wavelength. Without Maxwell’s addition to the equations, there would have been
no leapfrogging and no waves in the theory at all.
One can learn even more about the waves of light by examining Figure 4.12.
There the black and gray loops give rise to each other sequentially, like a father
and child building a tower of hands. Each E wave curls about the previous B
wave, and each B wave curls about the previous E wave, so that at any point in
space the electric and magnetic fields curl perpendicular to each other, and also
perpendicular to the direction in which they move. That is, the waves propagate
transversely, as illustrated. In this way Maxwell’s equations explained the fact
that light can be polarized. The transverse propagation of light is quite different
from the so-called longitudinal propagation of sound waves, in which the
variations in air pressure occur along the direction in which the wave travels.
In 1887 Heinrich Hertz used an antenna to create, transmit, receive, and reflect
electromagnetic waves in his laboratory, entirely confirming the theory. About
Maxwell’s equations he later said:
Figure 4.12. The transverse propagation of electromagnetic waves.
One cannot escape the feeling that these mathematical formulae have an
independent existence and an intelligence of their own, that they are wiser
than we are, wiser even than their discoverers, that we get more out of them
than was originally put into them.5
REALITY = PERFECTION; FACT =
THEORY
There is no better or truer description of the physical phenomenon of light than
to say it is precisely the electromagnetic field defined by Maxwell’s equations.
The electromagnetic field is not like Maxwell’s equations; it is Maxwell’s

equations. While a model builder knows that his model airplane is like a true
airplane,6 and a climate modeler is aware that his equations only simulate the
atmosphere, a physicist knows that light and Maxwell’s equations are one and
the same.
I see the trajectory of the discoveries of electromagnetism as follows:
From phenomena as facts
        to lines of force as an aide to visualization
                to analogies with fluid flow
                        to a theory of fields that has again become fact.
We advance by mounting new theories atop previous facts. If those theories
prove correct, they become facts too.
THE BEASTS OF THE FIELD
Who teaches us more than the beasts of the field and makes us wiser than the
birds of the heavens?
—Job 35:11
The advances of the sublime theory of electromagnetism didn’t end in the late
nineteenth century. In 1897 J. J. Thomson discovered the electron, the minuscule
carrier of the electric current. In 1900 Max Planck noticed the first hint of the
quantum nature of light, and in short order the completeness of classical physics
—Newton for matter and Maxwell for light—began to unravel. Einstein showed
that smooth light waves consist of chunky quanta, Schrödinger and that chunky
electrons satisfy smooth quantum mechanical wave equations.
The idea of the electromagnetic field is Maxwell’s equations. The idea of the
electron is the Dirac equation. Combining them both we obtain QED, the idea of
electrons interacting with light quanta, the theory of relativistic quantum
electrodynamics. The equations that compose it, Maxwell’s and Dirac’s, were
complete by the late 1920s.
QED seemed to work magnificently, the result of calculations using the theory
agreeing perfectly with experiment. But in the late 1940s atomic physicists,
among them Polykarp Kusch and Willis Lamb at Columbia, discovered tiny but
very precise anomalies in the radiation emitted by the single electron orbiting the
proton in a hydrogen atom.7 The wavelengths they measured didn’t quite match

those predicted by the straightforward use of QED. Theorists set about trying to
explain the size of the discrepancies and were led to consider the possibility that
they might stem from the interactions of the atom with the invisible Dirac sea
itself.
From a theoretical point of view, what we call a single isolated electron is
neither single nor isolated: it travels through the Dirac sea, which is filled to the
brim with an infinite number of invisible negative-energy electrons. When you
accept the existence of the sea as gospel rather than metaphor, the Dirac theory
of a supposedly single electron is actually a theory of many particles. There is no
solitary electron; the sea of electrons is the medium in which all particles live.
Electrons can pop out of it and leave behind empty positron-holes into which
other electrons can then sink in temporary oblivion.
This medium influences everything. The simple Coulomb attraction between a
hydrogen atom’s proton and its orbiting electron is altered by their immersion in
the sea. The sea’s invisible electrons repel the orbiting electron; the repulsion
modifies the orbit and hence alters the frequencies of the light waves it emits
when it transitions from one orbit to another.8 Keeping careful track of this
complexity—the interactions of the electron with the vast sea and with its own
electromagnetic field—is immensely difficult, both conceptually and technically.
Conceptual Difficulties: The StandAlone Electron Is
Bare, the Real One Dressed
The real electron we see is not the standalone electron the Dirac equation begins
with, undisturbed and private. Physicists call that hypothetical standalone
electron the bare electron. The real electron, the only electron we can experiment
on, suffers the drag of the sea; physicists call the real electron the dressed
electron, because it is clothed by the bits of the sea that stick to it. The idea of
dressing is a theoretical construct to take us from the imperfect unreal standalone
electron to the perfect real one that exists.
Because it is clothed, the dressed electron moves differently than it would if
there were no sea. To accurately calculate the properties of a real electron in a
real hydrogen atom, one must deal with the motion of a dressed electron.
Technical Difficulties: Calculations Produce Infinities
. . .

The drag of the sea changes the electron’s resistance to motion, not unlike the
way a car feels more massive if you drive it with the hand brake on. Because of
the sea, the mass of the dressed electron (colloquially called the “dressed mass”)
differs from the mass of the bare electron (the “bare mass”).
Similarly the perceived charge of a real electron, the dressed charge, differs
from its bare charge because the negative-energy electrons in the sea surround
and shield the bare electron, modifying the charge it displays to the outside
world. The dressed electron is a bare electron immersed in a medium. Just as
light travels more slowly through glass, so the electron behaves a little
differently as it moves through the sea.
You would think that these sea changes should be small, because
electromagnetic forces in general are relatively weak. But you can calculate their
size in the full theory of QED that takes account of the medium, and—the
horror!—they turn out to be infinite. The numerical difference between the
dressed mass and the bare mass is infinity. Equally unfortunate and equally
infinite is the difference between the dressed charge and the bare charge. These
are the true beasts of the field.
. . . But Physicists Figure Out How to Evade Them
Formal mathematics can help physics, but has never been allowed to hinder it.
New developments in mathematics, from calculus to topology, have often been
initiated by physicists who, by means of intuition and persistence, have sneakily
but sloppily invented new kinds of mathematics that were only later made
rigorous by purists. Newton invented the calculus in the seventeenth century to
handle mechanics, and its foundations were satisfactorily cleaned up years later
by Augustin-Louis Cauchy and his contemporaries. In the late 1940s,
reconnoitering around the technical difficulties of the Dirac sea, Richard
Feynman, Julian Schwinger, and Shin’ichiro Tomonaga found an ingenious way
to suppress the technical infinities of quantum electrodynamics by means of a
judicious combination of extreme care and chicanery. Their starting point was
never to forget that the normal quotidian electron we “see” every day is not the
bare electron. The normal electron is the fully dressed electron. Therefore, when
we look at an electron, with our eyes or our apparatus, what we see—what we
know as fact—is its dressed mass and charge.
Consequently there is no point in using the theory to calculate corrections to
the value of the mass and charge, since including them would be the double

counting of an effect that is already there. But that doesn’t mean that the effects
of the sea don’t matter. They do, but not for the purposes of calculating the mass
and charge of the electron, since these we already know from measurement. We
should instead use the theory only to calculate the incremental effects of the sea
on the motion of an electron in the hydrogen atom, over and above its effects on
the mass and charge.
Now for the Chicanery
The fact is that we don’t care what the Dirac sea does to free electrons, because
we have already accounted for the drag of the sea on the free electron by making
use of the observed values of its mass and charge. All so-called free electrons are
already conceptually dressed by the sea. Given that fact, what is important is the
drag on the bound electron over and above the drag on the free electron. That’s
the effect we can actually observe.
What Feynman, Schwinger, and Tomonaga noticed, mirabile dictu, was that
though the drag on both bound and free electrons was infinite, the difference
between them was finite! All the infinities can be dodged if we calculate only the
difference between the drag on the free and the drag on the bound electron. And
that is the only difference that is observable. If differences are all we calculate,
then nothing in any QED calculation is infinite.
The New Normal
Physicists call this process renormalization, a recalibrating of normality to
accommodate the recognition that the “normal” reality and perfection of the
world correspond not to what goes into the theory, but only to what comes out of
it when you have solved it. The normal isolated free electron we see is the
electron dressed by the sea, not the bare standalone Dirac electron. One must
redefine “normal” to be the final reality, not the original imperfection.
Feynman, Schwinger, and Tomonaga painstakingly calculated the effects of
the Dirac sea on the orbiting electron inside a hydrogen atom relative to the new
normal. They found that the sea produced minute changes in the frequencies of
light waves emitted by hydrogen, and that the calculations agreed with then
contemporary experiments to the stunning accuracy of one part in several

thousand. Nowadays the theory’s predictions are accurate to one part in 100
billion or so, or, as Feynman put it, equivalent to measuring the distance from
San Francisco to New York with the accuracy of a hairbreadth. Renormalization
works unimaginably well.
The pragmatic and cunning lesson it teaches is this: use your theories to
calculate only what you can really measure, and carefully avert your eyes from
everything else.
Nature will reveal nothing under torture; its frank answer to an honest
question is “Yes! Yes!—No! No!”
—Goethe, Maxims and Reflections
Financial modelers use a process similar to renormalization to force their less
than perfect, less than real models to fit the world they observe. They call this
process calibration, the tuning of parameters in a model until it agrees with the
observable prices of liquid (i.e., easily tradable) securities whose values we
know. Only when a model is forced to be consistent with this “normal” state of
markets can we reasonably use it to calculate the value of “abnormal” securities
whose prices we don’t know. But calibration in finance works much less well
than renormalization in physics: in physics the normal and abnormal are
governed by the same laws, whereas in markets the normal is normal only while
people behave conventionally. In crises the behavior of people changes and
normal models fail. While quantum electrodynamics is a genuine theory of all
reality, financial models are only mediocre metaphors for a part of it.
ELECTROMAGNETISM AS METAPHOR
Like all underlying facts and theories, electromagnetism serves as a metaphor
with which to understand ourselves and the world around us, as pointed out by
Owen Barfield in his book History in English Words:
The phrase “high tension,” used of the relation between human beings, is a
metaphor taken from the condition of the space between two electrically
charged bodies. At present many people who use such a phrase are still half-
aware of its full meaning, but many years hence everybody may be using it to
describe their quarrels and their nerves without dreaming that it conceals an
electrical metaphor—just as we ourselves speak of a man’s “disposition”
without at all knowing that the reference is to astrology. . . .

    The scientists who discovered the forces of electricity actually made it
possible for the human beings who came after them to have a slightly
different idea, a slightly fuller consciousness of their relationship with one
another. They made it possible for them to speak of the “high tension”
between them. So that the discovery of electricity, besides introducing several
new words (e.g., electricity itself) into our everyday vocabulary, has altered or
added to the meaning of many older words, such as battery, broadcast, button,
conductor, current, force, magnet, potential, tension, terminal, wire, and many
others.
QUANTUM DREAMS
Once, after long and sustained efforts with the theory of quantum mechanics in
graduate school, I had an exhausting but exhilarating dream: my entire body was
a Schrödinger wave that had to satisfy Schrödinger’s famous wave equation. In
my dream I struggled to flex my body so as to make it undulate like a three-
dimensional violin string, contorting myself to ensure that I satisfied the
boundary conditions of the differential equation, oscillating inside the box I
dream-inhabited, but pinned down at its walls.
I like to imagine that it was by some similar visceral but deeper intuition that
the discoverers of electromagnetic theory and QED merged with their subject.
EPILOGUE
Everything that we call Invention or Discovery in the higher sense of the
word is the serious exercise and activity of an original feeling for truth,
which, after a long course of silent cultivation, suddenly flashes out into
fruitful knowledge. It is a revelation working from within on the outer world,
and lets a man feel that he is made in the image of God. It is a synthesis of
World and Mind, giving the most blessed assurance of the eternal harmony of
things.
—Goethe, Maxims and Reflections

III. MODELS BEHAVING BADLY

Chapter 5
The Inadequate
Financial models are not the physics of markets • Method without content
leads to sophistry • Finance is about expectations • Uncertainty is
everywhere • The Efficient Market Model assumes that all uncertainty is
quantifiable • The only reliable principle: The Law of One Price • Return is
proportional to risk • The pleasure premium • The unreliability of CAPM •
Why the Efficient Market Model fails • The unbearable futility of modeling
There is nothing so terrible as activity without insight.
—Goethe, Maxims and Reflections
I began my professional life as a physicist, studying fundamentals and mastering
theory. Then, in 1985, I migrated to the center of the quant world at Goldman
Sachs. My colleagues were as smart as academics but more interesting. The
work was an interdisciplinary mix of modeling, mathematics, statistics, and
programming, all aimed at trying to value securities for trading desks. Quants
were the theorists, traders were the experimentalists, and we collaborated to
develop and explore our models. Though the aim was moneymaking, the
environment was collegial and the techniques were remarkably similar to those
Id used in physics. Within a few months I had met and begun to collaborate with
Fischer Black, the coinventor of the Black-Scholes option pricing model, which
regards markets as equilibrium-seeking systems and models them by analogy
with the physics of heat diffusion.
I plunged into work, reading and modeling and programming. I learned the
elegant logic behind Black’s work and witnessed the depth of his thinking. I
worked closely with traders who survived and prospered by using models. Soon
I began to believe it was possible to apply the methods of physics successfully to
economics and finance, perhaps even to build a grand unified theory of
securities.
After twenty years on Wall Street I’m a disbeliever. The similarity of physics
and finance lies more in their syntax than their semantics. In physics you’re
playing against God, and He doesn’t change His laws very often. In finance

you’re playing against God’s creatures, agents who value assets based on their
ephemeral opinions. The truth, therefore, is that there is no grand unified theory
of everything in finance. There are only models of specific things. I say “model”
because finance relies on modeling the mental qualities of stocks and markets as
though they satisfy the theories of the physical world. The analogies, though not
unfounded, are partial and flawed. That doesn’t mean that modeling in finance is
a waste of time; it means that you have to understand what models are best used
for, and then be very careful not to discard your common sense, as I shall explain
in the next chapter. In this chapter I want to describe the basic principles of
modern financial models and highlight the use of metaphors and analogies as
they appear. I want to emphasize the assumptions being made and comment on
their plausibility.
If I were to summarize this chapter in one sentence, I would write: Financial
modeling is not the physics of markets.
FINANCE IS NOT MATHEMATICS
Recently a visiting professor of finance gave a seminar in my department at
Columbia. Later, talking about his work in my office, he justified a result in his
presentation by invoking what he referred to as “the fundamental theorem of
finance”
Isn’t it strange, I thought afterward, that finance has a fundamental theorem
(and that, despite more than twenty years in the field, I wasn’t quite sure what it
was)? Why doesn’t physics, with its superior precision, have a fundamental
theorem too?
After he left I Googled “the fundamental theorem of physics” and found
nothing at all. So I Googled just the phrase “fundamental theorem” and soon
found the fundamental theorem of arithmetic: “Every natural number greater
than 1 can be written as a unique product of prime numbers.” That isn’t hard to
understand, and you can see why someone might call it fundamental. I Googled
further and found the fundamental theorem of algebra: “Every polynomial
equation of degree n with complex number coefficients has n complex roots.”
This is harder to understand, because algebra is more difficult than arithmetic,
but still it’s fairly straightforward.
Then I Googled “the fundamental theorem of finance.” I didn’t have to look
too far down the list of URLs to discover the following statement:

Fundamental Theorem of Finance. Security prices exclude arbitrage if and
only if there exists a strictly positive value functional, under the technical
restrictions that the space of portfolios and the space of contingent claims are
locally convex topological vector spaces and the positive cone of the space of
contingent claims is compactly generated, that is, there exists a compact set K of
X (not containing the null element of X) such that
How can anyone think that this incomprehensible statement is fundamental to
finance, a field whose focus is the management of money and assets? Why
should finance possess a theorem and physics lack one?
LAWS ARE NOT THEOREMS
Physics is concerned with the world about us. The world may or may not have
laws, but it cannot have theorems.
The Theorems of Mathematics
Theorems are if-then relations. The ifs are conditions; the thens are the
consequences that follow. In geometry Euclid’s axioms and postulates are the
unquestioned ifs, more or less apparently selfevident properties of points and
lines. One postulate, for example, is that it is always possible to draw a straight
line between any two points. One axiom is that things equal to the same thing are
equal to each other. Difficult, though not impossible, to argue with.
Euclid’s points and lines are abstracted from those of nature. When you get
familiar enough with the abstractions, they become tangible. Even more esoteric
abstractions, such as the infinitedimensional Hilbert spaces that form the
mathematical basis of quantum mechanics, seem real and imaginable to
mathematicians. Nevertheless the theorems of mathematics are relations between
the abstractions, not between the realities that inspired them.
The Laws of Physics
Science, in contrast, has laws. Laws are not contingent. They describe the way

the universe works, unconditionally. Newton allows us to guide rockets to the
moon. Maxwell enables the construction of radios and TV. Thermodynamics
makes possible the construction of combustion engines, which convert heat into
mechanical energy. QED drives all our electronic gadgets and networks.
Like mathematics, physics deals with abstractions, but there is a unity between
the abstraction and the object it represents. The laws we discover are valid
relations between one abstraction and another, but they are also valid for the
objects “beneath” the abstractions, providing a connection between the Idea
mode and the Extension mode. Hayek summarized this perceptively when he
wrote:
The task of the physical sciences is to replace that classification of events
which our senses perform but which proves inadequate to describe the
regularities in these events, by a classification which will put us in a better
position to do so.1
FINANCE MISUNDERSTOOD
Content without method leads to fantasy; method without content to empty
sophistry.
—Goethe, Maxims and Reflections
Finances objects of interest—markets, money, assets, securities—are also
abstractions. The aim of finance, like that of physics, is to find not only the
relationships between the abstractions themselves, but also the relationships
between the realities they represent. Finance cannot be a branch of mathematics,
and therefore should not have a fundamental theorem. Only those who don’t
understand the difference between the contingent and the actual, between their
inside and their outside, can imagine theorems of finance. If you cannot
distinguish between God’s creations and man’s idols, you may mistake your
models for laws. Unfortunately many economists are such people. If you open
up the prestigious Journal of Finance, one of the select number of journals in
which finance professors must publish in order to get tenure, many of the papers
resemble those in a mathematics journal. Replete with axioms, theorems, and
lemmas, they have a degree of rigor that is inversely proportional to their
minimal usefulness.
Physicists, brought up on a diet of astounding theories and successful models,

have the ability to distinguish a theory from a model and a good model from a
bad one. Economists for the most part have never seen a genuine theory, and so
discrimination is harder. The simple models they work with fail to reflect the
complex reality of the world around them. That lack of success is not the fault of
economists, for people have proved difficult to theorize about, and we still await
an understanding of Spinoza’s adequate causes for their behavior. But it is the
economists’ fault that they take their simple models so seriously.
Finding the truth about nature takes cunning and intuition. The invisible worm
of financial economics is its dark secret love of mathematical elegance
regardless of its efficacy, and its belief that rigor can replace fact and intuition.
SECURITIES AND MARKETS
It would be most desirable . . . to base the language for the details of a
particular area on the area itself.
—Goethe, Maxims and Reflections
Understanding the principles of financial models requires a familiarity with the
objects of interest.
SECURITIES
A security is a promise by its seller (a person or an institution) to make future
payments to its buyer. A security represents present financial value, and financial
theory aims at figuring out the magnitude of that value—what the security is
worth—and why.
Debt Securities
The simplest kind of security is a personal loan: you lend money to someone
who signs an IOU to repay you. You can regard the IOU as a debt security you
bought from the borrower by paying him the amount you lent him. A Treasury
bond is a debt security too: you lend a sum of money to the U.S. government and
it promises to repay the principal after 30 years and, during the interim, to make
interest payments to you, equal, for example, to 4.25% per annum.

Corporations can borrow money by selling IOUs called corporate bonds.
Conversely, if you hold a mortgage on your house, you sold an IOU to the bank
that requires you to pay it future interest and principal, with the house as
collateral in case you break your promise.
Debt securities are characterized by precise specifications, and their future
payoff is usually spelled out very clearly.
Equity Securities
Equity securities have less certain payoffs. The most common equity security is
a share of stock, an investment in a company that grants you a stake in its
business and consequently entitles you to a proportion of the profits. The
invention of publicly owned companies and the limited liability of their owners
for losses was one of the great facilitators of the spread of capitalism, and the
inability or unwillingness to prosecute an individual for a corporation’s misdeeds
is no doubt also a facilitator of corporate irresponsibility.
When you buy a share of stock, the company can use your payment to run its
business exactly as it pleases.2 Instead of a promised rate of interest, you get
your share of any future earnings. Because the existence and quantity of future
earnings are uncertain, there is an implicitly contingent quality to the stock,
which is therefore more risky than a bond.
Most shares of stock also give shareholders the legal right to vote at annual
meetings of the corporation and to have a say in selecting boards and making
decisions about potential mergers. Although these rights are not always
exercised and are hard to quantify, they are valuable. This additional layer of
strategic complexity is part of the reason that stock markets get more public
attention than debt markets; everyone loves a good story.
Derivatives
Futures contracts, forward contracts, and options on stock are securities that
involve even more uncertainty than equity. They are derivative securities; the
seller of any one of these securities is obliged to make future payments to the
buyer that depend on the future stock price, so that the securities derive their
value from the stock. Derivative contracts are explicitly contingent and are often

referred to more pedantically as contingent claims.
For Spinoza, love is a derivative of pleasure. Analogously, a call option
derives its value from the underlying stock because, at the expiration of the
option, the seller must pay the buyer the amount by which the stock price has
risen since the purchase of the option. If the stock price has fallen, the seller
owes nothing.
A call option is asymmetric, paying off when the stock price rises but not when
it falls. A forward contract is symmetric: if the underlying stock price rises, the
buyer of the contract gets the pleasure of receiving from the seller a payment
corresponding to the increase in price; if, however, the stock price falls, the
buyer suffers the corresponding pain of having to reimburse the seller for the
decrease.
Because of their contingent nature, the values of derivative securities can vary
dramatically with the price of the stock. Extreme sensitivity is always dangerous,
especially so when attempts to calculate the sensitivity depend on an inaccurate
model. This was the case with collateralized default obligations (CDOs). Their
sensitivity to housing prices played a major role in initiating the financial crisis
that began in 2007. Their values depended keenly, but opaquely, through several
levels of derivatives, on the value of the underlying housing market. When the
housing market crashed, the CDOs spread that market’s weakness through the
entire investment world to the large numbers of institutions that had bought
them.
MARKETS
Securities are traded on markets, physical or electronic locations where
participants meet to exchange securities for money. Markets originated in a
physical marketplace where people went from stall to stall and shouted bids and
offers to each other in a crowd. Nowadays financial markets are increasingly
situated on farms of computer servers distributed around the world.
The most straightforward are listed markets, which post in some central
location their participants’ offers to buy or sell a security, as well as a record of
its price at the most recent sale. Listed markets deal with popular standardized
securities that are easily described and available in quantity—stocks, for
example, or fairly simple, socalled vanilla options. Less uniform securities that
come in many similar but not identical variations—bonds, for example, which

can have an extensive variety of maturities and coupons—commonly trade in
over-the-counter markets, where buyers and sellers negotiate prices either face-
to-face, by telephone, or electronically. On a listed market everyone can see the
most recent prices, so one is less likely to be fleeced because of ignorance.
Nevertheless many securities that should trade on listed markets still trade over
the counter because the heavyweights in a market prefer to maintain the
advantage that opaque pricing gives them over smaller participants.
News and information affect prices, which themselves are news and
information. The history of prices and trading volumes from listed markets is
therefore critical in developing financial models. Many agents in financial
markets try to leapfrog the information flow by means legal (using algorithms to
try to predict future price movements from past ones) or illegal (paying for
insider information, a term whose precise scope keeps expanding to include
formerly common behavior but not fast enough to keep up with people’s ability
to stay one step ahead).
PRICE, VALUE, UNCERTAINTY
Price is what it costs to buy a security. Value is what you think it is worth. The
difference between the two is what modeling and investing are about.
Worth is a mental quality, a matter of opinion and therefore subject to
uncertainty. In contrast to the value of the electron’s mass or charge, there is
nothing absolute about the value of a financial asset.
In physics you can travel a very long way before you run into uncertainty.
Newton’s laws of motion and gravitation, Boyle’s law relating the pressure and
volume of ideal gases, Maxwell’s equations for electromagnetism, and the study
of the transformation of heat into mechanical energy in thermodynamics—all are
triumphs of deterministic understanding. You begin to encounter the theory of
randomness only when you try to understand the link between invisible atoms
and the familiar macroscopic world.
In finance the thread of uncertainty emerges from the start. We cannot know
how the value of a security will change through time because we don’t know
how the future will affect the promises made by its sellers. Value is determined
by people, and people change their minds.
Quoting Value

You can quote value in any currency, such as U.S. dollars, British pounds, or
euros. Money is just another asset. What differentiates money from other
securities is that, in the short run,3 it’s the least risky financial asset and is
therefore useful as a medium of exchange and a common denominator for
valuing other assets. Also, it’s the asset the government decrees that you use to
pay your taxes, and this gives it a very privileged status.
Nevertheless you don’t have to quote value in terms of dollars or euros; you
can quote value in ounces of gold or barrels of oil or shares of Google stock or
sticks of Wrigley gum. If you are estimating the value of an oil company, for
example, you might be better off valuing it in terms of barrels of oil rather than
dollars, and letting the price of a barrel of oil take care of the relationship to
dollars. In valuing a security, a good start is to think about the best currency to
use for the model.
THE EFFICIENT MARKET MODEL
The great financial crisis of 2007-2008 triggered an intense interest in the nature
of quantitative financial models and their apparent inability to predict the
disasters that occurred. The temptation to blame complex mortgage models for
the market’s near-dissolution was initially overwhelming. With time, observers
have become more measured; Paul Krugman and Robin Wells have pointed out
that identical disasters occurred even in markets where only simple mortgages
(which required no sophisticated models) were traded— Spain, for example.4
At the core of modern finance is the Efficient Market Model, a powerful and
simplistic model of human behavior. Despite its problems, it is worth a careful
examination. To expose its assumptions and analogies is the purpose of this
chapter.
A Share of Stock
Because stocks are among the most common securities, I will use a share of
stock as a typical risky security. Other securities—bonds, currencies,
commodities, mortgages, real estate, and so forth—are also risky, but a share of
stock will illustrate the idea adequately.
A company—take Apple, for example—is a tremendously complex and

structured endeavor. Apple has tens of thousands of employees, owns or leases
buildings in many countries, designs products ranging from desktop and laptop
computers to iPhones and iPads to power plugs and cables, manufactures some
of these on its own, outsources the manufacturing of others to China, distributes
its products through its website and stores and also via third parties, and sells
music and videos over the Internet. Apple advertises, provides product support,
maintains websites, and carries out research and development.
The entire economic value of the organization is reflected in one number: the
listed price of a share of its stock. This price is the amount of money most
recently required to buy or sell just one incremental share of the company.5
Financial modeling is an attempt to project the value of the entire enterprise into
that number. It aims to tell you what you should pay today for a share of the
company’s, and so the stock’s, future performance.
If your model indicates that the stock is worth more than its most recent price,
you can buy it and hope to make a profit. For centuries, therefore, men and
women have tried to predict the magnitude and direction of changes in the price
of a bushel of wheat, an ounce of gold, or a share of stock, from moment to
moment, day to day, month to month, or year to year. They haven’t had any
overwhelming success. Some predictors work from fundamentals, dissecting an
entire company, its management, products, pipeline, budget, and style, as well as
the state of the economy in which it operates. Others rely on technical analysis, a
combination of rational and magical thinking that involves spotting the repetition
of patterns in the trajectory of stock prices. None of these models works well
consistently.
Jujitsu Finance
It’s a fact, then, that no one is very good at predicting stock prices. Faced with
this failure, a school of academics associated with Eugene Fama at the
University of Chicago in the 1960s developed what has become known as the
Efficient Market Hypothesis, which I prefer to call the Efficient Market Model
(EMM), since it’s a model of a hypothetical world rather than a correct
hypothesis about the one we inhabit.
I was a persevering student of physics when the EMM became popular, though
I knew nothing of it. Over the years many formulations have evolved, some
more formal and rigorous, some less so. But if you take care not to get carried

away, as many faux-precisionworshipping economists do, if you can avoid the
temptation to define strong, weak, and other kinds of “efficiency” as though you
were dealing with a mathematical system rather than the world of humans and
markets, then you will recognize that the EMM acknowledges the following true
fact of life:
It is well-nigh impossible to successfully and consistently predict what’s
going to happen to the stock market tomorrow based on all the information
you have today.
The EMM formalizes this experience by stating that it is impossible to beat the
market systematically because the current prices of stocks reflect all the
information we have about the economy and the market. Only new information
can cause the prices to change.
Converting their failed attempts at systematic stock price prediction into a
fundamental postulate of their field was a fiendishly clever jujitsu response on
the part of economists. It was an attempt to turn weakness into strength: “I can’t
figure out how things work, so I’ll make the inability to do that a principle on
which to base a theory.” The EMM, beneath its formal cloak, is simply an
assumption about human behavior. It’s therefore either right or wrong.
In Efficient Markets, Price Equals Value
It’s hard to argue with the statement that markets are unpredictable. The EMM
goes further, though, and claims that at any instant current prices reflect all
current and past information, and that therefore the best estimate of value is the
current price. Stated that way, it sounds more dubious. Anyone with hindsight
can see that the market is sometimes wrong about value.
Fischer Black, the codiscoverer of the Black-Scholes Model for valuing
options, which grew out of the EMM, was a brilliant and original financial
theorist, but also a determined realist. In his widely read paper “Noise” he
acknowledged, as few academics do, the impossibility of assigning a precisely
accurate value to a security:
All estimates of value are noisy, so we can never know how far away price is
from value.
    However, we might define an efficient market as one in which price is
within a factor of 2 of value, i.e., the price is more than half of value and less
than twice value. The factor of 2 is arbitrary, of course. Intuitively, though, it

seems reasonable to me, in the light of sources of uncertainty about value and
the strength of the forces tending to cause price to return to value. By this
definition, I think almost all markets are efficient almost all of the time.
“Almost all” means at least 90%.
Even this estimate of the discrepancy between price and value may be
optimistic. No one knows how to truly determine value or even exactly how to
define it, except by means of a model, and so the discrepancy between price and
value can never be determined.
The scientific development of financial modeling is bound to be shaky when it
starts from an inability to define value clearly.
UNCERTAINTY VERSUS RISK
Present value is ill-defined and future value is uncertain. Uncertainty implies
risk; risk means danger; danger means the possibility of loss. In economics,
thoughtful people have come to distinguish between quantifiable and
unquantifiable uncertainty.6
Unquantifiable Uncertainty
Unquantifiable uncertainty is, for example, the likelihood of a revolution in
China or the detonation by terrorists of a nuclear bomb in midtown Manhattan.
These events are unlikely, but there is no reliable method of estimating their
odds. When someone says there is a one-in-a-million chance of a terrorist attack,
it’s an unverifiable guess rather than a probability. Though it sounds more
reasonable to calculate the probability of a large earthquake, a purely physical
phenomenon, to do so requires a model of the Earth’s crust and its motion. No
one knows how accurate such models are, and hence there is no way of truly
estimating probabilities based on them. The best you can do with unquantifiable
uncertainty is to be aware of it and aware of your inability to quantify it, and
then to act accordingly. In trying to make sense of specifying the odds of a large
earthquake, Freedman and Stark argue that common sense is best:
Another large earthquake in the San Francisco Bay Area is inevitable, and
imminent in geologic time. Probabilities are a distraction. Instead of making
forecasts, the USGS could help to improve building codes and to plan the

government’s response to the next large earthquake. Bay Area residents
should take reasonable precautions, including bracing and bolting their homes
as well as securing water heaters, bookcases, and other heavy objects. They
should keep first aid supplies, water, and food on hand. They should largely
ignore the USGS probability forecast.7
A similar approach to financial models would be wise.
Quantifiable Uncertainty
In rare and contrived circumstances, such as card games and roulette, uncertainty
is (almost) quantifiable, in which case F. H. Knight calls it risk. A classic
example is the uncertainty involved in tossing a coin: Will it come up heads or
tails? For an unbiased coin, the probability of heads or tails is 1/2, which means
that if you toss the coin enough times, the ratio of heads to tails will approach
unity ever more closely as the number of coin tosses increases. Similarly one can
determine the probability for three successive heads followed by two successive
tails to be (1/2), or 1/32. These are socalled frequentist probabilities, an
interpretation of the notion of probability in terms of the relative frequency of a
particular outcome in a large number of identical trials.
For a Platonic coin, the uncertainty is quantifiable. There is, however, no
realizable Platonic coin, just as there is no real-world Euclidean point or line.
Any actual coin is inevitably biased, however slightly. Furthermore it
experiences variable forces with each successive flick of the thumb, gusts of
moving air as it spins, irregularities of the floor as it bounces. The chain of these
events during the trajectory of the coin makes every detail of the environment so
important that, counterintuitively, individual details become unimportant. If
everything affects you so greatly, then nothing affects you very significantly.
Consequently the coin is effectively uncoupled from the environment. Under
those circumstances frequentist probabilities work well and uncertainty becomes
risk.
For frequentist probabilities to be meaningful, one must be able to subject a
system to repeated independent identical circumstances. You can do this with
coins because their history is unimportant. In human affairs, history matters, and
people are altered by every experience. To take a topical example, credit markets
after the great financial crisis of 2007-2008 did not behave as credit markets did

before, despite an identical lowering of interest rates, because lenders and
borrowers were unforgettably affected by their experiences of the crisis.
It’s not only the past that leaves its trace on humans. In physics, effects
propagate only forward through time, and the future cannot affect the present. In
the social sciences the imagined future can affect the present, and thereby the
actual future too.
Despite this, the Efficient Market Model stubbornly assumes that all
uncertainties about the future are quantifiable. That’s why it is a model of a
possible world rather than a theory about the one we live in.
RISK DEMANDS A POSSIBLE REWARD
To buy a stock is to take a risk, voluntarily. One does so only if the (imagined)
possible rewards outweigh the (imagined) risk of loss.
Physics models begin with the current state of the world and evolve it into the
future. Financial models begin with current perceptions about the future and use
them to move back into the present to estimate current values. And it is humans
doing the perceiving.
A MODEL FOR RISK
Risk = The Uncertain Return on an Investment
If you buy a stock for $100, you can imagine its price going up to $110 for a
return of 10%, or down to $90 for a return of -10%. The risk of the stock is
reflected in the range of possible returns you can envisage.
A Random Walk for Stock Prices
A company is a complex organism. How can one model the range of possible
returns that a share of its stock might accrue? The Efficient Market Model’s
answer to this question is radical: ignore complexity! It hypothesizes that the
market, anthropomorphically speaking, has used all available knowledge about
the company to determine the stock price. Therefore the next change in the stock
price will arise only from new information, which will arrive randomly and
therefore be equally likely to be good or bad as far as the company’s future

returns are concerned.
Quantitatively, the EMM assumes that additional bits of information arrive
uniformly, say every At seconds.8 Figure 5.1 illustrates how changes in the stock
price occur in the model as a result of the arrival of news. By assumption, good
news causes the company’s value to increase by a fixed percentage; bad news
causes the value to decrease. On average the stock price will grow, but with
random up or down percentage fluctuations about the mean. The Efficient
Market Model assumes that nothing wilder than these kinds of fixed fluctuations
about the mean occurs (or is imagined to occur, because in finance, models are
models of what is expected).
These apparently naïve up or down alternatives represent an attempt to model
the essential risk of owning a stock. Repeated over and over again for
infinitesimally small time steps, they mimic the more or less continuous motion
of stock prices in a plausible way, much as movies produce the illusion of real
motion by changing images at the rate of 24 frames per second. Is the mimicry
accurate as well as plausible? The answer to that question determines the
difference between reality and fiction, between a theory and a model.
Figure 5.1 A simple model for a stock’s returns during an instant of time At. The
stock has equal probabilities of random positive and negative returns about the
average growth rate.
Figure 5.2 illustrates a stock price in the EMM. The price has undergone seven
random up and down moves in (imagined) correspondence with the arrival of
bits of good or bad news. Because three of the seven moves are down and four
are up, the final stock price’s up and down moves almost cancel, resulting in a
net move up that is the result of only one bit of bad news, even though seven bits

arrived. The net fluctuation about the mean return is much less than the seven-
times-larger fluctuation one might have naively expected, because the ups and
downs tend to cancel.
The pattern of small net fluctuations holds more generally. One can show that
after n random up or down moves the magnitude of the average return, whether
net up or net down, is not n times larger than one random move, but only 
times as large.
Figure 5.2. An illustration of seven successive random moves in the stock price.
Notice that after seven moves the stock price has moved only one net unit from
its initial value.
Thus after 100 items of news will have arrived the stock price will most likely
have drifted only about 
, that is, 10 uncertain price steps, up or down, away
from its original value. After 1,000 time steps the average up or down movement
in the stock price will have been only about 32 steps. And after one million time
steps the average will be only 1,000 net up or down moves, pretty small
compared with a million.
Because the number of bits of information n that arrive during time t is
proportional to the time available, and because each bit moves the stock price
about some average return (Figure 5.1), the stock price tends to grow as time
passes. Its average return increases with time and can be written as μt, where the
coefficient μ (the Greek letter mu, pronounced “mew”) that multiplies the time
elapsed is the average rate of growth. In contrast, the average fluctuation up or
down about this growth rate can be written as 
, where the coefficient a (the

Greek letter sigma) measures the size of the fluctuations, which, because of the
tendency of the up and down moves to approximately cancel, increases only as
the square root of time elapsed.
Figure 5.3 illustrates the assumed behavior of stock prices in the EMM for
short intervals of duration At. This process is called diffusion. The stock price is
expected to appreciate through time at some average rate μ per year, which
finance aficionados call its drift. Part of the time it will grow more rapidly, part
of the time less so. The intrinsic size of the yearly fluctuations in the drift is
called the volatility a of the stock, and the net fluctuations increase slowly,
proportional to the square root of time. More volatile stocks have larger σ’s and
less volatile stocks smaller ones, but whatever their volatility, the net uncertainty
of their return increases with the square root of the time elapsed.
Figure 5.3. Stock price evolution during a short interval At in the Efficient
Market Model. The stock grows at an average rate μ with a volatility σ.
If you think of risk as the quantifiable uncertainty of imagined returns, then a
key result of the EMM is that risk grows comparatively slowly, as the square
root of time. Suppose you expect a stock to earn 30% in one year with a
volatility of 10 percentage points. All circumstances being equal during the
second year, you will correctly expect to earn double the return, 60% over two
years. Counterintuitively, at least until you get used to the EMM, you should not
expect the uncertainty of the returns to double to 20%. After two years the
uncertainty in returns is only its square root, about 14 percentage points. Risk
grows more slowly in the model, though not necessarily in life itself.
Drift μ and Volatility σ: A Numerical Example
Suppose that μ=5% per year and σ=3%. This means that the stock price is expected to grow at an

average rate of 5% per year with a volatility of 3 percentage points, meaning you can expect
random up or down oscillations of ±3 percentage points per year about the drift of 5%. During
some short periods, therefore, the stock price will grow at an annual rate of 8%, and for other short
periods at a rate of 2%. The risk is that you will not know which rate is about to prevail.
A more volatile stock could have the same drift of 5% with a volatility of 10%, so that sometimes
its price may grow at 15%, but at other times at -5%, its price decreasing rather than growing.
RISK AND RETURN
The radically naïve assumption of the EMM is that the only type of risk stock
prices suffer is the tame risk of diffusion, a risk that increases relatively slowly
as the square root of time. The EMM allows no wilder price movements. In that
case the behavior of stock prices is characterized entirely by the stock’s expected
return μ and its volatility σ.
The deepest question in finance is the relation between risk and return, or
between a and μ: if you expect a security to have volatility a, how much average
return μ should you expect? Let’s begin by examining the risk and return of
some common securities.
Treasury Bills
The simplest, safest way to generate future cash from current cash is to buy a
short-term, three-month Treasury bill. The purchase price you pay is loaned to
the government, which in return promises to pay you a guaranteed rate of
interest for three months and then return your principal. Because it is very
unlikely that the U.S. Treasury will not be around to repay you three months
later, the investment is close to riskless and therefore pays a low rate of interest.
Its return serves as a benchmark for riskier securities, which must promise to pay
more.
Corporate Bonds
Lending money to a corporation (that is, buying a corporate bond) is riskier
because corporations do sometimes go bankrupt. They must therefore promise to
pay a greater rate of interest than the Treasury because their promise is more

likely to be broken. And so, somewhat paradoxically, the more they must
promise to pay, the more likely it is that they will fail to do so.
Stocks
Suppose that, instead of lending money, you buy a share of company stock.
Though investors have expectations of the magnitude of future returns and base
their investment on it, the company makes no promise of how much the
investment will actually yield. That will depend on fortune. If you sell the stock
after three months, you will have to take what the market is willing to pay. In
short, buying a stock has a highly uncertain outcome.
Greater Return Means Greater Average Return
It’s a platitude in finance that people demand greater return for exposing
themselves to greater risk. But what does it mean to say you expect greater
return when there is a chance you may not get it? It’s a little subtle because you
have to imagine the range of all possible returns, from good to bad. The
expectation of greater return is an expectation of greater average return,
averaged over all possible profits and losses as a result of your investment.
Because a stock’s return is prone to greater risk and consequent misfortune than
that of a Treasury bill, investors expect a greater return, on average, from the
riskier stock.
“On average” can be interpreted in (at least) two ways. The first kind of
average is a time average: if you make a single investment and measure the
returns it generates year by year over many years, the time average is the
average of the successive yearly returns. The second kind of average is a
portfolio average: if at one time you buy many distinct but roughly similar
securities with the same risk, the portfolio average is the average of the returns
over all securities with the same risk during the immediately following year.
Mostly in finance one assumes without proof that these two averages are
equivalent—probably a false assumption. The financial world is not particularly
stable, so long-term averages will depend on the prevailing environment, which,
unlike that of the world of physics, isn’t stable. Governments, administrators,
and regulators change, booms and busts come and go, people modify their
behavior based on recent failures and successes, and so the patterns of returns

and their statistical distributions tend to change with time.
THE ONE LAW OF FINANCE
The Crucial Question: The Relation Between Risk
and Return
The key question for any model or theory of finance is therefore: What average
return above the riskless rate should you expect to earn for accepting a given
amount of risk?
Notice that the question is about one’s expectations of return rather than the
returns that will actually be realized. Understand that expectations about the
future are precisely a model. Notice also that realized and expected returns may
not agree. When realized returns differ too wildly from expected returns, the
world awakes, startled at the inadequacy of the models behind the prices. One of
the lessons of the credit crisis that began in 2007 is that the models used to
determine the value of mortgage securities did not include in their expectations
the possibility of the catastrophic future scenarios that actually occurred.
The Law of One Price: Similar Securities Have
Similar Prices
To answer a general question requires having a principle. The only principle you
can rely on in finance (and it’s not always reliable) is the Law of One Price: If
you want to know the value of one financial security, your best bet is to use the
known price of another security that’s as similar to it as possible.
When we compare it with almost everything else in economics, the wonderful
thing about this law of valuation by analogy is that it dispenses with utility
functions, the undiscoverable hidden variables whose ghostly presence
permeates economic theory. Financial economists like to recast the Law of One
Price as the more pedantically named Principle of No Riskless Arbitrage: Any
two securities with identical future payoffs, no matter how the future turns out,
should have identical current prices. This Law of One Price embodies the
common sense that the author of “the fundamental theorem of finance” was
trying so hard to convey but expressed so unclearly.
In the imaginary world of the Efficient Market Model, a stock’s price

movements are completely characterized by its expected return μ and its
volatility a. All that differentiates one stock from another is their respective
values of μ and σ—nothing else. Two securities with the same μ and σ are
therefore similar. The Law of One Price combined with the EMM then leads to
the following conclusion: Any two securities with the same foreseeable volatility
should have the same expected return.9
There is a shallow resemblance between the Law of One Price in finance and
Einstein’s principle of relativity in physics, presented in the table below.
Principle of Relativity
Law of One Price
All observers, irrespective of their speeds, should, from their
observations, deduce the same equations for the laws of nature.
All securities with identical risk, irrespective of their
nature, should provide the same expected return.
Light is special; nothing can move faster than light.
Riskless bonds are special; nothing can have less risk
than a riskless bond.
The Law of One Price is not, however, like the principle of relativity. It is not a
consistent law of nature. It is a general reflection on the practices of fickle
human beings, who, when they have enough time, resources, and information,
would rather buy the cheaper of two similar securities and sell the richer, thereby
bringing their prices into equilibrium. The law usually holds in the long run, in
well-oiled markets with enough savvy participants. In crises, however, duress
forces people to behave in what looks like irrational ways, and even in normal
times there are persistent shorteror longer-term exceptions to the law.
How do you use the Law of One Price to determine value? If you want to
estimate the unknown value of a “target” security, you must find a “replicating”
portfolio, a collection of liquid securities that, collectively, are similar to it, that
is, have the same future payoffs as the target, no matter how the future turns out.
The target’s value is then simply the price of the replicating portfolio, which,
being liquid, will have easily available prices.
This is where models enter the picture. It takes a model to demonstrate
similarity, to show that the target and the replicating portfolio have identical
future payoffs under all circumstances. To demonstrate the identity of future
payoffs, you must (1) specify what you mean by “all circumstances” for each
security, and (2) find a recipe for creating a replicating portfolio that, in each
future scenario, will have payoffs identical to those of the target.
Using the Law of One Price to Value Apartments
Here’s a simple financial model that illustrates most of the characteristics of

more sophisticated models. Consider the problem of estimating the value of a
grand eight-room penthouse apartment on Park Avenue in New York City. The
most direct way is to put the apartment on the market and look at the offers. Next
best is finding a recently sold, similar apartment in the same neighborhood and
using its sale price as the approximate value of this apartment.
Suppose that there have been no recent sales of similar apartments, and that
you can obtain only the recent sale price of one of many vanilla two-room
apartments in Battery Park City. These apartments are liquid and change hands
frequently. You will have to value the Park Avenue apartment relative to the
price of the Battery Park City unit. You can approximately replicate the
penthouse, in your imagination, by combining several Battery Park City units
into one larger unit the size of the penthouse. Suppose that requires about seven
Battery Park City apartments. Then your first estimate is that the Park Avenue
penthouse should be worth seven times the Battery Park City apartment.
This model assumes that the price per square foot of apartments is constant,
irrespective of apartment details. It’s a model because it assumes that square
footage is all that matters in estimating the value of the apartment. That’s clearly
not true. First, the quality of construction matters. Second, in New York City
very large apartments are scarce and sell at a premium. Third, a Park Avenue
location is more exclusive and hence more desirable.10 Fourth, there are more
staff and doormen per capita in a Park Avenue cooperative building. Et cetera.
In this model price per square foot is what quants call an implied parameter.
It’s “implied” in the sense that it’s not the literal construction cost per square
foot, but rather the implied price per square foot, obtained by quoting the market
price of the entire apartment and all its accoutrements and bundled services in
terms of the price per square foot.
The price of the replicating portfolio is therefore an underestimate. With some
practical experience you can make rule-of-thumb corrections for size, location,
park views, natural light, and apartment detailing to adjust the initial estimate of
a factor of seven. This is the way most practical financial models work. You use
similarity to get off the ground, comparing the characteristics of something you
don’t know with those of something you do. In the apartment valuation model,
square footage captures a major part of the variation in apartment prices. Then
you make commonsense heuristic adjustments for other important factors that lie
outside the model. Models for pricing stocks, bonds, and options work the same
way.

THE CONCLUSION: EXCESS RETURN IS
PROPORTIONAL TO RISK
The Law of One Price and the EMM both require that securities with the same
risk must have the same return. But how much return? Because there is only one
variety of risk in the EMM, the volatility a of the stock price’s diffusion, you can
easily engineer any amount of risk from one sample of it. Here’s the logic.
Suppose you begin with a stock that carries a particular volatility a and from
which you expect a return μ. Then you can easily create a portfolio with less risk
by diluting the stock with a riskless bond. But because the return of a portfolio is
the weighted average of the returns of its ingredients, you know what return to
expect for it. Hence, by the Law of One Price, you know what return to expect
for all securities with the same risk as that of the portfolio. In short, if you know
the risk and return for one stock, you know the risk and return for all. Here is the
precise recipe for diluting the mixture:
Ingredients: Prepare one dollar’s worth of a stock with volatility a and
expected return μ, while keeping ready for use one dollar’s worth of a riskless
bond with zero volatility and guaranteed return r.
Preparation: Mix together thoroughly a fraction w of the stock with a fraction
1-w of the riskless bond.
The mixture is worth exactly $1 too, but it is riskier than the bond and less
risky than the stock.
By doing a little algebra you can see that the volatility of the mixture is
because only the stock part of the mixture carries risk. By equally
straightforward algebra the expected return of the mixture is the weighted
average of the return of the riskless bond and the stock:
Focus on the terms involving w in these expressions and you will notice that
adding an extra wa amount of risk to a riskless bond wins you an extra w (μ r) of
expected return, over and above the riskless bond’s return r. Thus by the Law of
One Price we obtain the Law of Proportionality of Risk and Return:
If you expect return μ for risk a, then you should expect an excess return w (μ
— r) from any security with risk wσ.
By choosing different fractions w of the stock in the mixture, you can create
risk and expected return of any size. The more w, the more risk, the more

expected return.
A Numerical Illustration
Suppose the benchmark return of a riskless bond is currently 2% per year.
Suppose the market expects a return of 7% on a stock with a volatility of 20%.
From this you can figure out the return for any volatility, as follows: The stock
with a volatility of 20% provides an excess return of 7% 2% = 5%. Therefore a
stock with half its volatility, that is, 10%, must provide half as much expected
return, that is, 2.5% Adding this to the riskless bond’s return of 2%, you should
expect a return of 4.5% on a stock with volatility of 10%—if the EMM is
correct.
The Sharpe Ratio
According to the Law of Proportionality of Risk and Return, a risk 
 must
provide an excess return 
. Put differently, this means that for any
security the ratio of excess return to risk is always the same, since each is
proportional to the weight w.
Finance theorists like to write the Law of Proportionality of Risk and Return
entirely in Greek symbols to make it seem oracular:
This states that the ratio of excess return to risk is a “universal” constant,
denoted by the Greek letter X (lambda), which is referred to as the Sharpe ratio,
after William Sharpe, who first began to make use of this concept in the mid-
1960s. It measures the bang you hope to get for your buck of risk, and is
therefore also called the risk premium.
In the framework of the EMM it follows that, on average, by taking greater
risk you should automatically win greater reward. You don’t have to be smart to
make more; you just need to invest in a security with higher volatility. But you
will earn a higher reward only on average, not every time. That’s why it’s risky.
So how do you tell if you are a smart investor? According to the EMM the test is
the value of your portfolio’s Sharpe ratio. If your portfolio contains securities
whose realized Sharpe ratios turn out to be greater than the market’s average
Sharpe ratio, you have been smart. Of course, only if the EMM weren’t quite

right could you hope to find exceptional Sharpe ratios.
The theory of efficient markets has become so much a part of accepted market
lore that professional money managers measure and report their Sharpe ratios
with the hope of demonstrating their talent.
Judging Investments by Their Sharpe Ratios
Suppose that over the past 10 years a security A has produced an average annual return μA = 15%,
with high returns of 20% and low returns of 10%, so that the annual volatility σA is 5%,
corresponding to return fluctuations of ±5 percentage points about the mean.
    Suppose also that the riskless rate r for one-year Treasury bills during this time was 5%. Then
the excess return for security A was μA – r = 15% – 5% = 10% annually.
    The annual Sharpe ratio was 
. This means you have earned two units of excess
return for every one unit of risk each year.
    Now suppose you are confronted with a security B that earned an average return equal to 20%
per year over the same period, with lows of 5% and highs of 35%. How does that compare with
having invested in A?
    The excess return for B over and above the riskless rate was μB – r = 20% – 5% = 15%, which
looks better than the excess return of 10% for A. But the volatility aB of B, corresponding to half
the range between its high and low returns, was % (35% 5%) = 15%. The Sharpe ratio for B was
therefore 
.
    B looks better in terms of returns, but A is better in terms of return per unit of risk taken, which,
if there is only one kind of risk, is what matters. If there is only one kind of risk, you are better off
exposing yourself to it through security A than through security B.
    In this example we have calculated historically realized Sharpe ratios, looking backward rather
than forward in time.
AN ASIDE: THE PLEASURE PREMIUM
The Sharpe ratio X tells you how much reward you should expect from a given
chunk of risk. Risk is a fundamental quality, something you can choose to
expose yourself to or try to avoid, a primitive that cannot be reduced to
something simpler. The demand for risk reflects psychology and the physiology
beneath it. Humans will expect different degrees of return from a given amount
of risk at different times. When they become more risk-averse and demand more
return from accepting the same risk, stock prices fall and the Sharpe ratio rises;
conversely, when they become willing to accept less return, the ratio will fall and

prices will rise.
The desire for risk is a biological primitive, comparable to the desire for
deliciousness in food. The deliciousness of food is an independent quality,
distinct from its caloric and nutritional value. Chefs in restaurants can charge
more for greater expected pleasure and deliciousness. If you wanted to be
foolishly quantitative, you could define the pleasure premium as the amount of
dollars diners are willing to pay, over and above the bare cost of the ingredients
themselves, for deliciousness. You can make the following analogy:
Risk of a Security
Deliciousness of a Meal
Expected return on security: μ
Cost of meal: C
Return of riskless bond: r
Cost of ingredients: I
Excess return: μ — r
Excess cost: C – I
Risk: σ
Deliciousness:11 Ω
Risk premium 
 is the excess return per unit of
risk.
Pleasure premium 
 is the excess cost per unit of deliciousness.
The pleasure premium will vary from day to day; in flush times diners may be
willing to pay more for expected deliciousness; in bad times they may avoid
deliciousness and stick to nutrition. In a quantitative model the pleasure
premium Ω could play a large part in determining luxury food prices.
In theory securities sell on the basis of expected return, and in theory
delicacies could sell on the basis of expected deliciousness. But there is a
difference between preprandial expected deliciousness and postprandial realized
deliciousness, and if the mismatch is too great, the chef may be patronized no
more. Similarly, the expected return of a security differs from its realized return,
and if the mismatch is too great, the security will be shunned, as has happened
with collateralized default obligations. But whereas expected return and realized
return are completely distinguishable, expected pleasure is often a pleasure itself.
What is the appropriate value for Ω, the excess cost per unit of expected
deliciousness? No theory can dictate what a sybaritic society should pay for
pleasure. One might theorize that people pay the same amount per unit of
deliciousness no matter what food delivers it. Similarly, no financial theory can
dictate what return an investor should expect in exchange for taking on risk; that
too depends on appetite and varies with time.
I am of course simplifying things by treating all pleasure as equivalent; there is
more than one kind of deliciousness. There are sweetness and tartness, spiciness
and blandness, smoothness and lumpiness, all of them different types of
gustatory pleasure. And I have ignored other kinds of mentionable and

unmentionable bodily pleasures, which have their pleasure premiums too.
Similarly, there is more than one kind of risk and more than one kind of risk
premium: stock risk and bond risk and currency risk and commodity risk and
slope-of-the-yield-curve risk; and within the universe of stocks there is sector
risk—health risk, technology risk, consumer durables risk, et cetera.
In physics the values of the fundamental constants (the gravitational constant
G, the electric charge e, Planck’s constant h, the speed of light c) are apparently
timeless and universal. I doubt there will ever be a universal value for the risk
premium.
THE EMM AND THE BLACK-SCHOLES
MODEL
The best model in all of economics is the Black-Scholes Model for valuing
options on stocks, an ingeniously clever extension of the EMM published in
1973 by Fischer Black and Myron Scholes.a I spent my first two years at
Goldman Sachs, 1986–1987, working with Fischer Black on an extension of this
model to valuing options on bonds,12 and I devoted 1993–1994 to working on
an extension of Black-Scholes to stocks with variable volatility.
Stocks are commonplace, but a call option on a stock is more arcane, and prior
to Black and Scholes no one had a plausible clue for how to value it. A call
option works as follows. If you buy a one-year call on Apple, you have the right
to buy one share of Apple one year later at an agreed-upon price, say $350. The
value of the option one year hence will depend on the value of Apple stock on
that day. For example, if the share price turns out to be $370, the option will be
worth exactly $20; if the share price ends up being $350 or less, the option will
be worth zero. The call option is a bet that the stock price will rise.
Assuming that Apple stock moves randomly in accord with the precepts of the
EMM, then the more volatile the stock, the more likely its price will be to wind
up above $350, and therefore the more the bet is worth. Because the option is a
risky bet on the risky stock, it’s riskier than the stock, and yet its risk depends on
the risk of the stock itself.
Black, who began by studying physics, was a firm believer in arguments based
on equilibrium. In physics, if you mix together two gases at different
temperatures, they will settle into equilibrium when the heat flowing out of the

first gas and into the second is the same as the heat flowing out of the second
and into the first. Black applied analogous logic to options and stocks. If you
consider a market with two securities, Apple stock and Apple call options, then
you have two ways to expose yourself to Apple risk: via the stock or via the
option. The market will be in equilibrium when the price of the option and the
price of the stock are such that each security’s Sharpe ratio—each security’s
expected excess return per unit of its risk—is the same for both, so that investors
will have no reason to prefer one security over the other as a route to taking on
Apple risk. Until that is the case, investors will preferentially buy the more
efficient security and sell the less efficient one until their prices adjust to demand
and they eventually provide the same risk premium. That’s equilibrium.
By equating the Sharpe ratio of the stock and the Sharpe ratio of the option,
Black and Scholes were able to derive and, a few years later, solve an equation
for the model value of the call option. Furthermore, because the option must at
all times have the same risk premium as the stock, you can replace the option at
any instant by an equivalent investment in stock. The Black-Scholes Model tells
you exactly how much stock you need to replicate the option’s risk at any
instant, and thus, if you know the stock price, what the option is worth at any
instant. It’s like a recipe that tells you how to make fruit salad (an option) out of
fruit (stocks and bonds) and hence, by the Law of One Price, what the fruit salad
is worth.
Before Black and Scholes and Merton no one had even guessed that you could
manufacture an option out of simpler ingredients. Anyone’s guess for its value
was as good as anyone else’s; it was strictly personal. The Black-Scholes Model,
even more than the EMM that engendered it, revolutionized modern finance.
Using Black and Scholes’s insight, trading houses and dealers could value and
sell options on all sorts of securities, from stocks to bonds to currencies, by
synthesizing the option out of the underlying security.
The Black-Scholes Model is only a model, and so the synthesis is of course
imperfect in practice. Nevertheless, Black-Scholes works for options much
better than the EMM works for stocks. The EMM is at best a simplistic model
for risk that neglects the subtleties of stock price behavior. But Black’s great
idea, that an option and a stock should share the same risk remium when markets
are in equilibrium, is close to a more general truth. Irrespective of subtleties, the
risk of the stock and the risk of the option are sufficiently related so that equating
their risk premiums gives a sensible constraint on their relative prices. That
makes the Black-Scholes Model robust; it is a rarity among financial models.

In contrast, the EMM works much less well for stock valuation, because stock
prices suffer risks more diverse and wild than those associated with diffusion.
There are many other huge risks—among them, the enthusiasm of crowds that
can make entire stock markets rise, the fear that can make them crash, liquidity
that can dry up, counterparties that can all fail together in a crisis—that the
EMM ignores and that can therefore invalidate many of its results. This is what
happened in the great financial crisis.
THE CAPITAL ASSET PRICING MODEL
The Capital Asset Pricing Model, developed by Jack Treynor, William Sharpe,
Jan Mossin, and John Lintner in the early 1960s, is an extension of the EMM
that more realistically takes account of the risk not just of single stocks but of the
entire stock market. Finance aficionados refer to the model affectionately as
CAPM (“Cap Em”). Though economists regard CAPM as the triumph of
socalled modern portfolio theory, and though CAPM engendered the Black-
Scholes Model, it isn’t nearly as robust, and therefore isn’t nearly as useful.
The EMM as described thus far focuses on individual stocks and assumes that
their prices do nothing more dramatic than diffusion.CAPM extends the EMM
by recognizing that stocks are part of a larger market. In practice, stocks tend to
move in tandem, most of them going up when the market goes up and going
down when the market goes down. One reason for this co-movement is Keynes’s
now cliched but nevertheless accurate observation that it requires “animal
spirits” to take risk: investors pile into stocks when the world looks good, and
rush to safety when things go bleak. To make the model more realistic, the
founders of CAPM added this herding tendency to the EMM.
CAPM recognizes two kinds of risk embedded in each stock: the overall
market risk that affects everything, and the stock’s idiosyncratic risk independent
of the market. Market risk affects every stock and is therefore unavoidable once
you decide to buy any stock at all, whereas idiosyncratic risk can be different for
each stock, its own individual personality trait. When you buy even a single
stock you face both its market risk and its idiosyncratic risk. The insight of
CAPM is that because market risk is unavoidable, it is the only genuine risk you
have to take if you want to play the stock market, and therefore the only one you
should expect to be rewarded for. The capitalist mantra “More risk, more return”
according to CAPM applies to market risk only.

Idiosyncratic risk is avoidable: it can be diminished by diversification, the
assembly of a portfolio of many stocks whose idiosyncratic risks are unrelated
and therefore tend to cancel each other out. (This tendency to cancel is similar to
the tendency of independent random up and down stock price moves in Figure
5.2 to cancel, so that the idiosyncratic risk of a portfolio of n stocks grows only
as fast as Vn.) All that afflicts a stock in a (theoretically) diversified portfolio of
many stocks is therefore the market risk it carries.
CAPM characterizes each stock’s unavoidable market risk by a statistic, β
(beta), the ratio of its individual market risk to the risk of the entire market. The
β of each stock describes its tendency to herd with the crowd, and different
stocks have different measurable betas.13 The greater the beta of a stock, the
more it responds to a market move.
Exploiting the idea that any stock’s excess return is due only to the market risk
it bears leads to the following conclusion for markets in equilibrium: All of a
stock’s excess expected return is equal to its beta times the market’s excess
expected return.14 According to CAPM, the more the stock’s price moves with
the market, the more you should expect to earn.15
Utility stocks, for example, are stodgy and safe, less risky than the market,
because utilities supply gas and electricity that are necessities for survival:
animal spirits or no animal spirits, everyone is going to buy heating.
Consolidated Edison (stock ticker ED), whose fondly remembered 1960s motto
“Dig We Must!” advertised its frequent destruction of New York City roads as a
utilitarian necessity for the benefit of New Yorkers, has a low beta of about 0.3.
So (if you believe CAPM) you should expect only about one third of the
market’s excess return from Con Ed.
In contrast, Apple (stock ticker AAPL), a company that lives by inventing and
creating demand for usefully vogue products you can survive without, depends
on animal spirits. The beta of Apple is about 1, much higher than that of
Consolidated Edison and about the same as that of the market in general, and so,
according to CAPM, you should hope for three times as much excess return from
Apple as from Con Ed, about as much as you get from the market. The following
box shows that this hasn’t been the case.
A Simple Test: Apple and the S&P 500
Here is a plot of the prices of Apple (AAPL) and the S&P 500 (ticker ^GSPC) between September

16, 2009, and September 13, 2010. (All data and figures are taken from www.wolframalpha.com.)
    Here is a scatter plot of the daily returns of Apple and the S&P 500 over the same period.
    Let’s see how well the CAPM worked for Apple stock during that year.
    During the one-year period, Apple’s risk relative to the market was β = 1.05.
    Let’s be generous and say that the annual riskless rate was about 1% at the start of that year, so
that r = 1% in the equation in note 14.
    CAPM states that, written using algebra, 
.
    Strictly speaking, CAPM claims that this must hold for expected returns. But no one accurately
knows what people expected a year ago, and so it is common to check the validity of CAPM for
realized returns. During that period, AAPL returned about 55%, while the S&P 500, a good proxy
for the market, returned about 11%.
    The value of the left-hand side of the equation is 
.
    The value of the right-hand side of the equation is 
.
    The value of the left-hand side is about 44 percentage points greater per year than the value of
the right-hand side. CAPM didn’t work well at all during this period.
The predictions of CAPM in this example were violated by Apple to the tune
of about 44 percentage points of excess return over and above the value required
by CAPM. Aficionados use the Greek letter a (alpha) to refer to the amount by
which a stock’s actual return exceeds the fair beta-inspired CAPM value.
Why isn’t alpha zero? A kind way to explain the mismatch is to say that

CAPM holds over the long run, on average, with fluctuations from year to year
and from security to security. After all, CAPM is meant to describe the market in
equilibrium, and there are periods when the market must be between equilibria.
To test it you should test it statistically, not for one stock at one time. The
particular period considered in the example should be regarded as a statistical
fluctuation.
A still kinder way to explain it is to say that CAPM is incomplete and needs
extending. Market risk is not the only herding risk. Savvy investors are always
trying to make sense of the market’s behavior, and rightfully perceive stocks as
belonging to groups smaller than the entire market, groups whose constituent
stocks tend to be bought or sold as a class.16 Large capitalization stocks, “small
caps,” value stocks, growth stocks—each is an ensemble of companies whose
fortunes tend to move together. Looking more closely, we see that computer
stocks move together too, because certain kinds of news are relevant to the
computer industry but relatively insignificant for, say, health care stocks. Each of
these additional groupings and the factors that represent them are additional
types of risk that can lead to more complex versions of CAPM.
An unkind way to look at CAPM is to say that it’s not very good. Newton’s
law it ain’t.
CAPM’s Infiltration
Despite its lack of great success, CAPM has infiltrated the language of finance,
even nonacademic finance. I didn’t fully understand how deeply until I recently
tried to use Bloomberg, Yahoo, and Google to find the volatilities of Apple and
the S&P 500 to create the box above. To my astonishment there was no easy and
direct way to obtain a stock’s volatility σ. All those websites give you easy
access only to the stock’s beta, the amount of market risk carried by the stock
that is the hallmark of CAPM’s view of the world. It is a sign of the political
power of models that commercial websites publish the value of beta, a parameter
in a model that doesn’t work that well, but not the more fundamental and model-
neutral volatility statistic σ.
But CAPM has had a beneficial impact, having being responsible for
introducing into finance as metaphors the notion of alpha and beta. Alpha and
beta represent the sources of return. Beta refers to the return earned for simply
entering the market dumbly. Getting beta is easy: all you have to do is buy a
diversified portfolio of stocks without worrying about their individual attributes.

Alpha, in contrast, represents skill, the return generated by being smarter than
the hordes, by picking better-than-average stocks, or picking ordinary stocks at
the right time, as with Apple in the example above. Inspired by CAPM, investors
now ask themselves whether their manager is providing merely dumb beta or
smart alpha. Alpha is worth paying a fee for, and it’s supposed to be what hedge
funds provide. Beta should be cheap: anyone can whistle.
EMM: A THEORY OR A MODEL?
I showed that expected return is proportional to risk by using just two principles:
(1) you should expect equal returns from equal risks, and (2) a stock’s risk is
solely the volatility of the diffusion illustrated in Figure 5.3. The first principle is
pure theory and hard to argue with: If two securities truly have the same risk,
how could you not expect the same return from them? But that’s an expectation.
In life, expectations aren’t necessarily fulfilled. The second assumption is pure
model. The EMM’s picture of price movements goes by several names: a
random walk, diffusion, and Brownian motion. One of its origins is in the
description of the drift of pollen particles through a liquid as they collide with its
molecules. Einstein used the diffusion model to successfully predict the square
root of the average distance the pollen particles move through the liquid as a
function of temperature and time, thus lending credence to the existence of
hypothetical molecules and atoms too small to be seen.
For particles of pollen, the model is also a theory, and pretty close to a true
one. For stock prices, however, it’s only a model. It’s how we choose to imagine
the way changes in stock prices occur, not what actually happens. It is naïve to
imagine that the risk of every stock in the market can be condensed into just one
quantity, its volatility σ. Risk has too many aspects to be accurately captured by
that one number.
Figure 5.4. (a) A single stock path simulated via a random walk. (b) Four typical
simulated stock paths. (c) An actual four-year path for the level of the S&P 500
index.

The EMM Isn’t Wild Enough
Figure 5.4 compares the paths of stock prices generated from the EMM model
with the level of the S&P 500 from late 2006 to late 2010. The apparently naïve
either-up-or-down model does superficially mimic the riskiness of a stock’s
price.
But only more or less. The mimicry fails because the stock paths in the model
are just too smooth when compared with the observed movements of actual

stock prices. When examined closely, the stock price trajectory in Figure 5.4c is
jerkier than those in Figure 5.4b. Actual stock prices are more wildly random
than those of the model, as becomes very obvious during stock market crashes,
when stock prices cascade downward in giant leaps, and volatility spikes beyond
belief.
It’s not surprising, then, that CAPM doesn’t correctly account for the returns
on investments. CAPM may hold better in undramatic, liquid markets where
informed investors determine prices. But the model’s assumptions fail badly
during times of panic, fear, and limited liquidity. CAPM is a useful way of
thinking about a model world that is, quite often, far from the world we live in.
Conceptual Mismatches
There are also glaring conceptual flaws. In contrast to the model’s assumptions,
the news that drives stock prices doesn’t always arrive in small, steady
increments. Sometimes something very important happens suddenly and
discontinuously. The demand for a stock can become so great that its price leaps
up; more commonly the market’s panic to sell can be so intense and contagious
that the prices of all stocks crash downward, reflecting fear rather than the ideal
of rational information and response. These kinds of events are not rare, yet they
don’t fit into the framework of the smooth random walk economists like to focus
on. And it is these events that provide much of the true risk as well as the reward
of investing. The Efficient Market Model’s price movements are too constrained
and elegant to reflect the market accurately.
THE UNBEARABLE FUTILITY OF
MODELING
To use the Law of One Price that underpins financial modeling, one must show
that a target security and its replicating portfolio have identical future payoffs
under all circumstances. Most of the mathematical complexity of modeling in
finance involves the description of the range of future behavior that composes all
circumstances. Trying to specify this always reminds me of the 1967 movie
Bedazzled, starring Peter Cook and Dudley Moore. In this comic retelling of the
legend of Faust, Moore plays a short-order cook at a Wimpy’s chain restaurant in

London who sells his soul to the devil in exchange for seven chances to specify
the circumstances under which he can achieve his romantic aims with the
Wimpy’s waitress he desires. Each time the devil asks him to specify the
romantic scenario in which he believes he will succeed, he fails to specify it
sufficiently precisely. He says he wants to be alone with the waitress in a
beautiful place where they are both in love with each other. He gets what he
wants: with a snap of the devil’s fingers, he and his beloved are instantly
transported to a country estate where they are wild about each other. But he is a
guest of the owner of the estate, her husband, whom her high principles will not
allow her to betray. Finally, when he has only one chance left, he wishes for
them to be alone together and in love with each other in a quiet place where no
one will bother them. He gets his wish: the devil makes them both nuns in a
convent where everyone has taken a vow of silence.
The difficulty of the hopeful would-be lover is the same difficulty we face
when specifying future scenarios in financial models; as does the devil, markets
eventually outwit us. The devil is indeed in the details. Even if markets are not
strictly random, their vagaries are too rich to capture in a few short sentences or
equations.
Not all financial modelers are stupid or ignorant of the follies of using the
EMM. One can easily invent more complicated models of risky stock prices that
incorporate violent moves and ferocious outbursts of risk. But in using such
models one gives up simplicity for a still imperfect but more complex model that
doesn’t necessarily do better. As with earthquakes, it may be wiser to remember
that catastrophes much more dramatic than those the random-walk model
envisages occur quite often. It is better to ensure that one owns a portfolio that
will not suffer too badly under disastrous scenarios than it is to try to estimate
the probability of destruction.
So die the dreams of financial theories. Only imperfect models remain. The
movements of stock prices are more like the movements of humans than of
molecules. It is irresponsible to pretend otherwise.
aMyron Scholes together with Robert C. Merton, who derived a different
proof of the Black-Scholes formula and developed much of the elegant
mathematics associated with options pricing, received the 1997 Nobel
Memorial Prize in Economics for their work on the model. Fischer Black died
two years earlier.

Chapter 6
Breaking The Cycle
Caught in a fiendish cage • Avoiding pragmamorphism • The great financial
crisis and the abandonment of principle • The point of financial models • Be
sophisticatedly vulgar • Let the dirt be visible • Beware of idolatry • The
modelers’ Hippocratic oath • We need free markets, but we need them to be
principled • Once in a blue moon, people stop behaving mechanically
“Alas” said the mouse, “the world is growing smaller every day. At the
beginning it was so big that I was afraid, I kept running and running, and I
was glad when at last I saw walls far away to the right and left, but these
long walls have narrowed so quickly that I am in the last chamber already,
and there in the corner stands the trap that I must run into” “You only need to
change your direction” said the cat, and ate it up.
—Franz Kafka, “A Little Fable”
THE PERFECT CAGE
When I opened the refrigerator door one morning, I found a moth flying
furiously around the interior. It had somehow managed to get inside, and was
now fatally attracted to the refrigerator light. I tried to chase it out by flapping
my hand behind it, but to no avail. Every time I opened the door the light came
on and the moth circled it frantically, unwilling to leave. Every time I closed the
door it got dark and cold inside, not at all what the moth had stayed for, but
because the door was closed it couldn’t get out.
Finally I found a solution. I remembered the spring-loaded button in the hinge
of the refrigerator door that controls the bulb inside. I opened the door and held
down the button with my finger. The inside went dark and the moth headed out
for the more stable light of the kitchen.
It was a fiendish cage, perfect for moths, whose tropism made them free to
leave whenever the door was opened, but who wanted to leave only when it was
closed.

It was a miracle of rare device,
A sunny pleasure-dome with caves of ice!
—Samuel Taylor Coleridge, “Kubla Khan”
THE MYSTERIES OF THE WORLD
The world of Substance is full of puzzles. Theories offer us the most successful
and accurate way to describe the physical world. They are deep and difficult to
discover; they require verification but no explanation; they are right when they
are right. Models, however, live in the shallows and are easier to find; they
require explanation as well as verification. We need both types of understanding.
The most successful theories humans have created are concerned with
Extension. There are few genuine theories in the realm of Thought, and none
that is quantitatively accurate. There we rely mostly on metaphors and models.
Financial value, situated more centrally within Thought than Extension, is
therefore less inclined to yield to mathematics or science; there are no isolated
social systems on which to carry out the repeated experiments the scientific
method requires, and so it is hard to study the regularities that might reveal the
putative laws that govern them.
Given the success of mathematics in dealing with Extension, it has become
tempting to treat Thought as though it were a kind of Extension too. Most
models in the social sciences give in to what I like to call pragmamorphism,1 by
which I mean the naive tendency to attribute the properties of things to human
beings. Among the exceptions are Spinoza’s theory of the emotions and Freud’s
theory of the psyche. Pragmamorphism characterizes the approach that finance
has taken for the past 50 years.
It’s pragmamorphic to equate psychological states with their material
correlates, to equate PET scans with emotion. It’s similarly pragmamorphic to
assume the existence of a utility function in economics. It is clear that people
have preferences. But is it clear that there is a function that describes their
preferences? Pragmamorphic models are a valiant try, perhaps the best we can do
quantitatively. But we should remember that we are being pragmamorphic when
we use them, and that humans will necessarily lie outside the models’
boundaries.

MODELS THAT FAILED
People expect either too much or too little from financial models. To use them
appropriately requires some degree of vacillation. One must begin boldly but
expect little. If a little success is actually obtained, one must grow greedy. Then,
when one has gone only a little too far, desist.
I was motivated to write this book by the global financial crisis that began in
2007. After more than 20 years of hubris, models collapsed. At the end of the
cold war we imagined a future with no more history, a smooth stroll into the
sunrise accompanied by democracy, privatization, and free markets. It hasn’t
worked out that way. Authoritarian versions of capitalism have spread.
Privatization has become oligarchy. The gaps between rich and poor, managers
and workers, and owners and employees have widened. Economic models have
misfired and financial models have proved to be enormously inaccurate. More
recently the prescribed cure of a Keynesian stimulus to jump-start spending and
employment has had only a muted effect. Low interest rates, the Federal
Reserve’s cure for past crises and the progenitor of future ones, are being
prescribed again. Lessons have not been learned.
I wasn’t surprised by the failure of economic models to make accurate
forecasts. Any assurance economists pretend to with regard to cause and effect is
merely a pose or an illusion. They whistle in the dark while they write their
regressions that ignore the humans behind the equations.2 I was similarly
unsurprised by the failure of financial models. Financial models don’t forecast;
they transform one’s forecasts of the future into present value. Everyone should
understand the difference between a model and reality and be unastonished at the
inability of oneor two-inch equations to represent the convolutions of people and
markets.
What did shock and disturb me was the abandonment of the principle that
everyone had paid lip service to: the link between democracy and capitalism. We
were told not to expect reward without risk, gain without the possibility of loss.
Now we have been forced to accept crony capitalism, private profits and
socialized losses, and corporate welfare. We have seen corporations treated with
the kindness owed to individuals and individuals treated pragmamorphically, as
things.
When models in physics fail, they fail precisely, and often expose a paradox
that opens a door. When models in the social sciences fail, they fail bluntly, with
no hint as to what went wrong and no clue as to what to do next. With no way

forward, people try to restore the status quo ante at any cost.
WHAT IS TO BE DONE?
Financial models aren’t going to disappear. Data alone have no voice. Theorizing
and modeling are what humans do and will continue to do. So how do we use
models wisely and well?
I have explained that there are no genuine theories in finance. In physics,
Newton’s laws and Maxwell’s equations are facts of nature, but the Efficient
Market Model’s assumption that stock prices behave like smoke diffusing
through a room is not even remotely a fact. Financial models are always
metaphors.
WHAT IS THE POINT OF A MODEL IN FINANCE?
It takes only a little experience to see that the point of a model in finance is not
the same as the point of a model in physics. In physics one wants to predict or
control the future. In finance one wants to determine present value and goes
about it by forming opinions about the future, about the interest rates or defaults
or volatilities or housing prices that will come to pass. One uses a model to turn
those opinions about the future into an estimate of the appropriate price to pay
today for a security that will be exposed to that imagined future. I illustrated this
in my model for valuing a penthouse in chapter 5, where, by assuming that price
per square foot was the same for all apartments, I estimated the price of an eight-
room Park Avenue penthouse by replicating it out of two-room apartments in
Battery Park City. This process is characteristic of more general financial
models.
Models are useful in finance and here are some of their major benefits.
Models Facilitate Interpolation
One uses financial models to interpolate or extrapolate from the current known
prices of liquid securities to the estimated values of illiquid securities—relating
the unknown value of the Park Avenue apartment to the known prices of those in
Battery Park City, for instance. Similarly, the Black-Scholes Model proceeds
from a known stock price and a riskless bond price to the unknown value of an

option, which is a hybrid of stock and bond.
No model can be correct—a model is not a theory—and no replication is truly
accurate. But models can be immensely helpful in calculating initial estimates of
value.
Models Transform Intuition into a Dollar Value
The apartment-value model transforms intuitive knowledge about price per
square foot, now or in the future, into the value of the apartment. It’s easier to
begin with an estimate of price per square foot because that quantity captures so
much of the variability of apartment prices. Similarly, it’s far easier to convert
one’s intuition about future volatility into current option prices than it is to guess
at the appropriate prices themselves.
Models Are Used to Rank Securities by Value
Apartments have manifold characteristics and are difficult to compare. Implied
price per square foot can be used to rank many similar but not identical
apartments. It provides a simple one-dimensional scale on which to begin
ranking apartments by value. Implied price per square foot doesn’t truly reflect
the value of the apartment; it does provide a starting point, after which more
qualitative factors must be taken into account.
THE RIGHT WAY TO USE MODELS
Given the inevitable unreliability of models and the limited truth or likely
falseness of the assumptions they’re based on, the best strategy is to use them
sparingly and to make as few assumptions as possible when you do. Here are
some other rules I’ve found useful.
Avoid Axiomatization
Axioms and theorems are suitable for mathematics, but finance is concerned
with the world. Every financial axiom is pretty much wrong; the most relevant
questions in creating a model are how wrong and in what way?
Good Models Are Vulgar in a Sophisticated Way

In physics it pays to drop down deep, several levels below what you can observe,
formulate an elegant principle, and then rise back to the surface to work out the
observable consequences. Think of Newton, Maxwell, Dirac. Finance lacks deep
scientific principles, and so there it’s better to stay shallow and use models that
have as direct as possible a path between the securities whose prices you know
and the security whose value you want to estimate.
Markets are by definition vulgar, and the most useful models are vulgar too,
using variables (such as price per square foot) that crowds use to describe the
value of the assets they trade. One should build vulgar models in a sophisticated
way. Some of the best and most practical models involve interpolation, not in
prices but rather in the intuitive variables sophisticated users employ to estimate
value, for example, volatility.
Of course over time crowds and markets get smarter, and yesterday’s High
Dutch becomes tomorrow’s patois. The Black-Scholes formula, which translate
estimates of volatility into option prices, seemed so arcane when it burst upon
the world that Black and Scholes had great difficulty getting their paper accepted
for publication. Then, as users of the model grew more experienced, volatility
became common currency. Nowadays traders and quants have grown so
sophisticated that they talk fluently about models with stochastic volatility, a
volatility that is itself volatile.
Sweep Dirt Under the Rug, but Let Users Know
About It
One should be humble in applying mathematics to markets, and be wary of
overly ambitious theories. Whenever we make a model of something involving
human beings, we are trying to force the ugly stepsister’s foot into Cinderella’s
pretty glass slipper. It doesn’t fit without cutting off some essential parts.
Financial models, because of their incompleteness, inevitably mask risk. You
must start with models but then overlay them with common sense and
experience.
The world of markets never matches the ideal circumstances a model assumes.
Whenever one uses a model, one should know exactly what has been assumed in
its creation and, equally important, exactly what has been swept out of view. A
robust model allows a user to qualitatively adjust for those omissions. The
Black-Scholes Model is robust: its main assumptions are that the risk of an
option is related to the risk of the underlying stock, and that the market will be in

equilibrium when both option and stock provide the same excess return per unit
of risk. That’s a sensible idea, no matter how naively you define risk. The
dangerous part of Black-Scholes is the further assumption that the sole risk of a
stock is the risk of diffusion, which isn’t true. But the more realistically you can
define risk, the better the model will become because the underlying principle is
true.
Use Imagination
The perfect axiom or model doesn’t exist, so we have to use imperfect ones
intelligently. Smart traders know that you have to combine quantitative models
with heuristics. When people build models— when options modelers assume
stock prices diffuse like smoke, for example—they make all sorts of imaginative
assumptions that they then formulate mathematically.
When someone shows you an economic or financial model that involves
mathematics, you should understand that, despite the confident appearance of the
equations, what lies beneath is a substrate of great simplification and—only
sometimes—great imagination, perhaps even intuition. But you should never
forget that even the best financial model can never be truly valid because,
despite the fancy mathematics, a model is a toy. No wonder it often breaks down
and causes havoc.
Think of Models as Gedankenexperiments
No model is correct, but models can provide immensely helpful ways to estimate
value. I like to think of financial models as gedankenexperiments, like those
Einstein carried out when he pictured himself surfing a light wave, or
Schrödinger when he pictured a macroscopic cat subject to quantum
interference. I believe that’s the right way to use mathematical models in
finance, and the way experienced practitioners do use them. Models are only
models, not the thing in itself. Models are better regarded as a collection of
parallel thought universes to explore. Each universe should be consistent, but the
world of financial concepts and the minds of the humans that interact with them,
unlike the world of matter, are going to be infinitely more complex than any
model you make of them. When you use a model you are trying to shoehorn the

real world into a container too small for it to fit perfectly.
Beware of Idolatry
The greatest conceptual danger is idolatry: believing that someone can write
down a theory that encapsulates human behavior and thereby free you of the
obligation to think for yourself. A model may be entrancing, but no matter how
hard you try, you will not be able to breathe life into it. To confuse a model with
a theory is to believe that humans obey mathematical rules, and so to invite
future disaster.
Financial modelers must therefore compromise. They must decide what small
part of the financial world is of greatest current interest to them, describe its key
features, and then mock up those features only. A successful financial model
must have limited scope and must work with simple analogies. In the end you
are trying to rank complex objects by projecting them onto a scale with only a
few dimensions.
In physics there may one day be a Theory of Everything; in finance and the
social sciences, you have to work hard to have a usable model of anything.
THE FINANCIAL MODELERS’
MANIFESTO
On January 7, 2009, in response to the financial crisis, Paul Wilmott and I
published The Financial Modelers’ Manifesto, an ethical declaration for
scientists applying their skills to finance. Here is an excerpt:
The Modelers’ Hippocratic Oath
    I will remember that I didn’t make the world, and it doesn’t satisfy my
equations.
    Though I will use the models I or others create to boldly estimate value, I
will always look over my shoulder and never forget that the model is not the
world.
    I will not be overly impressed by mathematics. I will never sacrifice reality
for elegance without explaining to its end users why I have done so.

    I will not give the people who use my models false comfort about their
accuracy.
    I will make the assumptions and oversights explicit to all who use them.
    I understand that my work may have enormous effects on society and the
economy, many beyond my apprehension.
AN ETHICAL COROLLARY
I wrote that modelers of financial securities should make visible the dirt they
sweep under the rug. Similarly, the designers of financial products should create
securities whose purpose, exposure, and risks are clear. Unnecessarily bundled
complex products whose risks are obscure are often more profitable than simple
ones because their value is hard to estimate. If products were transparent, good
modeling would be easier.
MARKETS AND MORALS
I am deeply disillusioned by the West’s response to the recent financial crisis.
Though chance doesn’t treat everyone fairly, what makes the intrinsic brutalities
of capitalism tolerable is the principle that links risk and return: if you want to
have a shot at the up side, you must be willing to suffer the down. In the past few
years that principle has been violated. When Wall Street and the U.S. economy
were threatened, the ethical principles of capitalism took a backseat. After the
bailout of the financial sector, after the provision of cheap government loans to
banks at taxpayers’ expense, and after the banks’ rapid rebound from taxpayer
life support to record profits and bonuses, I am ashamed at the hypocrisies of the
system. If you want to be in the business of benefiting from the seven fat years,
then you must suffer the seven lean years too, even the catastrophically lean
ones. We need free markets, but we need them to be principled. As Edward
Lucas recently wrote:
If you believe that capitalism is a system in which money matters more than
freedom, you are doomed when people who don’t believe in freedom attack
using money. Russia has spotted that the weakest link in the Western
approach to life is inattention to the moral and ethical basis of capitalism.3

TAT TV AM ASI
In his novel The Leopard, Giuseppe di Lampedusa wrote about the effects of the
unification of Italy on life and society in Sicily: “If you want things to stay the
same, then things will have to change.” Capitalism seems incapable of principled
self-regulation. What can divert to good purposes the ingenious raw energy of
the Will it employs to maintain itself at any cost?
There is no elegant solution. People continue to act out their destiny
mechanically, doing what they unthinkingly believe they have to do. Wall Street
overshoots in its greed. The Senate committees grandstand. The president seeks
to get reelected. The world and the markets silently beg for a Churchill, and
society throws them Chamberlains. That’s the way of human affairs.
But occasionally there comes that wonderful moment when people who are in
a position to make a difference cease to behave mechanically. I think of Mandela
and de Klerk, Vaclav Havel, and Mikhail Gorbachev, men who, rather than
fulfilling their preprogrammed destinies, could imagine others as others
experience themselves, men who broke the cycle of karma, and so got one step
ahead of fate and altered the status quo.
It doesn’t happen often, but it does happen sometimes.

Appendix
ESCAPING BONDAGE
The title of part 4 of Spinoza’s Ethics is “Of Human Bondage, or The
Strength of the Emotions.” Part 5 is entitled “Of the Power of
Understanding, or Of Human Freedom.” There Spinoza spelled out
the plight of people caught in the grip of their passions and his
solution to this problem. Following is a diagram with my affective
summary of his theory.

 


Acknowledgments
I thank my agents, John and Max Brockman, for their encouragement and
support. Without their combination of intellectual interest and practical acumen
it would not have been written.
I am very grateful to Hilary Redmon, my editor at Free Press, for her initial
faith in the idea that a book about theories and models was worth writing, and
for her guidance in shaping it. This book wouldn't have been written without her
commitment. I’m also thankful to Sydney Tanigawa of Free Press for her help
with the manuscript.
In writing this book I have had the pleasure and benefit of many other people’s
help. Jeremy Bernstein and Peter Woit contributed useful comments on my
account of the development of electromagnetic theory. Dave Edwards did the
same, and provided me with additional stimulus in the form of hundreds of
articles on topics of diverse interest related to understanding the world around
us. Sebastien Bossu read my discussion of the foundations of financial models
and gave many suggestions that I incorporated. Richard Cohen, Leo Tilman, and
Marc Groz provided useful feedback on parts of the book dealing with finance.
Edward Hadas provided insight into the work of Spinoza and related
philosophical issues. Nassim Taleb pointed me toward several papers on the
philosophy of knowledge and enlightened me about the nature of heuristics.
Michael Goodkin lent inspiration and encouragement on several sections of the
book. I am also grateful to Wylie O’Sullivan, who helped edit several chapters
with great patience and skill. The Santa Fe Institute offered an eclectic, calm,
and productive environment for several weeks one August as I was starting to
write, and I’m grateful to Doyne Farmer for arranging the Institute’s hospitality.
Any defects in accuracy or taste are mine.

Notes

CHAPTER 1: A Foolish Consistency
1. Nonwhites in South Africa at various times were called natives, kaffirs,
blacks, Africans, and nonwhites. The term “nonwhites” (nie blankes in
Afrikaans) contemptuously identifies the salient feature of the black population
as their lack of whiteness. I write “contemptuously” because, as I discuss in
chapter 3, Spinoza defines contempt as the feeling induced by something
whose most salient features are the qualities it lacks. Dirac’s theory of the
positron, described in chapter 2, also illustrates how absence can become a
presence.
2. Normality is what you grow up with. Once, when she was about five years
old, we took my daughter on a Caribbean vacation to Anguilla. We stayed in a
hotel run by a Mr. Jeremiah Gumbs, a patriarchal-looking black Anguillan who
had served as the roving ambassador for his country during its brief 1967
revolution. Mr. Gumbs spoke a lilting biblical-sounding Caribbean English,
very different from that of his equally black American-born wife. One day my
daughter, who had lived in polyglot New York from birth and was totally
comfortable with people of any color, turned to me and asked, “How come Mr.
Gumbs is white and his wife is black?”
3. SPF ratings hadn’t arrived yet, but had they existed, the sophisticated-
smelling pseudo-Swedish iodine-tinted alcohol called Skol that made you look
brown as soon as you poured it onto your skin (where it sizzled briefly before it
evaporated) would probably have had a rating of around SPF 1/50 rather than
50. According to the definition of SPF, that would have made one minute with
Skol on your skin equivalent in terms of facilitating burning to 50 minutes in
the sun with no Skol.
4. Hypnosis, as Yuri Manin points out, became possible only after the
development of speech.
5. Years later, at a party in New York in the late 1970s, I met a dentist who used
hypnosis to anesthetize his patients. I let him take me into a corner of the noisy
room and do the arm-raising persuasion on me. Though I “knew” I could resist
it, my arm certainly wanted to go up, and so I let it.
6. It is significant that they called themselves Zionist Socialists rather than
Socialist Zionists, suggesting that the founders of the party were Socialists first
and Zionists second.

7. One of my friends in Habonim, later a judge in South Africa, was
euphoniously named Selwyn Selikowitz. My mother was amused at the South
African Jewish immigrant parents’ propensity for prepending Welsh, Scottish,
or Irish Christian names they could barely pronounce to Polish Jewish
surnames, resulting in mongrel combinations like Gavin Pasvolsky and Ian
Jacobowitz. Years later I discovered how accurately she had perceived the
pattern. Whenever in the United States I ran into a Justin or Malcolm
Kanopolsky or Rubinowitz, he had invariably been born in South Africa or
Rhodesia.
8. Miss Brodie’s claim in The Prime of Miss Jean Brodie, by Muriel Spark.
CHAPTER 2: Metaphors, Models, and Theories
1. Schopenhauer combines in one sentence the ideas behind the titles of Henry
Luce’s three midcentury periodicals, Time, Life, and Fortune.
2. Field, of course, is a metaphor too, the conflation of the qualities of a flattish
expanse of grass with the mysterious extension through space of the force that
emanates from a massive object. It’s hard to talk or write without metaphors.
3. Arisen is another gravitational metaphor. I had intended to use a distinct font
to indicate every metaphorical word in this chapter, but there are so many that
it would severely disturb the readability of the text.
4. I say “describe” rather than “model” for good reasons that will become
clearer as this chapter progresses. Deep description is the purpose of a theory.
5. Another fact of nature, the Pauli exclusion principle, prevents two electrons
from simultaneously having the same spin and energy.
6. Yehuda Amichai, “The Precision of Pain and the Blurriness of Joy,”
translated from the Hebrew by Ghana Bloch and Ghana Kronfeld, New York
Review of Books, February 18, 1999.
7. You can see analytic continuation at work in the extension of the definition
of the factorial function.The factorial of a positive integer n is the formula n! =
n x (n —1) x (n — 2) . . . x 1 (pronounced “n-factorial”), so called because its
factors are all the positive numbers less than n itself. When n is 4, for example,
then n! = 4 x 3 x 2 x 1 = 24. From the definition, it follows that 4! = 4 x 3! and
3! = 3 x 2!, and more generally that n! = n x (n —1)!, so that the factorial of an
integer is the product of the integer itself and the factorial of the integer just
below it. (Describing this integer as lying just below another integer is a
convenient gravitational metaphor that is almost unavoidable.)

Using the exclamation point to indicate the factorial is time honored but clumsy.
Since n! is a function of the number n, it’s clearer to reexpress it in terms of the
factorial function F(n), defined by F(n) = (n —1)!. You can see that F(n)
satisfies the oh-so-elegant recursive property F(n + 1) = n x F(n). You can
regard this property as a definition of the factorial function, a so-called recursive
definition, because it defines the function on the left in terms of the same
function (with a different argument) on the right, thus revisiting the function
again, “revisiting” being the etymological origin of the word “recursion.” If you
define F(1) = 1, then F(2), F(3) . . . for all integers n greater than 1 can be found
from the recursive definition. You could regard this particular recursion, F(n +
1) = n x F(n), as the essence of the factorial function, as mathematicians do.
Recursion occurs not only in mathematics, but also in computer science and
linguistics. A computer subroutine can recursively call itself, and a grammatical
expression is recursive because it can contain other, equally valid grammatical
expressions. Recursive functions are interesting because they involve an inner
tension: on the one hand they are narcissistically nearsighted, looking only at
themselves, local rather than global in scope; on the other hand, because they
look only at themselves, they can be more easily extended to vast regions of the
globe of numbers.
The definition F(n) = (n —1) x (n —2) . . . x 1 we began with works only for
positive integers n, because it involves generating a new number by the
repetitive subtraction of 1 from n and then multiplying everything that came
before by that number. If n is a positive integer and you keep subtracting 1 from
it, there is a natural stop at zero. If n is not a positive integer there is no natural
stopping point; you can go on forever until −∞.
The definition F(n + 1) = n × F(n) is more malleable, less obviously restricted
to a positive integer argument n. The natural question then presents itself to
curious mathematicians who always seek to generalize: Why shouldn’t there be
some other function F(x) that satisfies the relation F(x + 1) = x × F(x) where x is
not necessarily a positive integer but instead some more general number? Why
shouldn’t the factorial function exist both for x = 3 and, say, x = 3.2731?
The Swiss mathematician Leonhard Euler discovered (invented?) the gamma
function F(x) that does indeed satisfy F(x + 1) = x × F(x) for all x. For integer
values of x, it agrees with the traditional factorial function. For noninteger or
even complex values of x, I'(x) serves as a smooth extrapolation or interpolation
of the factorial from integer to noninteger arguments. It’s smooth because it
coincides with the factorial function for positive integer arguments, but

maintains the crucial recursive property for nonintegers. Mathematicians call this
kind of extension analytic continuation.
The gamma function I'(x) is a metaphorical extension of the factorial, in which
one property, its recursion, becomes its most important feature and serves as the
basis for extending it. The extension is a bit like calling an automobile a
horseless carriage, preserving the essence of carrying and removing the
unnecessary horsefulness, or like calling a railroad ferrovia in Italian or
Eisenbahn in German, focusing on the fact that it’s still a road, but one made of
iron. Analytic continuation is approximately a mathematical version of
synecdoche, a figure of speech in which an entire object is represented by one of
its parts, or metonymy, in which an entire object is referred to by one of its
properties. Analytic continuation is a method of modeling a function. But
whereas most models are restrictive—a model train is less than a real train— in
mathematics, a new model can be something greater rather than diminished.
That’s because mathematics deals entirely with its own world and obeys only its
own constraints.
8. How, you should ask, did astronomers determine the true luminosity of
Cepheids in order to verify the relationship between absolute luminosity and
frequency? There are some nearby Cepheids whose distance can be measured
by other, more direct means, and it is from these that one can determine that the
true luminosity and the frequency of Cepheids are related. Furthermore, there
are physics models that can plausibly explain why frequency and luminosity
should be so tightly related, and this sanity check confirms the observations as
trustworthy.
9. And therefore more complex.
10. R. P. Crease and C. C. Mann, The Second Creation, revised edition
(Rutgers University Press, 1996).
11. A model is made. A theory can be discovered. A model always implies a
modeler. A theory doesn’t necessarily imply a theorizer.

12. By “really” I do mean really: every fact is a theory, as are the proton and
neutron.
13. Dyson’s views on the styles of mathematicians are mentioned in chapter 4.
14. An example of this viewpoint is articulated in Dictionary of Psychological
Medicine: Giving the definition, etymology, and synonyms of the terms used in
medical psychology with the symptoms, treatment, and pathology of insanity
and the law of lunacy in Great Britain and Ireland, by Daniel Hack Tuke (P.
Blakiston, 1892):
We are inclined to look upon hypochondriasis from two different points of
view; in one we consider that it is rather a form of imperfect evolution and in
the other it is a form of nervous dissolution. In the former, the performance of
the bodily functions, which should have become so established as to be
automatic as far as feeling is concerned, have [sic] not developed so far, but
remain in the conscious stage, and on the other hand there are conditions of
age and disease in which the functions, which have been for years performed
unconsciously, again become consciously performed. To take examples, the
child learns to use its limbs slowly and with effort, but the time comes when
acts of the most complicated kind are performed without any conscious
adaptation of means to ends. With age or illness there may be a return to
conscious movements.
We believe that many other functions, such as that of digestion for instance,
go through a conscious stage to pass to one of healthy unconsciousness. In
one or two cases we have met with patients who have never got over this
stage of conscious digestion, and the numbers who in states of ill health or
degeneration once more become morbidly conscious of the digestion needs
[sic] not to be recalled. The constant conscious repetition of sensations, which
in the individual or in the race ought to be unconscious, leads to morbid
introspection and hypochondriasis; such is our contention.
15. See the discussion in chapter 3 of Spinoza’s theory of emotions for an
example of a nonmathematical theory.
16. In his Nobel Prize lecture, Feynman wrote,“Many different physical ideas
can describe the same physical reality. Thus, classical electrodynamics can be
described by a field view, or an action at a distance view, etc. Originally,
Maxwell filled space with idler wheels, and Faraday with fields lines, but
somehow the Maxwell equations themselves are pristine and independent of
the elaboration of words attempting a physical description.”

17. Philosophers since antiquity have written extensively about the difference
between episteme and techne. My notion of theory is not theory in the sense of
“removed from experience” or “the opposite of practice”; my theory is
analogous to episteme, in the sense of knowledge of the real as it is, or gnosis
in the sense of understanding. Techne is closer to craft or heuristic knowledge.
18. “Words are as valuable as money.”
19. Italics are mine.

CHAPTER 3: The Absolute
1. From the Greek tetra = four, gramma = letters.
2. The ancient Greeks apparently read the Hebrew letters
 in the
Tetragrammaton as though they were Greek, from left to right, and therefore
identified them with the Greek letters they resembled, PIPI, pi iota, repeated,
and hence pronounced “pipi.”
3. “Perfected” meaning not only completed but also made real and perfect, in
the Spinozan sense to be discussed later in this chapter: “And God saw every
thing that he had made, and, behold, it was very good.”
4. Imagine the word green always printed in red type.
5. That there is no name for an emotion involving two pleasures could be taken
to validate Schopenhauer’s view of the primacy of pain over pleasure.
Buddhists, though, do have the term mudita to denote a state of joy at the
success of others.
6. Spinoza regards clemency as the opposite of cruelty. But though cruelty is a
passion we suffer as it overwhelms us from the outside, clemency is not.
Clemency, according to Spinoza, is a power whereby man restrains his anger
and desire for revenge.
7. In finance an underlier is a simple security, and a derivative is a more
complex security whose value depends on the underliers beneath it. A stock is
an underlier; an option on a stock is a derivative contract.
8. The contempt for fiat money stems not only from the painless creation of
illusory value, but also from its impure nature. It has the soul of an underlier,
like the gold that it once laid claim to, but the body of a derivative, a contract
printed on paper that, in the end, is anchored to nothing but the government’s
insistence that it is legal tender for all debts.
9. Somerset Maugham took the title of his novel Of Human Bondage from part
4 of Spinoza’s Ethics, entitled “Of Human Bondage, or The Strength of the
Emotions.”
10. Gilles Deleuze, Spinoza: Practical Philosophy (City Lights Books, 1988).
11. This is perilously close to the modern view that everyone who we would
formerly have called bad is now someone’s victim rather than a culprit. But as
Philip Larkin wrote:

They fuck you up, your mum and dad.
They may not mean to, but they do.
. . .
But they were fucked up in their turn
. . .
12. A version of Blake’s “To see the world in a grain of sand . . .”
13. The appendix of this book contains my affective map of Spinoza’s Ethics.

CHAPTER 4: The Sublime
1. Maxwell’s paper “On Governors,” published in 1868, created the field of
control theory. He used differential equations to explain how to design a
governor to stabilize the energy output of a steam engine, so that the engine
would automatically slow down when it ran too fast and speed up when it ran
too slowly. This kind of cruise control is a desirable trait of economies too, as
yet unachievable.
2. A converging field is equivalent to a diverging field with the direction of the
arrows reversed.
3. A magnetic pole or charge would be the magnetic analogue of an electric
charge. Isolated magnetic poles, a single north or a single south, have been
conjectured to exist but have never been discovered. All one ever finds is
current loops that behave like north–south pole combinations (Figure 4.2).
4. It puzzles me: What did people think light was before Maxwell identified it
with electromagnetic radiation?
5. Quoted in E. T. Bell, Men of Mathematics (New York, 1937).
6. Apropos the word like, Jeremy Bernstein informs me (private
communication) that Marvin Minsky once remarked about something he
(Minsky) drew,“This looks like a bird, but no bird looks like this.”
7. Against my best intentions I am writing about the “orbiting” electron.
Orbiting is a planetary metaphor that fails when one moves from classical to
quantum mechanics. There is no “orbiting” electron.
8. The orbit of the electron is also affected by the quanta of its own
electromagnetic field, an additional effect I’m ignoring here.

CHAPTER 5: The Inadequate
1. Hayek also pointed out that the role of psychology is, somewhat
paradoxically, to create the path back from laws to the perceptions they
explain: “The task of theoretical psychology is the converse one of explaining
why these events, which on the basis of their relations to each other can be
arranged in a certain (physical) order, manifest a different order in their effect
on our senses.”
2. To be precise, when you buy a share of stock the first time the company
issues it, in an initial public offering (IPO), the company receives your
payment. If you buy a share later, in the secondary market, it’s like buying a
second hand book; you pay the owner of the book for it, not the publisher.
3. In the long run, of course, paper money is very risky; governments collapse,
countries disappear, empires fall, and things hold their value much better than
paper does. James Grant, the editor of Grant’s Interest Rate Observer, has
pointed out that an ounce of gold has always more or less been the price of a
good men’s suit.
4. According to Krugman and Wells, the crisis of 2007–2008 was caused by the
global savings glut (www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/2010/sep/30/ slump-
goes-why/). That was caused by the Asian currency crisis of 1997– 1998,
which stimulated Asian countries to avoid a repeat by running net surpluses
rather than net deficits. But what caused the Asian currency crisis? And what
caused whatever caused that? As I pointed out in chapter 3, this is a good
example of what Spinoza would call an inadequate explanation.
5. The prevailing price of one incremental share is not necessarily equal to the
price per share for acquiring the entire company. With physical goods one
usually expects a discount for buying in bulk. With securities one often pays a
premium for buying an entire company, probably because the desire to buy an
entire company indicates strongly that the buyer thinks it is worth more than it
currently trades for.
6. See F. H. Knight, Risk, Uncertainty, and Profit (Houghton Mifflin,1921).
7. See D. A. Freedman and P. B. Stark, “What Is the Chance of an
Earthquake?” University of California, Berkeley, Department of Statistics,
Technical Report 611, January 2003.

8. In mathematics the symbol A (Delta) before any other symbol indicates an
infinitesimally small change in the quantity represented by the second symbol.
Thus At is an arbitrarily small increment in time.
9. See Emanuel Derman, “The Perception of Time, Risk and Return During
Periods of Speculation,” Quantitative Finance 2, no. 4 (2002): 282–96.
10. “Exclusive” in describing an apartment means desirable and expensive
because it excludes many people. In a financial crisis, though, exclusivity
means illiquidity. What you want to own in a widespread financial crunch are
inclusive securities.
11. I use the Greek letter omega, pronounced “oh-mega,” to quantify
deliciousness.
12. F. Black, E. Derman, and W. Toy, “A One-Factor Model of Interest Rates
and Its Application to Treasury Bond Options,” Financial Analysts Journal,
January–February 1990, 33–39.
13. In principle the beta of a stock should be the same forever, its permanent
characteristic. In practice, like volatilities, betas change over time. This is one
of the problems of CAPM, though by no means its major one.
14. Or, rephrasing the CAPM result in algebra:
The left-hand side of the equation, μ - r, is the excess return you can expect to
earn when you invest in a stock. The right-hand side, μM - r, is the excess return
you can expect from investing in the entire market M.
15. I stress again that CAPM deals with expected returns; it is a theorem about
what people should expect if stocks and people behave the way the model
assumes they will. Contrast it with Maxwell’s equations, which tell you,
absolutely, how light will behave.
16. When savvy investors find a new way of grouping the market, and that
information gets around, other investors will probably begin to anticipate the
group behavior, and in so doing accentuate it even more strongly.

CHAPTER 6: Breaking the Cycle
1. From the Greek word pragma, meaning “a material object,”
pragmamorphism is the inverse of anthropomorphism, which is the attribution
of the mental characteristics of human beings to animals or objects. See
http://www.edge.org/q2011/q11_3.html#derman.
2. Is a stimulus stimulating when they keep telling you they are going to
stimulate you? Do Keynesians laugh when they tickle themselves?
3. Edward Lucas, The New Cold War: Putin’s Russia and the Threat to the
West, 2nd edition (Palgrave Macmillan, 2009).

Index

absence as presence
absolutes: and Derman’s four questions fiat money example and
irreducible nonmetaphor and love and desperation and

nature of theories and

passions and

perfection and
and Spinoza’s answers to Derman’s questions Spinoza’s emotions theory and
Tetragrammaton and

abstractions
accuracy: of economic/financial models of theories
action: at a distance

freedom of

understanding and

adequate causes
Adonai,

African Resistance Movement airplane models
Akiva, Rabbi
algebra: fundamental theorem of aliyah,
aliyah register
alpha: CAPM and
Amichai, Yehuda
Ampère, André-Marie

analogies

analytic continuation
Anderson, Carl

antiparticles

apartheid
apartments: valuing of

Apple stock
arithmetic: fundamental theorem of artists’ models

Asian financial crisis
assumptions: in financial models Modelers’ Hippocratic Oath and rules for using
models and

types of models and

unconscious
Atlas Shrugged (Rand) atomic physics
axioms/axiomatization
bad. See evil

bailouts

bare electrons
Barfield, Owen
Bedazzled (film)
Begin, Menachem
behavior, human: adequate knowledge and EMM as assumption about

explanations for
and humans as responsible for their actions and idolatry of models

Law of One Price and

laws of

pragmamorphism and
Ben-Gurion, David
Bernoulli, Daniel
Bernstein, Jeremy
beta: CAPM and
Betar (Brit Yosef Trumpeldor) binocular diplopia

birds
Black, Fischer
Black-Scholes Model

Merton and
Blake, William
Bnei Akiva (Sons of Akiva)
Bnei Zion (Sons of Zion)
body-mind relationship
Bohr, Aage
Bohr, Niels
bonds: financial models and See also type of bond
Boyle’s Law
Brahe, Tycho

brain
Brave New World (Huxley) Brownian motion
bundling of complex products cage: moth in perfect

calibration
Cape Flats Development Association (South Africa) Capital Asset Pricing
Model (CAPM) capitalism
caricatures: models as
cash. See currency/cash Cauchy, Augustin-Louis causes

Cepheid variable stars

chalazion
chaver (comrade)
Chekhov, Anton
chemistry: electromagnetic theory and Chesterton, G. K.

Chinese

choice

chromatography
Churchill, Winston
Coetzee, J. M.

coin tossing
Coleridge, Samuel Taylor
collateralized default obligations (CDOs) collective model, of nucleus Collie,
Max

commodities
communism: in South Africa
The Communist Manifesto (Marx and Engels) complex numbers, theory of

computer programs

consciousness

Consolidated Edison stock

contempt
content: Goethe’s view about method and method and

contradictions
control: purpose of models and theories and
self—
and theory of controlling engineering devices Cornell, Joseph
Cornford, Francis

corporate bonds

corporate welfare
corporations: bailouts of

cosmology
Coulomb, Charles

creative destruction
credit crisis (2007)

credit markets
curls: electromagnetic theory and currency/cash
darkness: Goethe’s view about light and light and
Darwin, Charles
de Klerk, F. W.
De Morgan, Augustus

debt markets

debt securities

deduction
Deleuze, Gilles
deliciousness: analogy with risk democracy

derivative emotions
derivatives, financial
Derman, Chaim (father)
Derman, Emanuel: childhood and youth of education of

in England

eyesight of

four questions of

graduate education of
moth in refrigerator example and professional background of

quantum dream of
Derman, Joshua (son)
Derman, Sonia (mother)
Derman, Sonya (daughter)
Descartes, René
desires: definition of

disappointment and

freedom and

money and
Spinoza’s emotions theory and will and
desperation: love and
devotion; Spinoza’s emotions theory and diagrams, Feynman

diffusion
Dirac Equation: analogies and bare and dressed electrons and Dirac wave
function and

as explanation of reality

idea of electrons and

impact on physics of

intuition and

knowledge and

matter and

metaphors and

nature of models and

nature of theories and

positrons and
quantum electrodynamics and Standard Model and

as successful theory
Dirac, Paul

Dirac sea
distance: measurement of
divergences: electromagnetic theory and diversification

domino computer

dressed electrons drift
Du Fay, Charles
“Ducks Ditty” (song)
Dyson, Freeman
Earth: as magnet
earthquakes: probability of economic models See also financial models; specific
model
Eddington, A. S.
Efficient Market Hypothesis. See Efficient Market Model Efficient Market
Model (EMM): accuracy of
as assumption about human behavior assumptions of
Black-Scholes Model and

CAPM as extension of
as cause of financial crisis conceptual mismatches in

development of

function of
futility of using financial models and hypothesis of

ideology and

ignoring of complexity by

invalidation of results of

Law of One Price and

as metaphor

popularity of

price and

QED and

risk and return in

Sharpe Ratio and
Spinoza’s emotions theory and stock market crash and

as theory or model

uncertainty and

value and

volatility and
efficient markets: definition of Einstein, Albert: as bird

as Derman role model

diffusion model and
and Dirac’s work

and intuition
as making the unconscious conscious on Maxwell
and models as gedankenexperiments quanta and

relativity theory of
electric generator, first
electricity See also electromagnetic theory electrochemistry: discovery of
electrodynamics: Maxwell’s laws of electromagnetic theory: absolutes and
accuracy of
Ampère’s contributions to

analogies and

confirmation of

curls and

divergences and

EMM and
Faraday’s contributions to

field and

function of

history of

intuition and

light and
Maxwell’s contributions to
and Maxwell’s views about Ampère as metaphor

phenomena and

as predictor

qualities of

quantitative laws and

Standard model and

as success
trajectory of discoveries of as triumph of mental over

physical

waves and
electromagnetism. See electromagnetic theory electrons See also Dirac Equation;
Dirac sea; electromagnetic theory emerging markets
emotions: absence as presence and as link to mind-body
emotions theory, Spinoza’s
empirical laws of planetary motion, Kepler’s Engels, Friedrich
engineering devices: theory of controlling equilibrium: Black-Scholes Model
and of markets

in physics

equity securities
Essays and Aphorisms (Schopenhauer) ethics
Ethics (Spinoza)

Euclid
evil: adequate knowledge and definition of

good and
Spinoza’s emotions theory and evolution, theory of

excess return
expectations: financial models and expected return

experience

explanations
Extension: Thought and

extrapolation

eyesight
fact: electromagnetic theory and financial models and

metaphor confused with

positron as

theory and

factorial function
failed models: economic

financial

immigration of Jews and

in mortgage crisis of

in physics

in politics

quantitative

in social sciences
Fama, Eugene
Faraday, Michael

fashion models

Federal Reserve
feelings: as metaphors
Fermi, Enrico

fetish
Feynman, Richard

fiat money
the field: electromagnetic theory and geometry of
finance: aim/focus of

fundamental theorem of

good and bad theories in

lack of principles in

misunderstanding of

one law of

pragmamorphism and

principle in
Spinoza’s emotions theory and financial crisis: of

Asian currency

cause of
The Financial Modeler’s Manifesto
(Derman and Wilmott)
financial models: accuracy of as analogies

assumptions in

basic principles of

benefits of

calibration of

development of theory in

ethics and

failed

fundamentals and

futility of using

as gedankenexperiments

God and

good and bad

impact of

intuition and

jujitsu finance and
lack of consistent results in manifesto for

mathematics and

metaphors and

nature of models and
as not the physics of markets objects of interest in

physics and

pleasure and

politics and

prediction and

price and
financial models (cont.) purpose of

right way to use

scope of

similarity and

successful

technical analysis and

as toy

uncertainty and

vulgarity of
what to do about See also specific model or topic
financial products: bundling of designers of
financial sector: ballooning of hypocrisies of

forward contracts
Franklin, Benjamin

free electrons

free markets
Freedman, D. A.
freedom: of action

adequate knowledge and

definition of

desire and

history of world and

morals and markets and

reason and
self-control and
Freud, Sigmund

frogs

futures contracts

galactic distances
gedankenexperiments: models as Gell-Mann, Murray

geometry
Gilbert, William (English physician) Gilbert, William S. (and Sullivan) Glashow,
Sheldon

global warming

God
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von Goldman Sachs & Co.
good: definition of

evil and

moral versus sensual
Spinoza’s emotions theory and Gorbachev, Mikhail
governors; Maxwell and
Grahame, Kenneth
Grant, James
gravitation, laws of

greed
Group Areas Act (1950)
Gumbs, Jeremiah
Habonim (the Builders)
Halley, Edmond
Hampshire, Stuart
happiness: Schopenhauer comments about Hashomer Hatzair (The Youthful
Guard) hate: Spinoza’s emotions theory and Havel, Vaclav
Hayek, Friedrich

hedge funds
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm
Heidegger, Martin

herding tendency
Herrigel, Eugen
Hertz, Heinrich
Herut (Freedom) Party
Herzl, Theodor
Hess, Victor

heuristics

Hilbert spaces
Hofstadter, Douglas

housing market
Huxley, Aldous

hydrodynamics

hydrogen atoms

hypnosis
idea: definition of correct theory and electromagnetic theory and

of electrons

laws of physics and

matter and
mind-body and

truth and

idealism
ideology: EMM and

idolatry
ignorance: Spinoza’s views about imagination
immigration, Jewish
Immorality Act (1950)
induction, law of

infinities

insider information
insolvency: as illiquidity

interest rate

interpolation

introspection
intuition: characteristics of Dirac sea and

electromagnetic theory and

of Feynman

financial models and

God as ultimate

Kepler and

knowledge and

laws and
and mathematics-physics relationship nature of models and

perfection and

pleasure and

Spinoza and
Spinoza’s views about

symbols and

theory and

truth and

understanding and
as way of understanding world invention/discovery: as synthesis of world and
mind irreducible nonmetaphor
Israel: Derman trips to

Habonim and
Labor movement and See also Zionism Jabotinsky, Ze’ev

Japanese
Jenkins, Mr. (plumber)
Jews: in concentration camps Derman’s mental models of

God and

immigration of

in South Africa
Journal of Finance,
Kafka, Franz
Kepler, Johannes

keratoconus
Keynes, Geoffrey
Keynes, John Maynard
Knight, F. H.
knowledge: Spinoza’s emotions theory and See also intuition Koestler, Arthur
Kolakowski, Leszek
Krugman, Paul
Kusch, Polykarp
labor: models as saving mental Labor movement
“Lady with a Lapdog” (Chekhov) Lamb, Charles
Lamb, Willis
Lampedusa, Giuseppe di

language
Larkin, Philip

Law of One Price
Law of Proportionality of Risk and Return laws: birds and

discovery of
Einstein’s views about

experience and

intuition and

for material world

models and

and one law of finance

of physics

purpose of

theorems and
laws (cont.)
understanding of adequate causes and See also specific laws
leaders: who make a difference Leftwich, Adrian
Leibniz, Gottfried
Lemkus, Jack

lemmas
The Leopard (Lampedusa) leptons

liberal democrats

Liberal Party

libertarian capitalism
life: Schopenhauer comments about light
lines: Euclid’s geometry and lines of force: electromagnetic theory and Lintner,
John
liquidity/illiquidity

lodestones

logic
Lolita (Nabokov)
London, England: Derman in
Lorentz-Fitzgerald relativistic contracting of rapidly moving rods Lorentz,
Hendrik

love
Lucas, Edward
luminosity: of stars
magnetism: phenomena of See also electromagnetic theory Mandela, Nelson
Manin, Y.
manufacturing: decline of

manufacturing recipe

market risk

marketing
markets, financial: CAPM and equilibrium of

listed

morals and

nature of models and
as object of interest in financial models over-the-counter

unpredictability of

value and
vulgarity of See also specific financial model or type of market
Marx, Karl

materialism
mathematics: abstractions in analytic continuation in

axiomatization in

bird and frogs in

electromagnetic theory and

extension and

financial

models and

imagination and
Modelers’ Hippocratic Oath and physics and

symbols and

theorems of
theories of inanimate matter and matter: composition of world and domino
computer and

idea and

inanimate

laws of
Newton’s discoveries about
nonrelativistic wave mechanics of Spinoza’s emotions theory and theories of

will and
Maxims and Reflections (Goethe) Maxwell, James Clerk: as a bird as Derman
role model
and Derman’s question about laws and explanations Einstein’s views about

electromagnetic theory and
and equations as facts of nature as expanding scope of adequate knowledge
impact of

laws

of physics and
and right way to use models Standard Model and
views about Ampère of

measurement of distance
mechanics: Newton’s laws of Merton, Robert C. See also
Black-Scholes Model
metaphor(s): as analogies
definition/nature of models and electromagnetic theory as

facts confused with

feelings as

financial models as

God and

hierarchy of linguistic
and irreducible nonmetaphor language as tower of

limitations of

mysteries of world and

physical basis of

positron and

purposes of

of Schopenhauer

symbols and

theories and
method: Goethe’s view about content and mind: body relationship with
composition of world and

domino computer and

idea and
invention/ discovery as synthesis of world and laws of

materialism and
Spinoza’s emotions theory and will and
Minsky, Marvin

miscegenation

mnemonics
Modeh (children’s prayer) Model T
Modelers’ Hippocratic Oath
models: accuracy of

analogies and

assumptions and

benefits of

as caricature

as collection of parallel

thought universes

definition of

explanations required for

as fetish

as gedankenexperiments

good and bad

ideal

language and

laws and
limitations/inadequacies of and making the unconscious conscious as metaphor

mysteries of world and

nature of

purposes of

for risk

rules for using

as saving mental labor

as simplifications

theorems and

theories compared with

time and

types of

unreliability of

validity of

verification of

vulgarity of
as way of understanding world See also failed models; specific model
or topic
money See also currency/cash monocular diplopia Montagu, South Africa:
Derman visit to morals: markets and

mortgages
Moses: burning bush and
Mossin, Jan
moth in refrigerator example motion, laws of
Mottelson, Ben
mudita,
Nabokov, Vladimir
National Union of South African Students (Nusas) Nationalist Party, Afrikaner
nature: inner relationships of negative energy
Newton, Isaac: as a bird

calculus and

CAPM and
and Derman’s question about laws and explanations discoveries about matter of
electromagnetic theory and
Keynes’s views about

laws of

laws of the universe and

mechanics theory of
and perfection via intuition and right way to use models theories of

observation
Oersted, Hans Christian
“On the Suffering of the World”
(Schopenhauer)
options: benefits of financial models and Black-Scholes Model and

Merton and
as objects of interest to financial models Spinoza’s theory of emotions and
valuing of
vulgarity of financial models and pain: definition of

money and
Spinoza’s emotions theory and Palestine

parity violation

passions
perfection: definition of

electromagnetic theory and

God as

intuition and

knowledge and

levels of

nonexistence of

reality and
Spinoza’s definition of
Spinoza’s emotions theory and of theories
phenomena: electromagnetic theory and importance of
physics: abstractions and

analytic continuation in

birds and frogs in
collective model in nuclear Derman’s interest in studying equilibrium in

failed models in

financial models and

function of

fundamental theorem of

God and
good and bad models and theories in laws of
and making the unconscious conscious mathematics and
Maxwell’s impact on

nature of models and

negative energy and

purpose of models in
and right way to use models theory as
distinguished from models and uncertainty and
values of fundamental constants in world as focus of See also specific scientist,
model, or theory
“A Piece of Chalk” (Chesterton) The Pirates of Penzance (Gilbert and Sullivan)
Planck, Max
pleasure: definition of

as derivative of love

expected

financial models and

generalized

intuition and

localized

money and

perfection and
Spinoza’s emotions theory and pleasure premium
Poalei Zion (Workers of Zion) Poincaré, Henri

points
politics: failed models in

financial models and

human affairs and
Population Registration Act (1950) portfolios, investment
Portnoy’s Complaint (Roth) positrons

postulates
Powers, Melvin

pragmamorphism
“The Precision of Pain and the Blurriness of Joy” (Amichai) preconceptions
prediction: financial models and purpose of models in physics and presence:
absence as
price: definition of

drift in

financial models and

fluctuation in
futility of using financial models and history of

implied

opaque

prediction of future
purpose of finance models and risk model and

value and
volatility of See also Law of One Price; specific financial model or theory

primes
primitives See also specific primitive
Principle of No Riskless Arbitrage. See Law of One Price principles: definition
of theories and Euclid’s geometry and

in finance

privatization

probability
Prohibition of Mixed Marriages Act (1949) proxies: artists’ models as psyche,
Freud’s theory of

psychoanalysis

psychology

Pygmalion model
Pythagoras’s theorem
QED. See quantum electrodynamics quanta quantum electrodynamics (QED):
accuracy of atomic physicists and

as best theory in world

complexity of

as genuine theory

history of

light and

as metaphor

quantum dreams and

renormalization and

quantum field theory

quantum mechanics

quarks
race: in South Africa
radioactive beta decay, theory of Rainwater, James
Rand, Ayn

random walk
randomness: EMM and

risk and

theory of
real estate: financial models and See also apartments reality

reason

regulation
relativity, theory of

renormalization
research: principles of
return: average
Black-Scholes Model and

CAPM and

EMM and

excess

expected

financial models and
return (cont.)

fluctuation in
futility of using financial modeling and realized

risk and

sources of

Revisionist Party
reward. See return risk: Black-Scholes Model and CAPM and

deliciousness analogy with

of diffusion

EMM and
and ethics of designing financial products financial models and
futility of using financial models and herding

idiosyncratic

market

model for

money and

premium

price and

purpose of models

purpose of theory

return and

uncertainty and

universal value for

volatility and
role models/exemplars
Roth, Philip
rules: Feynman diagrams and nature of models and

for using models
S&P 500: Apple stock and EMM and
Salam, AbdusSchadenfreude,
Scholes, Myron
Schopenhauer, Arthur
Schrödinger, Erwin
Schwinger, Julian
Science and Reflection (Heidegger) Second World War/World War II securities:
definition of

Law of One Price and
and ranking of securities by value unified theory of
valuing of See also type of security
self: control of

image of

understanding of
and why we treat ourselves differently from others will and
Senate, U.S.
sensations: global

local
sexual revolution: Habonim and Sharpe ratio
Sharpe, William
similarity: securities and

simultaneity

Six Day War
sleep: Modeh and

Schopenhauer views about
The Sleepwalkers (Koestler) social sciences; models in

Socialism

sophistry
soufflé recipes: assumptions and South Africa: apartheid in
Collie’s hypnosis in

communism in
Derman’s childhood and youth in internal contradictions of models of Jews in
political models that failed in space: outer, emotional vocabulary in theories of
Special Theory of Relativity (Einstein) Spider-Man advertising Spinoza, Baruch:
adequate causes of and body-mind relationship
and definition of perfection and reality and emotions as link between mind and
body emotions theory of

God of

as materialist

and money

understanding of world and

views about truth of

wonder definition of
stand-alone electrons

Standard Model
Stanford Linear Accelerator Center Stark, P. B.
stars: luminosity of

statistical mechanics
stimulation: Spinoza’s emotions theory and stimulus
stocks: financial models and as objects of interest to financial models risks of
shorting See also financial models; specific model

subatomic particles
subconscious: Spinoza’s emotions theory and subjectivity: race in South Africa
and sublimation
Substance: Spinoza’s Ethics and Summertime (Coetzee) survival: money and
Spinoza’s emotions theory and sweeping dirt under the rug symbols

symmetry
Tat tvam asi,

technical analysis

Tetragrammaton

theorems
theory/theories: absolutes and accuracy of

as adequate knowledge

analytic continuation and

confirmation of

contemplative nature of

definition of

development of

discovery of essence and
“dynamical,”

economics and

facts and

fetishes and

good and bad

of inanimate matter

intuition and
limitations/inadequacies of as linking outer with inner metaphor and

models compared with

mysteries of world and

nature of

overly ambitious

perfection of

positron as

purposes of

Standard Model as

subjects of

successful

true

uncertainty and

verification of
as way of understanding world See also specific theory

thermodynamics
Thomson, J. J.
Thought: Extension and
three meta-affects

time
Tomonaga, Shin’ichiro
transparency: ethics of designing financial products and

Treasury bills

Treasury bonds
Treynor, Jack
Trumpeldor, Yosef

truth
uncertainty: EMM and

financial models and

physics and

quantifiable

risk and

theory and

unquantifiable

of value

unconscious

underliers
understanding: action and

of adequate causes

of body

of experience

intuition and

of passions
self—

will and

of world
Universal Law of Gravitation (Newton) universe, laws of the

University of Cape Town

untouchables

utility functions

utility stocks
value: benefits of financial models and Black-Scholes Model and

definition of

determination of

EMM and

estimates of

financial markets and

financial models and

Law of

One Price and
mysteries of the world and determining price and
purpose of finance models and ranking of securities by

uncertainty of
and universal value for risk and valuing of options
vulgarity of financial models and vanilla options
volatility: benefits of financial models and Black-Scholes Model and

CAPM and

EMM and

financial models and
futility of using financial models and purpose of finance models and risk and

stochastic
vulgarity of financial models and Volta, Alessandro

voltaic pile
W-bosons
War of Independence, Israeli waves: electromagnetic theory and weather models
Weinberg-Salam Model
Weinberg, Steven
Wells, Robin

will
Wilmott, Paul
The Wind in the Willow (Grahame) wonder: Spinoza’s emotions theory and
words: limitations of
world: composition of

as focus of physics
intuition as way of understanding the invention/discovery as synthesis of mind
and mysteries of
World War II. See Second World War/ World War II worth: definition of
Yahweh,
Z-bosons

Zionism

Zippy model airplane

About The Author
Emanuel Derman is head of risk at Prisma Capital Partners and a professor at
Columbia University, where he directs the program in financial engineering. He
is the author of My Life as a Quant, one of Businessweek's top ten books of the
year, in which he introduced the quant world to a wide audience.
He was born in South Africa but has spent most of his professional life in New
York City, where he has made contributions to several fields. He started out as a
theoretical physicist, doing research on unified theories of elementary particle
interactions. At AT&T Bell Laboratories in the 1980s he developed
programming languages for business modeling. From 1985 to 2002 he worked
on Wall Street, running quantitative strategies research groups in fixed income,
equities, and risk management, and he was appointed a managing director at
Goldman Sachs & Co. in 1997. The financial models he developed there, the
Black-Derman-Toy interest rate model and the local volatility model, have
become widely used industry standards.
In his 1996 article “Model Risk” Derman pointed out the dangers that
inevitably accompany the use of models, a theme he developed in My Life as a
Quant. Among his many awards and honors, he was named the SunGard/IAFE
Financial Engineer of the Year in 2000. He has a PhD in theoretical physics from
Columbia University and is the author of numerous articles in elementary
particle physics, computer science, and finance.

