8
May 2009    Physics Today
© 2009 American Institute of Physics, S-0031-9228-0905-210-7
What’s bad about 
this habit
N. David Mermin
N. David Mermin is a retired professor of physics in Ithaca, New York. He has
many bad habits, but he does try to avoid reifying his successful abstractions.
After we came out of the church, we stood
talking for some time together of Bishop
Berkeley’s ingenious sophistry to prove the
nonexistence of matter, and that every thing
in the universe is merely ideal. I observed
that though we are satisfied his doctrine is
not true, it is impossible to refute it. I never
shall forget the alacrity with which Johnson
answered, striking his foot with mighty
force against a large stone, till he rebounded
from it—“I refute it thus.”
—James Boswell, 
The Life of Samuel Johnson
There is nothing . . . more abstract than 
reality.
—Giorgio Morandi, 
interview with Edouard Roditi
A bad habit is something you do,
without being fully aware of it, that
makes life harder than it needs to be. It
is a bad habit of physicists to take their
most successful abstractions to be real
properties of our world. Since the dis-
tinction between real and abstract is no-
toriously problematic, you might won-
der what it means to wrongly confer
reality on something abstract. I shall il-
lustrate our habit of inappropriately
reifying our successful abstractions
with several examples.
Perhaps the least controversial ex-
amples are provided by quantum me-
chanics. The quantum state may well be
the most powerful abstraction we have
ever found. (“Found” is a useful word
here, since you can take it to mean “dis-
covered” or “invented,” depending on
where you stand along the real–abstract
axis.) Are quantum states real?
In considering what that question
might mean, recall that in the early days
Erwin Schrödinger thought that the
quantum state of a particle—in the form
of its wavefunction—was as real a field
as a classical electromagnetic field is
real. He abandoned that view when 
he recognized that nonspreading
wavepackets were a peculiarity of the
harmonic oscillator, and that the wave-
function of N particles is a field only in
a 3N-dimensional space. 
But that does not prevent advocates
of the de Broglie–Bohm “pilot wave” in-
terpretation of quantum mechanics
from taking the wavefunction of N
particles to be a real field in 3N-
dimensional configuration space. They
give that high-dimensional configura-
tion space just as much physical reality
as the rest of us ascribe to ordinary
three-dimensional space. The reality of
the wavefunction is manifest in its abil-
ity to control the motion of (real) parti-
cles, just as a classical electromagnetic
field is able to control the motion of
classical charged particles.
Why does reifying the quantum
state make life harder than it needs to
be? Taking pilot waves seriously can
lead you to spend a lot of time calculat-
ing, plotting, and proving theorems
about the trajectory a (reified) point in
configuration space is pushed along by
a (reified) wavefunction. The trajecto-
ries make no predictions that can’t be
arrived at using ordinary, trajectory-
free quantum mechanics. Their primary
purpose is to fortify the view that quan-
tum states are real—a bad habit.
Even for people who don’t believe in
pilot waves pushing particles, reifying
the quantum state can make life harder
than it needs to be. It can make them
worry about faster-than-light influ-
ences in the kinds of experiments first
brought to attention by the famous Ein-
stein-Podolsky-Rosen paper. In such
experiments a system instantaneously
acquires a state as a result of actions
confined to the vicinity of a second far-
away system that no longer interacts
with the first. If the state of the first sys-
tem is a real property of that system,
then something real has clearly been
transmitted to the first system from the
distant neighborhood of the second at
superluminal speed. If the state is
merely a useful abstraction, then what,
if anything, has been transmitted and
where (or to whom) is far more obscure.
Reifying the quantum state also in-
duces people to write books and organ-
ize conferences about “the quantum
measurement problem” rather than ac-
knowledging, with Werner Heisenberg,
that “the discontinuous change in the
[quantum state] takes place . . . because
it is the discontinuous change in our
knowledge . . . that has its image in the
discontinuous change of the [state].”
Admittedly, you can’t entirely elimi-
nate the discomfort that gives rise to
“quantum nonlocality” and “the meas-
urement problem” by acknowledging
that quantum states are not real proper-
ties of the systems they describe. But the
recognition that quantum states are cal-
culational devices and not real proper-
ties of a system forces one to formulate
the sources of that discomfort in more
nuanced, less sensational terms. Taking
that view of quantum states can dimin-
ish the motivation for theoretical or ex-
perimental searches for a “mechanism”
underlying “spooky actions at a dis-
tance” or the “collapse of the wavefunc-
tion”—searches that make life harder
than it needs to be.
Quantum fields
Of course, ordinary nonrelativistic
quantum mechanics is just a phenome-
nology—a simplified version of quan-
tum field theory, the most fundamental
theory we have about the constituents of
the real world. But what is the ontologi-
cal status of those quantum fields that
quantum field theory describes? Does
reality consist of a four-dimensional
spacetime at every point of which there
is a collection of operators on an infinite-
dimensional Hilbert space? 
When I was a graduate student
learning quantum field theory, I had a
friend who was enchanted by the reve-
lation that quantum fields were the real
stuff that makes up the world. He rei-
fied quantum fields. But I hope you will
agree that you are not a continuous field
of operators on an infinite-dimensional
Hilbert space. Nor, for that matter, is the
page you are reading or the chair you
are sitting in. Quantum fields are useful
mathematical tools. They enable us to
calculate things.
What kinds of things? Trajectories in
spark chambers, nuclear level dia-
grams, atomic spectra, tunneling rates

www.physicstoday.org
May 2009    Physics Today
9
in superconductors, for example. It’s
wonderful that the same tool—fields of
operators on Hilbert space—works for
all those different purposes, but one
should not confuse the tool with the re-
ality it helps to describe.
Where does the demotion of quantum
fields from real things to calculational
tools leave the reality of plain old classical
electromagnetic fields, which represent
the kind of reality that Schrödinger ini-
tially wanted his wavefunctions to have.
When I was an undergraduate learning
classical electromagnetism, I was en-
chanted by the revelation that electro-
magnetic fields were real. Far from being
a clever calculational device for how
some charged particles push around
other charged particles, they were just as
real as the particles themselves, most dra-
matically in the form of electromagnetic
waves, which have energy and momen-
tum of their own and can propagate long
after the source that gave rise to them has
vanished. 
That lovely vision of the reality of
the classical electromagnetic field
ended when I learned as a graduate stu-
dent that what Maxwell’s equations ac-
tually describe are fields of operators on
Hilbert space. Those operators are
quantum fields, which most people
agree are not real but merely spectacu-
larly successful calculational devices.
So real classical electromagnetic fields
are nothing more (or less) than a simpli-
fication in a particular asymptotic
regime (the classical limit) of a clever
calculational device. In other words,
classical electromagnetic fields are an-
other clever calculational device. 
Space and time
What that device enables us to calcu-
late, of course, are classical spacetime
trajectories. What about spacetime it-
self? Is that real? Spacetime is a (3+1)-
dimensional mathematical continuum.
Even if you are a mathematical Plato -
nist, I would urge you to consider that
this continuum is nothing more than an
extremely effective way to represent re-
lations between distinct events. And
what is an event?  
An event is a phenomenon that can
usefully be represented as a mathemat-
ical point in spacetime. It is thus a phe-
nomenon whose internal spatial and
temporal extension we deem to be of no
relevance to any of the questions that
interest us. In introducing special rela-
tivity in 1905, Einstein, despite his later
concerns about physical reality in the
quantum theory, was well aware of the
abstract character of events. Early in
his paper he calls attention to “the in-
exactness which adheres to the concept
of the simultaneity of events at (ap-
proximately) the same place, which,”
he notes, “must be bridged by an 
abstraction.”
So spacetime is an abstract four-
dimensional mathematical continuum
of points that approximately represent
phenomena whose spatial and tempo-
ral extension we find it useful or neces-
sary to ignore. The device of spacetime
has been so powerful that we often reify
that abstract bookkeeping structure,
saying that we inhabit a world that is
such a four- (or, for some of us, ten-) di-
mensional continuum. The reification
of abstract time and space is built into
the very languages we speak, making it
easy to miss the intellectual sleight of
hand. Reifying (classical) electric and
magnetic fields is a more recent bad
habit, which also came to be taken for
granted until it started to unravel with
the arrival of quantum electrodynam-
ics, which promoted (or, if you prefer,
demoted) the fields to quantum fields—
abstract calculational devices.
Why is it a bad habit to reify the
spacetime continuum?  Well, it can lead
one to overlook the nature of some of
those events that are abstracted into
points. In 1905 Einstein also reminded
us that when one says that the train ar-
rives at 7 o’clock, what one means is
that “the pointing of the small hand of
my watch to 7 and the arrival of the
train are simultaneous events.” The
event used to label the time is associ-
ated with the behavior of a macroscopic
timekeeping instrument.  
Macroscopic clocks have macro-
scopic spatial extent. Even the best
clocks we have—atomic clocks—
exploit a transition in a cesium atom,
which is huge on the scale of an atomic
nucleus, let alone on the scale of the
Planck length. And even the size of an
atom grossly underestimates the size of
an atomic clock, for to make a clock out
of cesium atoms you have to tune a cav-
ity into resonance with the transition,
which brings us back to the macro-
scopic level of Einstein’s watch.  
So when I hear that spacetime be-
comes a foam at the Planck scale, I don’t
reach for my gun. (I haven’t any.) But I
do wonder what that foam has to do
with the macroscopic events that space-
time was constructed to represent and
the macroscopic means we use to locate
events.
Our own experience
Let me put it another way. The raw ma-
terial of our experience consists of
events. Events, by virtue of being di-
rectly accessible to our experience, have
an unavoidably classical character.
Space and time and spacetime are not
properties of the world we live in but
concepts we have invented to help us
organize classical events.  Notions like
dimension or interval, or curvature or
geodesics, are properties not of the
world we live in but of the abstract geo-
metric constructions we have invented
to help us organize events. As Einstein
once again put it, “Space and time are
modes by which we think, not condi-
tions under which we live.”
In some ways the point may also be
easiest to see in quantum physics,
where time and space refer ultimately
to the time and place at which informa-
tion is acquired or, if you prefer, at
which a measurement is made.
So I’d say that Dr. Johnson had it
right when he insisted that what im-
pinges directly upon us is real. The re-
ality of a sore toe is impossible to deny.
But the other side of “I refute it thus” is
to be suspicious of the reality of those
abstractions that help us impose coher-
ence on our immediate perceptions. I
doubt that Johnson’s valid affirmation
of the reality of direct perceptions con-
stituted a refutation of Bishop Berke-
ley’s skepticism about the construc-
tions we find to help us organize those
perceptions.
In my youth I had little sympathy
for Niels Bohr’s philosophical pro-
nouncements. In a review of Bohr’s
philosophical writings I said that “one
wants to shake the author vigorously
and demand that he explain himself
further or at least try harder to para-
phrase some of his earlier formula-
tions.”  But in my declining years, I’ve
come to realize that buried in those
ponderous documents are some real
gems: “In our description of nature the
purpose is not to disclose the real
essence of the phenomena but only to
track down, so far as it is possible, re-
lations between the manifold aspects of
our experience,” and “Physics is to be
regarded not so much as the study of
something a priori given, but rather as
the development of methods for order-
ing and surveying human experience.”
I’m suggesting that this characteriza-
tion of physics by Bohr is as true of clas-
sical physics as it is of quantum physics.
It’s just that in classical physics we were
able to persuade ourselves that the ab-
stractions we developed to order and
survey our experience were themselves
a part of that experience. Quantum me-
chanics has brought home to us the ne-
cessity of separating that irreducibly
real experience from the remarkable,
beautiful, and highly abstract super-
structure we have found to tie it all 
together.


