© 2023 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
METAPHYSICS AS PRAYER: 
INTRODUCING FERDINAND ULRICH
D. C. SCHINDLER
Abstract
Adapting Hegel’s division of poetry into the three modes, epic, lyric, and drama, Hans Urs von Balthasar 
characterized his own distinctive approach to theology as “dramatic,” indicating by that term an integration 
of the objective, conceptual dimension of the epic mode and the subjective, existential dimension of the 
lyric mode. This essay proposes that the German thinker Ferdinand Ulrich (1931-­2020), friend of Balthasar, 
achieves something analogous in philosophy: an “onto-­drama,” which integrates metaphysics and prayer. 
The principal aim of this essay is to introduce Ulrich to a wider audience by presenting the basic themes of his 
1973 book, Prayer as the Fundamental Act of the Creature. Using Emmanuel Levinas’s text “Philosophy and the 
Idea of Infinity” as a foil in order to bring out the distinctive features of Ulrich’s thought, this essay argues for 
the essential interdependence of the encounter with God and meditative reflection on the question of being, 
an interdependence that is played out as a drama right at the heart of personal identity.
I
As is well known, the twentieth-­century Swiss theologian Hans Urs von Balthasar 
adopts, and adapts, Hegel’s division of the three basic poetic forms in the Greek 
tradition—­epic, lyric, and drama—­to characterize the distinctive approach he himself 
develops in his own theological work.1 To summarize his account somewhat oversim-
ply, the epic form would correspond to theology in its typical mode, in which the author 
recounts the events he seeks to present from a distance, in order to make evident their 
objective and universal significance. The lyric form, then, would correspond to “spiri-
tuality,” especially in the Ignatian style, wherein the subject attempts, through imagina-
tive re-­presentation, to enter into the event in as immediate a manner as possible so that 
he can allow himself to be addressed directly and personally by its significance and to 
1 The categories appear in a variety of places, but his most explicit and extensive account of the classic 
categories and how he modifies them can be found in Hans Urs von Balthasar, Theodrama, vol. 2: Dramatis 
Personae: Man in God (San Francisco, CA: Ignatius Press, 1990), 53-­89.
DOI:10.1111/moth.12848
Modern Theology Month 2023
ISSN 0266-7177 (Print)
ISSN 1468-0025 (Online)
D. C. Schindler
Pontifical John Paul II Institute for Studies on Marriage & Family 
McGivney Hall 
620 Michigan Ave., NE 
Washington, DC 20064 
USA
Email: dcs@johnpaulii.edu 

2  D. C. Schindler
© 2023 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
respond in kind. In light of the persistent tension that has traditionally existed between 
spirituality and theology, Balthasar proposes to develop his theology in a specifically 
dramatic mode, which would seek to bring the lyric and epic poetic styles together into 
a unity while doing justice to what is distinctive about each in itself. Balthasar’s “theo-­
drama” thus associates objectivity, not first of all with abstract, propositional thought 
(though he does not at all exclude this), but instead with the intelligible structure of 
dramatic action, which enacts its objective meaning, and does so in a manner that calls 
upon the human subject’s free response, taking that response up into itself as a consti-
tutive part of its essential reality.2
If the “epic mode” of theology stands in some tension with spirituality, philosophy, even 
in its highest forms, would seem to be essentially indifferent to the lyrical mode of personal 
engagement with God, with what we might call the poetics of prayer. Indeed, the words 
“prayer” and “metaphysics” are rarely found together.3 If they are mentioned in the same 
breath, it is more often than not only to insist on a tension, if not an outright opposition, 
between what the terms evoke: dry, domineering, technical thought on the one hand and 
open, fluid, mystical experience on the other. The presumption of opposition was espe-
cially the case in the latter part of the previous century, and the beginning of the current 
one, when, in the wake of Heidegger’s powerful Seinsdenken, metaphysics was taken to be 
necessarily, and of its very essence, bound up with the “onto-­theology” that inevitably and 
in spite of any intentions to the contrary reduces God to a conceptual tool of human proj-
ects (technology).4 From this perspective, it was commonly assumed that thinking, which 
has its epitome in metaphysics, i.e., the science of being, presents an obstacle to the more 
properly personal encounter with God, an encounter that occurs essentially in the heart, 
whether that be considered the seat of passion or the source of ethical practice or action. 
This bypassing of reason for the sake of the responsive celebration of God and love would 
seem to have its roots in the most ancient Christian tradition, which took up an even older 
mystical insight: the things of God are best suffered rather than studied: οὐ μάθειν ἀλλά 
πάθειν.5 To the surprise, and possibly even the consternation, of modern day scholastics, 
who would presumably rather prove the First Cause through metaphysical reflection than 
encounter the Wholly Other in mystical prayer, even Thomas Aquinas would seem to af-
firm the priority of passion in the love of God over rational choice.6
2 We will not judge, in this context, the success of Balthasar’s theology in this regard, which has frequently 
come under suspicion: but see Ben Quash, Theology and the Drama of History (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2005) and Karen Kilby, Balthasar: A (Very) Critical Introduction (Grand Rapids, MIich.: William 
B. Eerdmans Publishing Company, 2012), and my responses to these criticisms: D.C. Schindler, Hans Urs von 
Balthasar and the Dramatic Structure of Truth (New York: Fordham University Press, 2004), 12-­25, and D.C. 
Schindler, “A Very Critical Response to Karen Kilby,” Radical Orthodoxy: Theology, Philosophy, Politics 3, no. 1 
(September 2015): 68-­87.
3 A striking exception to this apparent exclusivity can be found in the recent book by Andrew Prevot, 
Thinking Prayer: Theology and Spirituality Amid the Crises of Modernity (Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre 
Dame Press, 2015). An engagement with this book, which addresses many of the same figures we mention in 
the following essay, will have to await a future study. In the meantime, it is worth pointing out that, though 
Prevot does not simply dismiss metaphysics, he tends to concede the essence of the postmodern critique in a 
way that contrasts sharply with the perspective we will be presenting from Ferdinand Ulrich.
4 For a representative book in this line of thinking, see Merold Westphal, Overcoming Onto-­Theology: Toward 
a Postmodern Christian Faith (New York: Fordham University Press, 2001).
5 This phrase was attributed to Aristotle (Fragment 15) by Synesius of Cyrene (Dio 10.48A). It was help-
fully modified by Dionysius the Areogapite (Divine Names, 11.9.648A), who said we should “not only study 
but also suffer divine things” (emphasis added). In other words, he shows that these two ways of approaching 
and appropriating divine things are not opposed in principle but complementary.
6 Aquinas, Summa Theologiae (ST), 1-­2.26.3ad4.
 14680025, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/moth.12848 by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [17/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Metaphysics as Prayer: Introducing Ferdinand Ulrich  3
© 2023 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
But the assumption of opposition between the “epic mode” of metaphysical reflec-
tion and the “lyric mode” of personal prayer proves ultimately to be a problem for 
both. However much it may seem that this assumption simply expresses and affirms 
an age-­old tradition, it bears implications that cut to the heart of the essence of both 
philosophy and theology, not to mention a basic part of the Church’s mission, which 
is to bring God’s redemptive presence into the world. If metaphysics is severed from 
the living encounter with God that constitutes prayer, it not only becomes essentially 
godless,7 but it distorts, and finally perverts, the very nature of its essential object, 
namely being qua being. Conversely, though this might be less evident initially, if 
prayer is set in simple opposition to metaphysics as a matter of principle, it not only 
forfeits whatever ontological depth it may have had, often becoming little more than 
“inner feeling” or empty and inevitably rather cynical social action, but it likewise 
distorts its essential “object”: prayer can no longer be an encounter with the Creator, 
the transcendent source of all that is, but tends instead to devolve into an involve-
ment with some sort of idol, a mere projection of one’s feelings, ideals, or visions of 
what ought to be.
There are few figures in the contemporary world who saw—­or better, who both lived 
and demonstrated—­the vital connection between metaphysics and prayer and the conse-
quences of their separation more profoundly than the German philosopher Ferdinand 
Ulrich, who recently passed away on the Feast of Our Lady of Lourdes, 11 February 
2020. This rather solitary figure, who has remained relatively unknown in his native 
country, but whose work has been gaining increasing attention elsewhere, especially in 
the Anglophone world, wrote a prodigious number of books and essays over the span 
of about twenty-­five years, many of which concerned some aspect of the relation be-
tween metaphysics and prayer, or at least a theme that bears directly on this relation. In 
the early to mid-­1980s, for reasons that remain somewhat obscure, he renounced aca-
demic writing in order to devote himself in a more focused way to a life of prayer, 
though he continued to give lectures at the University of Regensburg, where he was a 
full professor until his retirement in 1996. In the following essay, after a brief presenta-
tion of Ulrich’s life and work, we will attempt to lay out some of the core principles of 
his thought on this theme as they come to light in a small book published in 1974 with 
the Johannesverlag, the press founded by his friend Hans Urs von Balthasar: Gebet als 
geschöpflicher Grundakt, “Prayer as the Fundamental Act of the Creature.”8 Upon its ap-
pearance, Balthasar lauded this book as accomplishing something “which we have 
awaited for centuries,” presenting what we may consider “a ‘little summa’ on prayer,” 
to which, “there is no longer any major thing to add.”9 In order to bring out what is 
7 Heidegger took this particular kind of godlessness to be salutary for both thought and prayer: on this 
theme, see Laurence Paul Hemming, Heidegger’s Atheism: The Refusal of a Theological Voice (Notre Dame, IN: 
University of Notre Dame Press, 2002).
8 We will be citing the page numbers from the original German, Gebet als geschöpflicher Grundakt (Einsiedeln: 
Johannesverlag, 1974), but quoting from a manuscript translation by Fr. Robert van Alstyne, S.J. This transla-
tion will be gathered with two other small books of Ulrich’s and published in English in a single volume by 
Humanum Academic Press, presumably in 2024.
9 Cited from a Johannesverlag catalogue, in Jacques Servais, “Balthasar promoteur et bénéficiaire de la 
pensée de Ferdinand Ulrich,” in Montrer aux hommes le chemin qui mène au Christ: Mélanges offerts à Msgr André 
Léonard, edited by Isabelle Isebaert-­Couuet and Abbé Erick Iborra (Paris: Lethielleux, 2020), 290.
 14680025, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/moth.12848 by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [17/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

4  D. C. Schindler
© 2023 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
unique in Ulrich’s book, we will contrast it in the following with a more familiar essay 
by Emmanuel Levinas, written about fifteen years earlier, “Philosophy and the Idea of 
the Infinite,”10 which touches on similar points but draws radically different conclu-
sions. The point of this contrast is not to do justice to the complex and sophisticated 
philosophy of Levinas in general, but to use his essay as a foil to set into relief what 
seems to be the distinctiveness of Ulrich’s contribution. As we will see, Ulrich’s short 
book enables a new way of thinking about the two fundamental human acts of prayer 
and philosophy that arises from their essential interconnection.
One of the best ways to enter into Ulrich’s distinctive approach to the “question of 
being” is to think of it as a “poetic metaphysics,” or more specifically as an “onto-­
drama,” by analogy to Balthasar’s “theo-­drama.”11 Like Balthasar, Ulrich seeks to inte-
grate the “lyric” mode of direct, personal engagement with the Origin of one’s being, 
the attunement of one’s innermost self to God in prayer, with the “epic” mode of con-
ceptually thinking through, objectively describing, and intelligibly explaining the es-
sential structures of this gift of being in its universal significance. Also, like Balthasar, he 
does so by insisting that there is no standpoint outside of the gift from which to survey 
it in detachment, but that, inside the dynamic of generosity, one cannot come to objec-
tive understanding of the gift without at the same time responding in a personal way, 
in freedom, to the Giver who remains present in it.
II
Ferdinand Ulrich was born in Odrau, Silesia (now Odry in the Czech Republic), in 1931. 
When he was fifteen, his family fled to the small town of Mühldorf am Inn in Bavaria, 
near Altötting, when German speakers were forced to leave the Sudetenland after 
World War II. The young Ferdinand initially hoped to be a Jesuit priest but had to leave 
the seminary because of a serious illness, and was turned away when he reapplied 
because of his apparently fragile health. But his courses at the seminary, and the oppor-
tunity to read Aquinas with a doctor he had met during his illness, had awakened a de-
sire to study philosophy. He therefore went to the Ludwig-­Maximalians-­Universität in 
Munich carrying a letter of introduction, which the doctor had written on his behalf to a 
professor of his acquaintance at LMU, the great Romano Guardini. Guardini, however, 
was no longer taking students, so he passed Ulrich on to another significant Catholic 
philosopher at the time, Alois Dempf, known above all for his work in medieval phi-
losophy, and his development of a distinctive philosophy of culture and philosophical 
anthropology.
10 We will cite this according to the translation and commentary provided by Adriaan Peperzak in To the 
Other: An Introduction to the Philosophy of Emmanuel Levinas (West Lafayette, IN: Purdue University Press, 
1993), 88-­119.
11 Ulrich drew this comparison himself in a private conversation in which he gave his approval to my 
translating the subtitle of his main work, Homo Abyssus, as “The Drama of the Question of Being,” instead of 
what would be the more literal (but in English more awkward) “The Risky Venture [das Wagnis] of the 
Question of Being.”
 14680025, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/moth.12848 by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [17/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Metaphysics as Prayer: Introducing Ferdinand Ulrich  5
© 2023 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Ulrich read ravenously, and from early on had received a powerful intuition of 
the connection between being and love, which became the determinative center of 
all of his thinking. A classmate of his, Heinrich Beck,12 introduced Ulrich to the 
work of Gustav Siewerth, who had developed what one might call a “speculative 
Thomism,”13 essentially a sounding of the central theme of being in Aquinas (which 
was being discovered more or less around the same time by the French thinker 
Étienne Gilson and the Italian thinker Cornelio Fabro), which Siewerth interpreted 
in a creative dialogue, first with Hegel, and then, increasingly, with Heidegger.14 
Ulrich was struck above all by Siewerth’s mention of the description Aquinas gave 
of creaturely being, as “completum et simplex sed non subsistens,” “complete  
and simple but non subsistent.”15 With Siewerth, Ulrich read this statement as 
Thomas’s anticipation of the insight into the coincidence of being and nothing, 
which, interpreted differently in Hegel and Heidegger, arguably informs the en-
tirety of the thinking of these two philosophers.16 But whereas Siewerth had taken 
this to be a contradiction that, in needing to be overcome, generated the speculative 
energy source from which all thinking might be drawn, Ulrich saw it from the first, 
not as a dialectical contradiction, but as a positive paradox of love, insofar as love is 
never possessed more than when it is freely given away, which means (as we will 
explain more fully below) that, in love, wealth remains bound up with poverty and 
presence with absence. Indeed, Ulrich saw in this description of created being a 
surprising metaphysical confirmation of the deep essence of love, precisely as this 
is illuminated by the central Christian mysteries of the Trinity, the Incarnation, the 
Theotokos, the Church, the sacraments, and so forth. This insight struck Ulrich like 
a transfiguring thunderbolt; he came to see this insight as opening up a novel way 
to understand some of the great projects of modern philosophy. As we will explain 
below, Ulrich interpreted Hegel, Marx, Nietzsche, and Heidegger, for example, as 
having rejected in various ways the meaning of being as love, and as a result being 
12 Heinrich Beck, whose professional career followed a path similar to that of Ulrich, wrote one of the few 
reviews of Homo Abyssus when it first appeared: Archives de Philosophie 29, no. 4 (October-­December, 1966): 
629-­32. Regarding classmates at the LMU, Ulrich also met the great American philosopher Thomas Prufer, 
with whom he remained friends until the latter’s early death. Prufer refers to Ulrich’s special insight into the 
phrase from Aquinas’s De potentia dei, 1.1., which we will discuss below: see Thomas Prufer, Recapitulations: 
Essays in Philosophy (Washington, DC: Catholic University of America Press, 1993), xii. (Prufer dwells at length 
on this phrase in his LMU dissertation, Sein und Wort; see my discussion of this in “What’s the Difference?,” 
The Saint Anselm Journal 3, no. 1 (Fall 2005): 25n123).
13 Note that this is missing from typical genealogies of Thomism in the twentieth century: see, for exam-
ple, the otherwise fairly comprehensive, albeit succinct, overview provided by Benedict Ashley, The Way 
Toward Wisdom: An Interdisciplinary and Intercultural Introduction to Metaphysics (Notre Dame, IN: University of 
Notre Dame Press, 2006), 44-­55. It is a significant oversight.
14 For a general philosophical presentation of, and engagement with, the thought of Gustav Siewerth, see 
Emmanuel Tourpe, Siewerth ‘après’ Siewerth: Le lien idéal de l’amour dans le thomisme speculatif de Gustav Siewerth 
et la visée d’un réalisme transcendental (Leuven: Peeters Publishers, 1998).
15 Aquinas, De potentia dei, 1.1. Marine de la Tour offers an illuminating discussion of the similarity and 
difference between Ulrich and Siewerth: Gabe im Anfang: Grundzüge des metaphysischen Denkens von Ferdinand 
Ulrich (Stuttgart: Kohlhammer, 2016), 129-­44; cf., Martin Bieler, Freiheit als Gabe: Ein schöpfungstheologischer 
Entwurf (Freiburg: Herder, 1991), 261-­70.
16 See the opening pages of Hegel’s Science of Logic (Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Humanities Press International, 
1969), 82-­108. To be sure, Heidegger’s conception of being evolves over the course of his thinking, but he 
arguably retains even in his later thought a basic insight articulated in “What is Metaphysics?,” in Basic 
Writings (San Francisco, CA: HarperPerennial, 2008), 93-­110. Rachel Coleman provides a helpful account of 
Ulrich’s distinctive interpretation in “Thinking the ‘Nothing’ of Being: Ferdinand Ulrich on Transnihilation,” 
Communio (Spring 2019): 182-­98.
 14680025, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/moth.12848 by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [17/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

6  D. C. Schindler
© 2023 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
compelled to provide some ultimately perverse substitute for this essential and in-
evitable truth.17
Sensing his student’s speculative metaphysical interests, Alois Dempf pointed 
Ulrich to Gilson’s L’Être et l’essence18; Ulrich responded by quickly writing a book of 
his own, Sein und Wesen (Being and Essence), which covered similar ground but from a 
radically different perspective, illuminating being particularly through its paradigm 
in human being.19 Dempf then insisted that Ulrich read a fairly controversial, but 
obscure, Austrian thinker, Anton Günther, who had attempted to develop a Catholic 
version of transcendental idealism (which the Church subsequently condemned20), 
and Ulrich once again responded by writing another book of his own.21 Dempf did 
not accept either of these works. Finally, his stipend running out and now a family to 
provide for,22 Ulrich rapidly composed a more conventional dissertation entitled, 
“Being and Matter: To What Extent is the Constitution of Substance Determinative  
for the Interpretation of Matter in Thomas Aquinas, John Duns Scotus, and  
Francisco Suárez?”23 Following German custom, he continued his studies at the 
University of Salzburg, and produced a habilitation thesis in 1959, which enabled him 
to apply for a position at one of the teaching colleges that were founded in Germany 
after the war in an effort to restore the Christian, Western tradition in the wake of 
Nazism. This “Hochschule,” in Regensburg, was eventually integrated into the univer-
sity in that city, and Ulrich thus became a philosophy professor there until his retire-
ment in 1996. In that time, he was active, not only in Regensburg, but as an occasional 
visiting professor in Salzburg, as well as at the Jesuit Hochschule für Philosophie und 
Theologie in Pullach (which then moved to Munich), and participated regularly in in-
ternational congresses in philosophy, especially in Gallarate, Italy, where he got to know 
many of the leading Catholic thinkers of the time.24 After his retirement, Ulrich spent 
long periods of time in prayer at a Franciscan monastery in Armstorf, and regularly led 
retreats and received students seeking light on philosophical questions and spiritual 
guidance. He also continued to give seminars at the Casa Balthasar in Rome. Ulrich had 
a heart attack on Christmas Eve in 2019, from which he did not fully recover, and he 
died a couple of months later. One of Ulrich’s best-­known students, Bishop Stefan Oster, 
to whom Ulrich entrusted his literary estate, said the funeral mass.25 He is buried next 
to his father and mother in the churchyard in Mühldorf.
17 This is the basis for Ulrich’s Metaphysik in der Wiederholung, “Metaphysics as Reenactment or Retrieval”: 
see Martin Bieler, “Ferdinand Ulrich’s ‘Metaphysics as Reenactment’,” Communio (Spring 2019): 41-­72.
18 Etienne Gilson, L’Être et l’essence (Paris: J. Vrin, 1948).
19 Ferdinand Ulrich, Sein und Wesen: Speculative Entfaltung einer anthropologischen Ontologie (Munich: pri-
vate printing, 1954).
20 See the account in the entry on Anton Günther from the Catholic Encyclopedia, published in New Advent: 
newad​vent.org/cathe​n/07085a.htm.
21 Ferdinand Ulrich, Versuch einer spekulativen Entfaltung einer anthropologischen Urgrundlehre nach dem 
Entwurf in Anton Günthers ‘Euristheus und Herakles’ (Munich: private printing, 1955). The English would be 
something like, “The Attempt at the Speculative Unfolding of a Fundamental Philosophical Anthropology in 
Light of the Model Provided in Anton Günther’s ‘Euristheus und Herakles.”’
22 Ulrich married during the time of his graduate studies and had three children.
23 Ferdinand Ulrich, Sein und Materie: Inwiefern ist die Konstruktion der Substanzkonstitution maßgebend für 
die Konstruction des Materiebegriffs bei Thomas von Aquin, J. Duns Scotus, und Fr. Suárez? (PhD dissertation, 
LMU, 1955).
24 Jacques Servais mentions Henri Bouillard, Augusto del Noce, Gaston Fessard, Helmut Kuhn, Jean 
Ladrière, Claude Bruaire, and André Léonard. See Servais,: “Balthasar promoteur,” 274.
25 The homily was published in English as Stefan Oster, “Of the Love that is ‘For Nothing’: In Honor of 
Ferdinand Ulrich,” Communio (Fall 2020): 570-­76.
 14680025, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/moth.12848 by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [17/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Metaphysics as Prayer: Introducing Ferdinand Ulrich  7
© 2023 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Ulrich would likely have remained more or less in obscurity but for having been 
“discovered” by Hans Urs von Balthasar; most of those who know of Ulrich’s work 
have tended to come to it through the Swiss theologian.26 The day after Ulrich de-
fended his habilitation in Salzburg, Balthasar was visiting a Jesuit friend of his in 
Rome, Fr. Wilhelm Klein, who was also close to Ulrich and who told Balthasar about 
the budding new philosopher. Fr. Klein then persuaded Ulrich to revise and send his 
habilitation to Balthasar, which he did, under a new title: Homo Abyssus: The Drama of 
the Question of Being.27 Balthasar published the book in his new press, and struck up 
a friendship with Ulrich that continued until Balthasar’s death in 1988. Though 
Ulrich was thirty years younger than Balthasar, he (along with Siewerth and Hans 
André28) had a profound influence on the metaphysical vision animating Balthasar’s 
theology, and the latter’s theology in turn opened up new dimensions in Ulrich’s 
thinking. There was a reciprocal fructification of thought in these two men, who al-
ready had from the start such a complementary understanding of the relation be-
tween faith and reason for an integrated Catholic vision of reality that their work has 
been described as sharing “the logic of a single mission.”29 After the publication of 
Homo Abyssus, which is no doubt Ulrich’s Meisterwerk, articulating the basic dimen-
sions of the metaphysics at the root of all of the rest of his thought, Ulrich composed 
several smaller books, which Balthasar published, one after the other. But when it 
became clear that the books would not manage to sell, the meager financial means 
supporting the Johannesverlag meant that Balthasar could not continue to publish 
Ulrich’s work. This happened to correspond at any rate more or less to the moment 
Ulrich had resolved to stop writing and devote himself to living more intensively the 
realities that had occupied his thinking—­to write in blood, as it were, rather than 
only in ink. The two nevertheless remained in close contact, and Balthasar left in-
structions, before he died, for the gathering up of Ulrich’s writing into a “Collected 
Works,” which has been produced by Johannesverlag, and which will eventually be 
translated into English by Humanum Academic Press, the publisher of the English 
edition of Homo Abyssus.30
A single thread runs through all of Ulrich’s writing, namely, the aforementioned in-
terpretation of being as love in the light of the great Christian mysteries. This interpre-
tation informs his understanding of child development,31 of freedom,32 and of 
language,33 and of the basic forms of thought and human existence more generally.34 
26 The most significant expositors to date of Ulrich’s thought, however, generally encountered Ulrich di-
rectly: Stefan Oster, Martin Bieler, and Marine de la Tour.
27 Ferdinand Ulrich, Homo Abyssus: The Drama of the Question of Being (Washington, DC: Catholic University 
of America Press, 2018).
28 See Emmanuel Tourpe, “Le thomisme ontologique de Gustav Siewerth, Ferdinand Ulrich, Hans André 
à l’arrière-­plan de la pensée balthasarienne,” Rivista Espanola de Teologia 65 (2005): 467-­91.
29 R. Carelli, L’uomo e la donna nella teologia di H.U. von Balthasar, second edition (Lugano: Eupress FTL, 
2007), 177, cited in Servais, “Balthasar promoteur,” 272.
30 Humanum Academic Press plans to publish the Collected Works, but also to gather together significant 
essays on coordinated themes, and so will likely not strictly follow the sequence of the German volumes 
published by the Johannesverlag.
31 Ferdinand Ulrich, Der Mensch als Anfang (Man at the Beginning) (Einsiedeln: Johannesverlag, 1970).
32 Ferdinand Ulrich, Gegenwart der Freiheit (The Presence of Freedom) (Einsiedeln: Johannesverlag, 1974).
33 Ferdinand Ulrich, Logo-­tokos, vol. IV of the Gesammelte Werke (Freiburg: Johannesverlag-­Einsiedeln, 
2003).
34 Ferdinand Ulrich, Leben in der Einheit von Leben und Tod (Living in the Unity of Life and Death), vol. 2 of the 
Gesammelte Werke (Freiburg: Johannesverlag-­Einsiedeln, 1999).
 14680025, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/moth.12848 by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [17/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

8  D. C. Schindler
© 2023 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
The culminating expression of Ulrich’s faith-­informed metaphysics is no doubt his book 
Gabe und Vergebung (Gift and Forgiveness), an 800-­page metaphysical interpretation of the 
parable of the prodigal son, which begins with a masterful exploration of the relation-
ship between spirit and letter, speaking and writing, and writing and reading, in light 
of the fact that this parable is recounted by the One who is himself both Son (who unites 
in himself the son who leaves and the son who stays home, thus reconciling them) and 
the Word, spoken by the Father.35 This “biblical ontology”—­which, in combination with 
his volume of metaphysical interpretations of fairy tales, prefaced by a hundred pages 
of aphorisms on the use of imagery in language,36 would open up remarkable dimen-
sions of the encounter between poetry and metaphysics—­was based on lectures Ulrich 
gave through the 1980s in his philosophy classes. Perhaps the briefest of Ulrich’s books 
(briefer indeed than a good many of his articles) is the one we will focus on here, Gebet, 
which is unique in being more directly a book on spirituality than on philosophy, 
though as we have already suggested the two are inseparable for Ulrich. This book has 
the advantage of presenting Ulrich’s fundamental insight into a more properly “lyrical” 
language, one that is significantly less technical than that found in Homo Abyssus. Before 
explaining Gebet, we will turn for a moment to a text from Emmanuel Levinas, which 
will help set an illuminating context for Ulrich’s book.
III
It is helpful to approach Gebet in the light of what amounts to a clear counterposition, 
namely, Levinas’s essay on “The Idea of the Infinite.” Although Levinas, in this essay, is 
not concerned directly with the question of prayer, as Ulrich is, he nonetheless seeks to 
characterize our encounter with God, and the bearing this encounter has on philosophy—­
which is to say on the fundamental form of human thinking in every sphere of exist-
ence. The contrast between these two thinkers is illuminating in particular because, 
while Ulrich comes from a robustly metaphysical perspective, grounded in the thought 
of Thomas Aquinas, Levinas comes from a distinctly anti-­metaphysical tradition, stem-
ming from Husserl rather than Aquinas, and accepting in large part Heidegger’s cri-
tique. To be sure, Levinas does not reject the idea of metaphysics simply; as we will see, 
what he rejects is metaphysics specifically as the philosophy of being, what he calls 
“ontology,” from a concern that such a philosophy threatens to compromise the truly 
radical metaphysics, the transcendence, of ethics, in which one has a genuine encounter 
with the infinite other.37 Like Ulrich, Levinas has Hegel, and his essentially totalizing 
form of thought, as a background concern, to which he seeks to develop a fundamental 
alternative. It is just this shared concern that allows the difference in their thought to 
stand out all the more clearly.
35 Ferdinand Ulrich, Gabe und Vergebung (Gift and Forgiveness), vol. V of the Gesammelte Werke (Freiburg: 
Johannesverlag-­Einsiedeln, 2006).
36 Ferdinand Ulrich, Erzählter Sinn (Narrated Meaning), vol. 3 of the Gesammelte Werke (Freiburg: 
Johannesverlag-­Einsiedeln, 2002). This book contains an astonishing meditation on “Hansel and Gretel,” as 
well as two other, lesser-­known stories.
37 Section one of Levinas’s best-­known work, Totality and Infinity, is called “Metaphysics Precedes 
Ontology.” For Levinas, “metaphysics” implies a transcendence toward the other that is “neutered” in the 
science of being as being. For a recent account of the positive sense that Levinas gives to metaphysics, now 
viewed principally as ethics, see Leora Batnitzky, “Levinas Between German Metaphysics and Christian 
Theology,” in The Exorbitant: Emmanuel Levinas Between Jews and Christians, edited by Kevin Hart (New York: 
Fordham University Press, 2022), 17-­31.
 14680025, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/moth.12848 by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [17/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Metaphysics as Prayer: Introducing Ferdinand Ulrich  9
© 2023 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Levinas intends, in this essay, not just to reflect on some particular theme or ideas 
in philosophy, but to pronounce judgment on the Western philosophical tradition as 
a whole. He does so effectively by engaging with the question that Heidegger had 
presented as the determinative one for metaphysical thinking, namely, “Wie kommt 
der Gott in die Philosophie?”38 The way philosophy relates to God, and reflectively 
interprets this relation, will determine the way it relates to all other things, which is 
to say this relation determines the most basic form of thinking in general. According 
to Levinas, one can formulate a basic alternative on this score, and trace out the im-
plications of each side, one of which very clearly dominates over the other in the 
tradition: “Autonomy or heteronomy? The choice of western philosophy has most 
often been on the side of freedom and the Same.”39 Either one affirms the ultimate 
object of thought as irreducibly other, as lying perpetually in the “beyond,” so that 
thought can never enclose that object within itself, but is required unceasingly to 
reach beyond itself, to overcome itself, finally to be responsive to a measure that ar-
rives always from the outside, so to speak—­in which case we have heteronomy, or as 
Levinas often puts it in other contexts, “exteriority.”40 Or, one affirms that the whole 
point of thought is reflective appropriation, that to think a thing just is to interiorize 
it, to encompass it within the mind, and thus to render what may indeed have begun 
as transcendent and external into something immanent to consciousness, something 
familiar or known. In this case, we have autonomy, the law of the Self (or of “the 
Same”), which Levinas takes to encapsulate the general Western notion of freedom.
According to Levinas, autonomy has been the dominant tradition in the West: “Thus, 
Western thought very often seemed to exclude the transcendent, encompass every Other 
in the Same, and proclaim the philosophical birthright of autonomy.”41 This dominance is 
reflected above all in the importance that tradition has given to freedom, but it comes to 
expression in a subtle way in all of the basic concepts of philosophy. For example, Levinas 
interprets the conventional notion of truth along these lines: while the truth relation ought 
to mean encounter with one’s abiding Other, it has tended to take the form of mastery over 
the Other—­as we see for example in the dictum “knowledge is power.” In this case, the 
achievement of truth represents a kind of triumph over a thing through its reduction to an 
assimilable idea, to which the knower remains superior.42 For obvious reasons, Levinas 
likens this conception of truth and knowledge to “narcissism,” which makes the object a 
mere means by which the subject reflects himself back to himself.43 Perhaps somewhat 
surprisingly at first, Levinas even includes Heidegger within this traditional framework, 
in spite of the fact that Heidegger tends to be interpreted as one of its greatest critics. While 
Heidegger seems to reverse the relationship implied in the Western notion of autonomy—­
for Heidegger, it is not that man possesses freedom, but rather freedom (as the open realm, 
38 See Heidegger’s discussion of this question, “How does the god enter philosophy?,” in his lecture on 
Hegel, Identity and Difference (New York: Harper and Row, 1969), 55-­56.
39 Emanuel Levinas, “Philosophy and the Idea of the Infinite,” in Peperzak To the Other, 92.
40 The notion of “exteriority” is essential to Levinas; he uses it, for example, to characterize his principal 
text: Totality and Infinity: An Essay in Exteriority (Pittsburgh, PA: Duquesne University Press, 1969). For a pow-
erful critique of Levinas along lines that Ulrich would affirm, see David Bentley Hart, The Beauty of the Infinite 
(Grand Rapids, MI: William B. Eerdmans Publishing Company, 2003), 75-­93.
41 Levinas, “Philosophy and the Idea of the Infinite,” in Peperzak, To the Other, 93.
42 Ibid., 90-­91; 94-­95; 96.
43 Ibid., 94.
 14680025, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/moth.12848 by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [17/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

10  D. C. Schindler
© 2023 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
“das Freie,” of being44) possesses man—­he nevertheless retains the basic affirmation of the 
primacy of the Same.45 In a way that will be decisive with respect to our presentation of 
Ulrich below, Levinas sees Heidegger’s option for autonomy expressed in the fact that 
what is ultimate, for him, is not an “Other,” but a “Neuter,” or in other words, we could say 
that it is a “What” rather than a “Who.” Being does not, finally, stand over against us as a 
genuinely abiding Other, the presence of which can be attested to only by the radical call-
ing of freedom into question. What is required for this radical challenge to Western auton-
omy is not a mere reversal of terms; instead, freedom must be made “ashamed of itself”46: 
“The Heideggerian freedom is obedient, but obedience makes it arise and does not put it 
into question, does not reveal its injustice.”47 For Levinas, we witness Heidegger’s rejec-
tion of ultimate heteronomy in the fact that he ends up absolutizing finitude, and thus 
shielding the finite from an encounter with the truly transcendent infinite.48
This critique helps us see the alternative Levinas proposes. According to the Lithuanian 
philosopher, there is another tradition in the West, which competes with and troubles the 
tradition of autonomy, however much it has tended to be left in the margins. This is the 
“other” metaphysics, the tradition that begins in Plato’s discovery of the “Good Beyond 
Being,” and tends to impose itself by intruding in the unlikeliest of places—­for example, 
inside the apparently hermeneutically-­sealed contours of Descartes’ cogito, which would 
otherwise aspire to be an absolute self-­relation. What arises here is “the Idea of the Infinite,” 
which of its nature upsets all attempts at autonomy. If the dominant philosophical tradi-
tion has necessarily tended to take an atheistic form,49 this counter-­tradition opens philos-
ophy up from within to an encounter with God, the genuinely Other.
According to Levinas, by its very nature the infinite cannot be captured in thought in the 
sense of being “englobed” by finite consciousness, because whatever can be englobed is by 
that very fact finite. To say that we have an idea of the infinite, which is something even 
Descartes acknowledged, means that something has entered consciousness without being 
englobed by it. There is in other words a reality that abidingly exceeds the very intentional-
ity that envisages it, something that remains, even in thought, irreducibly other than a 
thought object. But this can be the case only if thought does not have an essentially auton-
omous form, which is to say only if thinking does not mean most basically an internalizing, 
but instead is an ecstatic recognition of the presence of the Other. It is crucial to see that, for 
Levinas, the presence of the Other inevitably takes the form of a condemnation of the self, 
the kind of protest against the limitations that the self cannot help imposing on its other in 
44 For a classic presentation of freedom in Heidegger, see William J. Richardson, S.J., “Heidegger and the 
Quest of Freedom,” Theological Studies 28 (1967): 286-­307.
45 Ibid., 99-­104. One notes that even Heidegger’s notion of “Ereignis,” which governs his late thinking, has 
a reference to what belongs to the self–­das Eigen—­at least in Heidegger’s account of the etymology. Note also 
the importance of “das Selbe” in Heidegger (Identity and Difference”), though Levinas does not refer to this 
here.
46 Ibid., 102.
47 Ibid., 102. Levinas admits here that Heidegger—­diverging in this case from the central current of the 
Western tradition—­recognizes freedom’s essential responsibility to the other (hence the emphasis on “obedi-
ence,” a respectful, listening attunement to the other), but because this is a response to the faceless neutrality 
of being, it ultimately fails to do justice, so to speak, to the radical heteronomy entailed in the personal 
encounter.
48 Edith Stein makes a similar criticism: “Martin Heidegger’s Existential Philosophy,” in Maynooth 
Philosophical Papers 4 (2007): 55-­98.
49 The idea that Western philosophy has a natural tendency to atheism when left to follow its own inner 
logic received a classical expression in Jacobi’s famous open letters to Fichte and Mendelssohn at the end of 
the eighteenth century: see the translations by George di Giovanni in Main Philosophical Writings and the Novel 
Allwill (Montreal: McGill-­Queen’s University Press, 2009).
 14680025, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/moth.12848 by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [17/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Metaphysics as Prayer: Introducing Ferdinand Ulrich  11
© 2023 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
its spontaneous effort at autonomy. Here we come to understand better why the encounter 
with the infinite takes place not principally in the order of theoretical thinking but in the 
more directly ecstatic order of praxis. This is to say that the idea of the infinite surpasses the 
constraints of ontology, or the study of being, opening contemplative thought up to ethics, 
which is the proper first philosophy or metaphysics. This opening of thought to the out-
side is also why Levinas says that “the idea of the infinite is the social relationship.”50 If 
ontology, or the reflection on being, is an appropriative reflection on an essential neuter, it 
is the Face of another, a non-­neutered Other, that presents a radical exteriority. There is 
nothing in human experience that so challenges complacent self-­relation as the gaze of 
another person, who is not first of all an object of my intentionality but instead enters into 
my intentionality precisely as one who is intending me.
For Levinas, the essence of this experience is a judgment that places definitive lim-
its on my freedom, limits that may not be transgressed. The Face of the Other thus 
conveys the implicit commandment, “Thou shall not kill.”51 This implicit command-
ment presents an “absolute resistance” that one cannot find in being inasmuch as 
being remains an “It” that lacks a capacity to look upon me; it is an essentially “ethi-
cal resistance” that “opens the very dimension of the infinite, of what puts a stop to 
the irresistible imperialism of the Same and the I.”52 More basic, for Levinas, than 
love, which is in his view essentially complacent, we have on the one hand justice, in 
the form of a condemnation of the self as unjust, and on the other hand the infinity of 
restless desire. This desire does not arrive at some object as a final destination, in 
which to come to a self-­extinguishing rest. Instead, the desire provoked by the true 
Other is a desire to continue desiring, literally without end: an infinite desire for the 
infinite.53 Now, in the place of the essential wealth of freedom as autonomy, we have 
the essential poverty or indigence of a desire that refuses all fulfillment.54 The free-
dom championed by Western thought is thus called radically “into question” by the 
Face of the Other. For Levinas, and for many of his followers, God will not conform 
Himself to philosophical thought; instead, God calls thought to conform itself to Him, 
or more precisely to attempt to do so and thereby to recognize the ultimate futility of 
the endeavor. God calls thought into question, and so forces it beyond ontology into 
ethics, which alone respects the demands of exteriority and the otherness of the Other.
IV
It is against this backdrop that we can clarify Ulrich’s aim in Gebet. The perspec-
tive Ulrich develops in this book quite evidently fits into neither the autonomy nor 
the heteronomy currents that Levinas describes; instead, the book “outwits” this di-
chotomy insofar as it endeavors to bring to light a ground that precedes it: we will 
see that, for Ulrich, the most radical encounter with the Other occurs specifically in 
50 Levinas, “Philosophy and the Idea of the Infinite,” in Peperzak, To the Other, 108.
51 Ibid., 109.
52 Ibid., 110.
53 “Desire ‘measures’ the infinity of the infinite” (“Philosophy and the Idea of the Infinite,” 113).
54 Ibid., 98. It is significant, regarding the contrast we will draw with Ulrich, that Levinas identifies the 
Western view of freedom and possession with wealth in strict opposition to poverty: “Only in possession does 
the I complete the identification of the diverse. To possess is, to be sure, to maintain the reality of this other 
one possessed, but to do so while suspending its independence. In a civilization which the philosophy of the 
Same reflects, freedom is realized as a wealth. Reason, which reduces the other, is appropriation and power.”
 14680025, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/moth.12848 by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [17/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

12  D. C. Schindler
© 2023 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
the gift of being, indeed, one’s very own being, which means that the self comes to 
itself, receives itself, always already in communion with the Other (and with others 
in the Other). As already stated, the many common concerns Ulrich and Levinas 
share allow a difference to come clearly to the foreground. Like Levinas, Ulrich ends 
with something like the futility of philosophical thought when faced with the infinite 
mystery of God, which bears in turn on the relationship the human soul has with all 
others things without exception. But the differences between the two thinkers can 
hardly be less apparent. Before highlighting their difference, we will first sketch out 
the basic contours of Ulrich’s book.
Gebet has four parts. Rather than begin with a preface, in which he might survey the 
meaning of prayer and clarify his approach from some neutral position set apart, 
Ulrich begins, as we said at the outset, dramatically, already inside the encounter, 
which opens the signficance of both the lyric and the epic poetic modes, both the in-
timacy of prayerful encounter and the objectivity of understanding. He “jumps right 
in” from the outset, presenting a description of the encounter between the I and its 
Other that lies at the heart of prayer, a description in the epic mode but always inclu-
sive of lyric sensibility and decisive personal involvement: tua res agitur. Part of the 
point of the book is, indeed, to show that this encounter is so basic to the constitution 
of the I that there is, so to speak, no escape from it: prayer is the fundamental act of 
the creature, and so is already presupposed by every other act. Accordingly, in the 
book’s first part (9-­36), Ulrich describes the reflection on prayer as “dangerous,”55 for 
a variety of reasons: not only is this encounter inescapable, but it appears to present 
a fundamental threat, given modern presuppositions about the self and its essential 
autonomy. Prayer calls for the death of the self, thus understood, and so naturally 
provokes strategies of self-­defense. Part two of the book (37-­55), accordingly, charac-
terizes a variety of misinterpretations of prayer as the fundamental creaturely act, 
fluctuating between a kind of dissolution of the self in the infinite, or, in turn, a self-­
securing of finitude against such an imposing infinity. It ends by offering a proper 
image of prayer as rooted in a positive sense of poverty. Part three (56-­75), the center 
of the book, elaborates the liberated wholeness of prayer and the one praying, para-
doxically within the brokenness and humility of finitude, which is interpreted now 
most basically in terms of gift. Continuing in this line, the fourth part of the book 
(76-­98) reflects on thanksgiving (“Dank”) as the essential form of prayer, and ad-
dresses the ways that gratitude can take false forms. Finally, in the brief concluding 
part (99-­104), Ulrich presents prayer as an “anacoluthon”: prayer implies silence, not 
as the absence of speech, but as speaking in all things, everywhere—­speaking already 
in one’s being, because of the drama of the dialogue that constitutes one’s existence.
A helpful way into this unusual reflection is to compare it with certain antecedents 
in the classical tradition. Ulrich is not the first to approach the act of being as an act 
of prayer: setting aside some lyrical expressions such as the Psalms,56 perhaps the 
earliest such reflection in philosophy can be found in Plotinus’s Ennead 3.8, “On 
Nature and Contemplation.” In this treatise, the Greek thinker argues that nature is 
contemplative of its very essence, precisely because of its teleological order: to be is to 
receive goodness “from above,” in such a way as to become perfect and then bear 
55 The opening two chapters are available in English in “A Dangerous Reflection on the Fundamental Act 
of the Creature,” Communio (Spring 1996).
56 See Psalm 148; cf., also, Psalm 69:34 and Psalm 19.
 14680025, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/moth.12848 by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [17/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Metaphysics as Prayer: Introducing Ferdinand Ulrich  13
© 2023 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
fruit in action; all natural movement is a kind of “begetting in the beautiful.” Ulrich 
thus does not so much invent a notion as recall a tradition—­indeed, the neoplatonic 
tradition that reaches a certain original crystallization in Plotinus is arguably the de-
fining tradition of Western thought57—­while at the same time giving that tradition a 
newly “personalist” bent as a result of Christianity’s appropriation of classical 
thought. Perhaps the simplest way to characterize the essence of Ulrich’s little book 
is to see it as a meditative deepening of Augustine’s well-­known astonished acclama-
tion to God from The Confessions—­You are “more interior to me than I am to 
myself”58—­which Ulrich enriches by means of principles drawn from Thomistic 
metaphysics most basically, but also by insights from Hegel, Kierkegaard, Heidegger, 
and twentieth-­century dialogical philosophy; moreover, he unfolds these insights 
through an engagement—­again, essentially dramatic—­with the various contempo-
rary cultural patterns of the overcoming of dependency, which have their paradig-
matic expressions, for Ulrich, above all in Marx, but also in Nietzsche. The sources 
from which Ulrich draws remains more or less implicit, however evident they may 
be to the reader, and the relatively few footnotes in the book tend to be representative 
passages from the two last mentioned thinkers.59
The core idea of the book is expressed in its title. To say that prayer is the funda-
mental act of the creature is to say that to be at all is already in some sense to pray. The 
creature does not first exist, and then in a second moment encounter God—­for exam-
ple in man’s ethical encounter with the Face of the Other—­but the very act of existing 
itself is always already a having-­encountered-­God and by the very same token a call 
to renewed encounter, from the very root of being. Heidegger is well known for hav-
ing pointed out that the question of being is so fundamental it in some sense pre-
cedes the questioner, so that we do not ask it so much as it asks us. We cannot find a 
place outside of being so as to inquire into it from a distance. As we will see in a 
moment, Ulrich, essentially agreeing with the gist of this observation, recognizes—­
contra Heidegger—­that the “God question” is inevitably raised with the “being 
question,” so that our explicit dealing with the being question unavoidably takes the 
form of a discovery of something with which one has always already been engaged. 
At this fundamental level, the epic poetic mode, which seeks objective description 
and understanding from a distance, cannot be separated from the lyricism of imme-
diate experience. This always-­already-­having-­been-­involved in the being question is 
one of the reasons Heidegger associates questioning with (a rather generic) piety60; 
for Ulrich, again as we will elaborate, because it is an encounter, not simply with the 
(nonspecific) “holy,” as Heidegger puts it, but with the personal God of love, this 
piety takes the form, most properly, of prayer. In his metaphysical masterwork, Homo 
Abyssus, Ulrich explains at the outset that the philosophical reflections elaborated in 
all their technical sophistication within that book arose within the spirit of contem-
plative prayer, and can be properly interpreted only if read within the same spirit.61 
57 In this respect, the criticism of “Western rationalism” that takes the Enlightenment as a paradigm and 
reads the preceding currents in its light is profoundly wrong-­headed.
58 Augustine, Confessions, 3.6.11.
59 He also cites, more in passing, Hegel, Aquinas, Dante, Thérèse of Lisieux, Meister Eckhart, Elizabeth of 
Dijon, and Kierkegaard.
60 Martin Heidegger, “The Question Concerning Technology,” in Basic Writings, edited by David Farrell 
Krell (London: Routledge, 1993), 341.
61 Ulrich, Homo Abyssus, 5. Ulrich had made the same comment in Sein und Wesen, “Vorwort.”
 14680025, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/moth.12848 by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [17/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

14  D. C. Schindler
© 2023 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
It is important to see that this is not gratuitous rhetoric, but a formulation that is at-
tempting to do justice to its subject matter: the proper understanding of a reality as 
fundamental as that explained in Homo Abyssus can be achieved only within the real-
ity of a proper relation, which is thus described as it is enacted. As he puts it in Gebet, 
the various conundra posed by prayer can be resolved only by praying.62 And the 
subject matter of this little book is not simply different from that of his work on meta-
physics, but the same viewed from a different perspective.
The metaphysics “behind” Ulrich’s reflections on prayer is elaborated in detail in Homo 
Abyssus, but is indicated in certain summary statements in the book we are discussing. It 
is helpful to sketch this metaphysics out in simple form at the outset. There are three es-
sential moments in this metaphysics, each of which represents a certain paradox that 
would require further unfolding, but which we present here in a cursory way.63 1) For 
Ulrich, creation is best understood as the gift of being (creare est dare esse), and, because 
God is being itself (Ipsum Esse Subsistens), creation ought to be understood as a self-­gift:
Since God gives everything in his word of being, the creature has nothing from it-
self; the creature contributes nothing of itself—­with respect to God’s Yes by which 
it is called forth from nothing. Thus, nothing “other” stands over against the 
Creator, nothing that would externally compel him to self-­communication. This 
means that everything is owed to him. What [59] he gives is created from nothing, 
not formed from any material juxtaposed to him; instead, it streams forth from his 
heart. In every gift, he always gives himself. The Giver does not form the gift out-
side himself, but takes it “out of himself”: he gives it for nothing [umsonst: gratis], 
without advance payment, beyond every presupposition; he gives it because he so 
wills. Only one who has absolute possession of himself can do such a thing.64
Here we see why Ulrich regularly insists on the “archetypal unity” of being in 
God,65 which is a significant part of the meaning of ideality in Homo Abyssus;66 what 
he has in mind is that created esse, as the “perfection of all perfection and actuality of 
all acts,” is in some sense the privileged “likeness of divine goodness.”67 The mystery 
of being is a reflection of the (ever greater) mystery of God. 2) But this gift of being, 
even as a self-­gift, is nevertheless genuinely a gift, which is to say that being is truly 
given away into the genuine possession of the beings God creates. Ulrich therefore 
stresses the “separation” (Trennung68) of the Giver from the gift: the fact that the gift 
of being is definitive and absolute, not an extension of the self of the Giver, or a loan 
62 Ulrich, Gebet, 19.
63 For a more thorough presentation of Ulrich’s metaphysics in English, see chapter two of Companion to 
Ferdinand Ulrich’s Homo Abyssus (Washington, DC: Humanum Academic Press, 2019), 21-­48.
64 Ulrich, Gebet, 58-­59.
65 “Each gift that grows out of the heart of the Giver is therefore fully transparent to its origin, archetypally 
identical with it”; Ulrich, Gebet, 59.
66 See the lexicon entry on “ideality” in Ulrich, Homo Abyssus, 499.
67 Aquinas, De pot., 7.2ad9 and De ver., 22.2ad2; cf., ST 1.4.1ad3 and 1.4.2.
68 In some contexts, Ulrich uses the more provocative expression, “Todestrennung,” the “death-­
separation,” or perhaps the “separation-­unto-­death,” in order to indicate the genuinely kenotic moment that 
this separation entails. The first experience of separation is the coming forth from the womb—­an emergence 
traumatic for mother and child alike—­and the “wound” of the cutting of the umbilical cord. See Ulrich, Leben 
in der Einheit von Leben und Tod, 80-­92. Schopenhauer once famously said, “Jede Trennung gibt einen 
Vorgeschmack des Todes und jedes Wiedersehen einen Vorgeschmack der Auferstehung,” “Every separation 
gives us a foretaste of death, and every reunion a foretaste of resurrection.”
 14680025, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/moth.12848 by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [17/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Metaphysics as Prayer: Introducing Ferdinand Ulrich  15
© 2023 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
that will be at some indefinite point in the future called back, but a once-­and-­for-­all 
(irreddibilis) donation.69 It is crucial to see that, for Ulrich, this second point does not 
compromise the first in the least, but instead radically deepens it: God is more fully 
and properly present in the gift the more perfectly it is given, because he is thus im-
manent in it rather than remaining external to it, hovering over a “part” of himself 
that he does not relinquish. 3) Finally, as a gift, being must be received, which is to 
say it is not simply cast into a void or imposed on a merely passive non-­entity. 
Instead, the gift of being is received, paradoxically, by what “already exists,” not as 
if there were something in existence before creation, which is obviously contradic-
tory of the very notion of creation ex nihilo, but in the sense that, in its superabundant 
generosity, the gift of being in a certain respect presupposes its recipient.70 Clearly, 
the supra-­temporality of generosity is crucial if we are to make sense of what Ulrich 
is affirming. Here, we see the extraordinary depth of meaning Ulrich sees in Aquinas’s 
simple statement that “substance is the actual dimension of receptivity (‘proprium 
susceptivum’).”71 The gift of being gives rise to the very conditions of its reception, 
those conditions being an already actual receptivity rather than a passive emptiness. 
Thus, an expression of the radical separation of the gift from the giver, the absolute-
ness of the gift, is the fact that esse inheres in a substance as something like its acci-
dent.72 God gives being away so completely, we might say, the gift takes the form of 
inhering within, or even more radically arising from, the very reality of the creature 
itself: “esse … est actus entis resultans ex principiis rei, sicut lucere est actus lucentis” (“‘to 
be’ is the act of the being, which results from the principles of the thing, just as ‘to shine’ 
is the act of the bright thing”).73
This brief account of Ulrich’s notion of creation as gift helps us to see a point that 
is often misunderstood in his thought, namely, the relationship between the Thomistic 
“real distinction” between essence and esse (which, in modern scholasticism, gets 
reduced to a distinction between essence and existence), and the Heideggerian “on-
tological difference” between being (das Sein) and that which is (das Seiende). As typ-
ically understood, the distinction between esse and essence is a distinction that lies so 
to speak “within” the existing thing, the ens, marking not only the distinction be-
tween what something is and the fact that it is, but between a thing’s formal essence 
and the act by which that essence exists in the real order.74 To speak of a “real distinc-
tion” (rather than a merely “notional” or “formal” distinction) is to say that there are 
two principles that inhere within every given being (ens) that are irreducible to each 
other rather than being mere aspects of one reality, which the mind posits without an 
ontological basis. The ontological difference, by contrast to the real distinction, dis-
tinguishes esse, “the ‘to be’” (das Sein), not from essence (an otherwise abstract onto-
logical principle), but from the real ens, the existing entity, itself (which is the Latin 
equivalent of das Seiende). Though a being exists by virtue of the esse received from 
God, and, indeed, received so radically that the act of being is truly the act of the 
69 Aquinas, ST, 1.38.2. Aquinas cites this defining characteristic of gift from Aristotle, Topics, 4.4.
70 On this point, see Oster, “Thinking Love,” 680-­82.
71 Ulrich, Gebet, 53. Ulrich is referring to Summa contra gentiles, 2.55.
72 Aquinas, ST 1.45.3ad3.
73 Aquinas, In 3 Sent., d.6, q.2, a.2, co. Emphasis added.
74 Ulrich discusses at length the reduction of esse to the mere fact of existing in Suárez in his dissertation. 
Cornelio Fabro insists on the same point: see Msgr. John F. Wippel, “Cornelio Fabro on the Distinction and 
Composition of Essence and Existence in the Metaphysics of Thomas Aquinas,” Review of Metaphysics 68, no. 
3 (March 2015): 573-­92.
 14680025, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/moth.12848 by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [17/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

16  D. C. Schindler
© 2023 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
substance itself, which means that it is truly a perfection that belongs to the sub-
stance as an actually existing thing, this esse nevertheless remains a gift, which means 
it remains distinct from the substance that enacts it. Indeed, as a gift, it remains, even 
in its definitive possession, a communication united archetypally with the Giver, the 
actuality of the presence of God. Being is simultaneously within the substance as its 
own “to be,” and beyond the substance, as the fullness of actuality, the perfection of 
all perfection, a reflection of God’s absolute perfection.75 Heidegger envisions some-
thing similar to this in the ontological difference between Sein and Seiende, a differ-
ence he characterizes by evoking some of the language of love (it is in an en-­abling 
[Er-­möglich-­ung] as a gracious favoring [mögen], an en-­sheltering, and so forth), but 
Ulrich goes beyond Heidegger by taking back, so to speak, the language that 
Heidegger borrowed, and interpreting the difference explicitly in terms of love—­an 
interpretation that Heidegger cannot finally accept because of his relentless reduc-
tion of all things personal to the “ontic” (as Levinas himself showed).76 It should be 
noted that, by complementing the “real distinction” with the “ontological differ-
ence,” Ulrich is not creating some strange hybrid of Aquinas and Heidegger; rather, 
acknowledging the genuine insights of Heidegger on this point, he nevertheless in-
sists that what Heidegger means, at least in part, by the difference between das Sein 
and das Seiende can already be found in the text of Aquinas, even if this has not al-
ways been recognized.
One of the most original insights Ulrich unfolds in this book, which goes beyond not 
only Heidegger, but beyond the perspective Ulrich himself developed in Homo Abyssus, 
is what he comes to call the “dialogical difference,” by analogy to the “ontological dif-
ference.” It is, in effect, a kind of anthropological enactment of the ontological differ-
ence, and it lies at the heart of his reflection on prayer. To say that being, in general, is a 
gift is to say that my being is a gift. To whom is this gift given? In the first place, and 
most fundamentally, the gift is given to me. I am both the gift given, and the recipient of 
the gift. We have indicated the metaphysical paradoxes of creation above, and here we 
see these paradoxes played out existentially, in terms even of psychology and experi-
ence. In the twentieth century, largely, but not exclusively, among Jewish thinkers,77 a 
new prominence was given to the unique encounter between the I and the Thou, an 
encounter that has a radically different character, as Martin Buber has so unforgettably 
shown,78 from the encounter between the I and the “It,” i.e., what Levinas would de-
scribe as the “Neuter.” Continuing in the line of thinking we outlined above, Ulrich 
makes the proposal that something of the difference between the I and the Thou, and 
thus some analogy to the interpersonal encounter, takes place already within the I itself, 
once the I itself is understood radically as gift. In other words, Ulrich interprets the real 
75 Here we could fruitfully compare Ulrich to Przywara, who articulates the analogia entis similarly as an 
“in-­über,” but for whom the governing term is essence: see Erich Przywara, Analogia Entis (Grand Rapids, MI: 
William B. Eerdmans Publishing Company, 2014). John Betz has already taken the first steps toward an en-
counter between these two great thinkers: “The Analogia Entis in Erich Przywara and Ferdinand Ulrich: 
Toward a More Catholic Metaphysics,” Communio (Spring 2019): 109-­33.
76 It is revealing that Heidegger does not allow the person as such to liberate one to an experience of “what 
is as a whole”: See Heidegger, “What is Metaphysics?,” 99.
77 In addition to the Jewish thinkers Martin Buber and Franz Rosenzweig, there is the Christian Ferdinand 
Ebner, who has recently appeared in English for the first time: The Word and the Spiritual Realities (Washington, 
DC: Catholic University of America Press, 2021).
78 Martin Buber, I and Thou (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1937).
 14680025, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/moth.12848 by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [17/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Metaphysics as Prayer: Introducing Ferdinand Ulrich  17
© 2023 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
distinction in light of the ontological difference, and interprets the latter in terms of di-
alogical encounter. He concludes thus:
Here, I am for “myself” a given “I”(-­Thou), without ever being able to sublate 
[aufheben] the difference between the gift (=I) and myself as the recipient (=I), to 
extinguish this dialogical difference, through which my self is structured, or “to 
mediate” it reflexively from my existential standpoint. In this center, I am not 
present to myself as the Other who is “thought,” but entrusted to myself as a 
“gratuitous” [überflüssiger], given [geschenkter] friend. I cannot trap the life given 
to me in a “concept”; I cannot make the transferred gift available to myself as 
something known and administer it however I may think best. I cannot with-
draw myself from the movement originating in the Giver, in which he expresses 
himself to me. To do so would mean (or in any event only appear to mean) that 
I had succeeded in absorbing the gift into myself, separated it from its source, 
and then subsequently, by abstraction, isolated the essence of my life as an object 
of thought.79
The difference that is inseparable from gratuity is not a marginal aspect of things, but 
lies at the core of being and goes, so to speak, all the way down, all the way into the inner-
most essence of self-­identity. Because this gratuity is not the Heideggerian openness of the 
neutral (“Es gibt,” “It gives”80), but ultimately the personal love of a creator God, the dif-
ference expresses the presence of an Other who can face one in a reciprocal encounter 
(without being a mere object to me as subject). The Other is already present in my own 
self-­identity, such that I am not a pure self-­enclosed unity, sealed off from everything that 
is not myself (I = I). Instead, I am myself always and abidingly as a gift to myself, so that the 
dative is, so to speak, constitutive of the nominative: I receive myself as something like a 
Thou to myself, which is why I am ultimately capable of receiving every other Thou with-
out reduction to the Same.81
More particularly, because the presence of the Giver is so patent in the gift, the self 
that I receive is inseparable from the Thou of the Giver—­again, not because the Giver 
holds onto it without letting go, but paradoxically because of the separation implied in 
real generosity. As Ulrich puts it:
The Giver … has gone abroad, as the parable of the talents explains. He has 
“withdrawn” himself, so that, by the power of his gift, the well of our involve-
ment [Einsatzes] might spring open and, in this way, his present absence might 
break through. Only if the one who receives risks himself [Einsatz] will the pres-
ence of the Giver be unveiled. Whoever clings to him by a kind of craving for the 
“ground” will lose him. By contrast, for the one praying, the separation is itself 
a way in which the Origin is present.82
This difference of the I from itself in itself can of course take perverted forms, not only 
in extreme expressions that one sometimes encounters in the arts and poetry (for example, 
79 Ulrich, Gebet, 28.
80 Martin Heidegger, “Letter on Humanism,” in Basic Writings, 237-­38.
81 For a beautifully profound and succinct account of this point, see Erik van Versendaal, “Plenitudo 
Fontalis: Love’s Groundless Yes and the Grateful Originality of Nature,” Communio (Spring 2019): 172-­77.
82 Ulrich, Gebet, 25.
 14680025, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/moth.12848 by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [17/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

18  D. C. Schindler
© 2023 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Rimbaud’s “Je est un autre”), but in the various fractures of personality with which psy-
chology is familiar. Nevertheless, for Ulrich, the perversion is possible only because of the 
truth of being as gift. “I contain multitudes”—­not because of the fragmentation of person-
ality, constantly thwarted in its efforts ever to be a unified self, but because of the inex-
haustible fecundity of the gift that the person already is to himself, and for others.
The drama that ensues from being as gift, thus understood, gets played out over the 
course of Ulrich’s book as he explores in depth the various strategies of self-­preservation 
in the face of the encounter with the Other at the very heart of myself. Interpreted at such 
a fundamental level, this drama constantly takes unsuspected turns: the false identification 
of one’s own being with one’s origin, which may appear to be egoism taken to its furthest 
extreme, turns out to be a radical destruction of the self, and the desire to lose oneself, to 
dissolve into an ultimate nothing, gets unmasked as a supreme gesture of selfishness, a 
kind of self-­worship.83 Rather than follow out these various threads, we will focus here on 
a single theme that lies at the center of the reflections and serves to set into relief one of the 
book’s most astonishing and provocative affirmations. According to Ulrich, an especially 
distinctive paradox of love, which illuminates the mystery of prayer, is what we may call 
the “sameness” of poverty and wealth in the phenomenon of gift.84 To describe this same-
ness, Ulrich often makes use of a turn of phrase borrowed from Heidegger, the “selbige 
Verwendung” of two terms that seem to be straightforward opposites. This phrase, which 
Heidegger uses to characterize the relation between being and nothing,85 literally means 
something like “selfsame usage,” or in other words “interchangeability,” and may be 
translated as “convertibility”—­more superficially as a “coincidence,” or more profoundly 
as a “self-­exchange” wherein each term, in its reciprocity, brings to light the essence, the 
hidden depths of meaning, of the other. For Ulrich, in love, poverty and wealth are “con-
vertible” in the profound sense; they turn essentially into each other: to give love away, 
totally and completely, is to possess it definitively, and the most perfect way of storing up 
the treasure of love is to spend it.86 Prayer, the encounter of the creature with her Creator, 
which gives rise to the creature’s very being, must have the same basic shape as the love at 
the radical origin of being: one opens oneself, in a kind of neediness, or poverty of spirit, 
which seeks to receive from God. But this begging, in its depth, does not insist on its own 
emptiness;87 instead, it already has the form of thanksgiving, a response to the surprising 
fullness of already having received.
In order to highlight this paradox, Ulrich distinguishes it from two evident perver-
sions, using language that points directly to the paradigm he has in mind. On the one 
hand, we have a false emptiness which, in order to keep itself empty, refuses the Giver 
and denies the actual presence of the gift. The phrase Ulrich employs to describe this 
one-­sided emptiness is “pseudo virginity”—­the intended sense of which might best be 
83 See, e.g., section III.2.C of Ulrich, Gebet, 60-­64.
84 This theme is central not only in Gebet but throughout Ulrich’s oeuvre; it is something like a “signature” 
theme.
85 Martin Heidegger, “On the Question of Being,” in Pathmarks, ed. William McNeill (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1998), 317.
86 We are reminded here of Charles Péguy’s line: “You do not save your soul as you would save a treasure; 
you save it as you would lose a treasure: by squandering it”: Le mystère de la charité de Jeanne d’Arc, in Oeuvres 
Poétiques Complètes (Paris: Editions Gallimard, 1975), 392.
87 An illuminating foil to Ulrich’s position here can be found in Simone Weil’s notion of “decreation,” by 
which one reduces oneself to the “nothing” out of which one was created in order to draw closer to God: see 
Simone Weil, Gravity and Grace, translated by Emma Crawford and Mario von der Ruhr (New York: Routledge, 
2002), 32-­39.
 14680025, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/moth.12848 by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [17/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Metaphysics as Prayer: Introducing Ferdinand Ulrich  19
© 2023 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
captured by the Latin phrase “sola virgo,” which recalls the analogous one-­sidedness of 
Luther’s “three solae”: sola fides, sola scriptura, and sola gratia.88 This is a kind of ob-
stinate self-­humbling, a false modesty, a self-­preoccupied effort at effacing oneself, pu-
tatively in order to magnify the other, but in truth rendering the other impotent in 
relation to the self. The complementary error is of course that of the “sola mater,” which 
Ulrich interprets as the temptation to absorb the Giver, to claim generativity as a power 
due to oneself alone, to glory in one’s own creative capacity, in such a way as to smother 
the independence of one’s progeny.89 This, too, is an inability to receive, not because one 
has so absolutized the Other as to impose one’s own nothingness as an insuperable 
obstacle, but now because one no longer has need of the Other; to the contrary, in one’s 
perfect self-­sufficiency, one now exaggerates the Other’s need and therefore dependence. 
If in the former case one is poor in opposition to wealth, in the latter case one is rich 
without any poverty; in both cases one has betrayed the mystery of love:
Both figures, the self-­humiliating “sola virgo” (the finite posited as the sterile non-­
being) and the “sola mater” (who supplies the seed-­word by herself: a self-­created 
unity of being and becoming: a divine-­humanity, produced out of finitude, in which 
the man “becomes the highest entity for man”)—­both are forms of the shattered crea-
tureliness of being as love. They are two sides of the one and the same refusal: a No to 
being as a gift of love in the unity of wealth and poverty, life and death; the killing of 
trinitarian love; a revolt against its folly in the foolishness of the cross, in which the 
one praying has his beginning, where, in the fundamental act of the creature (Mary) he 
is reborn again and again.90
The proper living out of prayer, as the reenactment of the gift of being, is of 
course discovered in an utterly unique way in Mary, Virgin and Mother at once, 
whose incomparable greatness of soul (magna-­anima) consists in her perfect magni-
fication of the Other. Though this unity is a grace unique in history, it presents a 
model of prayer (and indeed of existence generally) that ought to be imitated analo-
gously by all creatures. Mary, whom Ulrich refers to as “the ontological difference in 
person,”91 receives herself, has her being, so perfectly as a gift, in such complete 
transparence to the presence of the Giver, that the Thou of God becomes quite liter-
ally present in her inmost being. Her perfect poverty becomes wealthy in an un-
heard of way: God himself is born of her, the Theotokos. In this context, Ulrich makes 
a startling suggestion, which he acknowledges cannot but provoke much “head-­
shaking.”92 He suggests that the greatest thinkers of the modern era—­he singles out 
in this context Hegel, Nietzsche, and Heidegger—­may best be interpreted as failed 
attempts at making philosophy itself a pseudo-­Theotokos, developing a form of 
thinking that rejected Mary, and by implication the Incarnation of God in Christ, and 
being therefore compelled to construct an Ersatz: the reconciliation of the infinite 
and the finite in the concrete universality of spirit (Hegel); the absolute “Yes and 
88 In each case, one could show how the exclusion of the complementary term ends up undermining the 
one that is absolutized. Ulrich’s metaphysics allows for a non-­reductive embrace of both terms in their 
asymmetry.
89 Ulrich, Gebet, 70-­71.
90 Ulrich, Gebet, 76.
91 Ibid., 78.
92 Ibid.
 14680025, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/moth.12848 by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [17/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

20  D. C. Schindler
© 2023 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Amen” of the Übermensch (Nietzsche); and the “thinking that is thanking” as a real-
ization of the ontological difference (Heidegger). A longer argument, which Ulrich 
does not provide in this book,93 would have to be made in order to show how this 
judgment does not hopelessly confuse the orders of nature and grace, philosophy 
and theology; the key to such an argument would be to show that the Marian reso-
lution is not deduced from the philosophical principles or the structure of nature or 
created being, but instead the supernatural mystery casts light in a gratuitous way 
on those principles.94 But in any event the point here is to see that the question of 
being itself eventually becomes the question of the Other, and that this question can-
not remain, as Levinas showed, in a neutral register, but inevitably takes a concrete, 
historical, and even personal form. In this way, the genuinely theological theme 
breaks out from within the womb, so to speak, of the philosophical question. Prayer 
is the fundamental act of the creature, and the creature’s fundamental act is philos-
ophy’s most essential concern.
V
After this brief exposition of the two thinkers, the difference between Ulrich and 
Levinas stands out quite clearly. Setting the difference into relief allows us to see 
Ulrich’s unique contribution. While both philosophers seek to overcome the mod-
ern Western tendency to reduce the O(o)ther to the self, and in so doing to open 
thought up in principle to God, they not only respond to this tendency differently, 
but they see the terms of the problem differently from the beginning. While one 
seeks a substitute for first philosophy in the traditional sense (ethics for ontology), 
the other affirms the essence of metaphysics as the science of being qua being, even 
if he allows this essence to be recast in the light of the self-­revelation of the 
Trinitarian God. Levinas takes the self as given from the start in a problematic form, 
which must be defeated by what would thus amount to an act of violence. In other 
words, the being of the self is assumed to be essentially ego-­centric. It is thus natu-
ral for the encounter with the Other to arrive in the essentially negative mode of a 
condemnation of the native injustice of freedom. The basic experience in this case 
is the imposition from above, or in any event from the outside, of a law that intro-
duces a constraint. We might think here of the apparently similarly inspired “Law 
of the Father,” in Jacques Lacan, wherein the “nom/non du père” violently trans-
gresses the child’s primal unity with the mother, thus provoking the symbolic con-
sciousness that enables speech.95 For Ulrich, by contrast, the Other is present in and 
to the self from the beginning, at the very ground of one’s being. In this case, the 
arrival of the concrete other, for example in the profound experience of another 
person’s face, is not most basically a condemnation, but a liberation; it is an 
93 We discuss this issue in Companion to Ferdinand Ulrich’s Homo Abyssus, 89-­112. See also Oster, “Thinking 
Love,” 690-­98. Ulrich’s position seems to be a novel one, at least with respect to discussions in the modern era, 
and deserves more study, especially given the fact that he does not himself spell out the details of his position 
but shows it instead of explaining it. It is worth noting, incidentally, that Gebet does not purport to be a work 
of philosophy.
94 In other words, the question for Ulrich is not whether Christian mysteries are explicitly mentioned in 
one’s philosophical reflection. Instead, the question for him is what role they play in the logic of the argument. 
He does not exclude their informing philosophical argument as long as they do not do so in the mode of 
necessary logical derivation.
95 See Jacques Lacan, Ecrits: A Selection (New York: Norton, 2002), 189-­91.
 14680025, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/moth.12848 by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [17/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Metaphysics as Prayer: Introducing Ferdinand Ulrich  21
© 2023 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
experience that magnifies the proper truth of the self and is therefore able to reso-
nate down into the core of one’s being. There is in Ulrich’s conception of the self, to 
be sure, a proper place for law, even in the form of heteronomy, but that law does 
not in the first place limit or condemn an otherwise primarily self-­determining and 
self-­asserting freedom. Instead, it brings to light the inner essence of freedom, 
which, as Ulrich never tires of repeating, is communal to its core, and includes from 
the beginning not only a “letting be” of the other, but even more fundamentally a 
“having been let be” by the other.96 The most primal truth is not justice but love, 
which includes but surpasses justice. The original utterance is therefore not “Thou 
shalt not kill,” but “Let it be done unto me according to thy word”; we do not begin 
with sin, but with Mary, who, to use Georges Bernanos’s celebrated expression, is 
“younger than sin.”97 This is because the world was created ultimately both in and 
for communion.
Levinas begins his reflection with a basic dichotomy, which, for him, determines the 
fate of the West: either autonomy or heteronomy. This dichotomy is connected to an-
other, that between interiority and exteriority. Levinas takes these dimensions to be es-
sentially opposed to each other; if the Other enters into the interior self, into 
consciousness, it does so only by way of transgression and violence, a No to the self that 
exposes the self’s truly native injustice. We arguably see a reflection of this same mode, 
for example, in the work of Jean-­Luc Marion, a Catholic disciple of Levinas, who seeks 
to bring out more forcefully the centrality of love, but does so by effectively eliminating 
the element of intimacy, enjoyment, possession of the O(o)ther, and rest in that love.98 
As we have seen, Ulrich does not simply deny the potentially disruptive presence of the 
O(o)ther, and the challenge this presence poses to the self, but he does not make disrup-
tion most basic, which would imply that the response to injustice is the most fundamen-
tal act of the creature and ethics is first philosophy. Instead, for Ulrich, there is no 
essential opposition between interiority and exteriority, which means that prayer is 
more basic than the response to injustice, and that contemplation is prior to action, even 
if it cannot but spill over into action. In this sense, Ulrich may be said to “rescue” the 
theoretical in the face of postmodern critiques. Prayer and metaphysics, the traditional 
“first philosophy,” are united in the primacy of contemplation, which is a fruitio, an 
enjoyment of the other as already present in and to the self. The poetic lyricism of 
immediate experience and the epic disclosure of objective form join together in the 
onto-­drama in which one finds oneself always-­already engaged, the drama that consti-
tutes one’s being and is thus presupposed in all of one’s acting and understanding.
96 Ulrich regularly characterizes freedom as having a “We-­form.” See, e.g., Gegenwart der Freiheit, 75-­158 
and Gabe und Vergebung, 738-­90. On Ulrich’s conception of freedom, see Bieler, Freiheit als Gabe, Stefan Oster, 
Mit-­Mensch-­Sein: Phänomenologie und Ontologie der Gabe bei Ferdinand Ulrich (Freiburg: Karl Alber, 2004), and 
Erik van Versendaal, “Letting Be: Ferdinand Ulrich on Freedom as the Fruitfulness of Being” (PhD Dissertation, 
The John Paul II Institute, 2019).
97 Georges Bernanos, The Diary of a Country Priest (London: Font Paperbacks, 1977), 180-­81.
98 One notes, for example, Marion’s insistence on distance as the genuine mark of love: see Jean-­Luc 
Marion, The Idol and the Distance (New York: Fordham University Press, 2001); cf., Jean-­Luc Marion, God with-
out Being, second edition (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2012). The point is not that distance is not 
part of love, but only that Marion’s position is one-­sided in a way that will entail radical problems for the 
God-­world relation.
 14680025, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/moth.12848 by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [17/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

22  D. C. Schindler
© 2023 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
The thought of Ferdinand Ulrich holds a special promise in this moment of the return 
of metaphysics.99 It does so because, instead of simply repeating traditional notions in 
indifference to modern and postmodern concerns,100 or condemning these notions on 
the basis of those concerns, it seeks to bring to light the traditional notions’ as-­yet un-
tapped depths. His little book, Gebet als geschöpflicher Grundakt, shows that, not only is 
metaphysics not inimical to the personal encounter with God in prayer, but in fact 
prayer and metaphysics properly understood converge on the same dramatic point: to 
understand what it means to be, one must enter reflectively into the fundamental act of 
being, and the fundamental act is the receiving of existence, a reception that occurs in 
the grateful attunement of one’s being to the Other who is always already present in the 
gift that is the self. Praying is thus ultimately a metaphysical act, and metaphysics is 
most authentically carried out in the spirit of prayer. Both, in their convergence with 
each other, find a unique expression in Ulrich’s poetic philosophy, his drama of the 
question of being.101
99 Philip Gonzales, “A Massive Sea Change in Recent Theology,” Church Life Journal, March 24, 2021: churc​
hlife​journ​al.nd.edu/a-­massive-­sea-­change-­in-­recent-­theology/.
100 We might compare this to the tendency to assert the tradition simply against the philosophical concerns 
of modernity, which we find, for example, in Thomas Joseph White, Wisdom in the Face of Modernity 
(Washington, DC: Catholic University of America Press, 2009).
101 I would like to acknowledge the helpful contributions of two anonymous reviewers of an earlier draft 
of this essay.
 14680025, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/moth.12848 by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [17/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

