
Inquiries into 
the Fundamentals 
of Aesthetics 

The MIT Press 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, 
and London, England 

Inquiries into 
the Fundamentals 
of Aesthetics 
Stefan Morawski 

Copyright c 1974 by 
The Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
All rights reserved. No port of this bok moy be reproduced in ony form or by any means, electronic or 
mechonicol. including photocopying, recording, or by any informotion storage and retrieval system, 
without permission in writing from the publisher. 
This book was set in Alphotype Futura light, 
by University Graphics, Inc., 
printed and bound 
by Hollidoy lithograph Corporation 
in the United States of America. 
First MIT Press Poperbock Edition, 1978 
library of Congress Cotologing in Publication Data 
Morowski, Stefan. 
Inquiries into the fundamentals of oesthetics. 
Includes bibliographical references. 
1. Aesthetics. I. Title. 
BH39.M618 
lll.8'5 
74·6123 
ISBN 0-262· 13096·3 (hordcover) 
ISBN 0·262·63066·4 (poperbock) 

To Lee Baxandall 


Contents 
Part I 
Basic Axiological 
Problems 
Part II 
Artistic-Cognitive 
Values 
Foreword 
by Monroe C. Beardsley 
ix 
Preface 
xvii 
Chapter 1 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Valuation 
l 
Chapter 2 
What Is 
a Work of Art? 
88 
Chapter 3 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Evaluation 
125 
Chapter 4 
The Objectivity 
of Aesthetic Judgment 
156 
Chapter 5 
Expression 
183 
Chapter 6 
Mimesis and Realism 
203 

viii 
Part Ill 
Genesis and Functioning 
of Artistic Values 
Contents 
Chapter 7 
The Vicissitudes 
of Socialist Realism: 
A Little Lesson in History 
Which Should Not Be Ignored 
251 
Chapters 
Art and Society 
295 
Chapter 9 
Major and Marginal 
Functions of Art 
in a Context 
of Alienation 
309 
Chapter 10 
Quotation in Art 
341 
Chapter 11 
Art and Obscenity 
362 
Index 
393 

Foreword 
Before assuming these phenomena are 
[sun] spots, which would suit us, let us 
first set about proving that they are not 
-fried fish. We crawl by inches. What 
we find today we will wipe from the 
blackboard tomorrow. And if we find 
anything which would suit us, that 
thing we will eye with particular dis­
trust. In fact, we will approach this ob­
serving of the sun with the implacable 
determination to prove that the earth 
stands still, and only if hopelessly de­
feated in this pious undertaking can we 
allow ourselves to wonder if we may 
not have been right all the time; the 
earth revolves. 
Bertolt Brecht, Galileo 
This passage from Brecht"' is a vigo­
rous expression of the genuinely scien­
tific spirit-especially as it is presented 
in the work of Karl Popper-and, in 
fact, of the spirit of inquiry in general. 
That spirit, I suppose, is never easy to 
sustain, unless one has the passion of 
Galileo {or of Brecht's Galileo, who is 
not the same). In our time, as in his, 
domestic pressures are powerful, 
whether in the form of threats or of 
apparently countervailing obligations, 
while the modern barriers between na­
tions and regions also make genuine 
intellectual cooperation difficult on an 
international scale. The spirit of inquiry 
is far from dead, however; and, indeed, 
it seems to me very much alive in the 
work of Stefan Morawski-one of the 
*I am grateful to Lee Baxandall for calling it to 
my attention. 
most fertile and probing marxist aes­
theticians at work today. 
It is not my function in contributing 
this Foreword to offer fuller explana­
tions of Morawski's theses-he is per­
fectly capable of speaking for himself­
or to make objections before the reader 
has had the opportunity to hear what 
he has to say. But I welcome the oppor­
tunity to express my sense of the gener­
al significance of these essays and to 
offer some comments that I hope will 
help that significance to become plain. 
Philosophers, critics, artists, and 
others in the United States who are 
concerned with the arts and who are in 
one way or a nether engaged in think­
ing about the problems of aesthetics 
have had all too little chance to learn 
about the work that is being done, and 
has recently been done, by ma rxist 
aestheticians writing in languages un­
familiar to them. A few of the chapters 
in this volume have previously ap­
peared in English, but the others reveal 
to us, for the first time, the range of 
problems that have been the concern of 
Stefan Morawski, and the zest and eru­
dition with which he has dealt with 
them. 
This volume represents only a part, 
but a substantial part, of Morawski's 
work in aesthetics. Though written at 
different times {during the years 1961-
67), its essays form a coherent whole 

x 
because of their pervasive marxist 
methodology. Moreover, they deal with 
the most fundamental problems of aes­
thetics. The first part of the book is con­
cerned with basic axiological catego­
ries, the second with the chief aesthetic 
values (here Morawski omits a detailed 
study of the value of form, to which he 
attaches great significance, but which 
he sets aside for separate discussion 
because of the complications alluded to 
in Note 6 to "What is a Work of Art?"), 
the third with issues concerning the 
genesis and function of artistic values. 
Although it is, in the final analysis, 
the expression of his own philosophical 
individuality, Morawski's aesthetic 
method reflects several converging in­
fluences. Not only is he a profound 
student of marxism, well acquainted 
with the various strands within that 
broad movement of ideas, but in his 
hands marxism is a living system that 
reaches out to new problems and new 
solutions. Although he shares the same 
basic orientation as such other original 
marxist thinkers as Lukacs, Fischer, and 
Lefebvre, he has carried several lines of 
philosophic thought a good way beyond 
them. He is the heir of the strong tradi­
tion of Polish analytical philosophy, and 
has assimilated the important ideas of 
that seminal phenomenological aesthe­
tician, Roman lngarden, whose influ­
ence has reached far beyond the bor-
Foreword 
ders of his native Poland. Morawski 
has read widely and thoughtfully in the 
work of Russian, American, British, 
French, Italian, and German aesthe­
ticians, and he has a rich experience of 
classical and contemporary works of 
art, most notably painting, literature, 
and film. It is not surprising, then, that 
he has a habit of singling out central 
and fundamental problems to tackle, or 
that he typically sees them in a broad 
philosophical and cultural perspective. 
The key to Morawski's complex but 
coherent theory of art is his consistent 
vigilant historicist orientation .... we 
must constantly direct a selective and 
value-alert attitude towards the fluctua­
tions in culture which aims to valuate 
and revaluate the constant and recur­
rent elements of value, without ever as­
suming that a matter of axiology is 
settled for all time. 
. Though he is the first to admit that his 
historical method is as much a program 
for future inquiry as a set of verified 
conclusions, his aim is a vindication of 
this standpoint, a demonstration that it 
offers the soundest hope for establish­
ing aesthetics on a solid foundation. 
This viewpoint necessitates investiga­
tion of the genesis of art in human cul­
ture, examination of its functions in 
human life, and discovery of the aspects 
and elements of art objects which re­
main constant throughout their long 
history. The aim is to provide an empiri-

xi 
cal basis for objectively defensible judg­
ments of works of art, for a pluralistic 
openness to the values of the arts, in­
cluding most especially their cognitive 
values, and for a clearer understanding 
of the artist's social role which will 
help make it possible to liberate his 
creative powers and end his alienation 
along with that of his society. 
One of the most widely debated is­
sues in American and British aesthetics 
during recent decodes has been that 
concerning the definobility of "art," or 
of "work of art." Morawski's way of 
tackling this issue is characteristic of 
his thinking in the range of artistic ex­
perience and knowledge that he brings 
to it, in his determination to take due 
account of both the internal aspects of 
the work of art and its social relation­
ships, and in his judicious conclusion: a 
provisional definition framed so as not 
to be closed to future artistic develop­
ments. 
Morawski's aim is to "develop an 
idea of art which can hold its ground 
despite the current crisis" of practice 
and definition in the visual arts, poetry, 
music, the dance, theater, and film. He 
is opposed both to traditional attempts 
to identify a single necessary and suffi­
cient condition of art and to the neo­
Wittgensteinian view that the concept 
of art includes no necessary conditions 
but is a "family resemblance" concept. 
Foreword 
Moreover, he does not concede that the 
definition need be either arbitrary or 
relative. Instead-and this may possi­
bly be the most original of his hypothe­
ses- he develops a set of four criteria 
that together constitute a definiendum 
for "work of art." His argument for 
them is historical: they are based on 
"historically traced invariants" among 
obiects that have been considered, de­
spite all their differences, as works of 
art. The criteria offered and carefully 
defended ore: 
1. being a "structure of qualities" that 
are either sensuously presented or 
semantically designated; 
2. having a "relative autonomy of struc­
ture"; 
3. being an artifact, at least in a broad 
sense; and 
4. being an "individual expression." 
All are present to some degree, Morow­
ski holds, in any object with a claim to 
consideration as a work of art, but the 
last two are "weak" conditions, in that 
they ore sometimes present only in a 
low degree and may be hard to discern. 
Morawski wants to keep his concept of 
art open and flexible to accommodate 
the avant-garde, yet determinate 
enough to be useful. 
One consequence drawn from the 
definition will perhaps occasion some 
surprise, because the transition is rath­
er swift. "On the basis of the definition 

xii 
of art proposed here, I think we may 
justifiably conclude that art provides, 
as many have assumed, a special mode 
of cognition of reality. " Even if we grant 
that every work of art is, in some broad 
sense, an expression of the artist's state 
of mind, some aestheticians will argue 
that the link with the "reality" outside 
that mind may in some works be a tenu­
ous one. Morawski would presumably 
reply that the artist cannot help but 
reflect social forces and physical condi­
tions, however indiref:tly and even dis­
tortedly, in his work. Yet here, again, he 
is anxious to avoid any one-sided and 
oversimplified view. His concept of art 
allows for the mediation of truth about 
reality by the artist's mind; he rejects 
the too simple concept of mimetic art 
that he finds in some marxist aestheti­
cians. At the same time, he conceives of 
the expressive content of art, not as 
something that can be detached and 
dealt with by itself, but as tied to form, 
as living in the form. And it is this that 
enables him to make out a cogent case 
for the importance of artistic experi­
mentation and artistic freedom. 
Each artist has a way of discovering the 
world, of giving it proportion, form, and 
color; he judges, stimulates, and obliges 
us to think and rethink nhrn rt rPrtnin 
aspects of things, whether it be by re­
calling them to us or by making us dis­
cover them; he charms us by his lan­
guage and composition. Therein lies the 
essence of the moral function of art. 
This function can only come from crea-
Foreword 
tive freedom. ["The Vicissitudes of 
Socialist Realism") 
Another feature of Morawski's aes­
thetic theory that may puzzle American 
aestheticians is his identification, or 
collapsing, of the questions "What is 
art?" and "What is good art?" Many 
contemporary aestheticians have 
worked hard to establish and clarify 
such a distinction, and they would re­
linquish it reluctantly, if at all. To define 
"art," Morawski holds, is to propose a 
theory of "artistic value." Of course, it 
has often been noted that the word 
"art" can be used in a laudatory way, 
as a kind of nonce-normative term, and 
it has also been argued that many so­
called definitions of art are conceale<:I 
judgments about what is more note­
worthy or desirable in works of art. 
However, Morawski means something 
more. He wishes to separate two kinds 
of normative judgment in aesthetics and 
criticism: what he calls "valuation" and 
"evaluation." To valuate an object ar­
tistically is to report the presence in it 
of "artistic values," which are those 
properties that confer upon the object 
the status of a work of art and at the 
same time give it worth as art. To evalu­
ate, on the other hand, is to grade, in a 
broad sense; we evaluate X when we 
say it is a better work of art {or a bet­
ter painting, say) than Y, or that it ranks 
among the masterpieces. 
This distinction is an interesting one, 

xiii 
and its importance is emphasized by 
Morawski. Some aestheticians who 
would agree that every work of art has 
some degree of artistic worth would 
nevertheless hold that to say a work of 
art is a good work of art is necessarily 
to make at least a very broad compara­
tive iudgment-it is better than aver­
age, or better than most-and, hence, 
to evaluate it. It is indeed difficult to 
separate the two procedures. Even in 
Morawski's system they are conceptual­
ly tied, since evaluations are built up by 
summing valuations (see "The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Evaluation"}, although he 
holds that there are also further criteria, 
beyond the presence and intensity of ar­
tistic values, that are legitimately taken 
into account in making an estimate of 
the comparative value of two works of 
art. Among these further criteria are 
novelty and originality, which he desig­
nates as "artistic." (His discussion casts 
much light on these interesting con­
cepts.) Others he designates as "non­
artistic," including social and political 
aspects of the work. 
Every genuine work of art has by 
definition its residual (artistic} values­
its constituent properties, expressive 
qualities, mimetic features. To make this 
point of view fully understandable and 
to defend it adequately would, of 
course, require a general theory of 
value. Unfortunately, Morawski's theory 
of value-which he has developed in 
Foreword 
other essays, as yet untranslated-is 
only touched on here. He holds that 
there are "value facts," distinct from 
"facts sensu stricto"; they are estab­
lished in "acts of appreciation," in 
which obiective data and subjective 
elements come together. They are no 
less empirical than other facts, but they 
are "more dependent on individual atti­
tudes, on hie et nunc cultural contexts." 
That is why the search for a sound defi­
nition of "work of art" -i.e., for a defi­
nition that can hold up through the 
process of artistic change and develop­
ment-must be based on historical 
evidence of comparatively permanent 
types of appreciation. 
In "The Criteria of Aesthetic Valua­
tion," Morawski maps the location of 
his own position for us by presenting a 
general survey or typology of theories 
of artistic value. I find myself very much 
in sympathy with the lines of criticism 
that he directs against the theories he 
rejects. I must admit that I don't sub­
scribe to all of his objections, and I 
would want to raise an occasional ques­
tion. For example, I don't think that 
"those who fall bock on an analysis of 
aesthetic experience as the sole basis of 
artistic value" really undermine their 
theory by admitting there are obiective 
traits that give rise to aesthetic experi­
ence; I think Morawski does not do full 
justice to the account of value in terms 
of "potentiality" or "capacity." But I cite 

xiv 
these points of disagreement not at all 
out of disrespect for Morawski's argu­
ment but to suggest the kind of continu­
ing dialogue that I, for one, would want 
to carry on with him -a dialogue that 
is, in fact, the best tribute that a reader 
can pay these essays. 
The importance of taking an historical 
perspective towards the problem of de­
fining "artistic value" is a theme that 
runs through this essay and the equally 
thoughtful essay "The Objectivity of 
Aesthetic Judgment." Here he suggests 
that we must study the genesis of art 
and its emergence from an entangle­
ment with other cultural concerns into a 
specialized form of activity with its own 
distinctive function. We must under­
stand the factors that are at work in its 
history, both those that affect its devel­
opment from the outside (such as politi­
cal and technological forces) and those 
that are at work internally (such as 
stylistic imperatives). We must look for 
the "constants" or "invariants" in the 
appreciation of art to discover what is 
central to the artistic enterprise and 
distinctively valuable in it. Furthermore: 
A necessary condition for being able to 
say anything at all about the objectivity 
of aesthetic judgments [by which I un­
derstand Morawski to mean, to ascribe 
objectivity to aesthetic judgments] is the 
existence of certain natural, social, and 
cultural regularities which combine to 
fix some biologically and culturally sta-
Foreword 
ble ways of selecting aesthetic objects 
as peculiarly coherent structures and of 
producing objects called works of art. 
I don't think I agree completely with 
this last statement, and I believe that 
many further questions could be raised 
about the complex logical relationships 
between historical and sociological 
study, definition, and valuation. It seems 
to me clear, however, that Morawski's 
plea here is a valid one, and that it is 
properly addressed to contemporary 
aestheticians. The kind of knowledge he 
has in mind is certainly connected with 
the adoption of particular concepts of 
art and theories of artistic value, and it 
is a kind of knowledge in which we 
have been notably lacking. 
The problems raised by the activity of 
defending evaluations involve further 
distinctions that Morawski discusses in 
an interesting way-e.g., between nov­
elty and originality, between content 
criteria and form criteria, and (a distinc­
tion he evidently regards as of central 
importance) between "mimetic" and 
"realistic," or representational, works 
of art. Whereas mimetic art reproduces 
(in a changed form) the external fea­
tures of things, realistic art captures 
their "typical moments" or "essential 
aspects of reality" (see the wide-rang­
ing and deeply thought out essay "Mi­
mesis and Realism"). Morawski is care­
ful to disclaim any commitment to 

xv 
ontological essences-the essential is 
"historically concrete and variable." 
Indeed, one of his aims is to work out 
and defend a very broad concept of 
realism under which, for example, a 
short story by Kafka or a motion picture 
by Fellini can find a place and a high 
artistic justification. He is rightly skepti­
cal of attempts to get at the cognitive 
status of literature through the concept 
of being "true to human nature," be­
cause it seems to him a profound histor­
ical truth that what is distinctively hu­
man is at all times a function of social 
relationships, which are always in the 
process of being changed. But that does 
not prevent certain widely varied liter­
ary works from seizing upon and illu­
minating important features of a partic­
ular phase of the historical process, and 
becoming (as in authentic socialist 
realism) an "affirmation of a particular 
reality by means of an attitude critical 
of everything apathetic and inert in it, 
everything lagging behind the ideals of 
that society." 
The justification of art for the marx­
ist, as for the Deweyan instrumentalist, 
must, in the last analysis, lie in its con­
tribution to human welfare. In his essay 
"Major and Marginal Functions of Art 
in a Context of Alienation," Morawski 
makes interesting use of three classical 
myths to crystallize his view of the prin­
cipal functions: art as a means by which 
Foreword 
man is restored to harmony with his en­
vironment; art as a means by which 
moral conscience and the sense of social 
obligations are quickened in human be­
ings; and art as a means of victory over 
degrading and destructive forces. This 
is a very high conception of art; but 
Morawski gives his thesis weight and 
content by a most interesting analysis, 
and telling examples, of the three ways 
in which art can be false to itself by 
failing to fulfill these functions. The 
aesthetic alienation that he describes so 
convincingly-whether due to art's tak­
ing into itself "the mystification and 
myths it has not engendered," or to its 
having to waste its substance in resist­
ing these encroachments, or to its being 
driven into a false aestheticism in which 
the artist becomes the eternal outsider, 
who washes his hands of his society­
is something that all thoughtful students 
of the arts are aware of. Morawski's 
own thinking has confirmed his belief 
that this alienation can probably be 
fully and permanently avoided only in 
the kind of socialist society envisioned 
by Marx and later marxists. For Moraw­
ski, this must be a libertarian socialism; 
he believes that the arts can only fulfill 
their functions if they are allowed free­
dom to develop in accordance with 
their own natures and the creative in­
sights of artists. To those who desire a 
nonsocialist society, or a less completely 

xvi 
socialist one, or who seek another road 
to socialism, his argument poses a seri­
ous -and very valuable- challenge. 
After all, one stands little chance of 
getting at the truth if one cannot, like 
Brecht's Galileo, accord full weight to 
all the evidence that can be adduced for 
those views one is at first most disin­
clined to accept. 
Monroe C. Beardsley 
Temple University 
Foreword 

Preface 
Most of the essays in this volume were 
written in the period from 1 961 to 1 967 
and have been extensively revised for 
the present edition. My chief aim during 
those years was to come to grips with 
the axiology of aesthetics from the 
marxist standpoint. At the time, this 
was a virtually untouched region of 
inquiry. Only a few authors in this 
philosophical tradition had tentatively 
scouted its possibilities, the most ambi­
tious and comprehensive of such en­
deavors being the late works of Georg 
Lukacs. 
Part l of this volume turns directly 
to the problems of marxist axiologicol­
aesthetic foundations. (I should stress 
that I, along with other similarly minded 
scholars, work with a particular kind of 
marxism, and it has become evident 
that no monopolistic, dogma-oriented 
interpretation can do justice to the 
wealth of the marxist heritage.) The 
next two ports relate intimately to the 
analysis in the opening part: Part 2 
discusses some principal artistic cate­
gories with the emphasis provided by 
the special interests as well as compe­
tences of the marxist viewpoint; and 
Part 3 focuses on the functional aspects 
of valuation and evaluation. 
Although it is not an all-embracing 
study in the traditional sense of an 
aesthetic "system," the volume does 
proceed systematically (in the historicist 
sense) with the material that is taken 
up. The issues of the genesis, structure, 
and function of artistic (aesthetic) val­
ues, and of the criteria corresponding to 
their determination, form the framework 
of my general methodological strategy 
and guide my procedure in the particu­
lar instances. 
I hove not included here my essay 
surveying the subject matter and the 
method of aesthetics, but I do wish to 
mention briefly its suggested perspec­
tive. I there assert my deliberated meta­
aesthetic position that aesthetics as a 
philosophical discipline is primarily con­
cerned with peculiar valuationol quali­
ties; it is for this reason that I am op­
posed to any scientifically oriented 
prescriptions for research (i.e., opposed 
to the aim or hope of establishing mea­
surable, quantitative aesthetic data). I 
do not, however, reject the application 
of empirical methods (biophysiological, 
psychological, sociological, semiotical, 
etc.) to inquiry in this field. The crux of 
the problem concerns how to unite 
these particular procedures with the 
general and pervasive philosophical 
methodology which, whether con­
sciously or perhaps unwittingly, any 
given investigator-scholar will put into 
operation. My contention is this: the 
marxist historicist methodology offers 
the advantage of these particular pro­
cedures while, at the same time, it pro­
vides the deepest insights into the dia­
lectical interrelations between the 

xviii 
relatively autonomous aesthetic field 
and its sociocultural setting. 
A final word needs to be added 
about the present situation of art and 
aesthetics. I am fully aware that the 
traditional categories which I have tried 
to use in an up-to-date way are in need 
of reconsideration. This is a point I 
make several times in the course of 
discussing the constituent artistic values 
and the chief criteria of evaluation. 
What, for instance, is now to be made 
of the broad and persevering antiart 
movement? I think that what is needed 
is a thorough study of the civilizational 
tremors of the postindustrial era and a 
rethinking (in a marxist perspective, I 
would urge) of the interaction of cre­
ativity and traditionally defined art 
(which may now be an historically re­
ceding phenomenon). My current work 
is addressed, in part, to this matter. 
The present book would not have 
appeared without the friendship and 
help of Lee Baxandall, who, while giv­
ing the proper shape and nuance to the 
essays in this version, offered me his 
time, energy, and suggestions . M. C. 
Beardsley read the whole of the text 
and gave his criticisms; for this I am 
most obliged, and I shall be pleased if 
the book can now stand the test of his 
critical mind. 
Preface 

Part I 
Basic Axiological 
Problems 


Chapter 1 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Valuation 
I must begin with a warning: I can within the space of a single chapter neither ex­
plain completely what I mean by "aesthetic value," nor expound satisfactorily the 
philosophical underpinnings of my views in this area. 1 Rather, the scope of this 
chapter will be deliberately modest. I shall first define a typology of the various 
competing axiological standpoints-that is, the value-oriented principles- that 
have been applied where aesthetic problems have been disputed, showing how 
these standpoints mutually "criticize" one another. I shall then briefly sketch my 
own conclusions in this area where marxist research has so for been scarce, arriv­
ing at what I hope to show to be some generally sharable principles of aesthetic 
value. 
The Place of Axiology in Aesthetic Theory 
The problem I have taken as my starting point, aesthetic value, is not in the least 
arbitrarily chosen. On the contrary, it has been the chief if not the exclusive attrac­
tion for aestheticians since early in this century. I may direct the reader to three 
widely used anthologies of aesthetic thought published in the United States. 2 Two 
of them -one edited by Eliseo Vivas and Murray Krieger, and the other by Morris 
Weitz-start off with a consideration of what is "essential" to art, as art. The third, 
edited by Melvin Rader, moves to the axiological problem less directly; its opening 
two sections deal with the creative process and the structure of artistic composition. 
Nonetheless, implicit in Rader's organizational strategy is the exploration of various 
efforts to define art, and this is confirmed by the opening paragraphs of his Intro­
duction which deal with this topic explicitly. In Europe, Raymond Bayer's important 
treatise confirms my choice in this matter. 3 Then too, Lalo and Souriau in France, 
Pareyson and Morpurgo-Tagliabue in Italy, all agree that preliminary to the settling 
of any other issues, aesthetics must deal with this question of value. Guido Mor­
purgo-Tagliabue, the author of the sole recent work synthesizing the tendencies 
in contemporary aesthetics, emphasizes this point: "Through the entire tradition 
of aesthetic doctrines, the axiological datum is present. Far from being novel, it 
emerges with the earliest thought on the nature of beauty and art. We need only 
to separate it from certain encrustations, from the ontological-cosmological atti­
tudes that distort it."4 
The problem for initial discussion, then, may be phrased thus: What is artistic 
value? I use the word "artistic" rather than "aesthetic" to emphasize my view that 
An early version of this chapter appeared in Polish in Kulturo i Spoleczenstwo, 1962, no. 4. A revised 
version appeared in Russian in Philosophical Studies (Tortu State University), vol. X (1966). An English 

2 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Valuation 
value composed by artists, artistic value, is the specific type and primary model 
for all aesthetic value. In other words, the value treated here is objective-subjective. 
"Artistic" refers to the objective, "aesthetic" to the subjective aspect of the same 
methodological area. In this view, not only can art draw on and embody nature, 
it is in fact the chief model for responsiveness by which on the whole we project 
aesthetic evaluations onto nature. We also derive from art the model in light of 
which, and given certain contexts, we designate some events or objects in everyday 
life as "aesthetic" objects. 
Yet some of my readers may still object if we do not start by considering the 
facts of either aesthetic creativity or aesthetic reception (experience) as the means 
for gaining an orientation to artistic value. Indeed, it is impossible to neglect entirely 
the claims that aesthetic experience may"make as the yardstick for developing our 
axiological criteria, since one of the foremost orientations for establishing aesthetic 
value has pegged its very legitimacy to the assertion that the experience of art 
provides a mandate as to which objects shall be valued as works of art. (I shall 
explore this standpoint in due course.) I must, however, reject the claim that aesthet­
ic creativity sets the standards for basing our axiological criteria. (That creativity 
is susceptible to an axiological approach is, of course, not to be disputed, but that 
is not the question here.) I will give three reasons for deciding not to base my orien­
tation to aesthetic value on the creative act: 
l. The traits of creative activity, when philosophically analyzed, seem uniform, 
even where the processes and results of artistic creation are the most diverse. This 
conclusion is supported by many studies. 5 Admittedly, some scholars have found 
reasons to describe a differentiation in the creative processes of art; Monroe 
Beardsley, for example, has boldly and adeptly described a variety of "normal" 
patterns of artistic creation. 6 Nonetheless, we are left to ponder why the range 
of objectified results of creativity proliferates beyond any "normative" range of 
patterns for artistic creativity. 
2. The creative act is one of exteriorization, which produces an objectified result; 
and while we may grant that the inner experience of the artist will be of crucial 
interest to the psychologist, what interests the aesthetic axiologist is the product 
of that creative process. (Benedetto Croce's aesthetics has lost much of its interest 
for later aestheticians precisely because he placed his whole emphasis on .the in­
terior processes.) It might be retorted that if we do exclude the interior aspect of 
artistic activity, we shall have no way to discuss the "gestures" whose tradition 
goes back to dada and Marcel Duchamp, since the acts of "antiart" relate far more 

3 
The Place of Axiology 
in Aesthetic Theory 
to psychological attitudes than they do to objectified art objects. Here I disagree. 
The principal aim of dodo is to suffuse ordinary life with art and to imbue ordinary 
objects with its attractions, rather than allowing our notions of art to be confined 
to the scarce "works of art" owned by a privileged few. Given this interpretation, 
John Cage or Marcel Duchamp should not be seen as the creators of new and as­
tonishing para-artistic "gestures" -which, in turn, an art-starved and art-worship­
ping public may isolate and venerate- but as provocateurs whose aim hos been 
to generate a heightened aesthetic alertness among the public and to direct this 
attitude onto socially perceptible data. 
3. If we ask how indeed we are to describe the creative process, we find that 
generally this task leads us at last to study its exteriorization, that is, the art object 
itself (this is also true of the process-oriented, one-time events called happenings). 
Patently, this must be the procedure for objects made long ago and for whose 
"mysterious" creative process we have no other data but the result itself. 
In this respect, the analysis of aesthetic experience has to proceed differently, 
since the "reception" of an art object consists of innumerable actual experiences of 
it. The reception has a compᣎite character a nd a n  immediacy which can be inter­
rogated as a recurrently present and an integral phenomenon -assuming, of 
course, a substantial correspondence of the present experience to the inherent 
qualities of the object evoking it. (It may be added that probing the aesthetic expe­
rience should, in fact, yield some evidence concerning the nature of the artist's 
activity. That is, the ideal recipient of an art object would recapitulate much of the 
experience of the artist in fashioning the work. A mediocre response to the some 
object would distort in port the artist's aim and attitude.) 
Given these reflections, if they are deemed acceptable by the reader, it will then 
be necessary to approach the problem of aesthetic axiology in terms of objectified 
aesthetic value. The problem, "What is artistic value?" may accordingly be refor­
mulated into "What is the work of art?" We shall then face two orders of difficulty, 
as many specialists remind us. There are, first, terminological difficulties in ap­
proaching the art object which is our subject matter, and, second, difficulties that 
emerge in precisely defining the particular object that occupies our attention (which 
is also to soy that our method of inquiry has to be clarified). 
Gunnar Myrdal has stressed in his highly useful study Value in Socio/ Theory 
(1 958) that on explicit orientation on the question of value is necessary in scientific 
work as well as in the humanities; and the experience I and colleagues of long 
standing hove had of the genesis and function of scientific inquiry convinces me 

4 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Valuation 
of the truth of Myrdal's view. Ernest Nagel has also argued in The Strudure of 
Science ( 1 961 ) that the humanities are in no way exceptional in this respect; that 
the natural scientists must face up to this same problem, this "logical crux," to use 
Myrdal's phrase. But Myrdal, while greatly illuminating the axiological character 
of scientific statements, goes too far; and I must agree with Nagel that if the more 
extreme versions of these arguments were correct then scientific statements would 
be meaningless beyond the social contexts of their origin (which of course do have 
their specific axiological coloration). 
However, given these variations among the contexts and the objects with which 
we must deal in valuations, it is right to speak of "facts in a strict sense" (the data 
about which we may make statements), and to demarcate from these another cate­
gory that we may calf "value facts" (the data about which we can only offer our 
judgments). Value facts will always be dependent on the individual's approach 
and on his temporal and cultural context; his judgments will be derived from ob­
jective qualities, but from objective qualities that are always a little equivocal. This 
is not to suggest that only the long-sanctioned idea of adequatio rei et intel/ectus 
properly assures the objectivity of one's approach to thᣏ external world. On the 
contrary, it is a mistake to believe that value facts are immune to any means of 
verification and, accordingly, should be barred from our inquiries. Value facts are 
more than idiosyncratic and are not merely personal, although their intersubjectiv­
ity possesses a character that is different from the truth or the falsity of atomic 
propositions. 
In tracing this demarcation, some authors follow the Anglo-American tradition 
of Josiah Royce, Charles Stevenson, and Ludwig Wittgenstein and assume a total 
dichotomy between evaluation and description, with the corollary that art (unlike 
science) can only provide a sensual-emotional selective approach to the world. 
Other aestheticians-for example, Beardsley, Rader, or Thomas Munro-would 
hesitate to divorce value from description; but they provide no clear constructive 
solution. 7 A demarcation of this approximate kind has to be made, but just how 
it is to be made is a key problem for methodology. An axiological aesthetics that 
has not settled this issue is hampered from the start. 
Aesthetics must first clarify its approach to aesthetic value as such, and then, 
subsequently, it can concern itself with the hierarchies among these values and 
objects. This separation of tasks was well understood by both David Hume and Hip­
polyte Taine. If the reader can agree to this separation too, then we shall be nearer 
to resolving whether, in discerning the irreducible characteristics of art (i.e .. of 

5 
The Place of Axiology 
in Aesthetic Theory 
artistic value), we at the same time do describe art (i.e., make statements about 
artistic values and not mere sensual-emotional utterances about art). To my mind, 
we do indeed describe art, notwithstanding that the intent of the description is 
different from that undertaken in a scientific approach to physical or biological 
data. In the latter case, certain neutral objects and events are described, while in 
the former case the data are values, that is, a distinct sort of phenomena that is 
constituted by our very intervention. In other words, an act of pure cognition does 
not involve such subjective elements as emotion and will so far as the definition 
of the character of a given fact is concerned, while every act which we may term 
"appreciative" does depend on the melding of certain given objective data with 
precisely this kind of subjective participation for the constitution of the particular 
value fact. (The importance of the analysis of value facts for philosophy proper 
will be apparent. As an integral aspect of the history of the species, and of course 
of humanity's changing cultures, value facts provide a basis for the recurrence of 
some types of judgments among aestheticians over the course of many centuries. 
This is to say that the value judgment is both assertive and normative, and that 
the axiological norms of aesthetics may thus be founded adequately on a set of 
qualities that have been accepted repeatedly in various cultural frameworks and 
in different times.) 
This much considered, how shall we proceed to artistic valuation with the aim 
of achieving an "objective" description of value? We should first be scrupulous 
about our intentions: we will demarcate facts sensu stricto from those value facts 
which are bound up with our emotions and will. Then, we will take pains to seek 
verifications of our valuational criteria through placing them in the broadest axio­
logical context. In other words, we seek to achieve intersubjective descriptions of 
the valuational norms. This is a complicated and tricky endeavor, but the "logical 
crux" is that neither these values nor the criteria of our valuation can be clarified 
until we have fully understood how we derive the criteria. The norms which justify 
our choice of value facts must be supported on a foundation which is not totally 
personal, and which is not absolutely (neutrally) objective, but which is, rather, 
sociohistorica/. 
Our century has seen the abandonment of the nineteenth century's efforts to 
describe the fundamental status of art by referring it to physiological (biological) 
equivalents. We may be sure this is due to the rise of cultural-anthropological un­
derstanding. Experiments are carried out today in the name of the old assumption; 
but their advocates, who are cybernetically oriented, prefer to regard their hypoth-

6 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Valuation 
eses as being of a propaedeutic character. Meanwhile, the specialized sciences 
carry forward the work of defining artistic values in the ways the species has es­
tablished them in its cultural development. The gestaltists, for example, are con­
cerned with certain properties that they consider peculiar both to the psychophysio­
logical structure of the species and to the character of the material world. Some 
of their studies argue persuasively that the human artistic (aesthetic) sense has 
evolved through a process which embraces an enormous range of internal and 
external factors that comprise the sociocultural environment wherein homo Faber 
has made his way from the beginning. 8 
There are five points with regard to the subject matter and method of aesthetic 
valuation which I think should be emphasized here: 
1 .  We must take care to separate the task of defining artistic value from the task 
of scaling or grading the various achievements of artistic value in specific works 
of art (i.e., judging what makes the superior and inferior work of art). Some aesthe­
ticians frame this issue as the distinction between constituent qualities (art's good­
ness) and the relative heightening of these qualities "as constituted" (i.e., art's 
greatness). This distinction is advanced by CJ. Lewis, Karl Aschenbrenner, and, 
especially, Stephen Pepper. 9 I do not accept the whole of their axiological systems, 
but I agree with these writers on the necessity of disentangling this pair of prob­
lems. I believe that, terminologically, this can be done the more easily if we apply 
the term "valuating" to the problem of artistic values-that is, to the discovery of 
the common distinguishing traits for a class of objects called works of art. The term 
"evaluating" should then be restricted to the determination of a scale, rank, or 
hierarchy for such objects, employing explicit criteria to determine whether work 
X surpasses work Y. A question arises here which will be properly discussed in 
the chapter on "The Criteria of Aesthetic Evaluation": When we have valuated, 
have we not already determined the criteria of evaluation? Moreover, with a finding 
that artistic value pertains to an object, do we not already claim a degree of that 
value?1 0 
2. In common with every other branch of knowledge, the task of aesthetics is 
descriptive and explanatory. However, the data described and clarified by aesthet­
ics (as an axiological discipline) are object-entrenched valuational qualities and 
the values pertinent to them. By aesthetic "values" I refer to such artistic categories 
as (a) form; (b) expression; (c) mimesis; (d) the construction-function-form syndrome 
in the applied arts, and so on. By "valuational qualities" I refer to (corresponding 

7 
The Place of Axiology 
in Aesthetic Theory 
to the values named above): (a) balance based on relations of dissonance or con­
sonance; the variation of one theme or many themes of parallel significance; (b) 
delicacy or crudity; harshness or suavity; (c) illusion or authenticity as the aim in 
handling the material; novelty or familiarity; broad and deep scope or superficiality; 
(d) a constructive format and its particular functional dynamism; sleekness or home­
liness; ease or discomfort. The valuational qualities, which are concretely manifest, 
have been analyzed often and in great specificity as providing the basis and the 
proof of designated value categories; it is thus inappropriate to think of factual 
description as a mode of knowledge inaccessible to aesthetics. The valuation of 
art, far from asserting a subjectivist or otherwise arbitrary normativism, is con­
cerned with the terra firma of facts. 
3. "Good" and "bad" are terms which may be used by aesthetics to denote the 
conclusions of valuation - but not in a noncomparative, isolated fashion. The aim 
of valuation should be to present art's fundamental val ues as distilled from the 
broadest range of human experience. 
4. In attributing "artistic value" to an object, we make a distinction between 
works of art and nonart. Assuming that the term "artistically valuable" means 
that we have found an (aesthetic) "good," we may then use the term "bad" to de­
scribe objects whose value as art objects we find questionable due to specific defi­
ciencies of their structure. However, it often occurs that such defects are not so 
glaring as to disqualify such objects as art objects; they are simply "bad" or defi­
cient works of art.11 I prefer not to use the term "disvalue" to name the negative 
pole of the axiological spectrum. Why not? Because an "ugly" art object would 
still be an "artistically valuable" object (not a "disvaluable" one) regardless of our 
complaints about specific aspects. As for "ugliness," it is a term with a minus at­
tached to it, but it should nonetheless be kept quite separate from the idea of dis­
value. In practice, "ugliness" can be used to mean either: (a) the opposite of "beau­
tiful," where "beautiful" is taken to mean not the essential quality of art per se 
but rather a particular formal ideal (see the discussion on this point in Chapter 2); 
or (b) the condition of being devoid of value, as in cases where, due to artistic 
incompetence, the object fail.s to rouse aesthetic emotions and the anticipated good­
ness is absent. In the former case, ugliness is achieved with artistic values even if 
its interest is of a different order than the differing (and taste-ordering) category 
of "the beautiful"; in the latter case, the essential aesthetic values are lacking (but 
there's still no question of "disvalue"). 

8 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Valuation 
5. Anyone asking "What is the work of art?" or, more generally, "What is art?" 
no matter how circumspectly must eventually face the challenges and rebukes of 
Ludwig Wittgenstein. In his Philosophical Investigations (1930), para. 77, we read: 
"Anything -and nothing - is right. And this is the position you are in if you look 
for definitions corresponding to our concepts in esthetics and ethics." Briefly, we 
can agree that the definition of art must not be artificially, too rigorously, or con­
finingly imposed. But I shall not wholly abide by Wittgenstein, mainly because the 
premises of my findings are chiefly historic rather than linguistic; and I shall agree 
with Melvin Rader that Wittgenstein's watchword "Beware of definition" would 
be better phrased: "Seek definition, but distrust it." 12 
In the remainder of this chapter, I want to work through a classification of the 
various theories of artistic value, relying on definitions of art supplied by the au­
thors themselves. (As Stolnitz has said: 1 3 "Each of the major theories of art . . .  
told us what to 'look for' in the work of art. Each thereby established criteria for 
judging art.") I will then use this classification as the basis for my own theoretical 
construct, on the assumption that a lucid choice of philosophical (or scientific) meth­
od is indispensable to value interpretation. 
In scrutinizing the chief solutions to the problem of value, the order will be: 
1 .  psychological subjectivism; 
2. ontological objedivism; 
3. the sociological point of view, with a consideration of its tendencies to both the 
subjectivist and objectivist poles; 
4. a close look at re/ationism that will permit us to work out a constructive position 
grounded in marxism's historical method. 
The classificatory assumptions adopted here are common in present-day scholar­
ship. The novelty will consist in the articulation of some distinctive sociological 
solutions and in the discovery of some significant shadings of implication in ex­
treme subjectivism (psychologism) and extreme objectivism (ontologism). Similar 
mappings have been published by Beardsley, Stolnitz, Heyl, and others; but still 
there are many nuances to my interpretation that I believe might be of interest. 
Readers who are, however, not interested in the itinerary may find its results, and 
my own positive proposal, described at the beginning of the section on "The Con­
ceptual Framework of Aesthetic Criteria." 
That is the plan, in a nutshell, for the next segment Of this chapter. All my de­
scriptions of the axiological positions will stress the criteria by which artistic (aes­
thetic) valuations are made; this is because I have found that, in order to develop 

9 
The Place of Axiology 
in Aesthetic Theory 
a fundamental orientation to the constituent elements of art, it is necessary to mar­
shal and analyze the chief "justifying" {philosophical} "reasons" for one's con­
clusions. 
Subjectivist Criteria 
Although still favored by many representatives of the semantic school, the sub­
jectivist point of view hos not stood up to the test of critico I ano lysis. Let us consider 
the arguments presented by psychologists on its behalf, starting with Polish rep­
resentatives. The extreme version of subjectivism has been argued by J. Segal and 
W. Witwicki, and a moderate version by Stanislaw Ossowski {before 1934) and 
Mieczyslaw Wallis. 14 The extreme wing held that aesthetics cannot become a sci­
ence or even a philosophy, since- in their view-aesthetic values a re strictly a 
matter of individual experience and are impossible to verify. Witwicki speaks of 
the chance character of art: Each individual develops aesthetic preferences accord­
ing to the needs of the moment; and the "beauty" of on object depends on whether 
and how it pleases someone at some moment. We can speak of this as a drastically 
relativizing psycho log ism. 
By what criteria do its representatives term some experiences "aesthetic" and 
some objects "works of art"? There is no objective standard -only the capricious 
and never centered emotion or will is in play. At best, this orientation can be re­
garded as justification for the platitude de gustibus non disputandum, "there is 
no accounting for tastes." But since on this interpretation even the "reasoned" 
taste cannot claim to be more than the private {perhaps mad) idiosyncrasy of an 
individual, the relativist psychologist must appear ridiculous when he declares 
for our instruction, having put on his "theoretical" cap, what is possible and per­
missible in aesthetics. 
Suppose he tells us that aesthetic pleasure {putting it more generally, aesthetic 
satisfaction) is, at least potentially, a generally human attribute. Here he would 
begin to found a theory for aesthetic experience. Yet he would at the same time be 
departing from his drastic relativism. He would be introducing a hedonistic con­
ception {still, however, acknowledging the individual differences}, or perhaps an 
emotionalistic conception, or a combination of the two, as a theoretical basis for 
describing the fundamentals of aesthetic experience. 
Hedonism and emotionalism have so often been criticized that I shall not dwell 
on them, but only recall to the reader that these conceptions seek ultimate justifi­
cation in some peculiarity of the aesthetic pleasure {or emotion). But merely to 

10 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Valuation 
assert such peculiarity and stop will not do; something specific needs to be said 
about its character (to speak of mingling impressions, feelings, and images is not 
enough to constitute a distinctive character). Certainly, a specific condition evoked 
in the appreciator seems to be the logical next step in the argumentation. 
Here Segal's work is pertinent. In 1908-10, another Polish aesthetician, Michal 
Sobeski, pressed Segal with the contention that an objective basis for experience 
may be ascertained from the study of forms. Segal's response was that each art 
object has its own particular beauty which is confirmed by a given individual in 
the course of a given experience-and there is no way to verify the accuracy of 
(provide criteria for) his perception, since the particular beauty is subjective, that is, 
it is only determinable by perception. Segal adduced two supporting arguments: 
(l) there can be no "objective" criteria of beauty, since if there were we would be 
able to locate these necessary and sufficient traits in every object called beautiful; 
and (2) such necessary and sufficient traits do obtain in aesthetic experience (he 
had in mind the Kantian theory of contemplation). Segal didn't substantiate this 
latter argument and it contradicts his notion of a beauty which ca n be only privately 
grasped. The former argument is also unsubstantiated, but in its course Segal 
makes several concessions to the objectivist position. He concedes that, in the act 
of aesthetic contemplation, certain objects may more nearly correspond to one's 
mood than do others; and he adds (without acknowledging its implications) that 
ugliness occurs as an absence of certain technical criteria, compositional elements, 
and so forth. 
This Kantian notion of contemplation to which Segal resorts is a good example 
of what must happen to one's arguments if one pursues the devious roods with 
their arbitrary dead ends which branch out from the notion of a generally human 
aesthetic experience as the value-orienting standpoint. Kant had furnished his 
position with at least two major conceptions: disinterestedness and semblance 
(virtuality). He also stated the premise (basic to his orientation) that the human 
mind is endowed with certain predispositions of attitude that lead to certain kinds 
of experience. His controlling category was disinterestedness (it would in later 
aesthetic history be supplanted by the equivalent ideas of detachment and isola­
tion). To this tradition one has to address the question: Detachment (or isolation) 
from what? The followers of Kant have proposed three possible answers: 
1. Disinterestedness with respect to all other life experiences. This answer is 
highly vulnerable, for we cannot hel p  mingling our immediate apprehensions of 
an object with the patterns and other memories drawn from our previous contact 

11 
Subjectivist Criteria 
with art objects-and with the impressions of our nonart experiences too. The 
viewer of representational art especially is sure to associate his sensations with 
a fund of recollections that have their source beyond art. John Dewey and his fol­
lowers have so thoroughly demolished the idea that art can be detached from our 
previous experience that I need say no more on the question. 
2. Disinterestedness with respect to the past and future. The "immediacy of the 
moment" is emphasized by this answer; and here the unexamined implications of 
the whole notion stand out more clearly. We see that, both here and in the pre­
ceding answer, the sense of disinterestedness would emerge no less strongly during 
the intense experience of a highway crash, a thrilling scientific argument, or the 
act of sex. Evidently, aesthetic contemplation must somehow be distinguished from 
the other varieties of engrossed detachment. How shall this be done? Must we 
not relate the characteristics of this aesthetic mood to the characteristics of the 
kind of object that implicitly invites (evokes) the peculiarities of aesthetic contem­
plation? Post-Kantians have sometimes sought to combine versions (1) and (2) of 
disinterestedness; they see the experience of art as "immediacy" combined with 
a detachment which means not so much non referral as a practicality. However, 
cannot an identical description be given of engrossing religious or philosophical 
contemplation? We can use the idea of an "apractical attitude" but we must supple­
ment this conception. 
3. Disinterestedness with respect to any possible materiality ("realness") and, 
in consequence, an emphasis on the virtuality (semblance) of the aesthetic object. 
This third answer is helpful in discussing representational works of art. It is clearly 
inappropriate, however, with regard to such avant-garde objects as earthworks 
and happenings, as well as art that is wedded to technology. 
Reviewing the Kantian idea of contemplation, we can conclude that it does not 
satisfactorily come to grips with aesthetic experience. It is in some respects too 
limited, ignoring aspects that we know to be integral to aesthetic appreciation, 
and it is in others too loose, applying to nonaesthetic states of mind which should 
not fit in. One advantage we get from looking into the Kantian theory of contem­
plation, we may add, is a greater confidence in the likelihood of the aesthetic (artis­
tic) object providing the proper starting point for our analysis of uniquely artistic 
values. 
My reader may now remonstrate with me: "You have made your job of persua­
sion too easy. The contemplation theory is, after all, not the sole orientation that 
supports the primacy claims of (a universally valid) aesthetic experience in the 

12 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Valuation 
defining of aesthetic value. Even though it is true that some do not find the con­
tᣍmplation theory superseded, still you might have taken on a more formidable 
opponent." Well, I must make this answer: very many specialists still have not found 
the contemplation theory to provide less than they desire by way of an analysis of 
aesthetic experience. Edward Bullough in his well-known essay revives it in his 
notion of "psychical distance "; ar:id numerous authors lean implicitly on this orien­
tation. I cannot consider here all of the alternative theories of aesthetic experience, 
but perhaps some key examples may be cited, drawn from the three anthologies 
mentioned earlier. 
The notions of aesthetic experience cluster into three theoretical categories: 
empathy, wish fulfillment, and illusionism. Each category suffers, as did contempla­
tion theory, from being at once too limited and too loose. A therapy-oriented wish 
fulfillment theory was presented early in the century by Freud and Jung. However, 
both declared that this psychic process did not exclusively base itself on aesthetic 
experiences (although art was considered important to wish fulfillment). Moreover, 
Freud and Jung pointed to a specific content within artistic objects which, they 
said, was necessary to actualize the repressed libidinal energy of the person expe­
riencing the art. Empathy theory is useful for reminding us of the expressive "terti­
ary q ualities " : those qualities that we project into objective data and then read 
back out of them. But it is enough for us to state this point concerning the theory's 
degree of relevancy to see how basically the premises of original Einfuhlungstheorie 
have been narrowed. (For further discussion see chapter 5, "Expression.") Illusion 
theory, strictly interpreted , relates to the figurines in wax museums and stresses 
their likeness to the real prototypes. More laxly, the theory speaks to a stylized 
representational ism. It has the fault that it depends on a single kind of art; and 
mimesis is ever increasingly under attack as the kind of art that should be cen-
trally considered in the analysis of artistic value. We see then that in each of these 
alternatives to contemplation theory it is a certain kind of object which proves 
evocative of a certain category of response or experience; hence, it is impossible 
to accept claims by these orientations to have superseded contemplation theory 
or to have obviated the necessity of analyzing the aesthetic object. 
I was led into examining the contemplation theory of aesthetic experience with 
its Post-Kantian improvements and also its competition due to Jakub Segal's reli­
ance on its mode of defending the valuational primacy of the "appreciative" mo­
ment. Returning now to Polish subjectivism, we can. continue to trace how the 
claims of the art object 's traits have gained a progressive recognition. 

13 
Subjectivist Criteria 
When he began his career, Mieczyslaw Wallis adopted an orientation not dis­
similar to that of Segal or Witwicki-seeing the aesth'etic object as eclipsed by the 
aesthetic experience, which was purportedly the sole legitimate subject matter 
for aesthetic valuational analysis. As his investigations matured, though, Wallis 
was to destroy the basis for his early views. In his essay on "Aesthetic Proposi­
tions" (1932), Wallis urged a distinction between personal and impersonal pro­
positions. The latter would be grounded, he thought, on the specifics of perception: 
these criteria would include an absence of defects in the sensory organs, a strong 
impressionableness, a definite background, the ability to grasp the artist's inten­
tions, and a normal psychic condition. What Wallis did not elucidate were the cir­
cumstances under which an aesthetic background is built up or the capacity to 
comprehend art is acquired. Wallis gave no fuller definition of the aspects of aes­
thetic experience. If we note his insistence that the experiencing person must effec­
tively be a perfect observer (responsive to all the demands made by the art object) 
for the "impersonal propositions of aesthetic experience" to be validated, and also 
his remark that to account for differences in aesthetic values we must take account 
of historicocultural changes, then we will be left with the firm conviction that Wal­
lis's contextual psychological orientation is inadequate. 
A later Wallis study with a psychological thrust, "Aesthetic Values, Gentle and 
Harsh" ( 1949), holds that aesthetic value is built up by experience; but in this dis­
cussion it appears that changes of artistic values, and even the fading of whole 
artistic eras, occur as the result of the coterminous needs of artists and their audi­
ences. This is an added historical-evolutionary thesis, even though it is connected 
to the thesis arguing for a common psychic structure; for it emerges that Wallis 
despairs of explaining on strictly psychological grounds how it may happen that 
"gentle" or harmonious aesthetic values are preferred in one period while in an­
other period "harsh" or disharmonious values are more liked. He notes the effect 
of describable traits in objects in evoking these disparate values (for example, the 
small or tiny is called beautiful and the gigantic is called sublime), and also, of 
course, the effect of formally evocative traits. He also notes the impact on art appre­
ciation of the objective (economic, religious, and national) facts in the evolution of 
society and culture. 
Stanislaw Ossowski, in the first edition of his Foundations of Aesthetics (1933), 
adopted the contemplation theory in its improved "immediacy" version. The next 
year he started to turn away from this psychological bias; and he carried the in­
vestigatory trail much further.1 5  From the start he had rather doubted that aes-

1 4  
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Valuation 
thetic experience could be understood as on isolate, unassociated with other types 
of experience; thus, a definition which reduced it to a unique mode of perception 
had to be mistaken. Next, Ossowski doubted that a human subject could discover 
a necessary and sufficient cb;ective attribute, or set of attributes, and his essay on 
"Subjectivism in Aesthetics" regarded aesthetic values as both ontologically and 
epistemologically unverifiable. From here, however, he went on to argue, in the 
second edition of The Foundations of Aesthetics, for an intersubjective verification 
(founded on the social and historical recurrence of certain values), a view he ad­
vanced as early as 1 936 in the article "The Sociology of Art," published in the jour­
nal Preglad Soc;ologiczny. Ossowski now saw the orientation of Witwicki as "aes­
thetic nihilism." 
A similar curve of retreat from extreme psychologism is evident elsewhere. We 
can, for instance, see the centrality of a subjectivist interpretation of artistic value 
in C. J. Ducasse, Art, The Critics, and You {1 944), or E. Bullough, Aesthetics (1 957, 
essays dating from 1 907-20). While Ducasse had argued in The Philosophy of 
Art (1 929) for a universal principle of "objectified feelings" (i.e., communicative 
and expressive emotions commensurate with the given object), fifteen years later 
he had become a psychological relativist. Art, The Critics, and You is astonishing 
in its "dogmatic liberalism"-that is to say, every singular, momentary experience 
is acknowledged and extended respect as fixing an artistic value, and there is con­
sequently no standard for adequate aesthetic experience. Bullough's "psychic dis­
tance" theory is more reasonable, since it advances facts that others may not ig­
nore; we shall have to agree with him that too much distraction by life's concerns 
(or, on the other hand, an excessive interiorization of the art object) is disturbing 
to the aesthetic reception. That is, if our personal interests cause the social refer­
ences of the art object to become the compelling attraction, then a certain necessary 
"distance" is lost; while if social references wholly elude us, then the "distance" 
is excessive and an inherent resonance of the work of art is lost. The question I 
raise with Bullough, however, concerns which objects will command our aesthetic 
attention and generate the requisite distance. He didn't ignore this problem, but 
he leaned to a moderate subjectivism. He did, however, evince the some hesitation 
about proposing a subjectivism as we previously found in statements by Wallis 
and Ossowski, and these reservations help to show why subjectivism is untenable. 
I might also mention here the psychologized version of Croce which we find in 
the writings of R. G. Collingwood. Here Croce's philosophical premises -which 

1 5  
Subjectivist Criteria 
see the lyrical intuition couched in an all-pervasive Spirit-are cast out as irrele­
vant to Collingwood's expressionist idea, which sees aesthetic experience as an 
intuitive empirical response to a sincere lyricism. Again, though, discussable bench­
marks are lacking. 
Members of the semantic-linguistic school have disparaged the position of Croce 
as "essentialist"; curiously, however, their own orientation is inclined towards 
subjectivism. I do not want to bring up the difficulties with the irreducible semantic­
linguistic approach here, but will reserve the inquiry for an occasion when the 
philosophical foundation can be more fruitfully probed. I can, nonetheless, note 
some of the developmental positions. An early figure is I. A. Richards, who differ­
entiated emotive from referential language quite sharply, and who discussed poetry 
as emotive (again, however, with no benchmarks). In the spirit of Richards, the 
so-called Wienerkreis, "Vienna circle," held that value judgments could be neither 
"true" nor "false," but functioned rather to present a norm persuasively or im­
peratively and were a kind of metaphysical utterance. 
Alfred Ayer leaned towards subjectivism too. Even though he said he couldn't 
share an axiological position which assumed that value judgment merely "asserts" 
the presence of a given emotion, this did not keep him from assuming (with the 
Vienna circle) that value judgment is "nonprepositionol" in character. Ayer sought 
to keep a distinction between the two positions but this proved untenable. Anyway, 
hadn't Ayer noted that value judgments may function as the empirical statements 
of individual or collective tastes? Adding (this is crucial) that these tastes are an­
chored by psychology and sociology, we may conclude that, according to Ayer's 
position (and Collingwood's too), the status of so-called lyrical/emotional value 
con be constituted only by referring it to emotional "givens" of the human subjects. 
Aesthetics was not much influenced by the early Austrian and British linguistic­
semontic philosophers (although I. A. Richards had on effect). The chief impact 
came after the Second World War when the primary text was Wittgenstein's Philo­
sophical Investigations, paragraphs 65 to 77. Wittgenstein proposed the elimination 
of rigorous definitions in favor of "open" concepts with indefinite borders; these 
should only be used to indicate, for example, that such-and-such objects at a given 
moment, and owing to some degree of family resemblance among themselves, 
con be termed works of art. This family resemblance is not derived from common 
traits of phenomena but from relationships among phenomena of a given class. 
Wittgenstein stressed that the outer limits of a class ore blurred (verschwommen) 

1 6  
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Valuation 
because these relationships among phenomena are different in each specific case 
investigated. 
Charles L. Stevenson, for instance, following Wittgenstein, holds that a class of 
poetical works can only be indicated with an ostensive definition (by means of 
"look and see"). 
1 6  This orientation has been used -unjustifiably-to deduce that 
artistic values are a matter of subjective choice. On this interpretation, to cite a 
poetical work as a value (that is, as an aesthetic phenomenon) is to propose a 
personal and quite arbitrary recognition of certain traits of an object as being artis­
tically valuable. The reader may find this leaning of postwar linguistic philosophy 
best illustrated in the collection of articles entitled Aesthetics and Language (Ox­
ford, 1 954). Arnold Isenberg and Margaret Macdonald there argue that aesthetic 
values emerge from the eye of the beholder. 17 There is, they hold, no way to ascer­
tain the objective correctness of an aesthetic judgment; all judgments of this order 
are only efforts at persuasion, easily refuted. However, American aestheticians of 
several orientations have vigorously opposed this deduction from linguistic philos­
ophy, 1 8  and I think it must be clearly said that, taking the evidence as a whole, it 
is unfair to consider linguistic philosophy a subjectivist orientation to aesthetic 
axiology. Nor should we neglect Wittgenstein's own warnings against psycholo­
gism. We may most plausibly view his proposal that we "look and see" what he 
describes as "the dawning of an aspect," in terms of an equivocal blending of 
relationism with sociologism. (I shall come back later to analyzing why I view 
Wittgenstein's orientation to aesthetic values in this light.) 1 9  
There is yet another reason why linguistic philosophy should not be thought 
fundamentally subjectivist: even its followers most prone to give it this reading 
have been compelled to temper their views (e.g., Morris Weitz). They guard them­
selves, and we cannot call them outright subjectivists. Nonetheless, Wittgenstein's 
premise of "open concepts" does encourage some followers in the direction of 
psychologism, and particularly in matters of aesthetic valuation and evaluation. 
Looking over these instances, the subjectivist approach seems innocent of the 
means to defend itself. Every theory which seeks to derive its axiology from aesthe­
tic experience alone emerges as deficient. Each such orientation is at once too loose 
and too limited, as already noted. Also, there are many of these theories, and they 
are mutually incompatible, each ruling out the next one. The empathy school leaves 
no place for the illusionist approach; illusionists have no use for EinfOhlungstheorie; 
both of these approaches cancel out the "pure" contemplation school, and so on. 

1 7  
Subjectivist Criteria 
We may add that, while not doing full justice to the diverse aspects of art expe­
rience, these approaches likewise smuggle in this or that concession to objective 
properties which give rise to this or that aesthetic attitude. Another example may 
well be cited in this context: Aram Torossian's Guide to Aesthetics (Polo Alto, 
1 937), which is in effect a summo of twentieth-century subiectivist arguments that 
it is experience alone which decides what objects will be considered aesthetic; by 
the time Torossian is done, however, it emerges that some patterns possess ob­
jectively verifiable expressive qualities which decide artistic value. 
I would not want to conclude this section without explicitly stating my high re­
gard for the many ongoing studies of aesthetic experience considered as an integral 
component of the creation of aesthetic value. My criticisms are directed only at 
the futility of the one-sided orientation which believes in aesthetic experience as 
the alpha and omega of the aesthetic realm. To be precise, I cannot share the ultro­
skepticol subjectivism of, soy, J. 0. Urm son 's "What Makes a Situation Aesthe­
tic?"20 which sees the aesthetic experience as mere hypostosis -to me, more seems 
involved than iust attention to a certain object in particular circumstances, for there 
is evidence, which I find convincing, that so-called aesthetic objects hove shared 
traits and that the evoked responses are correspondingly similar. I should soy here, 
in connection with Urmson's interest in attention, that we must not confuse the 
aesthetic attitude with aesthetic experience. The problem of attitude involves such 
concepts as disinterestedness, detachment, distance, and attention - and in aes­
thetic research the aesthetic attitude is relevant to the experience but is not identical 
with it. I shall offer a tentative synthetic analysis of aesthetic attitude and experi­
ence before the end of the chapter. Here, it will be sufficient to state that I get more 
help from Bullough's idea that some objects generate more aesthetic distance than 
do others, than I get from Ducasse or Segal or the empathy school. 
Most useful, I discover, is the gestoltist theory of a process of formation of aes­
thetic patterns, which find their reference in defi nite psychophysiologicol disposi­
tions of the human species. Gestoltism seeks to discover the lows which govern 
the entire, integral aesthetic transaction (its subjective and obiective components); 
in approaching this goal, it pushes across the threshold of a strictly psychological 
theory. The same con be said, in another manner, of the treatment of aesthetic 
experience by Romon lngorden. His Studies in Aesthetics (in Polish; Warsaw, 1 957-
58) regard the development and the rhythm of aesthetic experience- its core pro­
cessual qualities and qualitative patterns (Gestaltqualitdten)-as intimately related 

1 8  
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Valuation 
to the aesthetic object; lngorden speaks of experience as constituted in relation to 
a primary intentional object (a literary text, a pointed surface). Again, aesthetic 
experience has its objective, functional value correlative. 
Objectivist Criteria 
Objectivism, the antipode of subjectivism, may also be called the ontological posi­
tion. Among its defenders ore phenomenologists (including Mikel Dufrenne), so­
colled formalists, neoexistentiolists (including Louis Lavelle; d. his Traite des valeurs 
[Paris, 1 951 ]), and some oestheticions of empirical tendencies (such as Theodore 
Greene). In Poland, the chief representatives ore lngorden and Jerzy Galecki. On 
what do the objectivists found aesthetic value? The answers are several: 
l .  on qualities (objects) that ore held to pertain to some kind of special reality 
whose a priori lows may be discovered through intuition; 
2. on certain empirical properties which ore not, however, considered subject 
to social and historical variation; or 
3. on on attitude of Solien ("ought"), which is not based on a justifying ontologi­
cal statement. (It might be called a "deontologicol" attitude.) Included here are 
George E. Moore's "ontinoturolistic fallacy,'' and Robert Hartman's The Structure 
of Value (1 967), which sees the valuable as emergent from on object that perfectly 
fulfills the definition conferred on it. Objectivism hos many nuances within these 
chief categories; I cannot mention all of them, but we may examine some character­
istic tendencies. 21 
Although lngarden stated that he hod not gotten beyond the initial steps of his 
theory of value, we find on ambitious argumentation, suggesting why values "are 
not relative" but hove objective character, in several of his important texts. 22 He 
said in 1 948: "Values hove their existence as particular qualifications of certain 
objects which ore distinguished by their harmoniousness and excellent structural­
izotion . . . .  They ore not accessible to everyone but only to persons able to attain 
to quite special and rarely met criteria as respects their particular perceptive dispo­
sitions."23 lngorden went on to cope with specific difficulties, such as the sup­
posedly unambiguous relationships among the aesthetically neutral qualities (e.g., 
the-material), the aesthetically significant qualities (e.g., symmetry, elegance, orig­
inality), and the criteria of positive or negative value (e.g., beauty or ugliness). His 
fundamental position remained unaltered throughout his studies: he argued, on the 
one hand, that artistic values (i.e., creative techniques) produce the objective char­
acter of the aesthetic values whose polyphonic patterns will determine the proper 

1 9  
Objectivist Criteria 
response and appreciation, and, on the other hand, that on intuition not given to 
everyone reveals in the aesthetic object this Wertqualitat which abides there in­
dependently of incidental experience and of the evaluative judgment. 24 
A similarly complex and developed argumentation hos been attempted by some 
formalists (e.g., Clive Bell and Stanislaw lgnacy Witkiewicz). Most formalists, how­
ever, hove been content with asserting little more than that a truly artistic practice 
hos infallibly aesthetic results-that is, that the creation of formal values is on 
elemental fact, on indelible and permanent act of communication. Accordingly, a 
satisfactory personal criterion of artistic values is assumed to emerge as one gains 
experience in applying the senses and reason; a purely subjective intuition is ruled 
out since it is assumed that the senses and reason will be educated intersubjectively. 
Wilhelm Worringer, in his Abstroktion und Einfoh/ung ( 1 908), assumed an ob­
jectivity derived from an innate human drive to create patterns that are geometrical 
(nonorganic}. Others have hesitated to propose such a "genetic" thesis. Instead, 
they link artistic values to the so-called permanent properties which they either 
dub "empirically obvious" or interpret as ontologically absolute. 
Adherents of the nongenetic, absolutist orientation include Theodore Greene 
and C. E. M. Joad. Greene believes that the objectivity of aesthetic value corre­
sponds to the experience of the amateur no less than to that of the connoisseur 
("empirically obvious"); he goes on to argue that even a partially "subjectivist" 
solution cannot establish more than the inclinations of X or Y. 25 Joad provides 
a more consistent and full version of objectivist theory. In Matter, Life and Value 
(London, 1 929), he shows that the subjectivist theory foils due to a faulty theory of 
cognition; he likewise brings out the circularity of the argument that the art experts 
are conceded to know artistic values merely because laymen who ore playgoers, 
art buyers, etc., do not have the confidence to assert their conflicting tastes (this 
assumes that only those who are not experts are expert enough to judge). Jood 
holds that aesthetic value cannot be an entirely relative matter, even granting that 
only individuals can find and valuate it- it hos independent existence and (here 
Jood takes a flying leap into the comp of Plato) is ontologically absolute. 26 This, 
however, leaves us at another arbitrary blank wall with an expert telling us what 
his thinking hos revealed must be behind it, and in this respect Joad's position 
does resemble that of the phenomenologists who cite an emotional intuition as 
the source of their certainty that art's value consists of special (objective) qualities 
that are specifically patterned (this is the view of Max Scheler and Jerzy Galecki). 
In contrast, the deontological view offers a no less arbitrary objectivist orienta-

20 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Valuation 
tion; its position likewise depends on the projected attribution of objective value 
rather than on on analysis of how such value comes to be located in historically 
situated objects; it is, as Hortman concedes, a modern metaphysical version of 
objectivism. Let us, then, draw up a balance sheet of the objectivist orientation 
to aesthetic value, leaving aside the paradoxes of deontologism. 
Those who affirm the objectivist axiological solution argue that: 
1. Certain objective properties do exist and they provide the sole basis for artistic 
values. 
2. These properties evoke the distinctively aesthetic experience. 
3. They alone provide the basis of the aesthetic judgment. 
Beyond these common tenets, the objectivists diverge. The most extreme dogmatic 
position soys that the fixed set of.objective properties (which for them ore generally 
nonempirical} defy verification, but that contemplation reveals their ontological 
absoluteness and transcendent constancy. (Here is Plato's notion of a Hyperborean 
beauty, and Schelling's "absolute beauty" which is revealed when subject and 
object achieve identity.} Phenomenologists point to a number of aesthetic values 
and insist that these ore given to our encounter by direct experience, which will 
produce on intuitive recognition; they thus appeal to evidence that is more-thon­
empiricol. The advocates of the nonempiricol. absolutist standpoint usually ore 
of monist persuasion, a framework that con be shored, and also readily argued 
within, by those authors oriented towards empiricism. The empiricists, however, 
regard aesthetic value as on immutable, sensuous given (or, at least, one graspable 
by reason}, a given pertaining to a specific property or set of properties. If we as­
sume such properties, there con be no problem of the undefinability of value; the 
mode of being is empirical (examples of definitions that correspond to this position 
on aesthetic value ore the idea of "unity in diversity," or of perfection, as articulated 
by Leibniz, Wolff, or Baumgarten}. 27 
A statement of empirical objectivism that is cleansed of any remnant of on im­
puted hypostotized ordering principle in the cosmos is George Birkhoff's Aesthetic 
Measure (Cambridge, Moss., 1 933), which argues for a constant objective beauty 
such as corresponds to a mathematical formula of ancient Pythagorean inspiration. 
Birkhoff's formula is M = o/c (where M is the degree of aesthetic value, o the 
degree of order, and c the degree of complexity in a given system of properties}. 
The most aesthetically valuable works ore those possessing maximum order with 
minimum complexity (which is not to insist on minimal elements}. Birkhoff found 
the formula no less workable for the lyric aspect of poetry than for polygonal forms, 

21 
Objectivist Criteria 
but the limits of the approach are suggested when the author himself sees it as 
being most rewarding for dealing with metrical or spatial composition (poetry or 
abstract form). A more recent mathematical formulation of objective empiricism is 
Gunsenhauser's principle M = R!H (where R is the subjective redundancy and 
H the statistical information on Claude E. Shannon's model). 28 A similar scientizing 
of the idea of "aesthetic measure" through a mathematical presentation can be 
found in the work of Max Bense. 
There are, of course, less dogmatic empirical objectivists who do not think that 
objective properties are all marshaled in a single, immutable canon of value. They 
see instead a number of modes of aesthetic measure; they speak of symmetry, 
proportion, harmony, and other indicia. These varying modes correspond to various 
aspects of the given relationships of part to part and of the parts to the whole. 
Invariably, however, the character of the relationships proves integral and objec­
tive. This sort of moderate objectivism was stated by Dorer and Diderot, for instance 
(the latter in "Le Beau" [ 1 751 ) especially, and also in his later writings). Moderate 
objectivism is also the term we may use for any notion of form conforming to a 
permanent, uniform pattern; this would be the case even where a single, rigorous 
prescription of form (e.g., Hogarth's S-line) is abandoned for multiple patternings 
of an objective form, and even where the idea of variants on a single, permanent 
form gives way to a relative latitude of permitted forms, since the latitude always 
turns out to be restricted in principle. Thus, Edmund Burke defined two distinct 
categories, the beautiful and the sublime; and when writers of the later eighteenth 
century ventured to add a third distinct category, the picturesque, the range of 
form was still not greatly diversified. 
This leads us to inquire about the /east dogmatic objectivists. They are the empiri­
cists who see a variety of differing systems of properties. Their pluralism emerged 
on behalf of an objectivist orientation only in the twentieth century. Although lati­
tudinarian, these authorities allow that the diversity of systems may overlap in the 
scope of a single object. Some of these pluralists (Ruby Meager and Helen Knight 
in England, and Monroe Beardsley in the United States) also take pains to note 
that art objects never are totally unique; that, while the relationships within art 
objects are impermanent, the relationships of the parts to the whole may often be 
repeated and it is on this basis that the aesthetic judgment is gradually shaped. 29 
One pluralist who does not make this stipulation is William E. Kennick. He finds 
the artistic values in every art object to be freshly anchored; those of any given 
art object are quite distinct from those of any other. 30 

22 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Valuation 
Reviewing the objectivist criteria of aesthetic valuation, we note first that those 
tendencies that are the feast empirical are likewise the feast rewarding. Certainly, 
it is arbitrary and not helpful (unless no other solution is to be found) to claim that 
objective properties simply exist and that they defy verification. No less arbitrary 
is the choice to ignore the evidence of contrasting broad styles and epochs in the 
history of artistic values. The most extreme objectivism may turn its back on spe­
cific definition, preferring to regard Beauty as a mystery that surpasseth reasoning 
and to which none but a select few are prepared to obtain access. We may in turn 
point out, however, that this dogmatic, metaphysical apriorism, this refusal to de­
fine data and approach, brings extreme objectivism very dose to extreme subjec­
tivism. 
What if the objectivist grounds an absolute principle in empirical forms? Today 
we look back at Burke or Hogarth as rather quaint aestheticians; the idea of en­
compassing the facts evident in art objects by means of a single (or two-or three­
fold) narrow principle of the aesthetic seems anachronistic. Gustav Fechner gave 
us another instance of this futility when he worked out an "experimental" aesthetics 
to "confirm" a postulated principle of ideal harmony in any given system of proper­
ties. Such experiments are no more authentically open to the influence of raw data 
than was the mathematical scheme of Birkhoff. Recently, the experimental curiosity 
of objectivists has been far more open and cautious. Those I have termed the mod­
erate objectivists now Jean towards a multidimensional system of relationships, 
all having parity for aesthetics. Yet to them we must answer: Since you admit that 
a single canon of aesthetic value may be manifested in different systems, is it not 
logical to forego the presumption of a single canon and to continue with probing 
the particular systems? 
This brings us to those objectivists who carry this suggestion to the particularist 
zenith of finding no repetitions of values among works of art, and uniqueness in 
every instance. We cannot deny that the multiplicity of raw data have here been 
faced up to, but we may well ask whether there are not some recurrences of valu­
ationaf qualities that have been neglected. The excessively particularizing tendency, 
as seen in Kennick, seems about to step back across the antipodal threshold to 
a position scarcely distinguishable from subjectivism; for, if it is true that objective 
qualities cannot be reduced to a single canon, the next step would seem to be not 
simply to declare everything in sight a unique value, but instead to study under 
what circumstances and for whom certain particular qualities become the different 

23 
Objectivist Criteria 
constituents of aesthetic value. It is a logical and beckoning matter for inquiry, 
whose answer will shift us away from objectivism. 
Relationist Criteria 
We now turn to a preliminary inquiry into relationism as it differs from and criticizes 
objectivism. Heyl, Beardsley, and Stolnitz have rightly declared that aesthetic value 
is always value for someone. 31 It is, simply put, relational; or, in another terminol­
ogy, it is instrumental. 
So far so good, for the premises of relationism. However, with this orientation 
also, we cannot countenance the "pure" approach, no matter how clearly it sur­
passes the subjectivist and the objectivist standpoints. Stolnitz, an aesthetician 
who is close to relation ism himself, brought this out in a critique of C. I. Lewis, 
the prominent American specialist in aesthetic valuation. 32 Lewis sought to cope 
with the status of the objectified aesthetic value by using the notion of the "poten­
tial" of art objects. In employing this conceptual tool, however, he largely lost sight 
of the actual values, their circumstances, and those who related to them. The shift­
ing context of art objects and their reception does require an explanation such as 
pure relationism for the most part overlooks, for an abstract "potential" is not 
the way to get out of the problem of the here-and-now as it differs from the many, 
diverse thens-and"'fheres. In point of fact, Lewis uses an underdeveloped version 
of relationism that scarcely goes beyond emphasizing the interdependency of ob­
ject and subject. This bare relationship should lead us to investigate criteria for the 
conditions within which the instrumentality is aesthetically achieved; that is, to 
the question: Under what circumstances does a correspondence (i.e., an adequate 
relation between subject and object) appear? 
Up through the eighteenth century, the circumstances which resulted in this 
correspondence were generally attributed to the dispositions of the deity, an ex­
planation I have elsewhere termed "aesthetic divinism." Yet even then, some inter­
est was paid to the psychophysiological question (by Edmund Burke, for instance). 
As theoretical hypotheses became increasingly well-founded on the historical hu­
man reality and were explored with empirical tests and analyses, however, the 
metaphysical approach to relationism lost plausibility. 
A sociological paradigm of relationism emerged in the nineteenth century; it 
viewed the adequate relation of object and subject as oriented by shared predilec­
tions and norms which were, in turn, delimited by space and time. We may note 

24 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Valuation 
that the instrumentalists agree with this conception. They attempt to solve the ques­
tion of adequacy, however, without coming down clearly on the side either of so­
ciologism or of relationism. Their premise is that the X (aesthetic object) and Y 
(aesthetic experience) establish one another. To explain this mechanism of mutual 
feedback they posit some kind of faculte maitresse (to use Taine's durable phrase). 
But it is left uncertain whether the aesthetic object functions as the means engen­
dering certain collective psychosocial ends, or the object functions merely instru­
mentally to arouse these (collectively unanimous) responses. To put it otherwise, 
instrumentalists wish to stand with the relationist orientation without winnowing 
carefully the arguments they accept from a pure sociologism. The result is that 
their instrumentalist position remains highly ambivalent. 
If it is true, however, that the dispositions of the deity, and also the delimited 
sociocultural norms, fail to clarify satisfactorily the problem of the instrumental 
correspondence of the object to the subject, where else may we turn with our em­
pirical investigation? We are left to investigate the natural conditions of human 
artistic creation and reception. The relationist orientation must look, accordingly, 
to the competing approaches of psychology within a biophysiological context. 
This is what Burke naively proposed; today, sophisticated science aims to lend 
specific data and interpretation to a purely logical relationist notion of the "poten­
tial" agreement between what is valuable and the va luing agent. 
Gestaltism is, I believe, the empirical approach that best explores the specific 
basis of relational adequacy. There is by no means a homogeneity within the ges­
taltist school. Some representatives, such as Ehrenfels and Wertheimer, emphasize 
the psychophysiological characteristics of the human subject that lead to the per­
ception of phenomena in the form of patterns. Others, and here I mean Kohler, 
Koffka, and Rudolf Arnheim, who is the leading aesthetician of gestaltism, stress 
that these pattern-creating propensities of the human subject mesh with some 
pattern-forming characteristics of the perceived phenomena. Thus, Koffka sees 
aesthetic value emerging from a dynamic interaction of stimulus and reaction.33 
What is suggested here is that, beyond the objective existence of color, form, 
and their combinations, there also exist the "physiognomical properties" of these 
elements with their patterns -such properties as joy or sadness, for example. These 
are termed "tertiary qualities" since they are generated by the conjuncture of sub­
jective receptivity and objective data. 
Beyond that finding, Arnheim has written in "Gestalt Psychology and Artistic 
Form" that the principle of pattern (also termed the principle of similarity) is only 

25 
Relotionist Criteria 
a corollary to a more general law which holds that phenomena tend to gravitate 
towards the simplest available coherent patterns. 34 The human organism is con­
nected with the form of the world outside it through isomorphic relationships, and 
both are controlled by the principle of economy, which states that, in man and the 
world alike, there is a complex fecundity coupled with a propensity towards preser­
vation, towards pattern, and towards compactness. Arnheim's argument does not 
halt here; using this framework, he goes on to try to differentiate the characteristics 
of the strictly artistic patterns. He may speak of the balance and simplicity of the 
art object; or, drawing on Koffka's concept of the "physiognomy" of an object, he 
may cite the expressiveness of the various elements of a pattern or of the pattern 
as a whole. Expression is inherently symbolic, explains Arnheim, since all appre­
hended patterns must pass through the capabilities of the mental (brain) structure; 
that is, they must conform to the mode of "visual thinking" by which human per­
ception has to process the outer reality and render its patterns meaningful. By "sym­
bolism," Arnheim thus indicates not only the so-called content of art, but, especially, 
the structure of art objects as o whole. 
We may summarize then: the fundamental gestaltist principle (gravitation to a 
balance which requires simplicity and economy) seems to have clear application to 
such phenomena in the nonhuman world as crystals, and in the arts to the rondo 
(music), the haiku or limerick (poetry), declamatory couplets (the stage), etc. We 
might logically expect such art objects to be considered the highest forms; yet nei­
ther Kaffka nor Arnheim wishes to go this far, and they both seek instead for sup­
plementary principles. Thus, gestaltism's aesthetic conception is incomplete at best 
-and some would consider the basic notion of gestalt too vaguely formulated and 
the isomorphic hypothesis unsupportable. 
There is no doubt that the gestaltist theses require more refinement. But, despite 
these charges, the orientation as a whole is in no way disproven. As early as 1 920, 
Wolfgang Kohler could compare the principle of structure with the second law of 
thermodynamics. L. L. Whyte has more recently remarked on the astonishing sim­
ilarity between physical and biochemical processes and those that transpire within 
the cortex:35 in both types of processes a pattern-formation occurs, the chief point 
of distinction being that the processes within the brain include o conscious selection 
and synthesis of the most diverse material. According to Whyte, the aesthetic mean­
ingfulness of the cerebral functions is derived from a controlled, formative plasticity, 
from the structuring of interconnected patterns of volatile elements. 
We may or may not accept the hypothesis that innate dispositi?ns towards pat-

26 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Valuation 
terning exist. However, if the correspondence of the objective and subjective as­
pects of the aesthetic field is to be accepted, we must bear in mind the finding of 
recent perception theory that an experience of a given object is never merely pris­
tine and entirely imminent. The patterning transaction, that is to say, amounts to 
more than a passive perception of an object (stimulus) by a mind (response) here 
and now. Gestaltists do say that the response is active and selective, but they do 
not effectively acknowledge the influence of our store of past experiences. We do 
have expectations whefl faced with contexts of perception similar or dissimilar to 
those of the past. Gestaltism, stating that we visually categorize the world after 
having patterned it, neglects this intermingling of cerebral with sensory factors. 
Indeed, we perceive by a filtering process which largely selects what we know from 
our past. I do not speak here, of course, of the more nebulous and indeterminate 
subject matter of perception, but rather of perceived sociocultural patternings. 
If this interpretation is tenable, then we should say that human history (the 
psychosociological context) has some bearing on each perceived pattern. Even the 
way in which we conduct aesthetic valuation cannot be regarded as an exception; 
all the more so, if we find a theoretical basis for the patterning of value in the char­
acter of human perception (which, of course, relationists do). This is one more rea­
son why the aspect of relationism in the gestaltist conception does not relieve us 
of the need to face gestaltism's difficulties and pitfalls. 
In what way does a specifically aesthetic pattern differ from other kinds of pat­
tern? Does every process of pattern-formation have its aesthetic aspect, or is pat­
tern-formation perhaps centrally aesthetic in character? With regard to the first 
question, we must decide whether gestaltism's definition of aesthetic pattern de­
pends on its related notion of the "tertiary qualities" (i.e., on a "physiognomic" or 
"symbolic" expressiveness). Whatever our answer may be, we shall still have to 
deal with the issues implicit in the second question. 
There are other difficulties. Arnheim has largely failed to concern himself with 
this problem: In what sociohistorical context are the given patterns perceived as 
aesthetic values, and how is this dimension of pattern-response to be interpreted? 
For instance, his essay "The Perceptual Analysis of a Symbol of Interaction" (Con­
finia Psychiatrica, 1 960) discusses the ancient Chinese symbols for yin (earth) and 
yang (heaven) within a framework of Taoist philosophy which, though superbly 
employed from a psychological standpoint, is yet one-sided since he gives insuffi­
cient attention to the cultural context. This is perhaps the greatest difficulty for the 
gestaltist contribution to relationism. Its exploration of human nature is simply 

27 
Relationist Criteria 
inadequate as the sole frame of reference; relationism must also be concerned with 
the sociohistorical situation. At times, Arnheim has done so quite impressively. 
His study of Picasso's Guernica36 is an instance, for here he sees the formative 
artistic process and the final "fixing" of the expressive-symbolic whole in close 
connection with "the condition of the world" and the political commitment of the 
painter. B. C. Heyl has also developed in this direction, although unevenly;37 his 
tendency is to instrumentalism and he aims his shafts chiefly at the sociological ap­
proach -very intelligently- in the task of disproving the latter's sufficiency when 
used by itself. 
Of the positions examined to this point, the relational standpoint will seem the 
most solidly justified. Especially is this so if we move, as we now shall, to establish 
relationism in a thoroughly historicist framework. 
To this end, we shall want to proceed now with an eye on the writings of Her­
bert Read, Maud Bodkin, and Northrop Frye, with special attention given to Wal­
ter Abell's The Collective Dream in Art (Cambridge, Mass., 1 957). I must warn, 
though, that the "historicism" of these writers is frequently of Jungian inspiration. 
Consider Read's essay "The Dynamics of Art" (in Eranos-Jahrbuch, 1 952). In dis­
cussing engrams and the gestaltist notion of pattern, Read seeks for a dynamic 
framework solely in "archetypes" and the functions of myth. The conclusion to be 
drawn is that those aesthetic patternings and themes which enjoy more than a 
brief reception are pervasive of all of human culture and all of human history- and 
that this ubiquity has a primarily psychological explanation. Consider how Read 
applies this seemingly historical approach. In the name of a "universal human 
nature," he offers a purely naturalistic interpretation of relationism; in this sense, 
Read treats the "archetypal myths" that he finds through history as fundamentally 
empirical and supra historical. As a consequence, social history becomes little more 
than a vast screen onto which are projected the so-called inherent myths of man­
kind. I must object. This is a pulling inside out of the correct procedure for studying 
social history. The objective data of history are precisely the fundamental data we 
should use to develop a relational description of the various myths, archetypes, 
topoi, etc. 
Sociological Criteria 
In developing a sociological understanding of aesthetic value, we must start by 
distinguishing between two sociological approaches. One is totally relativist and 

28 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Valuation 
is tantamount to psychologism; the other is the ally of relation ism and furnishes 
the premise of a truly historicist perspective. 
Underlying the concept of sociological relativism - instrumentalism, Beardsley 
calls it, following Dewey-are these notions: that different social groups will de­
cide on aesthetic matters differently, and that, even if a great many aaree on certain 
values, other social groups or strata will surely disagree; that, in different periods, 
different traits of objects will be deemed aesthetically valuable; and that collective 
tastes rather than individual tastes are worthy of exploration. In the phrase of 
Juan Flo: "An aesthetic object is an act of cultural faith."38 
This position is most precisely articulated by George Boas. In A Primer for Critics 
( 1 937) and Wingless Pegasus ( 1 950), he argues that the emergence, spread, and 
survival of any given set of values is due to the mystifications of "experts," snob­
bery, and the inertia of habit. Propaganda and prestige may entrench them; yet 
aesthetic values are so insubstantial that they may be regarded as merely instru­
mental, having only limited significance for some persons at some time.39 Only 
an unjustifiable "metaphysics" could attach a "terminal" (objective) meaning to 
aesthetic values. (Boas adduces as evidence the ups and downs of the Mona Lisa, 
Hamlet, and Bach's music in aesthetic evaluations through the years.) 
We must be grateful to sociological relativism for marshaling the facts of a pre­
cipitously variable social reception even in the case of objects now widely admired 
as the highest art. We must not underestimate this shiftinᣌ response factor; yet we 
must also be critical of Boas' account of social reception. After all, not all responses 
to art objects are of an equally aesthetic character. Often such objects are appre­
ciated or condemned on grounds which are negligent or at times completely omis­
sive of aesthetic qualities. From the sociological standpoint, such responses (which 
may be moral, political, or religious) have their place. Especially is this so when 
the social context itself considers political or religious values to outrank other kinds 
of value. Nonetheless, is anything conclusive said regarding aesthetic valuation 
when relativism brings up the empirical data to prove that transient or irrelevant 
responses may affect the approval or disapproval of certain aesthetic objects? 
Surely not; and if through the signs of fickle regard for an object we are given even 
mild cause to suspect the presence of aesthetic values, the sociological plea of de 
gustibus non disputandum is overruled in favor of our obligation to search for 
these values. 
If we were not prepared to do this, how would we ever be able to understand 

29 
Sociological Criteria 
the universally accepted distinction between high art and moss-media or "popular" 
art? It doesn't matter in discussing this distinction whether one despises the very 
idea of mass media (mistakenly, I will odd) and condescends to folk or popular a rt  
objects. (Another clear distinction has to be made here: a t  present the "arts" of 
the moss media ore frequently little more than solidly crafted entertainment, often 
merely pastimes, while artistic values ore integrally present, if perhaps in o second­
ary capacity, in most of folk or popular art. The mass media as presently consti­
tuted should not be confused with popular art creation.) The point I wish to make 
is that if the sociological argument is unreservedly pursued we should hove to place 
commercially sponsored entertainment, the so-called folk and popular arts, and 
the "fine arts" on on equal plane, for all that concerns a sociological standpoint 
is that there be interest and appreciation. 
Yet, perhaps this is not fair. Boas and the other relativists may not want us to 
toke their criteria literally and apply them unstintingly and exclusively. Their aim 
may be more limited and strategic-it happens often enough - namely, to seize 
and compel the reader's attention to this or that neglected matter. If this is the case, 
we should note that the relativists do persuade us that the works of do Vinci or 
Shakespeare or Bach were long neglected by virtually everyone (just as were their 
own contributions to aesthetic theory and criticism, we may odd), and that, even 
in o single time and place, different social groupings do often respond in irrecon­
cilable ways. Relativism fails, however, to make any larger case. To do so, it must 
become what we described above as the particularist version of objectivism, ac­
cording to which the various and possibly irreconcilable aspects of an art object 
may each be justified objectively. In moving to this position, however, sociologism 
is brought quickly to dealing with the issue of why and for whom an object exists 
as art. (This problem was explained in my concluding remarks on the excessive 
particularization of objective values: if to declare everything in sight on objective 
value is to approach subjectivism, then one begins to try to pattern the acts of ap­
preciation and their recurrences, and to see what coherences and sociohistorical 
norms begin to emerge). 
Perhaps the more stubborn relativists won't make this step at all; perhaps they 
will insist that contemporary opinion alone decides what is or is not art. This stand 
forces us back into the instrumentalist limbo; or it could, if we let it. We need not 
let it, though, since there are arguments which lift our viewpoint above the in­
strumentalist pitfalls. These are some of the matters of evidence which should in-

30 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Valuation 
terest anyone seeking to orient a valuational effort: 
l .  Why have certain aesthetically valued aspects or properties of objects been 
similarly valued in quite different circumstances and times? 
2. Is it permissible to fragmentize an art object, even atomize it, seeing it as a 
jumble or grab bag of discrete and often conflicting aesthetic presences which 
may be valued by anyone differently from anyone else and also differently on vari­
ous occasions? 
To the charge of atomizing the whole of an object, relativism may respond that 
this is indeed a reasonable position on the way objects are received either by in­
dividuals or by groups . In the first case (the summing of individual assertions of 
values), relativism falls into the trap of subjectivism; in the second case (the re­
sponse of temporally and spatially confined groups) relativism simply repeats its 
central, perennially weak thesis. Thus, when an unqualified sociologism is pressed 
to defend its standpoint, it has to fall back-on particularist objectivism , on psy­
chologism , or on relationism. 
Perhaps it will seem unlikely, but Ludwig Wittgenstein appears to stand sub­
stantially, if not wholly, within the relativist perimeters as here considered. To some 
extent I have had to translate or convert Wittgenstein's vocabulary and philosophi­
cal premises, so as to make them concordant with my procedures here. However, 
this is not a step without precedent, for it has already been said among his inter­
preters that Wittgenstein's late philosophy is anthropocentric. His lectures and 
conversations on aesthetics of 1 938 make evident that his thought had two ten­
dencies:40 a relationist one, and an instrumentalist (or, more broadly stated, ethno­
centric) one. His peculiar kind of relativism is predominant when he is talking of the 
expressive traits of art, which we have to endeavor to absorb and figure out in the 
same way we puzzle over a person 's facial expression . He declares that the whole 
of a poem or a painting is taken in through a "looking-at" and that we should per­
sist in the experiencing act to learn what response the art object properly evokes 
(i .e . ,  Do we respond approvingly or reject it?) . 
The basis of this directly apprehending response is scarcely describable accord­
ing to Wittgenstein, and to attempt an account of his suggested approach would 
lie beyond the scope of this chapter. I might mention that his approach was of a 
piece with his antiscience campaign, waged starting with the Troctotus. It will suf­
fice also to note that he differentiated the whole-and-immediate apprehension of 
aesthetic objects from the "pointing--to " employed in the analysis of nonaesthetic 

31 
Sociological Criteria 
phenomena, and he also mentioned the stock of associations which any recipient 
brings to the act of directly apprehending o n  art object. 
Now to his instrumentalist tendency. Wittgenstein declared against any idea of 
the beautiful because it would imply a permanent and objective set of criteria of 
the beautiful. It is true Wittgenstein stopped short of recognizing the (as he termed 
it) "Aho!" response- a  momentary and private satisfaction- as being appropriate 
to art. He argued that proper (right) aesthetic judgments will offer justifications by 
pointing to certain reasons, that is, to qualities that exist in the work of art. 
But what did he mean when he declared that such reasons were "occasional"? 
Wittgenstein argued that a primitive tribesman or a visitor from Mars would hove 
other uses for objects than we do; that is, an environment or the total culture of a 
given period is decisive for our axiological-aesthetic motivations. Other fragmen­
tary thoughts-concerning the rules which prevail for both musical composition 
and the tailor's trade -also seem to allude to environmental norms. One fragment 
mentions works of art which, like the Beethoven symphonies or the Gothic cathe­
drals, transcend the appreciation evoked according to the "rules" of an era and 
derive their stylistic character instead from the personality of the creator. Here, 
we may understand great individual style in two senses, either as a value which 
actually surpasses the paradigms (games) of an epoch, or as a value which, al­
though contained within the contemporary framework, still is personally realized 
(Wittgenstein can also speak of individual style as representing that of the epoch, 
and vice versa). 
How do Wittgenstein's two tendencies, as documented in the notes of his lectures 
and conversations, find confirmation elsewhere? Moore's exegesis of Wittgenstein's 
1 930-33 lectures brings out their relationist character. Wittgenstein held that the 
beautiful con not be equated with the merely agreeable, nor is it an objective con­
stant. He said that, in order to assess a composition by Brahms for its values, we 
must first hear it in many performances; then, by comparisons, we can determine 
the work's properties. If relotionism is pervasive in the 1 930-33 period, we may 
guess that it was, in fact, the very groundwork for the ethnocentric, relativist ten­
dency which emerged in his work afterwords, for both lead in the some direction ­
our concrete situation and the given linguistic practice determine our aesthetic 
responses or apprehensions on the basis of a holistic, intuitive grasp of the artistic 
(para-artistic) object. 
I n  his preparations for the Philosophical Investigations, contained in the 8/ue 

32 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Valuation 
and Brown Books (1 933-35), appeared the motif of the expressiveness of art. Once 
again, the particularity of the given object is stressed; and the insight one has into 
it is said to be verifiable by comparison and sampling. In these texts, Wittgenstein 
makes no mention of the rules, paradigms, and formulas of an era. He does, how­
ever, discuss language games and the results they imply for communication (Brown 
Book), with an emphasis on the dependency of language on its cultural setting. 
It is possible that Moore, in discussing the earlier phase of Wittgenstein's thought, 
was silent about sociological, ethnocentric matters because his own interest (as 
was true of J. Casey later) chiefly ran to the question of "motives" versus "causes." 
Certainly, Wittgenstein was fascinated with this latter question, both in general 
and as it applied to art. He did say that Freud's causal, depth-psychology approach 
to dreams, jokes, and anxieties, while it aspired to science, in reality propagated 
a new myth. This conclusion interests us because Wittgenstein regarded psycho­
analysis as he did aesthetics, as a body of knowledge relevant to motivations and 
reasons (thus justifying our "looking-at" procedures) but in no way touching on 
"causes." This is such a complex matter that I cannot even briefiy get into it here. 
Yet I shall not refrain from observing that Wittgenstein's position is not as clear-cut 
as may appear. He insisted on disengaging motives (which we may know) from 
causes (which we may only conjecture); and although, he said, we do try to under­
stand both, we can justify only the motives, no matter how intently we pursue the 
causes. We cannot reject his distinction of motives and causes; but then he took 
the added step of demanding that we drop causal inquiries from our aesthetic 
research. He made this demand frequently and explicitly- nonetheless, he was 
brought to concede the possibility of linking the (available) reasons and the causal 
nexus (in the Brown Book, Harper Torchbook edition [ New York, 1960], p. 58), 
particularly if the chain of reasons was pursued backwards tenaciously ad infinitum 
(Blue Book). Wittgenstein held out no hope of his personal success in this quest. 
Yet in the Philosophical Investigations (para. 1 98) he did, in point of fact, link train­
ing and custom with a causal nexus. Thus, it appears-also in regard to his ideas 
about conforming to rules and accepting the influence of the cultural environment 
(motives which he traces to training and teaching)-that the aesthetic valuational 
operation does not exclude causal explanation. However, I cannot systematically 
pursue this problem here, and must leave Wittgenstein's thought on the matter 
without a satisfactory resolution. 
In sum, Wittgenstein does employ the arguments of relationism (in an obscure 
version) and of instrumentalism (which his students would refer to as his linguistic 

33 
Sociological Criteria 
naturalism). Neither tendency will necessarily reach back so as to refer to a con­
jectured underlying "cause" for aesthetic valuation. The general relationist's logic 
is clear: he will describe obiective qualities as the "reasons" which justify his state­
ment; the cautious instrumentalist, however, will describe only such "motives" as 
are shared by the social group to which he belongs (he will, nonetheless, usually 
go on to cite causes for his sociological preferences and aesthetic norms). 
That, briefly, is Wittgenstein's connection with the sociological position on aes­
thetic value. The orientation of his followers is rather different. A teacher should 
not be held responsible for everything done in his name or under the influence of 
his ideas, of course. (Anyone who has read Under the Net by Iris Murdoch will 
see, in the description of the relationship between Hugo, the character standing 
for Wittgenstein, and his disciple Jake, a glimpse of the bizarre way in which a 
philosopher's legacy can be taken over and altered.) To my mind, it is completely 
symptomatic that Wittgenstein's tendency to relationism has been minimized or 
overlooked. The relationist tendency is quite unmistakable in the Philosophical 
Investigations (i.e., the treatment of looking-at an artistic whole; also, the inter­
relations between similar cases), in Zettel (1 57: the soulful expression of musical 
composition); and in the lectures of 1 933-35 and 1 938. Yet what has been done 
by Anglo-American aesthetics with Wittgenstein's legacy? The relationist aspect 
has dropped out of sight. What remains is emphasized in one of two ways: as in­
strumentalism (a valid but overstressed aspect of the legacy); or as subjectivism 
(and this, as discussed earlier in the essay, is invalid and interpolated). 
The influence exercised by Wittgenstein and particularly by his school is enor­
mous, and I want to take the time to examine this heritage with some care. Fol­
lowers of Wittgenstein in aesthetics have concentrated their attention on the con­
cept of art. They say that any definition of art which finds necessary and sufficient 
criteria of an aesthetic object undoubtedly makes an "essentialist" claim. This 
argument has been presented by Paul Ziff in the United States since 1 953, the 
year of William Elton's edition of Aesthetics and Language in England. Morris 
Weitz, in a widely studied essay of 1 956, "The Role of Theory in Aesthetics," fur­
ther drained the ambition of philosophers to arrive at a satisfactory definition of 
art. More recently, a range of positions has emerged within the Wittgensteinian 
sphere of influence; and the concept of aesthetic value has been disputed, for 
example, by Maurice Mandelbaum, Erich Kahler, Mary Mothersill, Monroe Beards­
ley, and George Dickie in the United States, and by Ruby Meager in England. 
Let me stay a moment with Weitz. The position of his early essay may be sum-

34 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Valuation 
marized with two complementary propositions: first, instead of speaking of art's 
common properties, as did traditional aesthetics, we should speak only of "strands 
of similarities"; and second, the criteria and reasons we cite in determining the 
properties of art are continuously altering. He concludes that one can only operate 
with an "open concept" of art. Now, I think I needn't dwell again on the error of 
thinking "open concepts" are important only when discussing aesthetic problems 
-the working concepts of every science must be modifiable and emendable, and 
the generalizations must be adjusted in a dynamic context which draws on the 
entire world of ideas. 
Weitz is rather ambiguous in discussing the "strands of similarity" which make 
up a family of works of art. Writing of Wittgenstein's notion of art as a game, he 
suggests that art may only be defined arbitrarily and gratuitously in the narrow 
boundaries of a moment of history, by an operation of "looking-at" and pointing 
out chosen aspects. This is a psychological relativist position, and Weitz only ex­
pands it slightly when he speaks of the collective "looking-at" performed by cer­
tain groups, such as the artists and critics who then propound a new " ism." Else­
where-while discussing the nature of tragedy, a nd just in passing -Weitz states 
that the concept of art is based on common properties and that the aesthetic con­
ception of these propertjes is shared among persons in a cultural milieu. This is a 
sociological relativist position in the ethnocentric version. 
Now, a definition of art could be called (to use Max Black's term) a "reported" 
definition if we were applying the sociological relativist approach; while from a 
psychological relativist standpoint the definition would be "programmatic" at best. 
Weitz commands a cool logic and an intention to resist all intrusions of "essen­
tialist" ungainliness in defending his psychological relativist tendency; but still 
his position is vulnerable to all the objections to a subjectivist orientation that we 
have previously noted. The dismissal of any common properties of art objects re­
mains arbitrary; and we are likely to associate Weitz's claims with those of the 
neopositivists that values are only a projection of emotional states. 
I should emphasize again that Wittgenstein is not responsible for such conclu­
sions, although he is often held to be the fount of them. In the Philosophical 
Investigations Wittgenstein modified his own previous rigorism with respect to 
being and language, laid down in Tractatus. Indeed, in the later phase of his philos­
ophy he saw the world as so multitudinous and diverse that language might be 
suited to it only when flexible and verschwommen. Whereas in Tractatus he had 
looked for ontological unconditional necessities on the premise that the limits of 

35 
Sociological Criteria 
the world were to define the limits of language (and vice versa, for the logical 
discourse sets the boundaries of any significant confirmation or denial), in Philo­
sophical Investigations the limits of our language (culture) are seen in any given 
circumstances to define the limits of the world. No longer is factual discourse op­
posed by him to strictly logical discourse: philosophy, like art and religion, cannot 
be more than descriptive; it must abandon the futilities of theorizing. 
I leave aside here the picture theory and the account of unsayable things in the 
parts of Tractatus that indubitably point towards Wittgenstein's later solutions. 
There still remains in Tradatus a demarcation between the soyoble and the non­
sensical for which no appropriate verbal expression con be found. In the Philo­
sophical Investigations these difficulties are surmounted. However, the preference 
for verschwommen language is not to be regarded as a tolerance of gratuitous or 
merely slack definitions. And as I have tried to show, there is not room in Wittgen­
stein's proposal of "looking-at" patterns of expression (which in his view tend to 
correspond to everyday human responsiveness) for psychologism. In sum, then, 
the "family resemblance" notion of Wittgenstein does not support Weitz's axio­
logical subjectivism, but Weitz does correctly find support in Wittgenstein for 
his instrumentalist tendency. 
These same two tendencies of the school of Wittgenstein appear in Paul 
Ziff's essay "The Task of Defining a Work of Art" (1 953) and in Frank Sibley's 
"Aesthetic Concepts" (1 959), both presented in Philosophical Review. Ziff was 
more tentative than Weitz. He still conceded a continuity in the aesthetic tradition, 
and he simply pointed to the continual shiftings in the idea of art. He stressed, 
more firmly than Weitz, the "reasonableness" of definitions within their social 
context. We could agree with Ziff to discard the terms "true" and "false" as ap­
plied to definitions of art if we could also reach agreement with him and others 
that these terms should consequently be permitted only a logical sense, as with 
reference to "atomic" propositions. This step would, however, leave us with no 
ready means to cope with the conceded continuity in the idea of art. Because Ziff's 
position is much more sociologically oriented than that of Weitz, however, we 
are encouraged by this instrumentalist argument to seek an overview which passes 
beyond the particular sociocultural setting and to fix some generalized and his­
torically founded affinities of aesthetic value. Ziff's formulations in no way ap-
pear to deter us from asserting, for example, that Poussin's The Rape of the Sabine 
Women has evoked an identical or strikingly similar aesthetic response among 
various social groups in different periods. Can we not reasonably conclude this? 

36 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Valuation 
Presumably, we may also stipulate that this response is due not to the painting 's 
genre, nor to the galleries where it has hung, nor to the artist's skill and reputation 
considered apart from the painting, nor to the subject matter (many properly ig­
nored paintings on this theme exist) -rather, the response is particularly due to 
a complex formal structure, the merits of which successive generations of viewers 
from highly diverse backgrounds have perceived as yielding a distinctive value. 
If this much is so, we have to ask why and how this property of the painting should 
stand out as the work's necessary and sufficient condition as an art object. It is 
through such self-questionings that instrumentalism is able to move towards appli­
cation of its competence to generalized and historically founded problems and 
thus to participation in a more than strictly relativist stand. 
Sibley's essay stresses the liabilities of the aesthetic concept which result from 
its being rule-conditioned and rule-governed; in his opinion, no artistic entity could 
possess a set of properties which might yield definite and constant criteria of aes­
thetic value. I will save my full response to this argument until I have proposed 
valuational criteria. Here I wish only to indicate how Sibley appeals to instrumental 
arguments: On the one hand, he relates our concepts of art to the dynamic non­
aesthetic context of our life habits, changing vocabulary, and the like- inculcated 
by a "causal" training and teaching, I may note with reference to the earlier dis­
cussion of Wittgenstein's notion of "cause" -and, on the other hand, he relates 
the concept of art to a common human potential (i.e., a natural sensibility), and 
here again (as in Wittgenstein's lectures) there is an important relationist tendency 
alongside the instrumentalism. 
To conclude with the legacy of Wittgenstein and the sociological orientation, 
I want to return once again to Weitz, this time to his Ham/et and the Philosophy 
of Literary Criticism (l 964). At first we see him making magisterial use of the in­
strumentalist interpretation of critical history, as he demonstrates how representa­
tive critics of Shakespeare in various periods have applied "reasons" for their 
judgments which were paradigmatic for the periods. Weitz proposes a sharply 
demarcaterl phasing of the critical procedures he has acknowledged as feasible: 
description, explanation, and evaluation. However, he goes further and argues 
here and there in his second part against Charles Stevenson that a critical inter­
pretation can be explanatory and that an evaluative approach need not provide 
only imperative, normative utterances. I do not believe that his proposal of a sharp 
phasing corresponds to the most productive critical practice. Doesn't explanation 
usually begin to develop in the full tide of description? Aren't evaluations perhaps 

37 
Sociological Criteria 
most solidly established if they organically emerge in the course of the explanatory 
operation? And don't the three distinguishable operations merge together into a 
tightknit interpretation? 
I cannot here make an appropriate analysis of Weitz's illuminating inquiry into 
the structure of Ham/et and the phases of its critical reception, but I shall state what 
I learned from following his interpretive studies: I learned -and this departs from 
Weitz's own deductions-that the valuational "reasons" that critics supply to their 
readers are most useful and persuasive when the critics have founded their essays 
on these problematic matters: 
l .  the historical context of the art object; 
2. the multisided and multilayered structural pattern of the art object (i.e., the 
recognition of a multiplicity of valuational qualities together with their selective 
apprehension); 
3. the historical record of valuational approaches to the work; 
4. the aesthetic concepts, understood in their continuity and mutability. 
Weitz's interpretive readings of Shakespeare criticism, as I say, contributed to 
this statement of fundamental critical guideposts, but Weitz does not embrace these 
conclusions. What ore his conclusions? He would agree that some descriptions 
ore supported by the art object and that some ore not. He would agree that de­
scriptions are validated to varying degrees by the art object, and that the same 
holds for the validation of explanafions and even of evaluative utterances. Weitz 
thus feels justified on the basis of the text per se in turning down the interpreta­
tions of Knight, Fergusson, and Jones as the least plausible Ham/et valuations 
among those that he considers. The intc;irpretations of different aspects by Bradley, 
Wilson, Spencer, Stoll, and Campbell are, in the same way, judged to be legitimate. 
Weitz believes critics must at a minimum test their interpretive "reasons" on: Ham­
let's feigned madness (its degree is another issue); Hamlet's passion_ and melan­
choly (taedium vitae); Hamlet's intellect (which rather than retreating spurs the 
hero's actions forward to his own destruction). Additionally, in tlie Elizabethan con­
text, critics should have no doubts a bout orienting themselves to the adulterous 
character of Gertrude and the hypocritical character of Claudius. The inner core 
of the Hamlet mystery may be highly difficult to describe (let alone explain and 
satisfactorily evaluate); but we reasonably expect a critic to interpret: the drama's 
metaphysics (to be or not to be); its aesthetic context of genre expectations (the 
revenge tragedy); and the historical confrontation that is represented (a truth-seek­
ing individual hemmed in by a conventional world of opportune lies). The descrip-

38 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Valuation 
tions and explanations of the Hamlet-Ophelia and the Claudius-Gertrude relation­
ships may be expected to vary within rather wide and legitimate limits; but precisely 
the ambiguity (the vagueness) of these structural points makes for a significant 
dimension of the play. The interpretive criteria brought to Hamlet have been numer­
ous and diverse to be sure (certainly, the work has been denigrated as well as 
praised without reserve); but I should say that no critic who pays attention to the 
structure of his chosen art object could fail to interpret certain properties as values 
positively possessed by Hamlet. These would include: its profound truthfulness 
to many aspects of living {within the historical moment; also in the sense of striving 
towards a universal human ethos); its impressive display of diverse and mercurial 
passions; and its arresting i maginative power, in the sense of a richly individual 
and yet coherently developed i magery. On a foundation of these properties, one 
may evaluate Hamlet as obviously a good art object. 
Why do I use "goodness" rather than Weitz's "greatness"? At this point we 
are still attempting to define the concept of aesthetic valuation, that is, the funda­
mentals of value in art. Thus a "scaling" term ("greatness") is not appropriate. 
One can say only that there is a value, and consequently, since in my estimation 
any value fact is positive, there is some goodness realized here. This kind of fun­
damental, plain, or indisputable value is discerned by explanatory interpretation, 
which is, in turn, predicated on a descriptive interpretation with respect to such 
data as, for example, what the text says sentence by sentence, and also (and pri­
marily) the structural pattern of the art object in its historical situation. As I have 
suggested, even the descriptive phase involves a degree of explanation: the data 
must be both discerned and interrelated in their capacity as value facts. 
I should again stress here that, in presenting the common traits in the centuries­
long criticism of Hamlet, I am using Weitz's analysis but drawing my own theo­
retical conclusions, which are not his. It may be that his are different because I 
am concerned for aspects of the valuational operation which he either does not 
find significant or considers misleading. This is to say that there are philosophical 
differences between us, and philosophy is the ultimate clarifying or obfuscating 
choice. What I find especially remarkable is Weitz's destructive summation of his 
own constructive findings. The apparent reason for this is that Weitz seeks to 
stress his points of divergence from earlier Hamlet scholars rather than his agree­
ments; moreover, he fears entrapment by a "real definition" of the meaningful 
structure of this play. He thus postulates an absolute schism between the critic's 

39 
Sociological Criteria 
evaluative operation and the discovery of values which would obviously claim the 
recognition of any scholar of Hom/et at any time and which, accordingly, would 
remain unaffected by variations in critical norms. 
Weitz sees just two options. Either a single and definitive interpretation would 
have to be enforced on all critics in all eras; or we must concede that no single 
set of properties can supply the common frame of subject matter for all critics in 
all eras. Given this choice, naturally Weitz preferred the second course. He was 
likewise unwilling to admit any latitude of ambiguity to some central properties of 
Hom/et, such as might be considered integral to the "goodness" of this master­
piece. I must say that I find Weitz's skepticism bracing in many respects, but it 
seems to disable this very competent and precise scholar at the transition point 
which might take him beyond instrumentalism. 
I do not think Weitz has the weight of argument on his side. Instead, I see a pre­
conceived bias against evidence that indicates the existence of recurrent and con­
stant phenomena. His bias is not unlike that which we found in the work of George 
Boas. Weitz can make impressive use of logic; and he asserts his position only 
after a sustained confrontation with a classical dramatic touchstone of artistic 
valuation and with some of the best criticism that the play has inspired. And yet, 
he and Boas are dose on several points. They do not allow fundamental aesthetic 
valuation to go a step beyond a statement of one's justifying reasons (i.e., beyond 
pointing to some qualities that have caught one's attention}. The valuation opera­
tion is held to be legitimate only for the one occasion and in the given circum­
stances: the temporal scope is limited, and only a delimited social sampling is 
"reported." 
I oppose these terminal restrictions placed on the use of the interpretive findings 
because in my philosophy the dynamics of the value alterations themselves may be 
interpreted, and the variables taken into consideration, without resorting to "es­
sentialist" arguments. This is not my diagnosis alone: the reader may think of 
Pitirim Sorokin's studies in cultural dynamics or of Clyde Kluckhohn's comparative 
approach to the values within a single society and between various societies, just 
to mention two examples. Indeed, it seems most logical that the permanency of 
the flux in valuations should become the fundamental orienting subject matter 
into which any axiology might inquire. 
Some leading theorists of value dynamics in the United States, such as Melvin 
Herskovits, are of the opinion that there are, in the last instance, no value invari-

40 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Valuation 
ables. They give as one reason the cultural (environmental) conditioning which 
extends even to our perceptual faculties. Their opponents use arguments which 
equally compel our attention. I find myself in agreement, for instance, with Nicholas 
Rescher's fine chapter on the dynamic changes in value assessment and value 
scales, where he writes: "Few things ore immutable in human affairs, and man's 
values reflect this (itself abiding) circumstance. But there are, fortunately, at least 
some fundamental stabilities in the human condition, and it is preeminently these 
that are reflected in our adoptively well-established volue-systems."41 Rescher 
hos ethical values primarily in mind; but among the kinds of values whose status 
is less rather than more vulnerable to the revolutionary transformations in social 
history, the aesthetic values should, I think, be included. Rescher uses a method 
to study value and locate its stability in the human condition which is not my own. 
Interesting, however, is the affinity of approach. It is more important that a transi­
tion beyond a strict sociologism be achieved than that the theories be identical. 
Meanwhile, even in its most illuminating version, which is ethnocentrism, the socio­
logical orientation is most fruitfully regarded as a steppingstone to further investi­
gations. 
Possibly my reader will disagree, and will not wont to "advance" beyond the 
findings of the ethnocentric interpretation. All I ask is that my own historicist 
orientation not be condemned in advance, before the reader hos hod a chance to 
consider the evidence and arguments. Even if my presentation is judged a failure, 
the process of inquiry should be illuminating. And even failures ore a kind of 
positive result in the sense that a new, negated hypothesis hos been added to 
one's store of knowledge. 
What precisely is to be our subject of inquiry? It is whether aesthetic values 
may occur which lost longer than a single period and are found in several geo­
graphical locations. As I hope to make clear, this l ine of approach is implicit in the 
Marxian methodology. Nonetheless, morxism was seemingly not so understood 
by George Plekhonov, the founder of Russian morxism, nor does the evidence 
suggest that it was so understood by Paul Loforgue or Franz Mehring, prominent, 
marxist writers on literary and other problems in the period of the Second Inter­
national who, together with Plekhonov, introduced and propagated the principles 
of a sociological relativism during the classical period of formation of the marxist 
interpretation of phenomena. Taking leave of the relativist version of the socio­
logical orientation, then, we can say that it hos been advanced by nonmarxists 
and marxists alike. 

41 
Towards an Historicist Orientation 
Towards an Historicist 
Orientation 
Building then on the ethnocentric-relativist version of the sociological orientation, 
I now consider the sociological orientation's second version. Our investigation of 
historicist socio/ogism must be thorough and careful. It will lead us to examine 
culture in its process of development, for evidence makes it clear that the process 
of development began in late primitive times when aesthetic values developed 
on independence from practical and magical relationships. Since that crucial period, 
despite the changes in the systems of social organization, the constancy of some 
properties of art objects seems to be confirmed. 
I realize that this viewpoint as an orientation for valuation is not widespread 
in the United States or in Western Europe. Neither is it unknown. Arthur Child, for 
instance, has asserted a kind of objectivity of artistic values, and he has justified 
this objectivity in terms less of human psychology than of sociohistorical devel­
opment. 42 He argues that while individuals differ in their interpretations of values 
due to social (extra-aesthetic) causes, yet the variations are secondary as com­
pared with the objectivity of the values preserved and confirmed in the history of 
culture. 
Child does not clearly identify the historically invariant values; he does not 
sketch their genesis; and he does not ask why some endure, and how they differ 
from those thot turn out to be evanescent. Yet his work does distinctly shift the 
discussion onto on historical basis; as does that of Giovanni Salinas. 43 Their essays 
point the way to the possibility of superseding an exacerbated relativism. To those 
authors -Chambers, Boas, Kellett, etc. -who describe only the continually shifting 
fashions of art, its "whirligig of taste," the stabilities of history ore but a ghostly 
background against which "taste" is the manifest proof of the contemporary values 
in society and culture. The determination of taste is frequently ascribed to ideo­
logical (class) and ultimately to social considerations, with mediations provided by 
religion, politics, morality, philosophy, etc. Undeniably, these fluctuations of value 
ore present and they often may seem the most prominent evidence. Nonetheless, 
the strands of continuity within the cultural and historical fabric should not be 
denied prior to investigation of their possible occurrence. 
How should such an investigation be organized? I should first remark that it 
will be concerned not only with the evidence of continuity in history but also with 
the basis for values in nature (i.e., the predispositions founded on human biology). 
One other preliminary remark seems called for: When I spea k of the continoity, 
recurrence, or permanence of artistic properties, I refer to those relatively objective 

42 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Valuation 
traits that have been valued more or less from the time of their creation as aesthetic 
values. This is not tantamount to "the test of time" concept put forward by some 
relativists who feel that the judgment of today's generation may be regarded as 
ultimate. Andre Malraux implies such an "acquisitions standard" for le musee im­
aginaire; but to let today's opinion prevail in every case against all the past evi­
dence is to allow subjectivism to enter through the back door of the museum, thrust­
ing a sociological credential into its hands. Emil Utitz has already confronted this 
partial idea of enduring values and proved that the claim non omnis moriar has to 
be confirmed with persuasive evidence of an excellence of formal structure, which 
he termed the Gestaltungsweise. 44 
There are a number of pitfalls awaiting the search for recurrent values of art 
in history. These can, however, be made explicit and anticipated. We should, for 
example, guard against presuming that once an aesthetic value has been created, 
it will remain in effect through all history and everywhere. An objectivist and 
sociological standpoint, such as historicism builds on, could not make that as­
sumption; we must remain skeptical of the absolute permanence of any value. 
Another possible and related misunderstanding is the assumption that the co­
herent body of artistic values must include all of the heterogeneous, multitudinous, 
and loosely itemized attractions of art that the relativists bring up. This is only 
to point out that the objectivist and sociological orientation can easily slip into 
its negation: either an antirelationist dogmatism or a "panaestheticism" which 
undermines aesthetics when it ignores the distinctions between aesthetic phe­
nomena and other cultural phenomena that are properly termed political, moral, 
religious, utilitarian, etc. 
How are we to avoid these pitfalls? There is but one way, which is to maintain 
a vigilant historicist orientation. In other words, we must constantly direct a selec­
tive and value-alert attitude towards the fluctuations in culture which aims to valu­
ate and revaluate the constant and recurrent elements of value, without ever as­
suming that a matter of axiology is settled for all ti me. 
Given this general orientation, a suitable organizing principle of procedure is 
presented by the Marxian methodology in its attempts to pursue a consistent 
historicism (of course, not all the history-oriented relationists are marxists). This 
procedural approach emphasizes the problem of genesis. I have not mentioned 
"genesis" as a focus of methodology before, but it necessarily must occupy a 
key position in the philosophical framework proposed here. Why? My hope is to 
explain why and how some aesthetic values enjoy survival despite the continuous 

43 
Towards an Historicist 
Orientation 
changes in social conditions ond individual preferences. If I am to do this, I must 
try to reconstruct the process by which these values come into being, and I should 
interpret their most remote history against o setting of the fluctuations in culture. 
The marxist conception offers a solution to the task. Marx stated the premise thus: 
"The senses of the social mon ore other senses than those of the nonsocial mon. 
Only through the objectively unfolded richness of man's essential being is the 
richness of subjective human sensibility (a musical ear, an eye for beauty of form -
in short, senses capable of human gratifications, senses confirming themselves os 
essential powers of man) either cultivated or brought into being."45 This premise­
a preliminary to Marx's later investigations, and presented in his German Ideology 
as well as the 1844 Manuscripts - holds that the genus homo sapiens had pre­
dispositions to aesthetic perception, but that these were formed only in a humaniz­
ing (i.e., social) context. 
If this is so, how precisely do the biological predisposition and the social human 
environment interconnect? Plekhanov in his Letters Without Address (1 900) specu­
lates about those anmal and primitive human "drives" that condition the human 
creative activity and perception that eventually comes to be called aesthetic. Among 
such "drives" or "instincts" Plekhanov mentions: sexual attraction, an imitative 
impulse, and a responsiveness to antithesis, to symmetry, to rhythm, and to animis­
tic phenomena. Another marxist work which, under the influence of Darwin, goes 
further in deriving the human sense of beauty from documented animal behavior is 
Karl Kautsky's Materialist Conception of History (1 927, the summary of his life's 
work). Christopher Caudwell, a later marxist, argues in his essay on "Beauty" 
(1 938) that the artistic process emerges from instinct and is molded by the process 
of labor in a social environment. 46 In The Necessity of Art (1 957), Ernst Fischer 
presents a not dissimilar theory: there are, he says, preaesthetic elements in nature 
(among his examples are the structures of crystals and of living organisms). Mean­
while, the aestheticians in the Soviet Union have debated a natural as opposed to a 
social emergence of aesthetic value for many years.47 In view of these marxists' 
arguments on behalf of a presocial, naturalistic explanation for the genesis of aes­
thetic behavior, how can anyone agree with the critics of marxism who say that the 
marxist interpretation is strictly oriented to sociological relativism? 
To come to grips properly with the problem of the genesis of aesthetic values, I 
want to give full consideration to Marx's orientation. This will be best achieved if, 
instead of restricting myself to his explicitly artistic and aesthetic texts, I turn to his 
writings which approach the basic historical problems so as to suggest method-

44 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Valuation 
ological solutions. The aim, again, is to reconstruct the origin of what I have termed 
aesthetic value. 
The historical and logical procedures of inquiry used by Marx in Capital supply a 
useful model for the present investigations. Here, Marx applies a scrupulous meth­
od which, while ranging from the primitive elements of barter to the complex forma ­
tions of finance capital , nonetheless traces minute transformations. Marx uses a 
logic that is, according to Engels, at bottom "no other than that selfsame historical 
method , only freed from historical form and from hindering accidents."48 This logi­
cal method yields a precise presentation of the historical processes, as well as their 
artifacts, because Marx first seeks to define the newly emergent structure, so as to 
illuminate the "essential" elements and relationships that in later historical develop­
ment will be elaborated and crystallized . 
According to Marx's model of historical genesis, the initial elements of a structure 
are certain to be modified; many adiunct and supplementary traits will be taken on; 
in some cases the initial elements may be submerged from view. Conversely, even 
if the process of transformation is untidy, yet it occurs without unaccountable rup­
tures; the changes in the once emergent elements are explicable, and are due to 
their increasing influence, to the feedback-response to this developing role, and to 
the overall maturation of the phÌnomenon and its context. The Marxian notion of 
the peculiarity (the specific status) of the object of inquiry considered at any given 
moment is predicated on this conception of the genesis of particular structures. 49 
There have been many reservations expressed towards this historicist method­
ology. At least since Dilthey, readers have been asked to reiect the genetic "deter­
minist " analysis (concerned with strictly extra-aesthetic phenomena) in favor of an 
"intrinsic " structural analysis (concerned strictly with the character of the obiect) . 
Who has made this demand? Among others, there are the followers of the Lebens­
philosophie, the phenomenologists and the existentialists whom they influenced, 
the structural linguists (Ferdinand de Saussure through the Prague circle to Roman 
Jakobson), and the anthropological structuralists (Claude Levi-Strauss and his 
school). 
Without question, the general method of the several structuralist lines of descent 
differs from that of Marx; not only in that they have another understanding of the 
idea of a structure , but also and primarily in that Marx didn't conceive of the prob­
lem of genetic analysis or of structural analysis in terms of an either-or exclusivity. 
Rather, he experienced the need of both approaches and he interrelated them intri-

45 
Towards on Historicist 
Orientation 
cately; he believed he could not expect to interpret the basic traits of phenomena 
accurately apart from understanding their process of emergence. 
Marx considered that no structure appears with complete fortuity. It arises as a 
component of some process; and we can assume that the defining traits of the 
phenomenon were formed in the context of the many other phenomena with which 
it was integrated and which helped to shape it. For example, the modern human 
species is more fully understood because the genealogy and characteristics of the 
ancestors of humankind have been researched, back as far as (it now seems) the 
dryopithecine ape. 
We know how wildly philosophers could miss the mark of anthropological 
knowledge when they merely conjectured about the essential traits of "man," his 
"humors," god-given qualities, etc. The last two centuries have provided a m uch 
more complicated and more accurate picture of human genesis. One of the more 
fascinating aspects of genetic interpretation is the opportunity that it gives to ob­
serve the interplay of natural and cultural forces, and a good example of this is the 
animal and civilizational components of the emergence of aesthetic value. 
We should correctly expect easier going when the object of inquiry is this more 
' 
specific problem of aesthetic value. What we need to learn is how and to what 
extent the traits of the "aesthetic object" and the "aesthetic experience" can be 
clarified by discerning these phenomena historically and, above all, as newly emer­
gent phenomena still closely integrated with other heterogeneous phenomena. An 
example of a subject for inquiry is the emergence of the relative autonomy of aes­
thetic objects (more on this later) in the era when the autonomous trait was still 
scarcely to be perceived and was perhaps even resisted as unwelcome for some 
purposes. Some of my readers may object that an intentional project of this sort­
to seek the first beginnings of roughly known if not conjectured characteristics - is 
certain to find just what it hopes to find; moreover, the objective and historical 
method is time-consuming, uncertain, and demanding of immense knowledge, com­
pared, for example, with the phenomenological intuitive grasping of an object's 
essence with no preconceptions. To this I shall answer: To fail to see an object in 
its context and its process of development, where its components may become 
functionally known, is a sure way to obtain arbitrary apprehension and under­
standing of the object. 
Admittedly, we will not get far in using the genetic approach and the objective 
orientation to historicist contexts if we seek fixed, forever-settled determinants, 

46 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Valuation 
which ore the mandate for dogmatic interpretation of present-day structures. In­
stead we must have an eye for the continuous give-and-take between structures 
and their contexts. An ahistorical determinism has nothing in common with the 
method of Marx. In brief: (1 ) Any given structure should be examined for its genetic 
process of formation so as to illuminate its character and function. (2) The historical 
process should be examined as it impinges on the object of special inquiry. In their 
further development, the internal and the external fields cooperate, and their inter­
action provides the fundamental qualities of the X to be studied. 
The Conceptual Framework of Aesthetic Criteria 
I have sketched a typology of the various principal solutions to the problem of artis­
tic value. It will help if we draw a balance sheet of what we have ascertained to this 
point. 
1 .  This is not the first such typology, whether formulated or implied. However, 
none of those I am familiar with have attempted to distinguish among the variants 
within the major types of value criteria. In contrast, what have we determined? 
a. Subjectivism has at least these variants: extreme or "nihilistic" subjectivism; a 
moderate version; and a subjectivism which inclines to acknowledge a universal 
foundation for the aesthetic experience and thus borders on a psychologically ori­
ented relation ism. 
b. Ontological objectivism has at least three variants: a metaphysical version, 
postulating a special or privileged order of existence for aesthetic value, the proper­
ties of which may or may not be definable; a deontological objectivism, which holds 
that values are attributed by persons to the traits of objects which in some way 
coincide with personal, metaphysical claims upon such objects (the Sol/en- "ought 
to be so" - syndrome); and an empirical objectivism, which recognizes one single 
permanent quality of beauty or (in the pluralist case) a variety of such permanent 
qualities. 
c. Relation ism has two principal versions: logical, schematic relationism, wh irh 
builds on the abstract idea of "potentiality"; and empirical relationism {e.g., gestalt­
ism). 
d. Sociological relativism has two principal variants: the extreme particularist 
version, which recognizes only different, circumstantial collective tastes or pre­
dilections, which occur here and there in given historical contexts; and an instru­
mentalist tendency of sociological relativism, descriptive of more permanent proper-

47 
The Conceptual Framework 
of Aesthetic Criteria 
ties which are termed beautiful in a given short-term tradition and social grouping. 
{This last tendency lends assistance to relationist analysis .) 
e. Sociological objectivism likewise has two possible versions: panaesthetic socio­
logical objectivism; and a sociohistorical objectivism. 
The reader may wonder why I take the trouble to discriminate within the major 
axiological categories. I do this, not to be pedantic, but to find why it is that unrec­
onciled differences should remain where, for all intents and purposes, two scholars 
appear ready to agree on common fundamentals of axiology. There is also another 
reason. We can glimpse with some certainty now that there is a perpetual equivoca­
tion within every one of the axiological orientations: between the Scylla of subjectiv­
ism and the Charybdis of ontological objectivism. 
2. We further notice from studying the typology that just a single one of the five 
major axiological categories is devoid of the least smidgeon of verification from 
everyday experience. This is the ontological (and the "deontological") end of the 
objectivist spectrum, which holds that aesthetic value is a priori an absolute proper­
ty. A "nub of rationality" can be conceded even to this speculative orientation; and 
it is retrieved from metaphysics by the ethnocentric and relationist approaches. 
3. Experience with its empirical access to data would seem to lend greatest cre­
dence to two orientations in the typology: psychologism and sociological relativism. 
The "nub of rationality" in psychologism is that values always are given to the 
individual; yet, to make this empirica l  truth the alpha and omega of one's axiology 
is to be sure to arrive at a dead end. Of sociological relativism much the same can 
be said, but on a brooder basis; by drawing on empirical data, the historical muta­
bility of values is shown; when this use of data is also applied to the problems of 
aesthetic objects, instrumentolism emerges, and the possibility of relationism ap­
pears on the horizon. 
4. Of the axiological paradigms I hove identified, that which offers the greatest 
scope for the substantial analysis of aesthetic value (succumbing to neither Scylla 
nor Charybdis) is relation ism; but relation ism still awaits the fullest available devel­
opment of its empirical foundations. It, too, must have its "nub of rationality" sup­
plemented - here, by the analysis of historical considerations which affect the rela­
tionship between subject and object. 
5. The typology counsels us, on balance, to orient our further inquiry both objec­
tively and historically (relying on the relotionist paradigm, as I have noted). In other 

48 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Valuation 
words, this should be our deduction when we observe how the alternative major 
conceptions of value- psychologism, absolute objectivism, sociologism -all choose 
silence after having stated very elementary facts. What I propose must, in contrast, 
serve to deepen the analysis of valuation and evaluation. A relation ism which looks 
to objectivity and historicism can encompass and elucidate value both as it mutates 
and as its traits recur in widely different times and places. 
6. Where did this typology come from? Two of its major orientations (indeed its 
"cornerstones") go back to the start of aesthetic thought, for objectivism was the 
outlook of the Pythagoreans and subjectivism was the profession of the Sophists. 
Relationism emerged with Basil the Great and the scholastics and formed a bridge 
to the work of Thomas Aquinas. A universalist approach to aesthetic experience 
was apparent in Philodemos, long before Hume and Kant. Psychological relativism 
is stated by the thirteenth-century Polish philosopher Vitelius, but it can also be 
attributed to the remarks of Socrates on functional value. Sociological relativism can 
be located in the ideas of Giordano Bruno and, especially, the architectural thinker 
Claude Perrault. Historicism was, ironically if you will, the last of these orientations 
to emerge historically. Its founders were Vico and Herder.50 
7. It might help to elucidate the typology if I demonstrate how its major concep­
tions interrelate in terms of the dynamics and contradictions of the valuational 
activity- in particular from the standpoint of the object of analysis (see figure l ) . 
My own choice of valuational field is, of course, historicist relationism -and per­
haps figure 2 will clarify its approach to the object of valuation. 
Now, all these major conceptions make the claim that they should be accepted as 
the foundation for valuating art. Each wishes to provide our criteria, but they are 
not all equally concerned to provide justifications to sway our judgment and clinch 
their claim. How is orientation X or Y to justify its criteria for calling a given object 
artistically valuable? Let me take the case of subjectivism, which, especially in its 
extreme version, disdains to provide self-justifications. Even if it does explain -
aesthetic value is "a liking which lasts for the given moment" might be the words­
still, no appeal to objective verification is made; we are simply presented with a 
claim. 
It may seem odd, but the objectivist axiology in its metaphysical (ontologital) ver­
sion similarly omits to refer to anything objective which can be tested. Metaphysical 
objectivism relies on intuition as its proof: the sole reason advanced is the state-

49 
The Conceptual Framework 
of Aesthetic Criteria 
ment by the valuator that he has privileged or divine access to the faculty of per­
ceiving the aesthetic values in their metacontext. The extreme objectivists are will­
ing to divide the audience of art into the blind and those blessed with vision; rather 
like the idea of civitas dioboli and civitos Dei in Augustine. 
No matter that the request for reasons is turned aside by the extreme positions of 
both subjectivism and objectivism. No matter that we cannot "refute" the meta­
statements offered. There are still criteria implied by these positions with which we 
may argue. What do we mean by criteria? How dowe know which criteria are 
adequate? Usually we indicate standards, that is, some sort of justification with 
PSYCHOLOGISM 
(individual subject) 
I 
THF SUBJECT Ô 
SOCIOLOGICAL RELA TMSM 
(collective subjects) 
RELATIONISM 
(subject and object 
ahistorically related) 
HISTORICIST RELA TIONISM 
(correlations based on 
recurrent data in 
cultural evolution) 
Figure 1 .  The Major Modes of Voluational Fields. 
ONTOLOGISM 
(object as such, 
independent of subject) 
Ó 
T 
THF OBJECT 
/ l  
PANAESTHETIC OBJECTIVISM 
(summing of collectively 
appreciated objects) 
---
----
--------------× objects 
Figure 2. 

50 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Valuation 
which we hope to make our statements appear plausible rather than merely sound 
unanswerable. If we are asked for our criteria, and we have these standards, we 
should then be able {optimally) to point to properties or traits (i.e., characteristics) 
of on object that will yield persuasive evidence in support of our statement or judg­
ment. Whether this evidence should be considered as constant, or as contextual (or 
even circumstontiol)-this is precisely the moot question. The etymology of the 
word "criteria" counsels us to seek to distinguish truth from untruth, value from 
unvalue. 
In this quest for certainty, our justifications will primarily be centered on empiri­
cal standards or indices as the means to win arguments. At least, this strategy hos 
worked rather well for the proof or disproof of cognitive statements; but will it aid 
us to verify the problems of value? I think the appeal to empirical evidence is less 
efficacious in voluotional problems, but then it is not as conclusive with respect to 
epistemology in general as is often thought. The reader may know Desire Mercier's 
older but often cited Criteriologie generale ou la theorie generole de la certitude, 
which demonstrates the plethora of disparate epistemological criteria on which 
philosophers rely. There is not to this day final and conclusive agreement on the 
rules of certainty with regard to evidence or even on the means for distinguish-
ing an "adequate" knowledge from rank error. What do the philosophical dictio­
naries advise? That a criterion involves -truth-value. Well and good. Yet just here 
is where the problems explode into philosophy and the different orientations cease 
to be able to persuade one another. 
Wittgenstein, famed as the epistemological paladin of recent philosophy, fought 
against error and inexactitude on the field of criteria. What was his view of the 
difficulties? First, that while we must seek the "best possible" evidence, we must 
be prepared to make do with other grades. However,merely suggestive or symp­
tomatic data cannot provide evidence, since no trustworthy basis exists for inferring 
from such phenomena of experience a statement or judgment about them. Second 
and worse, the problem seemed to Wittgenstein to lie not so much in the selec-
tion of evidence which con be verified as in the question of whether criteria con be 
framed as definitions or whether the training (practice) which prepares a person to 
apprehend (accede to) the criteria must be emphasized. There were many varieties 
of usage of criteria which disturbed Wittgenstein. The notion, for example, that a 
sensuously given sign finds its criterion when it is correlated to the thing signified, 
seemed to him a quite vacuous idea of criterion. 
Another token of the prevailing distress is Meaning and Knowledge: Systematic 

51 
The Conceptual Framework 
of Aesthetic Criteria 
Readings in Epistemology, a popular textbook edited by Ernest Nagel and R. B. 
Brandt (New York, 1 965). The authors included in this anthology are able to agree 
on one issue only: the purely formal stipulation that a distinction must be main­
tained between the criterion and the defining operation. This failure to achieve a 
common ground on any step but the most elementary is common in epistemology. 
The criteria invoked to separate truth from error are almost ludicrously numerous 
and disparate. The more serious and pressing, then, is our need resolutely to solve 
this problem of criteria for our present inquiry. 
These are, then, some prominent appeals to reasons; valuational criteria might 
be claimed to correspond to: a privileged special universe of data not accessible to 
all; everyone's total experience; the logical rigor of the argument; the pragmatic 
results it can produce; intuition, possibly mystical; the guidelines imparted by some 
authority who (or which) is acknowledged; what we consider and proclaim to be, 
quite simply, self-evident. 
In our effort to compore and select among the criteria lucidly, a proposal by C. G. 
Hempel seems to me apt.51 He says that criteria are truly useful - in other words, 
clarifying and explanatory-when they afford a general conceptual framework 
within which we may restate a porticular explicandum and proceed to systematize 
its substance theoretically. If we can agree to this, as I do, then we must declare 
that the so-called traits of evidence- or as others call them, the justifying character­
istics-do not self-evidently establish the status of what we believe we know. Once 
this assumption is made, however, it may cast us adrift in the ocean of evidence 
which now is considered semiopaque, and there may seem no saving raft of con­
ceptual structure which can be more than a deceptive and humiliating mirage. 
In other words, we all want an unassailable rocklike foundation for our state­
ments about evidence. Where shall we find it, and how shall we find it? Aren't we 
caught in a vicious circle where we justify all of our observational statements with 
an appeal to data evidence, and try to validate our selections among sense impres­
sions, perceptions, and so on, with an appeal to the very criteria which, in turn, 
require some unassailable reasons in evidence before we are able to rely on them? 
Let us assume that we seriously do want solid knowledge and not mere protocol 
statements. Our epistemic procedure must then have cognitive premises which are 
of a broader than epistemological reach and character. What can comprise such 
premises? They will be determined by a philosophical conception of homo sapiens, 
history, and nature. 
In indicating the necessity of a conceptual foundation, I hove had to be almost 

52 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Valuation 
impossibly brief; but, as I said at the outset of the chapter, it is also almost impossi­
ble to delineate the fundamentals of my philosophy in a book deeply involved with 
aesthetic questions. To serve up my philosophical carte du jour in a slapdash short­
order fashion would do violence to both it and the alimentation of my reader. Still, 
I do hope to have indicated the uncertainty about the certainty principle which is the 
lot of general criteriology today. The situation in my specific field, aesthetics, is even 
less resolved. Here too, a choice of epistemological criteria will at last induce the 
valuator to make axiological (philosophical) assumptions. The reader may shake 
his head and wonder how, if epistemology itself is so fraught with criteriological 
issues, it will be possible to come to grips with the ultimate criteria of aesthetic 
value. One solution might be to clarify the typology of the major solutions to aes­
thetic valuation, as I have done, and then let the problems drop without attempting 
to determine the bedrock axiological criteria through a debate which might possibly 
prove futile. However, this obstacle of sorting through the conflicting and comple­
mentary criteria of the typology does not seem to be one that can or will long stand. 
This difficulty is not exceptional in its stubbornness; indeed, everywhere, facts 
and values appear to be in a mutual and dependent tension. The intersubjectivity 
of valuational criteria must thus be understood in light of the intersubjectivity of 
scientific investigations, and the families of values and their possible hierarchies 
must be considered. On every hand the axiological quandary just cannot be es­
caped; and it often is the "missing link" in an otherwise interesting argument. For 
example, in Peter Caws's Science and the Theory of Value (1 967), the author ob­
serves the problem of facts that do not dovetail with values, and of values that go 
beyond any set of facts; but he does not resolve the question. Or consider Risieri 
Frondizi's What /s Value? ( 1 971 ): the author expostulates on the various distances 
at which values may stand from the "terra firma" of facts; he sees a range going 
from subject-dependent, socially variable values, which are the sort he ascribes to 
gastronomical, political, and legal phenomena, all the way over to an objectively 
given, universally human version of morality; and he can thus be puzzled and mis­
led by the function of values because he lacks an understanding of the necessity of 
a bedrock conceptual axiology. 
The applied axiology of a field such as aesthetics is immobilized without such 
fundamental underlying decisions. By commencing with a typological analysis of 
the extant applied criteria, we have at least a dense, extensive, and ample idea of 
the resources of aesthetic criteriology, while a theorist who starts with only his own 

53 
The Conceptual Framework 
of Aesthetic Criteria 
perceptions and formulations would work from an impoverished model of valua­
tional possibilities. 
Having started, however, we cannot evade Frank Sibley's insistence, in his previ­
ously mentioned essay "Aesthetic Concepts," that it will prove impossible to formu­
late aesthetic criteria which are definite and constant- rule-conditioned and rule­
governed - with which to approach any given set of properties. Let me restate 
Sibley's argument. Suppose we attempt to take account of all the distinctive and 
various properties of all the innumerable objects which are called art; would we 
then, on the basis of the sum, be able to define the criteria of aesthetic (artistic) 
value? It should be clear that Sibley's enumerative approach, with its instrumental­
ist assumptions, would lead to no definite or constant standards. However, I think 
he frames the problem wrongly. The empirically given data as such seem to me the 
only relevant evidence in just two matters-when we want to know: (1 ) the medi­
um (material) of an art object; and (2) the technical skill of the artist (how well he 
chisels, modulates tonality, lays on paint, controls his movement, etc.). These as­
pects are by no means unimportant to the creative process and to the attainment of 
the art object; nor are they partitioned as by a Chinese wall from the value-imbued 
aspects of the art objects. Yet I will insist that the matter of the medium and of the 
technique (these sole questions settled strictly by the empirical facts) concern pre­
artistic (or para-artistic) values. 
In attempting to valuate art, we are concerned with the wholes rather than the 
particular elements; and even if one single quality should constitute the whole of 
the value (I will admit the possibility), still its value could not be verified by its per­
ceptually grasped traits, since then we would have the vicious circle where the 
single quality (the X) is deemed an artistic value, and the supporting evidence (crite­
rion of value) is none other than just this quality being investigated. 
By citing an atypical, one-element pattern, do I cheat in treating the problem of 
empirical evidence as the possible criterion? Consider a more complicated, more 
representative case: a valuable whole which is a complex of elements A, B, C, etc. 
Here, we cannot simply reduce the whole to the sum of the perceptually grasped 
A, B, C, etc., but we do perceive a pattern of the whole, and it may be asked why 
we cannot seek our axiological supporting evidence in this configuration of the A, 
B, C, etc. This is to argue that we should be able to prove artistic criteria by refer­
ence to the elements of consonance, thematic variation, and dominance of a motif 
in a pattern - or, perhaps, it will be by reference to the elements of dissonance, 

54 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Valuation 
pounding repetition, or kaleidoscopic richness. In any case, the reason we do not 
do this is because we are then immediately back within the vicious circle. Precisely 
the elements of the composition are denoted as the value itself; how then can we 
use them as the axiological criteria? It's a bit like the Moliere character saying that 
opium opiumates. In other words (and coming back again to Sibley): Isn't it a matter 
of also looking for the axiological regularities as such, which provide the criteria 
and ultimately also our axiological-aesthetic orientation, rather than looking solely 
at the properties as such, which are governed or conditioned by regularities? More­
over-assuming my typology bears on the question -the regularities ("rules") are 
not infinite; indeed, the "rules" may be subsumed in some fundamental procedures. 
I should add that the point I am making is pertinent to each of the five major orien­
tations to value-to psychologism no less than to ontological objectivism, relation­
ism, sociological relativism, or historicism - because each of these standpoints 
does discriminate between the data considered and criteria, and because each 
axiological paradigm operates by subordinating .the specifically cited reasons to 
the axiological-aesthetic principles which it applies. 
Every statement or judgment of value, then, is conditioned by an axiological 
thesis which has its support in a philosophical framework of statements or judg­
ments. These are the contexts within which the ultimate criteria of aesthetic valuaᣊ 
tion operate: 
1 .  characteristics of the aesthetic experience; 
2. characteristics of the aesthetic object; 
3. interrelational aspects of the aesthetic subject and object; 
4. characteristics of the socioaesthetic setting (collective opinions of the object); and 
5. characteristics of the aesthetic subject and object which historically are observed 
to have recurrence. 
Certainly, this perspective differs from the reliance on empirical proof of value with­
in the valuated object in the tautological fashion, evasive of the necessary axiologi­
cal explications, which we noted in Sibley. 
In proposing this criteriological table, I have left aside the actual, empirical, ob­
served (or implied) characteristics of the objects of an aesthetic valuation. To specify 
these characteristics is the job of applied criteriology (having, of course, previously 
used the data to establish the ultimate axiological and philosophical framework). 
In this sense, we consciously. "commit an error" in persistently speaking of certain 
particular objects and experiences as though obviously or fundamentally "aes­
thetic." No set of qualities has such a priori, absolute existence. To impute such 

55 
The Conceptual Framework 
of Aesthetic Criteria 
characteristics it is first necessary to have an axiological orientation such as is here 
delineated. 
The valuational search for "rules" demands and calls such criteria into explicit 
being; while the formulated criteria lend clarity and a focused procedure to the 
valuator's undertaking. However distinctive and however varied, aesthetic values 
and valuational qualities must be regarded as criterion-conditjoned; and behind 
the aesthetic criteria stand, of course, the ultimate axiological-philosophical 
orientations. 
When Sibley speaks, then, of rule-governed conceptions (by which term he 
indicates such valuational qualities as harmony, disharmony, charm, melancholy, 
representation, or deformation, which the valuator describes in the given work 
of art), we can best take these as specific reasons offered to justify and particu­
larize an axiological orientation already adopted, whether deliberately or un­
knowingly. Such reasons can at times be haphazard, but most often they par­
ticularize and evince one or a nother fundamental orientation. Of course, here the 
ultimate criteria are more or less veiled behind the subcriteria (the specific valua­
tional qualities which are cited), but a definite axiological context and the con­
ditioning individual and sociohistorical variables may and must be described. 
It is almost habitual for critics within a specific field of the arts to use the 
subcriteria which are handy and prominent rather than applying the criteria for all 
aesthetic value. Moreover, these subcriteria for a special field are often m istaken 
for aesthetic fundamentals. 
Ultimate criteria may also be lost from sight if the function of an art object (most 
often, its reception) is accepted as a (sub)criterion which exhausts the interest of 
the given observer. Often the functional subcriterion that is applied is political, 
moral, or religious; such subcriteria may be, and readily are, admitted as surro­
gates into aesthetic valuation (for more on this matter, see chapter 3, "The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Evaluation"). I should add that it is impossible to cope with these surro­
gate criteria merely by pitting other (aesthetic) subcriteria against them. What is 
needed is a basic clarification of the valuational question through a confronta-
tion with fundamental principles. And since the ultimate criteria are veiled behind 
the subcriteria, they must be brought forward by analysis. Seeking to present the 
necessary and sufficient (rule-governed) properties which will justify us in calling 
object X a work of art and the state of mind of Y an aesthetic experience, we are 
forced to more and more fundamental criteria, until, at length, we arrive at an ir­
reducible axiological-aesthetic position oriented by definite, implicit, or manifest 

56 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Valuation 
philosophical premises. The typology of such positions is a useful a id, for it enables 
us to select among the five major orientations with a knowledge of post experience 
and the alternatives provided by oestheticians - hopefully, offering a means to 
eliminate needless confusions and pitfalls. 
On this basis, the historicist orientation affords, in my view, the sturdiest 
axiological-aesthetic solution and hence the best means of verification of aesthetic 
values. Earlier I sought to prove the superiority of this orientation; now I wish to 
move into a further description and articulation of its premises. Let me first go 
back briefly to a remark I made earlier about Wittgenstein, where I stated that 
his distinction between motivation and the causal nexus was helpful. Why is this 
so? When I respond to on art object, my response clearly is motivated by it, but the 
causation of the response is not necessarily comprised in my responding. Although 
I can give reasons for having the response, explanation ought to be considered 
another matter. I con supply supporting evidence with regard to certain proper­
ties-of my state of mind, of on object, or of both in context- while not stating any 
causes and effects. However, the causation problem ought to be faced squarely 
when we analyze matters bock to ultimate aesthetic criteria. For example, if a 
subjectivist says he calls X valuable, and the reason he gives is that he likes it, we 
should be able to press him further. We will want to get him to add that he sees 
no causes worth mentioning and that the sole motivation which he will admit is . 
that of preference (liking) for the value. We would similarly wont the relotionist to 
try to explain why a correlation emerges between object and subject (this motiva­
tional field, he soys, is crucial to his orientation); and the sociological relativist will 
be asked for the why of his substantiating reasons. In this connection, C. G. 
Hempel has recently given an instructive analysis proving the possibility of passing 
from understanding (empathy) to explanation of the disposition of a given indi­
vidual. 52 In terms of my argument, precisely the historicist orientation seems 
able to give the fullest explanation of its discerned specific reasons (motivations). 
In other words, the historicist con give the strongest available reasons for his 
reasons: he will develop a relationist position, broadened and qualified with 
historical understanding, with the resultant causal explanation deepened through 
investigation of the genesis of artistic value and of aesthetic experience. (For a 
central application of the relationist and historicist explanation of artistic value, 
see chapter 2, "What Is a Work of Art?" while in the next section I shall consider 
the problems and uses of genetic inquiries.) Briefly, the relational-historicist 
position studies the accumulated knowledge of ethnocentric (and also transcul-

57 
The Conceptual Framework 
of Aesthetic Criteria 
tural) aesthetic transactions, from the origins to the present, so as to locate in these 
processes the ultimate foundation of aesthetic valuation. Let me reiterate that the 
kind of historicism that I present here should be distinguished on the one side 
from the Historismus (of Meinecke and others) popular following World War I, 
which leads to sheer relativism; and on the other side from a quasi-theological 
(teleological) treatment of the historical process, which invests history with 
eternally fixed solutions (i.e., an immutable axiological status). My contention is 
that one must search for temporal aesthetic paradigms and for invariants, always 
recalling that no invariant may be pronounced valid beyond the historical data 
available to the present moment. 
I perhaps need scarcely add that a relational-historicist will not introduce the 
whole scope of causal explanation into the specific VGluation of every given X. 
Neither do we expect such an apparatus of theory from the average amateur of art 
or from a journalist-critic. Nonetheless, persons concerned with having an explana­
tion for their judgments should take care that the immediate reasons given for 
describing on art object are consciously regarded as criteria that point back to an 
ultimate axiological-philosophical choice which, in turn, entails a methodological 
procedure. Not every one of the major axiological orientations encourages us to 
inquire into the causes which lie behind the values that motivate persons (values 
that, on the other hand, are finally situated in social history and/or in nature); but 
in my opinion the most enlightening of the axiological standpoints do precisely 
this.53 
The Origins of Aesthetic (Artistic) Va lue 
It follows from the foregoing outline of the theoretical framework for valuational 
activity that we should investigate the origins of aesthetic (or more precisely, ar­
tistic) value, to see whether the best research and thought on this matter backs up 
and contributes to the historicist approach on valuation. It is, however, a complex 
question; and the following pages will be, at most, a suggestive introduction. 
Stimulating marxist discussions of the genesis of artistic value hove come 
recently from Ernst Fischer and, especially, Georg Lukacs. 54 In the course of 
describing my approach, I wont to distinguish it from theirs. 
Fischer, although well worth reading on this question, nonetheless does not 
really consider the emergence of art insofar as this is a problem of its differentia­
tion from certain preconditions (among them labor, rhythm, magic, sexual symbols). 
While dating art from the introduction of the division of labor, he fo ils to deal 

58 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Valuation 
with the process of its origination. This is to say that he omits to locate among the 
preconditions their germinal protoartistic qualities which eventually will be 
transformed into the primary traits of that new formation of social consciousness 
which is art. Also, Fischer omits to provide a tentative definition of art in his 
second chapter where it would be needed to move discussion forward, and this 
indeed stems from methodological irresolution whether to be concerned solely 
with the external context of art, or instead to attempt a geneticostructural ap­
proach, which would describe a defined artistic pattern that materializes as part of 
a sociocult.ural process in which labor and magic are closely integrated. Nor does 
Fischer adequately deal with the questions of magic and production, both central 
to the process, and this leaves him unprepared to say which of the two (or both 
equally?) was dominant in developing the earliest vague yet unmistakable traits 
of art. Nevertheless, his interpretation does bring out the fact that labor and 
magic do not merely "prepare for" the emergence of art but are the activities 
from which aesthetic value emerges. 
Lukacs" leaves us in no such uncertainty as to methodological premises and in­
tentions. He moves with deliberation to study the genetic process of art from the 
outside and inside, treating it as a complex, dialectical whole. He tends to describe 
magic as the dominant precondition and magical symbolism as the germinal origin 
for artistic mimesis. However, Lukacs' undeviating insistence that mimesis does 
provide the operative core of the artistic phenomenon bars him from a full appre­
ciation of certain aspects of art which are persuasively indicated by Fischer-
and which may be summarily described as formal structure, emergent from a 
rhythm and a symmetry that, in turn, acquire values due to the historical human 
experience of models in nature and, above all, in work. To claim that Lukacs ig­
nores such aspects would simply be untrue; but he does underestimate them in 
his estimate of the emergent traits of art. 
In the remarks that follow, I shall note where I differ with these recent, important 
marxist texts. (Let me add that it would be irrelevant to take up the issue with 
some earlier marxists, such as Plekhanov or Kautsky, whose thought on the 
origins of artistic value was influenced by nonmarxist sources.) The reader should 
bear in mind the overarching unity of methodologies which, despite differences, 
characterizes the marxist approaches presented here. 
As against the positions of Fischer and Lukacs- and, by extention, myself­
it might be rejoined that scholarship has for decades recognized the centrality of 
labor and magic to the birth of art; therefore, what is so "marxist" about our 

59 
The Origins of Aesthetic 
(Artistic) Value 
thesis? With some reservations, I accept the premise of this argument. But its 
conclusion seems incorrect, and here is why: 
l .  If I consider the views most widely acknowledged on the origin of art, it 
emerges that most are quite one-sided. These four hypotheses are the commonest: 
(a) Labor is called the primary determining factor (Karl BOcher through Franz 
Boas and his followers). (b) Magic is termed the key determining factor (James 
Frazer's The Golden Bough through Leonard Adam's Primitive Art and the ideas of 
today's ethnologists who hold that primordial myth shapes art). (c) Play is termed 
the key to the birth of artistic and aesthetic experience (Karl Groos through Johan 
Huizinga's homo ludens to contemporary studies of leisure as the foundation for 
human fulfillment). (d) Sexuality is termed the primary determinant (Freud and his 
school). These are predominant approaches to the question, although, undoubted­
ly, many attempts are made to combine approaches. 
2. Even when combinations of the approaches are tried, these are decisively 
different from what marxists offer as a procedure. Take two telling instances: 
(a) Claude Levi-Strauss includes both primitive myth and technical skills (bricolage) 
in his interpretation. However, his methodology does not pay attention to the 
genesis (in the strict sense of this term) of phenomena at the birth of art; he is not 
interested in the process whereby structures emerge. (b) Herbert Read sees the 
primordial evolution of ait occurring in two stages: the first vitalistic and the 
second constructive. In the vitalistic phase, symbolic magic combines with eidetic 
imagery to produce the work of art; in the constructive phase (the neolithic 
period), the labor element predominates. It should be evident from these two 
examples that even where a pair or more of factors are included, methodology 
remains the ultimate question. 
Because a positing of relevant factors is so distinct from the development of a 
suitable methodology, Georg Lukacs found, when he came to ask the marxist 
procedural question (How, and in what way, do antecedent factors shape works 
of art and also enter into them as specific traits in early sociocultural evolution?), 
that not a single nonmarxist scholar had directly posed the operative problem. 
Marxism thus has its own method on this question, and despite the fact that 
nonmarxists may employ some of these elements too, the following expectations 
seem its most salient conceptions: (a) historically, artistic activity comes before 
aesthetic experience (aesthetic experience being understood as the apt apprecia­
tion of an art object); and (b) art's structural traits are shaped by antecedent 
genetic stimuli. Both of these matters need further explanation. 

60 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Valuation 
I interpret any social phenomenon in two dimensions that are best thought of 
as intermeshed but distinct: one idiogenetic and the other allogenetic. The idioge­
netic dimension (from the Greek idios, "one's own") includes the totality of inner 
elements of a developing phenomenon, and the allogenetic (from the Greek a//os, 
"other") includes the totality of outside elements effective on a given process. 
We may say that the allogenetic analysis looks at the primary patterns inasmuch 
as they produce a new pattern. Primary patterns, in my view, include the biosphere 
of human activity as much as the natural and manmade environment. 
I have already suggested the two fields of primary patterns that have chief 
importance in the allogenetic analysis of emergent artistic value: magic and work. 
The artistic (new) pattern in its process of formation is studied by the idiogenetic 
approach, which finds such elements as rhythm or mimesis operative in inte­
grating a new, original whole. 
From the integral standpoint of the historical processes, we can say that 
primary patterns are the precondition of, and lend substance to, such semi­
autonomous, particular structures as primordial art objects through a process of 
interiorization that draws on the productive and magical activities. In the structure 
of the new class of objects, the primary patterns now participate in the trans­
formed aspect of formal characteristics and iconic symbols. In other words, 
allogenesis and idiogenesis are coterminous processes which together result in 
the structuring of an art object. Homo Faber works (but magical strategems are 
among his trusted modes of production); homo ludens plays (and yet this playing 
occurs in a context of labor or as a necessary preliminary to labor); and these are 
one and the same person. Play as leisure is the later-emerging activity of neces­
sarily productive humanity. But as the activities of civilization increase and 
ramify, and as communicative and practical targets and know-how increase, so 
too do the autotelic activities grow, directed into ever more varied structures. 55 
This two-sided methodology now leads us to restate the process of the genesis 
of artistic value, for we wish to describe both the external conditions and the 
internal process in a methodologically adequate fashion. Let us first make some 
further assumptions explicit. We can only approximately guess as to when the 
species homo sapiens began to show some aesthetic promise, on the basis of a 
developing physical and mental aptitude for generating this and other kinds of 
distance between the species and other modes of nature. Scholars in several 
different fields have estimated that the first evidence of "art," so-called, could 
have occurred in the upper paleolithic period, no nearer than 40,000 years to 

61 
The Origins of Aesthetic 
(Artistic) Value 
our era. We must, however, be cautious, for it is certain that our present attitudes 
distort the data. The primitive tribesmen who produced the objects which we 
admire quite evidently had no aim and thus no awareness of making art. 
If we now consider our methodological resources, and we weigh this dilemma 
of the discrepancy between what the cavedwellers thought to produce and what 
they indeed produced, we realize that what is to be studied is the gradual historical 
evolution of a specifically and acknowledgedly artistic field. The sociocultural 
context in which this process took place was magical/productive, or productive/ 
magical if you will. Tools were increasingly improved, enabling the worker to pass 
from rudimentary useful labor to the incorporation of more refined patterns and 
structures. The work was always touched by some element of magic, for the 
totemic (zoomorphic) mode of consciousness of that era was ubiquitous; but the 
animistic perceptions and beliefs, rites and symbolism were deeply practical in aim. 
They were, in fact, inseparable from the social praxis of the day, since magic was 
opus operandum inoperons (in Mauss's apt phrase). These primary polarities have 
a dialectical cohesion that admits tensions, ambivalences, and oppositions. We 
can thus delineate, in the extrinsic sphere, the development of means of produc­
tion -from flake and core tools, through efficient scrapers, adzes, wedges, cutters, 
and the like, continuing to pottery and basketry, and spinning and weaving at 
the dawn of the neolithic era -and, at the same time, a development of signs and 
ritual initiation in the magical sphere-from the rude steatopygic symbols for 
sexuality, apotropeic tattoos, the wondrous pictograms found in the caves of 
Altamira and Lascaux, Le Roe de Sers, Marsoulas, and Les Combarelles, to finally 
the earliest religious ceremonies. 
It should be borne in mind that, according to the newest findings of Louis 
Leakey, homo hobilis is two million years old and the available data allow us to 
state that the history of human tool-making reaches back at least a half-million 
years, to the early and middle Pleistocene age. There is no parallel evidence of 
magical rituals from this same early era. Yet the absence of data is not con­
clusive proof that homo sopiens then lacked the capability to produce symbols. 
In any case, the empirical data testify beyond any doubt to a primordial tool­
making disposition of humanity, spurred by the harsh necessities of the fight for 
survival. 
As concerns what we know today of thᣋ beginnings of art, the evidence appears 
to point to a time much, much later than the origin of human civilization. In my 
view, the same two factors which a number of anthropologists have found requi-

62 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Valuation 
site for the rise of civilization -tool-making plus magic and ritual -are indis­
pensable for the emergence of art. As I cannot provide here a detailed survey of 
the background to art's origin, I might refer the reader to Gordon Childe's books 
for the changing condition of the productive capacities of the species, and to the 
French scholar Henri Wallon for the history of the emergence of intelligence, 
which meant the transition from magical to realistic thought. A number of stan­
dard works describe the early evidences of art; the theoretical ineptitude of most 
of these studies may be disregarded, although some authors, such as Leroi-Gour­
hon, offer a stimulating insight into the primitive world view. Especially worth 
mentioning on the specifics of early art is Max Raphael's Prehistoric Cave Paintings 
(Princeton, 1 945); some of its theses may now appear dubious but the text as a 
whole is unsurpassed due to its philosophical-historical approach to the problem 
of form-content relationship in Dordoqne art. 
I should like to venture some hypotheses to be followed up, on the strength of 
information in the above and related studies and in the light of our foregoing 
clarifications: 
1 .  It does seem fair to postulate that artistic sensibility developed at an earlier 
era than did aesthetic sensibility. Members of the species "did" art before they 
"appreciated" art. Given the primordial conditions, with production and magic 
pressed into the service of immediate needs, millions of years would have been 
consumed in the refinement of productive and magical activity before "art" might 
conceivably have been institutionalized (the idea of the artist) and an aesthetic 
experience and attitude could emerge. 
2. Through this timespan which the contemporary mind can scarcely encom­
pass, and at a creeping pace scarcely to be recognized by today's harried slave of 
technology, the artistic activity did slowly evolve; and it remained imbued with 
both magical symbolism and utilitarian functions. The external stimuli were 
modestly absorbed and "internalized" within the product itself: rhythm and 
symmetry were emulated, and sexual and cosmic symbols provided the vocabulary 
for iconic, sensuously given communication. Increasing craft skills lent them-
selves to more finely articulated and coherent wholes. The quality of art objects 
which we today call form then emerged primarily around attributes such as 
rhythm, symmetry, and proportion, as a part of directly productive endeavors ­
although magical rites were also imbued with rhythmic cadences. Conversely, 
the birth of m·imesis was primarily tied up with magical symbolism -although such 
symbolism also appears in many artifacts crafted by primitive man. Accordingly, 

63 
The Origins of Aesthetic 
(Artistic) Value 
the two main aspects contributing to art's genesis cannot be sharply demarcated 
as stemming from quite opposite phenomena at the start of civilization. 
3. When did art which we would consider consummate become possible? I 
would conjecture: only as these more and more sophisticated "wholes" also 
took on another trait, that of autote/icism (from the Greek autos, "self" and te/os, 
"end" or "completion"). Very gradually, these objects came to be fashioned with 
the avowed intention of evoking o special kind of response, one that came near 
to that of the maker of the object or the doer of the performance. The transition 
to autotelicism should not be placed earlier than the peak of the neolithic era. 
This new acknowledgment of the intrinsic qualities of the "wholes" went to­
gether with a decay of the earlier integrity of the magical/productive context. 
The reason for this breakup of the seemingly eternal verities of animism was the 
increase of the results and control obtained by labor. The more effectively the 
species worked, the less did magic obsess the mind. The dialectics of the develop­
ment of our species hung chiefly on the unity or disunity of this dualism. The 
neolithic era saw a revolution in technics and material production - very much 
surpassing the sweep and impact of the industrial revolution of our eighteenth 
century. The parallel upswing of the autotelic interest and tolerance was marked 
by the emergent dominance of geometrical design. The magical, symbolic mean­
ings continued alongside, or else allusively veiled within the geometrical forms, 
as affirmations of prior symbolic representations; but the primary aim was now the 
artisans' and users' delight with the internally regulated order of ornaments on 
baskets, blankets, pots, etc. The role of magic was eventually taken over by 
religion, which made its own claims on art; but I need only note here that the 
composition of the religious object is such that its potential for autotelicism is not 
effaced. 
4. A spur to autotelicism, as suggested, was the gradual relinquishment by 
magic of its pervasive capacity to imbue every element of reality with a fetishistic 
function oriented to the fantastic understanding and/or mastery of life conditions. 
This was due not only to geometric stylization but also to the change in repre­
sentation, which remained the practice of primitive humanity; representation 
became increasingly autotelic as it grew more deliberately and ably mimetic. 
The pictograms on the cave walls, where their function had to be more occult 
than meant for delight, still performed symbolic functions-but the prototypes for 
these ideograms (the stags and buffalo and hunters out in the real world) were 
more "naturally" presented, while the totemistic and fantastic functions receded. 

64 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Valuation 
Mimesis began to establish a new semiotic code (Aeschylus in Athens and later 
studies by George Thomson explore the transition). 
5. To find increasingly realistic traits does not justify a description of "natural­
ism." This error is still frequently committed in handbooks on prehistoric times, but 
I want to stress very strongly that depiction in the paleolithic era was not a 
detailed rendering of that world, and we con derive from it no "report" on the 
external conditions of the tribesmen at the down of mankind. Mimesis remained 
very close to a magical realism. Mon still confronted nature and the animal was 
still the principal mediation in the Altomiro or Lascaux frescos, the bison with a 
turned head from Mos d'Azil. and the hunting scenes from Haggar. We ore here 
offered a synthetic grasp of the existence of our primordial human species: the 
powerfully graphic portraits of bison, rhinoceros, horses, lions, and so on, were 
elements of a paleolithic vision founded on the zoomorphic principle. Its main 
aspects were slaying and copulation (procreation), both reflective of the effort to 
survive and the need to contest vigorously and resourcefully with nature (the 
servitude/mastery syndrome). 
The above examples are evidence of mimesis as a process occurring at once 
within the magical world and against it. Mimesis gradually became liberated from 
the primacy of magical patterns, and, when we compare the work of the barbaric 
era with the savage antecedents, we see that representation hos become imitatio. 
It might be rejoined that the subsequent neolithic era does not permit the above 
conclusion, because its essential characteristics involved geometrical design, and 
representation was stopped in its evolution to appear only later and in a new guise. 
Con it then be termed the selfsame mimesis in evolution? I think the only sensible 
reply is as follows: The essential features of the neolithic era did not eliminate 
the mimetic impulses and the practice that corresponded to them. It would be 
arbitrary to hold that between, say, 5,000 and 2,500 years ago, the time of Homer, 
all representotionalism disappeared from primitive arts. Clearly, art for the home 
gained a priority in this era due to developed technical-material conditions which 
encouraged the species to ever more refined shaping of objects for everyday prac­
tical use. Yet let us note that while at this time artistic form become an enhanced 
quality of the created wholes (and was, let me add, a continuation of the pointed 
cove compositions that dote from the Magdalen ion era), so did the equally primi­
tive African culture, for example, continue and deepen the mimetic trend (sites in 
Rhodesia provide the positive evidence). 
We may conjecture a similar process in the syncretic expression of dance, song, 

65 
The Origins of Aesthetic 
(Artistic) Value 
and poetry. George Thomson's Marxism and Poetry (1 946) sketches the transition 
from recitation to written poems, from inspiration a nd trance to composition, 
from anonymous utterance by and for the whole community to individual utterance. 
This passage is parallel to a transition from hypnotic, magical symbolism to epic 
narration about the world. 
6. If these hypotheses on the origin of art ore accepted, we con conclude that, 
although the primitive creator's intention will never be discovered, we ore none­
theless justified in describing as "art" these structured qualities probably meant 
only as communication. Retrospectively and looking from "above" on this mil­
lennia-long process of groping for form and mimesis united with one another in 
expressive, relatively autonomous wholes, we con see first the protoaesthetic 
constituents, which become increasingly conspicuous and cogent, and next (by the 
midpaleolithic era) some initial artistic structures. I believe my hypotheses are not 
merely a reading of aesthetic criteria into a primeval context to impose on his­
torically and axiologically alien frame of reference on an object of study having 
uncomprehended circumstances, purposes, genesis, and function. Aware of that 
danger, we do and must begin with the scrutiny of specific structures ascribed to 
particular eras through scientific testing procedures. It seems certain that art was 
not a priori given to mankind, nor did it emerge suddenly. Rather, art slowly be­
came art as known in recorded history. The sets of qualities apparent in artifacts 
from the Auvignac period dote the evolution of the art phenomenon from earlier 
than the first intentional, self-conscious art activities known to us. If we admit 
works from ancient Egypt and Greece as art, the traits we admire in them ore 
revealed in nuclei in paleolithic beginnings. Marx hos it that human anatomy is 
the investigator's clue to the anatomy of apes, accepting that while the ape is not 
a homo sapiens both species are simians (primates). An analogous comprehension 
of the sculpture of Lespugue through study of the work of Myron or Praxiteles is 
also reasonable. 
How does the foregoing analysis stand up in the light of recent empirical re­
search by paleolithic scholars? A number of doubts have been introduced on mat­
ters that had once seemed settled. For instance, it is asked whether the cave sites 
of drawings really were sacred for magical purposes -the patterning of footprints 
within and without the caves, and some evidence of children in the presumedly 
ritual precincts, lend evidence to the doubters. Why were so few mammoths and 
reindeer depicted, since they were a chief aim of the hunts, if the drawings had the 

66 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Valuation 
magical function of enabling the kills? Nor is the fact of frequent overpointing, or 
superimposition of the presumably esoteric images, ignored by the questioners. 
Indeed, how do we know the drawings were made before hunts? Could they not 
hove been made afterwords, perhaps long after the event? In view of such issues 
raised by recent anthropological discussion, I would like to note that some matters 
seem yet well beyond dispute even among the prehistorians and ethnologists-and 
reasonably so, if one cautiously reconstructs the integral structure of primitive 
society, its material basis, and the evidence of the activity of homo sapiens in that 
era. 
On what matters does something like unanimity seem to prevail among experts 
in this field? 
1 .  An "art for form's sake" interpretation gets no support from the experts who 
explain this initial period. 
2. The mind of the aboriginal, it is agreed, seems to be characteristically attracted 
by the goal of an extension of his powers into the environment through magical 
attitudes and the making of tools, which increasingly achieve the dual result of plac­
ing homo sopiens in control of eventualities while lending the species a certain 
distance on the flux of experience. 
3. The principal role of animals in the iconography leads all scholars to conclude 
that the sympathetic magic of the hunters was a chief spur to artistic activity as 
such. 
4. Agreement prevails as to the general totemic significance of primitive art; the 
only difficulty seems to be to elucidate the concrete circumstances, the reasons, and 
the aims of the given totemic context. 
5. Sexual {mythological) motifs are everywhere understood -especially since 
Leroi-Gourhan's investigations-as the energizing element in primitive symbolic 
magic. 
Now, it is just because there is substantive agreement on these fundamental 
matters that I dare to argue that the contemporary empirical data do support the 
philosophical-historical interpretation I propose here. I will also insist that my analy­
sis, while corresponding to the best available evidence, also goes further than the 
findings of particular research. I urge this because only a philosophically founded 
and coherent theory can raise and encompass the final problems of art's origin. 
Whether or not it is the marxist interpretation which emerges triumphant among 
other competing philosophies in offering the fundamental context is, however, a 
meta-aesthetic issue which I shall not attempt to argue here. 

67 
The Origins of Aesthetic 
(Artistic) Value 
Given this short statement of basic considerations and hypotheses for interpret­
ing the origins of art and with it the genesis of aesthetic value, I can now elaborate 
on certain points. First, we may tentatively define the art object in its nascent struc­
ture; we may soy that it composes o relatively separated and self-coherent whole 
produced by acculturated and learned skills, that it has some formal qualities (such 
as rhythm, symmetry, proportion) in a harmonious arrangement, and that also it 
has eidetically given symbolic meanings which a perceiver can relate to the real 
world. I do not think I need to add this to the tentative definition, but I shall soy it 
anyway: these "wholes" were the expression of attitudes pervasive to the given 
primitive society. Only much later did idiosyncrasy-that is, a heightened individual 
expression -begin to occur among the makers of these objects. I should again 
emphasize that the saturation of art objects with the implicit aims of magic and 
labor did not cease for more millennia than we can comprehend. Indeed, the degree 
of independence achieved by artistic value throughout history hos been entirely in a 
context of the dialectical development of magic and production, considered in their 
unity. Not until the nineteenth century of our era was there ever- in all history, so 
far as I am aware-the overt declaration of a break from the subordination of 
artistic value to utility value or fetish value. 
What about the character of aesthetic experience in the primitive eras? I have 
suggested that the emergence of this sensibility depended on the progress of art­
the disposition to aesthetic response developed as a feedback or responsiveness 
among croft workers who became creative in acting on the nuances they noticed in 
the items they made for productive and occult use. It was surely the case that aes­
thetic awareness could become explicit, highly articulated, and farflung only when 
the artists had an institutional recognition conferred on their skills and talents. On 
the one hand, it is true that a// aesthetic experience is "object-embedded." On the 
other hand, the apt response is realized only where the perceiver has gained suffi­
cient separateness from nature (here, see Marx's 1844 Manuscripts on the differ­
ence between the animal and the humanized senses) and where a tradition of expe­
rience with the protoartistic dimension has accustomed the sensibility. At the initial 
stage, the protooesthetic sensibility scarcely glimpsed any motive to grow disen­
cumbered of its pervasive utilitarian and magical (later religious) conditionings and 
responses. Nonetheless, the protoaesthetic capacity developed and spread, and its 
autotelic character in turn gained recognition. (I cannot stress too strongly that 
these events occurred inconspicuously and took longer than we can comprehend.) 
This relative autonomy of aesthetic experience took o position parallel and com-

68 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Valuation 
plementary to that of artistic structure, though less noticed perhaps. However, 
when the individual subject in early history would interiorize his perception of 
an artistic whole and savor ecstasy from the intensity of his equilibrium, his wish 
would be to know this experience more vividly and definitely. At this point, I would 
introduce the idea of psychic homeostasis- a  synthesis of all faculties of spirit or 
mind, suspended for the purpose of contemplating the "rival ᣉarid" presented by 
art. This homeostatic equilibrium has the most proximate correlation with the "play­
ful" quality of creative activity. For a long time, the playfulness of the art activity 
was obscured or denied by the scarcity-and-utility mentality of historically primitive 
contexts. Then, long after play was acknowledged to pertain to the artists' manipu­
lation of materials, techniques, and symbols, the centrality of this same play quality 
in aesthetic sensibility was widely unacknowledged. 
These propositions relate not only to the historicist philosophical orientation of 
marxism; they are also relevant to some of the generalizations reached by Monroe 
Beardsley. The traits of unity, complexity, and intensity, argues Beardsley, may be 
accepted as characteristic of both art objects and the aesthetic experience. I find 
that these traits correspond to my concept of a coherent whole comprising a "rival" 
world that is separate from the real world and pervaded with a richness of cohe­
sively patterned qualities, or sets of qualities, which are immediately given and 
symbolically meaningful. It is, moreover, illuminating to bring out two points on 
which Beardsley's conception differs from mine. First, an a historical method is used 
to arrive at the conclusions: Beardsley appears to want to describe some principles 
of invariable artistic value, this despite the instrumentalism of his Aesthetics, which 
has an ethnocentric amplitude that spans the European tradition. Second, Beardsley 
discovers value in aesthetic objects only when they evoke (arouse) aesthetic experi­
ences, and the value (goodness or greatness) of the experiences is decisive for him. 
My own view is that aesthetic experiences are attendant on and thus subordinate to 
the primordial artistic activity. Looking at this issue historically, there seems no 
good reason to presume the cavedwellers to have experienced contemplation of a 
peculiar kind, since (however some among them may have excelled) the whole 
community partook of producing primeval art objects-and since art and artists 
were not yet designated as such, we may be certain, not even implicitly. Later, when 
the complex aesthetic field was established in the civilizational context, it could 
more or less readily command attention and receptiveness. Yet, no matter how 
relatively autonomous in more than one sense the aesthetic experience may be­
come, it acquires this status only in dependence on and in feedback with the art 

69 
The Origins of Aesthetic 
(Artistic) Value 
object. Even so, although Beardsley and I have differences, I am struck by the affin­
ity of our findings in the face of the disparity of our premises. 
A further interesting fact is the healthy result brought about at the insistent prod­
ding of aestheticians who see no way to establish a definition of aesthetic value or 
of aesthetic experience. Those of us who continue to seek definition have been 
helped and encouraged in refining our methods and statements by the negativism 
of critics who insist on pointing to everything problematic or in need of further 
study. Indeed, the arguments of the antidefinitionists have done a great deal to per­
suade me that, everything considered, the historicist position provides the most 
cautious and sound basis for examining properties in the aesthetic field. 
More than the above I really cannot attempt here with regard to presenting the 
genetic interpretation and its tentative findings. However, it may be worthwhile 
briefly to confront the geneticostructural approach advanced by marxists with an­
other and different structuralism that is much admired today in Europe and also in 
the United States. The structuralists have done much to spread an understanding of 
the art object as an autotelic whole. They are usually careful to speak of the entity 
they analyze as comprising strictly the synchronic aspect of the art object, which 
cannot be comprehended without adding the diachronic analysis. "History," they 
soy, is implicit in every pattern, and they add that each "historical process" gives 
rise to the formation of such patterns. We find these statements in Jacobson, Levi­
Strauss, and in their structuralist forefathers (e.g., Mukarovsky from the early 
1 930s), and, nonetheless, there is considerable difficulty in taking such formula­
tions as an aid to improving a methodology. The problem lies in the failure of struc­
turalists to confront real history. They do not become involved with the genesis of 
structures or the explanation of cause-and-effect results and meanings. However, 
it is just such conditionality which most needs analysis. 
Let me state the problem more generally. In considering the relations between 
art and reality, can we confine our attention to just the semiotic-functional depen­
dencies? If we think we can, then do we accept that such an unarguably deter­
minant dimension with regard to the particular art object as is provided by the 
broadly understood traditions of culture may thus be subsumed? If so, then what 
about the specific causal effect of other social phenomena in relation to this cate­
gory? I think the answer must be no on both accounts. In many respects, the entity 
as it is studied by the structuralists will remain inexplicable. Their method considers 
an already given structure subject to modification that, however, does not go be­
yond the limits of semiotic change. 

70 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Valuation 
The marxist rejects this conception; and must instead ask how the given structure 
emerges from the nonartistic field. This geneticostructural inquiry must, of course, 
start with the structure (whole) which is given, that is, with the result of an histori­
cal process which has to be reconstructed and scrutinized. The later phenomenon is 
something of a guide to explain and understand the earlier, and perhaps even the 
original from which it stems. We are thus compeled to inquire how, through the 
long history of art, internal and external factors have cooperated to this end. In 
brief, what we look for is the process of the origin and then the evolution of a phe­
nomenon. What we consider is a process of continual tension, reaction, and com­
pensation, with the archaic and the plainly conventional, the invigoratingly new and 
the challengingly "avant-garde,"·all in constant flux with prior patterns, which are, 
thus, being continually upset. The process is conditioned and precipitated chiefly by 
extra-artistic phenomena, on a foundation of the extant background of artistic re­
sources, and is, of course, most immediately influenced by the present artistic con­
text. 
Every social pattern -and so each artistic pattern - is subject to this rule of caus­
ality, and explication should seek not to ignore or pass it over lightly. For an ex­
ample of causal processes we might consider the tensions and conflicts of the ide­
ologies (distinctly inflected structures of thinking) which have their referential basis 
in the class structure and conflicts of society. When we consider the relations of art 
and reality in this dimension, perhaps we note the clash and tension between what 
the particular artist creatively "asserts" in his work (through the moral of a story, 
direct declamation, choice of genre or subject matter, etc.), and a socially class­
dominant or even pervasive idea of what social relations, or art itself, should be 
thought to be. This sort of discontinuity, the novelty characterizing structures of art 
enhanced and inflected by an aura which is causal, can be conceptualized in terms 
of a disparity between the psychogenesis and the sociogenesis of an entity. 
If we had to rely only on a structuralist methodology for our approach to the 
"diachronic" processes, then we might do no better than to go back to Juriy Tinya­
nov and Boris Eichenbaum. They had a splendid grasp of the idiogenetic problem. 
However, a marxist is not satisfied with the idiogenetic causal explanation alone. 
ldiogenetic development remains incomprehensible in the absence of an account of 
the a//ogenetic dimension which interacts with it. Just this methodological step was 
taken by the Czech theorist of literature Jan Mukazhovski in the late 1 930s. 
It is not enough to scrutinize phenomena for conjunctures -that is, for mere 

71 
The Origins of Aesthetic 
(Artistic) Volue 
convergences of elements in a longer and more durable flux of elements and prop­
erties. These occur often, and are obvious. What is more significant is the possi­
bility of certain invariant combinations. 56 The geneticostructuralist interpretation 
may most securely verify such invariants (constants), if they are traceable, precisely 
because of its incessant concern for the patterns of development within the frame­
work of the history of culture from its dawn up to our time. Our attention ultimately 
goes then to these aesthetic constants which we look for whether we are delving 
into the origins of art in various places, or are concerned with our own time of in­
ternationally-knowing restlessness with art. Of course, we do not expect an abso­
lute identity of characteristics when aesthetic objects or experiences from such geo­
graphically or temporally incongruous contexts are compared. There cannot be a 
strictly commensurate identity of cross-cultural patterns. But if we look for at least 
a remarkable similarity among some kinds of traits, shall we be disappointed? 
I have no wish to anticipate here the circumstantial analysis applied in the next 
chapter, but some observations can be made in a framework of the geneticostruc­
tural method that would be badly compromised if it could be proven that the art 
of today shatters traditions of artistic value which were agreed upon over thou­
sands of years. After all, is it not true that mimesis is no longer a central aspect of 
art, that craftsmanship (a contribution of skill or technique) and even an artifact 
(a material accomplishment, or "object") seem no longer essential? However, if 
we then look into earlier aesthetic history, could we not find grounds for seeing 
these tendencies as actually reverting to some archaic, and even protoartistic prac­
tices of art? For, indeed, some members of the avant-garde are devoted to a paro­
technofogicaf approach, while another grouping seeks to stir ancient emotions 
through pararitual. Such tendencies, moreover, diminish individuality in art. 
In response, some scholars have forecast the death of art itself. This obituary 
seems wrongly conceived; and yet, there likely is on end to plausibility for certain 
definitional ideas of the traits of art. Some long-occepted assertions may vanish, 
such as that concerning art's individualism; but will there not remain - beyond all 
the haphazard convergences and the ruptures of pattern - some funda mental valu­
ational traits, not as an absolute identity, but instead manifested variously in a 
continuum? Here I would especially cite the ongoing, recurrent evidence of a di­
rectly given perception of a "rival," relatively autonomous "world," which has 
heightened, peculiar properties that some person's ideation has organized. 
A comparable conclusion seems warranted if we examine aesthetic experience 

72 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Valuation 
through the ages. The avant-garde's accomplishments seem to de-emphasize the 
aesthetic experience of a free play of psychic energies; and the homeostatic har­
mony of a receptive spirit which acquires balance appears unsought. Intended, or 
at least principally achieved instead, is a state of unease or of being off-balance 
and riddled by tension; this psychic response is closer to the gambler's fevered, 
apprehensive anxiety than it is to the relaxed almost equestrian control that once 
was attributed to homo ludens. What else do we notice as characteristic of the ex­
perience of avant-garde art? Doesn't the experience of some of this art depend on 
protoortistic phen9)mena which are reminiscent of earliest culture? Phenomena 
which, accordingly, immerse us, in part, in the practical (technical) or symbolic (cog­
nitive) activities which also cradled the aesthetic traits proper at art's origin? Sup­
pose the neolithic person had somehow set down the protoaesthetic experience in 
a description comprehensible to us. Wouldn't we presumably interpret it as respon­
sive to a basically practical activity which, however "graced by" decorative or ex­
pressive "touches," was yet an extensively contingent mode of experience? None­
theless, although contemporary aesthetic experience departs from what art was 
said to evoke a century ago, and although at points it also seems to approach the 
task-oriented description we ascribe to the origin of aesthetic reception, there still 
seem to be invariables. What does remain, when long-term but inessential notions 
of fundamental aesthetic response have been stripped away? 
l .  The experience is still evoked by an aesthetic object. 
2. It may still be felt to "trigger" a homeostatic balance of our psyche. 
3. Due to direct stimulation by a "rival" object-world, an exhilarating play of mental 
energies may be initiated (even if cursorily, and even if peppered with annoy­
ances and a preoccupation with contingencies). 
From this analysis, I provisionally conclude that the genetic interpretation sub­
stantially contributes to our criteriology of aesthetic value, that. is, to our discern­
ment that some properties of objects and of experiences are constants and others 
are variables. True, I do expect to find some constants, and I may be especially keen 
for data that point this direction. In this respect, I place a good deal of confidence, 
philosophically, in the witty dictum of Marx (in his Grundrisse) that, as to method, 
the human anatomy is the best clue to the anatomy of the ape. Undoubtedly, no 
one can entirely rid himself of the preconceptions that stem from his contemporary 
and personal viewpoint. Yet it does seem possible to make effective use of the con­
temporary "clues" to any category of antecedents. In thus approaching the prepar-

73 
The Origins of Aesthetic 
(Artistic) Value 
ations for contemporary aesthetic value and experience, I use historical researches 
which start from the origins of civilization and come up to the present in consider­
ing the aesthetic artifacts and the recorded opinions of artists and audiences. Here, 
I have only been able to make the most abbreviated application of this means of 
inquiry, chiefly confining myself to a hypothesis concerning the origins of aesthetic 
activity. This same methodological approach has to be applied to, and checked 
against, the evidence of constants and variances in subsequent periods. The prob­
lems increase; the approach must be more complexly fashioned as the materials 
available to aesthetic valuation accumulate. However, the axiological conclusions 
will also begin to firm up and a pattern of reciprocal elucidation and checking will 
appear. The causal knitting which the genetic interpretation looks for helps to mini­
mize error. If the historical inquiry described had complete success, we should be 
able to valuate with axiological accuracy even the most recent and avant-garde 
tendencies of artistic activity. I am skeptical that this degree of historical and valua­
tional mastery can be achieved. Still, my belief is that it must be sought. But it 
should be pursued cautiously, no matter what temptations encourage a rush for 
certainty. 
Of particular help for the axiology of art would be a rigorous and exhaustive 
proiect to study its autotelicism (i.e., the relative and always tenuous autonomy of 
art), as we experience it in contrast to the actual world that art "rivals." A scholar 
might want to couple to this study an analysis of the recurrent temptation which 
artists feel to erect an "ivory tower" in reiection of the claims made by the world 
(which provides the nourishment for all art) on its wards. Obviously, such studies 
cannot be pursued without touching on the problem of general (i.e., social) and par­
ticular (i.e., aesthetic) alienation and disalienation. 
Another task which the geneticostructural method must tackle is centered on 
what Beardsley has termed "regional qualities," in other words, those elements or 
sets of elements which are to be found only at certain places and times, but which 
do nevertheless constitute value. That certain qualities occur prominently only to 
disappear or suffer neglect and contempt (they are, of course, fused with more 
durable values) is an effect which arises at sociohistorical conjunctures. We can, 
for instance, understand the successes even of so-called formalism, or of the utili.: 
tarian tendency, as being due to the temporal predominance of "regional" quali­
ties. In sum, if, due to the time and the place, the role of any favored artistic quali­
ties becomes disproportionate, then we can speak (borrowing a term from Thomas 

74 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Valuation 
Kuhn's study of the structure of scientific revolutions) of the prevalence of aesthetic 
paradigms, as opposed to what I hove termed the aesthetic invariables or con­
stants. 
Synthesis: Towards the Valuation of Today's Art 
I want to conclude with some comments concerning the valuation of the contem­
porary state of the arts. Naturally, my viewpoint is that of sociohistorical relation­
ism, its axiology being the only one which takes effective account of the prior his­
tory of human culture, including especially the tendency of the aesthetic object to 
become set off from adjacent life phenomena. Lacking such fundamentals, a valua­
tional orientation would be hard put to discriminate the fundamental from the 
ephemeral properties of art objects. 
Can art be defined in terms of a single property? Such definitions have been tried 
by many scholars. Others, however, whose approaches go back to Dugald Stuart 
and Hippolyte Taine, explicitly settle for nothing simpler than a set or complex of 
properties; and it is in this trend that I too find the most stimulating efforts and the 
most promising opportunities. As Morris Weitz has shown, the single-trait approach 
to valuating art has always drawn a blank. 57 The single criteria proposed by for­
malism, voluntarism, emotionalism, intellectualism, and intuitionism were all proven 
inadequate or mistaken. We could also add to his list: sensual ism (the criterion of 
art as a given in sensuous-concrete form); operotionalism {the criterion of art which 
includes everything manmade); and axiologism {the criterion of art which includes 
every sensuously apprehended value-the iconic interpretation). Yet, and regret­
tably {as I tried to bring out while discussing Wittgenstein's reception in the United 
States), the proposal regarding criteria which Weitz in turn makes {his pars con­
struens) is oddly feeble. More adequate is the position of DeWitt Porker in his study, 
"The Nature of Art."58 No single property but a complex of characteristics is defini­
tional; Parker argues. He names three properties which he thinks outstanding: re­
liance on the imagination to provide satisfaction; social significance; and an inner 
harmony of the work. Still more convincing is the proposition of Beardsley, cited 
ea rlier. 59 
What have the Soviet marxist authors considered to be the basis of valuation? 
Many of their texts display an inherited encumbrance of stereotyped utterances 
{e.g., "art is thinking in images") which have little usefulness when one tries to 
solve the core difficulties. Other formulations ore completely wrong: such as the as-

75 
Synthesis: Towards the 
Valuation of Today's Art 
sertion that realism is the specific constituent property of all art. Among recent 
assessments, there has been some favor for the criterion of "poetic pathos" (a term 
also used by Belinsky), a property understood as synonymous with "the ideologi­
cal-emotional-sensuous content" of a work of art. 60 This axiological preference is 
stated by Moisei Kagan and also by Leonid Stolovich, whose work The Object of 
Aesthetics develops criticisms of competing interpretations of art and so carefully 
argues its author's own approach as to have drawn much attention. 61 In its own 
way, however, the solution attempted by Kagan and Stolovich seems as one-sided 
as those surveyed by Weitz. 
A complete and acute assessment of the contemporary state of the arts requires, 
among other measures, an account of all of the possibly relevant phenomena, that 
is, an account of the work accepted as being significant by most artists and schol­
ars. The theories of the Soviet scholars are hampered because their conception of 
what may and may not be art is too arbitrary and discriminatory. In comparison, 
the historicist viewpoint gives the advantage of allowing a comparison of novel 
trends with all of the contemporary, broadly recognized achievments in art that 
working artists closely consult in orienting their new aesthetic strategies, as well 
as with masterpieces and lesser works of a more distant past that provide indices 
of certain substantial principles of regularities which have so far endured. The next 
chapter, "What Is A Work of Art?" seeks to provide a definition adequate to con­
temporary artistic praxis. Four distinct criteria are there suggested; and the one that 
nowadays seems still predominant and decisive relates to a coherent field created 
by the art object, achieved with the special characteristics of the art structure.62 
Again, no one of the conditions for artistic status that I single out is sufficient in 
itself. The art object presents a coherent, relatively self-sufficient whole; it is com­
posed of a compact expressive harmony of formal qualities and of eidetically given 
symbolic meanings; it is an artifact that is the product of skills which must be ac­
quired and disciplined; and it is the work of a given individual whose objectified 
traits pervade it to greater or less degree. These aspects function in the aggregate, 
they are an ensemble of complementary value-laden properties. 
Every work of art is a sign referring to reality, if only in the sense that it is a 
symptom (token) of the real: it is genetically and functionally related to reality. 
And yet the sign is simultaneously "transparent" and "opaque." Charles Morris' 
article "Esthetics and the Theory of Signs" ( 1 939), elucidates this point. Its '"trans­
parency" relates the art object to the external world; its "opacity" is a function 

76 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Valuation 
of the object's integral structure of perceptual qualities, which together with 
their attributes (ideas, representation, expression) create the relatively autonomous 
value. The subjective criteria so often applied to determining whether on object 
is art ore activated by the "opacity" dimension of the work, so to speak. In other 
words, there is a sheer pleasure in gazing on the harmonious sensuous elements 
(quod visum placet); and there is a kind of playful recreation in this giving of 
attention, an articulation of the "surplus energy," which art furnishes beyond any 
moral or practical or cognitive functions. 
Originality is not an attribute of every art object. However, every work will 
be (as I have mentioned) representative of a given artistic individuality, and the 
magnitude of this aspect is determinable in each specific case. How is the in­
dividuality measured? Each work of art carries on open dialogue with both its 
tradition and the gamut of ar:istic practices current at the moment; and there is, 
to some extent, a modification, as well as perpetuation, of these available values, 
properties, and materials. Following the suggestion of S. K. Shaumian, the Soviet 
linguist, we might say that art objects are "phenotypes" within the context of 
"genotypes": that is, every artist has a dependency, dialectical in character, on 
his historical situation and the traditions inherent to his vocation. I would add that 
the phenotype has some possibility of shattering an accepted genotype (which 
occurs in cases of great artistic originality). The functioning of the genotype is 
central to the historical processes; and one function of originality is to prepare 
the way for a new genotype. 
In the next chapter I will offer a tentative definition of artistic value which needs 
further factual verification, just as does the handling of the genesis of artistic 
value presented in this chapter. To soy this is to advertise that the accumulation 
of facts may point to different conclusions. The chief problem in verification, I 
should add, has to do with the differences among the major ethnocultural tradi­
tions. Is it reasonable to expect that the some constants would recur in the Indian, 
the Chinese, and the European heritages of art and aesthetic experience? This 
question must be studied without equivocations. A collective approach is needed, 
for surely only the coordination found in a research institute entirely devoted to 
this question, and drawing not only on aestheticians and art historians but on 
anthropologists as well, con hope to provide a conclusive answer. 
The methodological strategy which I propose does require just such resources 
for its full implementation. I should also add that the usefulness of the present 

77 
Synthesis: Towards the 
Valuation of Today's Art 
hypothesis will not be lessened if its tentative conclusions are finally disproved. 
However, on the evidence available (see, for example, the Fall 1 965 issue of the 
Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism), it appears that the recurrence of basic 
properties will prove transcultural. Why? Such concepts as harmony, rhythm, 
symmetry, mimesis, expression, catharsis, and homo ludens occur again and 
again in the cultures of East and West. 
Finally, I must emphasize that it is inherent to the principles of my methodology 
that the values of art as we define them carry no prescriptive force for the future 
of art. We con make no blueprint of what is to come. We can only study the pre­
sent, very unsettled situation from the standpoint of what have been the constants, 
and inquire of recent developments, which seem to annihilate form and take the 
shape of life itself, whether they in fact destroy everything in the aesthetic tradi­
tion. Happenings seem careless of artistic structure, but do they deport entirely 
from aesthetic patterning? In this light, it would seem an error should anyone 
want to dismiss the present analysis "because there hove been later artistic de­
velopments" (which in their turn, of course, will be challenged and eclipsed). 
In any case, Umberto Eco's fascinating Opera aperta; formo e indeterminazione 
nelle poetiche contemporanee (Milan, 1 962) offers persuasive argument that the 
"open" artistic structure- Eco sometimes calls it the "work of art in action" ­
will continue to assert on internalized coherence and specificity in the familiar 
matrix of our everyday world. Indeterminacy and ambiguity ore the most ancient 
telltale traits of works of art; and, thus, what we see at present, Eco holds, is 
simply a modification in the expected role of the artist, the perceiver, and the 
result which relates and unifies them. 
This standard triadic schema hos grown elastic or fluid, much more dynamic. 
The process of theatricalization of the fine arts and music shifts the attention to 
creativity itself, downgrading the created product; the act of expressing reduces 
the lasting result of the expression to secondary importance. Even literature hos 
become involved to a point, though it is resistant to this trend of theotricolizotion. 
There is, for example, Julio Cortazor's Rayuela (1 963), a stochastic playing of 
the artist's thoughts in such way as to entangle the reader in the search for the 
meaning of his existence and, also, the meaning of what is termed the domain 
of art. Perhaps the future of art will demand a modification (i.e., extension) of the 
concept of structure (pattern). A work of art's internal structure might lose some 
of its significance; instead, there would predominate the structure of a scene 

78 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Valuation 
that comprehends the artist, the public, and their mutual achievement. Beyond 
this we must not anticipate. We should bear in mind, as respects the lacunae in 
the prognosis, that no rebus instantibus definition of art could soy more. It appears, 
to my way of thinking, that aesthetics may profit from the example of Hegel's "Owl 
of Minerva," which never ventures forth until dusk. Aesthetics should follow artistic 
developments and not attempt to precede them. 

79 
Notes 
1 .  Unfortunately, my essays on the nature 
of value facts (o question which is only 
briefly touched upon in this chapter) hove 
not yet been translated into English. They 
hove been published in Polish in Studia 
Filazoficzne (no. 4, 1 967; no. l . , 1 968). 
2. M. Roder, ed., A Modern Book of Esthet­
ics, 3rd ed. (New York, 1 960); E. Vivas and 
M. Krieger, eds., The Problems of Aesthetics 
(New York, 1 953); M. Weitz, ed.,. Problems 
in Aesthetics (New York, 1 959). 
3. R. Bayer, Traite d'esthetique (Paris, 1 956), 
pp. 234, 238-239. 
4. G. Morpurgo-Tagliabue, L 'Esthetique 
contemporaine (Milan, 1 960), p. 61 2. 
5. See, for example, B. Ghiselin, ed., The 
Creative Process (Berkeley and Los Angeles, 
1 954). 
6. M. C. Beardsley and H. M. Schueller, eds., 
Aesthetic Inquiry: Essays on Art Criticism 
and the Philosophy of Art (Encino, Calif., 
1 967), pp. 1 7 1 -1 87. 
7. N. Rescher presents a conception which 
is similar to mine on many points in his 
Introduction to Value Theory (Englewood 
Cliffs, N.J .. 1 969). For to ask whether values 
ore well or ill founded, and to proceed to 
abolish the supposedly insuperable fact/ 
value dichotomy and to admit perfectly 
objective standards, means to accept the 
peculiar factuality of values. I cannot de­
scribe here the detailed differences that 
separate Rescher's approach from my own. 
Let me only state that his formula for value 
(p. 9) - it is oriented to rationalized action 
entrenched in a positive attitude having 
concern for some beneficial state of offoirs­
does excellently fit economic or ethical 
behavior, but I doubt whether it encom­
passes, say, the aesthetic or purely cognitive 
values. For this reason, I prefer to under-
Notes 
stand values as o set of qualities (or o single 
quality) characterizing a given object, event, 
or action, dependent on sustaining agents, 
which should be viewed in sociohistorical 
short-term and long-term contexts, and 
entailing some specific, beneficial kind of 
experience, both in those individuals who 
initiate the constituting of this set of quali­
ties (or single quality) and in those who 
respond to it. This tentative formulation also 
comprises aesthetic (artistic) values, in 
which case "action" applies only to the' 
creative process and to one's contact with 
aesthetic objects, while the beneficial aim 
is "optimum success in conveying the 
artistic message to the world" and "achiev­
ing the peculiar satisfaction we term aes­
thetic." The aesthetic (artistic) value may 
be demarcated from others which are also 
intrinsic by the fact that it functions in sev­
ere! dimensions: it is sustained by natu-
ral, biophysiological values as it releases 
in the recipient a kind of equilibrium (ho­
meostasis); it is primarily of a social and 
spiritual character, but can contribute as 
well to material and sociopolitical well­
being. Note too that all of these dimensions 
provide data for the factual aspects of 
value analysis. 
8. See, for example, K. Koffka, "Problems 
in the Psychology of Art," in Art:A Bryn 
Mawr Symposium (Byrn Mawr, 1 940), pp. 
209-220; R. Arnheim, Art and Visual Per­
ception (Berkeley, 1 954); and L. L. Whyte, 
ed . . Aspects of Form (London, 1 951 ), where 
the physicist, the neurophysicist, the bio­
chemist, the botanist, etc., pool their under­
standing of aesthetics. 
9. C. I. Lewis, An Analysis of Knowledge 
and Valuation (LaSalle, Ill., 1 947), chs. 
1 4  and 1 5; K. Aschenbrenner, "Aesthetic 
Theory- Conflict and Conciliation," Journal 

80 
of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, vol. 1 8, 
no. 1 (September 1 959); S. Pepper, The 
Sources of Value, (Berkeley, 1 958), ch. 1 3. 
1 O. Rescher, Value Theory, also empho· 
sizes the need for a philosophicol delineation 
between neutral and value-laden objects 
and the importance of first determining 
value and only then ranking it. He speaks 
of these two operations as "valuation" and 
"evaluation" (pp. 65-66) - but he then 
proceeds unaccountably to use the term 
"evaluation" in another context to describe 
the fundamental axiological task: the de­
fining of the valuable as such and prior to 
ranking. Rescher and I also agree in con­
ceiving of a scale of value along which the 
differing degrees may be posted; this is 
what I hove called, in my 1 962 essay upon 
which this chapter is based, the "funda­
mental axiological-aesthetic continuum," 
which corresponds, I believe, to Rescher's 
ordinal value-scale. 
1 1 . Rescher, Value Theory, pp. 64-65, 
discusses such matters in terms of "worth." 
1 2. Roder, Modern Book of Esthetics, p. 
xviii. See also F. C. Sporshott, The Structure 
of Aesthetics (Toronto, 1 963), ch. 5 and the 
conclusion of ch. 1 7. 
1 3. J. Stolnitz, Aesthetics and Philosophy 
of Art Criticism (Boston, 1 960), pp. 37 1 -
372. Sporshott proves this point from the 
meta-aesthetic point of view in his Structure 
of Aesthetics, chs. l and 2. In the course of 
treating the various aesthetic theories which 
bear on the basic aesthetic problems, Spar­
shott succeeds in showing that philosophical 
commitment and axiological decisions ore 
involved in the discussion of the meaning 
and validity of a concept of art, of the nature 
and kinds of aesthetic experience, and of 
judgment. For this reason, he justly calls 
aesthetics a philosophy of man. 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Valuation 
1 4. J. Segal, "The Psychological Character 
of the Fundamental Problems of Aesthetics," 
Przeglad Filozoficzny (no. 8, 1 9 1 1 ), 369-
429; W. Witwicki, "A Letter on Aesthetics," 
ibid. (nos. 1 -2, 1 949), 25-35; S. Ossowski, 
The Foundations of Aesthetics (Warsaw, 
1 933), and "Subjectivism in Aesthetics," 
in Ksiega pomiotkowo ku czci T. Kotor­
binskiego (Warsaw, 1 934}; M. Wallis, Aes­
thetic Propositions (Warsaw, 1 932), and 
Aesthetic Values: Gentle and Harsh (Lodz, 
1 949); all works in Polish. I should stress 
that I do not attempt to cope here with the 
entirety of the views represented by these 
writers. I hove restricted myself to what is 
predominant in the works mentioned and 
which, moreover, is relevant to my attempted 
typological scheme. In justice to the obove­
cited scholars, I must state that, for instance, 
M. Wallis, in his contribution "Verite et 
validite des propositions esthetiques" to 
the Trovoux du IX Congres International de 
Philosophie (XII: Paris, 1 937), said that the 
aesthetic experience proper actualizes all 
of the aesthetic potentialities of the per­
ceived object. 
1 5. See note 1 4, above. For my own review 
of the third edition of this work, see "An 
Introduction to the Labyrinth of Aesthetics," 
Studio Filozoficzne (no. 5, 1 959). 
1 6. c: L. Stevenson, "Interpretation and 
Evaluation in Aesthetics," in M. Block, ed., 
Philosophical Analysis (Ithaca, N.Y., 1 950); 
and "What is a Poem?" Philosophicol Re­
view, vol. 66, no. 3 (July 1 957), pp. 329-
362. A similar position is developed by 
Weitz in two essays: "Criticism without 
Evaluation," Philosophical Review, vol. 
61 , no. 1 (January 1 952), pp. 59-65; and 
"Reasons in Criticism," Journal of Aes­
thetics ond Art Criticism, vol. 20, no. 4 (Sum­
mer 1 962), pp. 429-437. 

81 
1 7. M. MacDonald writes: "So to affirm 
that a work of art is good or bad is to com· 
mend or condemn, not to describe it" (p . .  
1 29). A. Isenberg says: "The truth of R 
never adds the slightest weight to V because 
R does not designate any quality the per­
ception of which might induce us to assent 
to V" (p. 1 39). By "R" Isenberg means reason 
-the basis for value judgment-and by 
''V" he means the verdict, the judgment 
itself. There is left only the eye of the be­
holder, "whose praise or censure" in fact 
decides N (the norm), which comes to be 
asserted as a general statement that what­
ever possesses such and such qualities is 
pro tanto good. 
1 8 . B. C. Heyl, New Bearings in Esthetics 
and Art Criticism (New Haven, 1 943), part 
2, sec. 2; M. C. Beardsley, Aesthetics: Prob­
lems in the Philosophy of Criticism (New 
York, 1 958), sec. 27; Stolnitz, Aesthetics and 
Philosophy of Art Criticism, pp. 409-41 9; 
D. Walsh, "Critical Reasons," Philosophical 
Review, vol. 69, no. 3 (July 1 969), pp. 386-
393. Since this chapter was initially written, 
the representatives of the linguistic trend in 
aesthetics have altered their views in some 
respects: see C. Barrett, ed., Collected Pa­
pers on Aesthetics (Oxford, 1 965); and M. 
Mandelbaum, "Family Resemblances and 
Generalizations Concerning the Arts," 
American Philosophical Quarterly II( 1 965), 
pp. 21 9-228. 
1 9. See also the interpretation given in J. 
Casey, The Language of Criticism (London, 
1 966), chs. l and 2. Cosey draws on com­
ments of G. Moore (Philosophical Papers, 
X) in respect to Wittgenstein's lectures of 
1 930-33. 
20. This article can be found in J. Margolis, 
ed., Philosophy Looks at the Arts (New York, 
1 962). 
Notes 
2 1 .  Stolnitz, Aesthetics and Philosophy of 
Art Criticism, pp. 390-41 9, offers an in­
teresting analysis of this conception. He 
sees in it two principal tendencies-one 
denying the possibility of a definition of 
values, the other admitting this possibility. 
Common to both approaches is the notion 
that if two persons make contradictory 
judgments about one and the same value, 
just one of them can be right: the one having 
"good taste." 
22. See "On the Relativity of Values," 
Przeglad Filozoficzny, vol. 44, nos. 1 -3 
(1 948), in Polish; "La valeur esthetique et 
le probleme de son fondement objectif," 
paper delivered to the Third International 
Congress of Aesthetics, Venice, 1 956; and 
"Bemerkungen zum Problem des asthe­
tischen Werturteils," paper delivered to the 
International Congress of Philosophy, Pad­
ua, 1 958. 
23. lngarden, "On the Relativity of Values," 
pp. 92-93. I simplify here to the extent that 
I have left aside the problem of those artistic 
values which, according to lngarden, are 
relative in their status of aesthetic values 
but also, qua intentional, have objective 
existence. Since this chapter appeared in 
its initial form, lngarden has published a 
collection of all his axiological essays on 
questions of aesthetics, Experience, Artwork, 
Value (in Polish; Cracow, 1 966). My critique 
of this book appeared in Estetika {Prague), 
1 970. no. l .  
24. Many complexities of interpretation 
in the phenomenological conception have 
been neglected here; however-and In­
garden stresses this moment particularly ­
the aesthetic object comes into existence 
as a product of intentional attitude, aes­
thetic experience in turn being unthinkable 
without the object having taken form. In 

82 
this sense, employing lngarden 's own inter­
pretation, we might define his position as 
relationist. 
Complications of a similar nature ore 
raised by his latest statement: that Wertur­
teilen (i.e., verbalized aesthetic judgments) 
do not necessarily articulate objective stan­
dards. This indeterminate conclusion pre­
cludes the possibility of obtaining axiolog­
ical certitude here. 
All the some, the objectivist version which 
emerges from the pronouncements of ln­
gorden himself would appear to be more 
correct. Why? First, because, with reference 
to the lotter point, he insisted on the ob­
jective character of the oesthetische Bewer­
tung (i.e., appraisal) which is the mediator 
between the aesthetic experience and the 
verbalized judgment. Second, though the 
former point entails a complicated nexus 
and would indeed require o detailed analy­
sis of lngorden's system, we con simply 
repeat ofter lngarden that the aesthetic 
experience is founded on the artistic-tech­
nical "skeleton" (the primary intentional 
object) and that the aesthetic object, which 
is the terminal, absolute value regardless 
of the different possible concretizotions, 
must necessarily comprise some kind of 
reconstruction of the underlying voluotionol 
qualities inherent in the schematic struc­
ture that we coll the work of art. I am using 
lngarden's terminology here, and I should 
odd that in his view "objectivity" hos di­
verse meanings depending both on one's 
philosophy and on the kind of data u nder 
study. According to the phenomenological 
standpoint, those aesthetic values which 
ore of heterogeneous {i.e., dependent on 
cognitive processes), secondary intentional 
character (intrinsic both to the experience 
and to the concretized object), ore no less 
The Criteria · 
of Aesthetic Valuation 
objedively given than is the primary inten­
tional dimension. 
25. T. M. Greene, The Arts and the Art of 
Criticism, 3rd ed. (Princeton, N.J., 1 952) 
pp. 4-5. In this same work, the author, 
letting himself in for inconsistency, terms 
artistic values a "tertiary quality," that is, 
he justifies their objectivity by saying they 
ore dictated by certain inner mechanisms 
as well as by the intrinsic properties of the 
works of art. Such on understanding ap­
proaches gestoltism in the relotionist variant 
(the structures of the subject corresponding 
to the structures of the object). See the article 
in which the notion of tertiary quality is 
thoroughly analyzed: C. C. Pratt, "Aes­
thetics," Annual Review of Psychology 
( 1 961 ). pp. 71 -92. 
26. He calls such values subsistent objects, 
in order to compare them with concepts 
which ore neither physical nor psychic 
objects. For Jood on aesthetic value, see 
Vivas and Krieger, Problems of Aesthetics, 
pp. 474-479. 
27. We should not omit to mention that 
behind these formulations is located the 
notion of deity, the Great Architect who 
shapes and orders the world supernolly. 
Nonetheless, we hove to deal here with 
empirical attitudes, since the deity is under­
stood in the guise of a most competent 
watchmaker who hos set everything going; 
the frame of reference is the empirically 
given mechanisms which, it is assumed, will 
be comprehensible to everyone's reason. 
28. See R. Gunsenhouser ond H. Kreuzer, 
eds 
. •  Mathematik und Dichtung (Munich, 
1 965). pp. 295-31 1 .  
29.See M. C. Beardsley, "On the Generality 
of Critical Reasons," Journal of Philosophy, 
vol. 59, no. 1 8  (August 1 962), pp. 477-
486. 

83 
30. W. E. Kennick, "Does Traditional Aes· 
thetics Rest on a Mistake?" Mind, vol. 62 
(1 958), pp. 31 7-334. 
3 1  • Heyl, New Bearings in Esthetics, pp. 
1 25-1 45; Beardsley, Aesthetics, pp. 530-
543; Stolnitz, Aesthetics and Philosophy of 
Art Criticism, pp. 41 9-437. 
32. Lewis, An Analysis of Knowledge and 
Valuation, chs. 1 2-1 5. I should add that, 
despite his general relotionist outlook, 
Lewis wavers continually in his conclusions; 
now toward psychologism (the contemplo· 
tive stote, ocquiescence to what is immediote 
in the mind, as a basis of value) and now 
toward obje(tivism {value as a property 
inherent in the object). The weakness of 
Lewis' position lies in his relationism being 
purely a logical proposition. Hence, he is 
given over to monotonous reiteration of on 
unvaried motif. 
33. Koffka, "Problems in the Psychology of 
Art." 
34.ln Whyte, Aspects of Form pp. 1 96-
208. The premises and conclusions of this 
kind of approach were set out by Arnheim in 
Art and Visual Perception. The some ideas 
ore developed in his recent Visual Thinking 
(Berkeley, 1 969). Notably again, nothing said 
there with regard to the intelligence of 
sensory responsiveness - shape patterns as 
a kind of abstraction, structuring as the 
recognition of generic traits, and the grasp· 
ing of relationships within a whole- pro· 
vides a key to the strategy for distinguishing 
aesthetic wholes. I set aside here the 
problem broached by Arnheim in chapters 
2 and 3, where he seems to hold that au· 
thentic thinking is always and primarily 
visual. This biased, untrue thesis could not 
in any case be helpful in elucidating the 
complex response to pure and impure 
verbal media (literature, theater). 
Notes 
35. L. L. Whyte, "A Scientific View of the 
'Creative Energy' of Mon," in M. Philipson, 
ed., Aesthetics Today (New York, 1 961 ), 
pp. 349-37 4. 
36. R. Arnheim, Picasso's Guernica: The 
Genesis of a Painting (Berkeley, 1 962). 
37. See Heyl, New Bearings, pp. 1 41 - 1 44. 
38. Atti del Ill. Congresso lnternazionole di 
Estetica, Torino, 1 957, p. 1 77. 
39. Instrumentality means something dif· 
ferent here from what it means to the relo· 
tionists. The lotter describe only the relation 
between a particular individual and a given 
object. What Boos indicated is the functional, 
changing relations between a particular 
social group in a given situation and a given 
class of objects, which, owing to considera· 
tions of one kind or another, ore determined 
to be works of art. Heyl. Beardsley, and 
Stolnitz hove, in some of their recent state· 
ments, clearly inclined to this interpretation, 
thus proving that no firm line demarcates 
relotionism from sociological relativism. This 
kind of sociological standpoint is defended 
by Teddy Bruni us, the Swedish aestheticion, 
when he speaks of the ethnocentric foundo· 
tion of aesthetic value. (See his essay "The 
Uses of Works of Art," in Beardsley and 
Schueller, Aesthetic Inquiry, pp. 1 2-25.) 
40. These lectures were reconstructed from 
students' notes and were issued only in 1 967 
in C. Barrett, ed., Wittgenstein: Lectures and 
Conversations on Aesthetics, Psychology, 
and Religious Belief (Berkeley, 1 967). 
4 l • Rescher, Value Theory, p. 1 1 8. 
42. A. Child, "The Socio-Historical Reio· 
tivity of Aesthetic Value," Philosophical 
Review, vol. 53, no. l (January 1 944), pp. 
1 -22. 
43. G. Solinas, "Storicito del giudicio este· 
tico" [The historicity of aesthetic judgment], 
Rivista di Estetica (Moy-August 1 960), 

84 
pp. 21 3-221 . 
44. E. Utitz, Grund/agungen der a//gemeinen 
Kunstwissenschaft, vol. 2 (Stuttgart, 1 920), 
p. 292. 
45. K. Marx, Economic and Philosophical 
Manuscripts of I 844, 2nd ed. (Moscow, 
1 961 ), p. 1 08. The pertinent texts are now 
presented in K. Marx and F. Engels, On 
Literature and Art, ed. L. Baxandall and S. 
Morawski (St. Louis, 1 973). 
46. "Our own proposition about beauty is 
this: whenever the affective elements in 
socially known things show social ordering, 
there we have beauty, there alone we have 
beauty." And: "Art, then, conditions the 'in­
stincts to the environment and in doing so 
changes the instincts." Christopher Caud­
well, Studies and Further Studies in a Dying 
Culture (New York, 1 958), Part II, pp. l 06, 
1 1 2. 
47. For rejections of a basis in nature, see 
V. Vanslov, Prob/ems of the Beautiful (Mos­
cow, 1 957), and L. N. Stolovich, The Aes­
thetic in Reality and in Art (Moscow, 1 959). 
Both works are in Russian; their positions are 
criticized (in English) by Victor Romanenko, 
in S. Mozhnyagin, ed., Problems of Modern 
Aesthetics (Moscow, 1 969), pp. 1 21 -1 57. 
Ivan Astakhov likewise defends a natural 
foundation, ibid., pp. 1 58-1 86. I might add 
here that Stolovich expresses an undue 
severity toward Dmitryeva's remarks recog­
nizing "the elementary principles of beauty" 
in nature itself. Dmitryeva does not assert, 
as did Todor Pavlov, the existence in nature 
of preaesthetic and presocial elements. 
Rather, she simply puts forward an hypoth­
esis analogous to that of the gestaltists. It 
may well be that Dmitryeva is perfectly 
correct. She is not unaware that natural 
properties are activated aesthetically only in 
a social environment. When Marx, in A Con-
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Valuation 
tribution to the Critique of Political Economy 
(Chicago, 1 904), pp. 20, 2 1 1 ,  wrote of a 
diamond on the breast of a harlot and, 
particularly, of the natural splendor of gold 
and silver, probably he had in mind such 
elementary protoaesthetic traits. I have set 
forth and analyzed the discussions by 
Soviet aestheticians regarding the genesis 
of artistic value, in the second chapter of 
my book Between Tradition and a Vision 
of the Future (in Polish; Warsaw, 1 964). 
48. K. Marx and F. Engels, Collected Works, 
vol. 1 3  (Moscow), p. 497. 
49. See the interesting treatment of this 
matter by E. V. llyenkov, The Dioledics of the 
Abstract and the Concrete in Marx's 'Capi­
tol (in Russian; Moscow, 1 960). 
50. See the survey study by Wlodyslaw 
Tatarkiewicz, "Objectivity and Subjectivity in 
the History of Aesthetics," Philosophy and 
Phenomenological Research (December 
1 963). It must be added that Tatarkiewicz 
leaves the historicist approach out of his 
account. Moreover, fn light of arguments I 
hove set forth here, his terminology seems 
vulnerable. He does not distinguish relo­
tivism from objectivism and he ignores any 
meeting ground of subjectivism with rela­
tivism. It may also be worthwhile to odd to 
my own succinct account, above, that not 
only did relationism emerge from a context 
of objectivist-oriented medieval aesthetics, 
it also arose from the subjectivist trend in 
the eighteenth century; Hutcheson, Burke, 
and Karnes, for example explained the cor­
respondence of subjective and objective 
components as due to divine intervention. 
Attentive exegesis of Hume's "Standard of 
Taste" and Kant's Kritik der Urtei/skroft 
will locate a relationist strand in the argu­
ments. The third phase of this approach -
in the shape of instrumental ism (i.e., the 

85 
correspondence of a given set of values and 
given collective aesthetic opinions in a 
definite limited context) - come with socio­
historicol analysis as practiced from Mme. 
de Stoel through the doctrinaires to Hip­
polyte Taine. 
5 1 .  See C. G. Hempel. "Problems a nd 
Changes in the Empiricist Criterion of Mean­
ing," in Nagel and Brandt, Meaning and 
Knowledge, pp. 1 7-27. 
52. See C. G. Hempel, "Formen und Gren­
zen des wissenschaftlichen Verstehens," 
Conceptus, vot 6, nos. 1 -3 (Innsbruck, 
1 972), pp. 5-1 8. 
53. I would like to express my thanks to 
Professor C. G. Hempel for his critical 
reading of this section and for encouraging 
me to keep my position. 
54. E. Fischer, The Necessity of Art (New 
York, 1 964), chs. 2 a nd 4; G. Lukacs, Die 
Eigenart des Aesthetischen (Neuwied, 1 963). 
55. Marx, in the 1 844 Manuscripts, posed 
the question of the genesis of aesthetic 
value, or to use his own phrase, how primi­
tive man made the transition from a mogic­
utilitarian attitude to a "mineralogical 
sense." To put it differently: How did socio­
historical processes liberate a human artis­
tic-aesthetic activity? Did they release natu­
ral powers? Marxism does not seem to deny 
a limine the contributions of gestoltism. 
Rother, it is able to assimilate and develop 
them, for it recognizes that early mon ­
before he could create the first cave drawing, 
before he could tentatively pantomime the 
social performances he observed, before he 
could find aesthetic significances in color­
hod to go through a considerable develop­
ment (preparation for a free practical and 
intellectual activity, the hands' mastery of 
n umerous skills, the ability of people to 
u nderstand one another with the aid of 
Notes 
language, the mastery of the mind over 
reality). In other words, if he thinks the 
gestoltists correct in saying that man is 
endowed with an innate propensity for 
"pregnant" structures, yet the marxist will 
wont to return the investigation to the 
domain of culture (history) to test historically 
the biophysiopsychological hypothesis about 
a visual "thinking" in patterns . 
. Marxism affords a sophisticated and il­
luminating theory of labor considered as a 
process of "the humanization of nature" 
and, at the some time, the humanization of 
man. The conditions we hove mentioned 
function only in a concrete social setting -
which it is necessary to study thoroughly. 
When Marx wrote, in A Contribution to the 
Critique of Political Economy, that "the sen­
sation of color is, generally speaking, the 
most popular form of aesthetic sense," he 
appeared to treat color as a natural aes­
thetic property. However, it is also Marx 
who cautions that this aesthetic function 
of color (i.e., gold and silver) is linked with 
a specific form of wealth. This problem is 
not elaborated or resolved by Marx. In any 
case, it appears to me that Marx's idea of 
beauty as one of "measure" (in German, 
Mass) accords with the gestaltist concept 
of "structure," and also with the "rhythm" 
of the inner and outer world of man as 
studied in the splendid essay by R. Boyer, 
"L'essence du rythme," in Revue d'Esthe­
tique, vol. 6 (1 953), pp. 277-290. 
56. This problem was taken up by F. Brau­
del on a different philosophical basis; see 
" Histoire et science sociole: La longue du­
ree," Anna/es, no. 4 (1 958). H is distinc­
tion of the history of "circumstances" (i.e., 
chronological history) from a "histoire de 
longue duree," is strongly analogous to my 
own distinction of sociological relativism 

86 
from the historicist position proper. 
57. M. Weitz, "The Role of Theory in Aes­
thetics," Journal of Aesthetics and Art 
Criticism, vol. 1 5, no. 1 (September 1 956). 
Incidentally, this scholar held, in his Phi­
losophy of the Arts ( 1 950), a position much 
more restrained in its critical aspects and, as 
I see it, much more fruitful in its concluding 
deductions. 
58. D. H. Parker, "The Nature of Art," 
Revue internationale de philosophie, no. 4 
(1 939), pp. 684-702. D. W. Gotshalk in his 
Art and the Social Order (Chicago, 1 947) 
advances a similar conception, which centers 
upon the second of the properties here 
listed. Art is multivalent; yet it is vital to 
lend assistance to what is the basic value 
among the others (the term "multivalent" 
was introduced by the well-known American 
anthropologist Franz Boas). Gotshalk's 
trend of analysis approximates my own 
to some extent. 
59. M. C. Beardsley, "The Definition of the 
Arts," Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criti­
cism, 1 961 , no. 4. 
60. See M. S. Kagan, "On Ways of Studying 
the Peculiarity of Art," Problems of Aes­
thetics ( 1 960), pp. 46-84, an essay especially 
interesting for its polemical demarcations. 
Related articles by this author in English 
can be found in Current Digest of the Soviet 
Press (November 1 8, 1 959), and Soviet 
Studies in Philosophy (Summer 1 968). Ka­
gan carries forward the position stated by 
A. Burov in his book (in Russian), The Aes­
thetic Essence of Art ( 1 956 -excerpt in 
Soviet Literature, 1 957, no. 3, in English), 
according to which art, appealing to all of 
of our psychic capacities, may be character· 
ized as the synthetic embodiment of human 
life. 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Valuation 
6 1 .  Thus Stolovich: "Man's aesthetic rela­
tion to reality is an integral, sensual- i.e., 
iconic, emotional and ideological relation, 
which psychically affirms man's place in 
reality." "Art-or the artistic:-is a synthe­
sis of the objective and subjective aspects 
of the aesthetic relation of man to reality." 
L. N. Stolovich, The Object of Aesthetics (in 
Russian; Moscow, 1 96 1 ), pp. 69, 73. 
In his book The Aesthetic in Reality and 
in Art (in Russian; Moscow, 1 959) Stolovich 
offers another definition of the aesthetic. 
He speaks of "the dialectical unity of the 
material form with the sociohuman content" 
(p. 70). But such a definition leads to a 
peculiar "panaestheticism," that is, the 
admission of all phenomena which in some 
sense express the domination of man over 
nature (e.g., the gesture of a man who has 
gone up a high hill, or a diagram by a 
learned biologist), as aesthetic phenomena. 
Stolovich advances a number of important 
remarks regarding form as a characteristic 
trait or artistic value (pp. 51 , 1 55-1 58); 
however, he also skews these remarks, as 
time and again he mixes up the genesis of 
the values in the labor process (whereof he 
writes sagely) and their significance within 
the structure of the work of art. 
62. Dorothy Walsh justly termed art an 
alternative reality, as distinguished from 
possessing either the physical or the sche­
matic (ideal) mode of existence ("The Cogni­
tive Content of Art," Philosophical Review, 
vol. 52, no. 5 [September 1 943), pp. 433-
451 ). Many authors note this characteristic 
moment of art. Especially productive, in the 
scientific sense, is the view of Roman Jakob· 
son who speaks of a poetic: fragment as a 
specifically organized linguistic expression 
which "violates" the colloquial usage of 

87 
words to focus attention not only, and 
never primarily, on information, but on the 
inner structure of the fragment. It is not 
hard to glimpse traces in this view of the 
thinking of Shklovsky and Tinyanov­
which, if in a general way one-sided, is not 
an unfounded conception of just this point. 
Notes 

Chapter 2 
What Is 
a Work of Art? 
The idea of art is at present undergoing a crisis. The definitions being offered ore 
almost ludicrously numerous and diverse, while some writers express doubts obou1 
the possibility of any definition at all. I feel that any attempt to conceptualize art 
which hopes to prove persuasive must adopt a strategy which encompasses the 
uncounted variations among works of art, and does not exclude any field of artis­
tic activity or any facet of cultural history. No easy task! Yet nothing less than this 
seems useful. How should we make a start? Our initial assumptions should not be 
overly simple, for we would then find ourselves hemmed in by them later on. The 
differences among the various arts should be examined carefully so that we shall 
not be tempted to isolate a single field of art as the universally valid aesthetic mod­
el. Various arts should be repeatedly consulted, and we should seek especially to 
determine what might be the common substratum (if not precisely bedrock) on 
which the arts gain their purchase and find their elaboration. By "substratum" 
I wish to indicate the long duration of specific historical situations, characterized 
by conflicts of many kinds which precipitate various attitudes, including philosophi­
cal and aesthetic orientations. Integral to the historicᣇ! situations are specific socio­
politicol and socioeconomic processes which often induce entire transformations 
of the precedent ideas about human beings and their world. While acknowledging 
and even emphosizinq such Qreot variations and transformations in nnd nmoni:_i 
the historical situations, we will also ask whether it is possible to locate some re­
current sociocultural data. Understood in this way, the substratum - and also the 
possible long-enduring definition of art which hos to find its foothold there - must 
prove problematic in the extreme. 
How indeed shall we conceive the origin and constitution of a possibly perma­
nent phenomenon which we coll art and which we consider by means of diverse 
aesthetic categories? The awareness of the problematic character of conceptualiza­
tion hos rapidly increased since the turn into the twentieth century. Nearly every 
long-preserved world view hos been cost in doubt by recent scientific and tech­
nological discoveries as well as political events of a revolutionary character (start­
ing with the October Revolution). Given these transformations in the domain of 
thought as a whole, it is not surprising that the previous idea of art hos not held. 
The principle that art is constituted primarily by on imitation of reality, on idea 
which the European tradition hod accepted since the Renaissance, hos been over-
Written in Polish in 1964, this chapter wos published in Zeitschrift fur Aesthetik und allgemeine Kunst­
wissenschaft, vol. 1 4, no. 2 ( 1 969). Its first appearance in English was in L. Baxandall, ed., Radical 
Perspectives in the Arts (Baltimore, 1 972). 

89 
Recent Developments 
thrown by antimimetism. It is indispensable that we grasp this and other shifts 
in judgments concerning art in all of their developmental charoder and concrete­
ness. Only then can attempts at definition be adequately verified. 
Recent Developments 
We may begin with the shift to a preponderantly antimimetic orientation towards 
the basic notion of art. It is symptomatic of such changes that in this instance di­
verse and indeed mutually antagonistic movements in the art world contributed 
to the end result. The decorative surfaces of the nabis and Matisse and the new 
use of space of Cezanne and the cubists undermined the construzione legittima 
of Alberti and Leonardo. Painters could now superimpose simultaneous views, 
thus adding a time dimension. The break with the impressionist-pointillist method 
of patterning small flecks of color, culminating in a form-and-color whole, was 
almost as great. Whether more or less mimetic, the "rival world" approximating 
our normal world was banished. Yet the ingenious new worlds of painterly imag­
ination generally retained references to reality and they were in no sense divested 
of all objectivity or spaciousness. (The work of Leger and Picasso testify to this.} 
The break with the precedent idea was carried further by those who sought to 
evoke reflex responses with coloristic systems and who were obsessed with the 
symphonic expressive impact of hues (Kandinsky, Delaunay, Larionov, Goncha­
rova}. The ultimate possibilities of an abstract art were deduced by Malevich, Mon­
drian, a nd Strzemiriski. And what of the dadaists and the constructivists? Their 
immediate tradition was not fauvism or Delaunay's Orphism, but cubism -espe­
cially the synthetic forms. The pursuit of unprecedented optical inputs was aban­
doned, in favor of provocative "exact" duplicates of fragments of reality (Ernst's 
collages} or engineering feats (Tatlin, Rodchenko, El Lissitsky}. While the analytical 
cubists and the Orphists invented means to present a uniquely fashioned object 
in painting, the dadaists and constructivists championed the painfully non-art 
objects of everyday as the basis of their aesthetics. But in any case mimesis was 
excluded, and the traditional. sharp distinction between art and the actual world 
was abandoned. Brancusi's sculpture Bird in Space was treated as an ordinary 
piece of metal by New York customs officials. This is as indicative of the modern 
status of mimetism as the dadaist protest in Duchamp's urinal. entitled Fountain, 
or Picabia's inkpot, The Holy Madonna. 
Dada was an eruption that helped to destroy the prior distinction between art 
and nonart by attacking the concept of mimesis and also by exalting the idea of 

90 
What is 
a Work of Art? 
ugliness. An end was put to the absolute primacy of the beautiful (in its earlier 
sense, oriented to Greek and Renaissance models). The naturalists had earlier 
brought the ugly into art, but the dadaists, along with the surrealists, were the 
first to attack directly the "isolated" and "harmonious" character of art which some 
believed could free us from the necessity of understanding our moral and political 
responses to it. For the naturalists, ugliness had been similar to the sublime and 
the tragic; above all, it was a protest against the beautiful and its claim to exclu­
sivity. The dadaists and surrealists also preferred the ugly in the name of life. They 
took a new look at the social order, and their imaginations respected neither dogma 
nor boundary. 
The dadaist attitude was revived with the spectacles concocted by Yves Klein 
in Paris. When Klein's model climbed into a tub of blue paint and then impressed 
her "pose" on a white canvas, more than a moral scandal was involved. This was 
a destructive aesthetic gesture from an artist.who evoked illusionism in art the 
better to debunk it. Robert Rauschenberg's The Bed (1 962) consists of the artist's 
own blanket and pillow which he has sprayed with color. Here is at once a fur­
therance of the dadaist protest against aestheticism and a mockery of a civilization 
in which possessions are everything. Not dissimilarly, Wladislaw Hasior, a Pole, 
exalts banality by using rubbish as his basic material, which he proceeds to orna­
ment with plebeian motifs from folklore. Ugliness is here given a symbolic sense 
owing to the tradition to which the artist relates and which he at the same time 
deconsecrates. 
A parallel should be seen between protests against such principles as the imita­
tion of given reality or the rule of the beauty of antiquity, and the challenging of 
the aesthetic principle of generally understood, real, and logical necessities. In 
accordance with prevailing thought, nineteenth-century writing employed an om­
niscient narrator whom the reader could equate with the author himself, whose 
implicitly accepted task was to describe and finally explain the settled facts of hu­
man existence. In painting and sculpture, the meaning of the images could similarly 
be deduced from an internalized order. When such art lost its religious organizing 
principle, trust was still placed in philosophy or in science, or in both. 
The twentieth century has seen this confidence in order and necessity under­
mined. The arts have become a field for independent philosophical exploration, 
and the idols of earlier times have given way to His Highness, Accident. 
A clear-cut distinction must be made here. On one side we place the subjective 
manifestations, the visions that we associate with the stream of consciousness 

9 1 
Recent Developments 
or the unconscious. On the other side we locate the efforts, prominent in the fifties 
and sixties, to consider experience itself as a kind of lottery. (Sometimes an actual 
machine was used to approximate the demise of any human sense of necessity 
in events.) Inspiration is a precious notion for those involved in the former ap­
proach; the idea runs through Bergson's elan vital, Freud's method of free associa­
tion, and Breton's "inner model" and "automatic writing." In the visual arts, the 
tendency evolves from fauvism and expressionism through surrealism to, more 
recently, action painting. 
Those who see experience as a lottery are indebted to information theory and 
are fascinated by antientropic systems of given elements and the unexpected emer­
gence of new combinations of these elements. This sense of liberty to conceive 
new dispositions of material elements is seen in such recent experiments as op 
art and all of the plastic-luministic-kinetic efforts to 9chieve unprecedented ar­
rangements in desanctified spaces. In his novel Joker, the Polish writer Kazimierz 
Brandys portrays the convulsions of contemporary civilization and the uncertainty 
of everything which might have continued to provide a basis for the generalizations 
of the aesthetician. He says of the artist's response to the confusion in the world 
that the task of the writer is to give embodiment to an "invisible" world, by which 
he means the writer's own constructs. The application to visual arts is immediate, 
where "invisible" may be taken to certify the inclusion of any or all physical or 
psychical phenomena in a work, wheth.er these elements are eruptions from the 
artist's ego or unconscious or the result even of "chance" games played with the 
material according to stochastical laws alone. 
These often elaborate forays in the name of accident or liberty against constant 
and comprehensible regularity started in the first decades of our century, at the 
same time that another tendency was crystallizing. Moholy-Nagy tried, his wife 
says, to execute an art object by issuing directions over the telephone, his aim be­
ing to avoid all individual intervention in the evolving work. By denying direct con­
tact he hoped to get a cool and precise structure that could readily be duplicated. 
His aim was a depersonalized, pure
y intellectual beauty (if that term is still ap­
plicable in this context). This was a confirmation, from the artist's viewpoint, of 
the thrust of artisan and now of machine products into the domain of art. This 
trend probably began with William Morris and triumphed with Gropius; aesthetics 
has not since been able to deny it. Some basic precepts had accordingly to be re­
vised -for example, the thesis, advanced by eighteenth century aestheticians and 
carried on by Benedetto Croce, that original expression is the chief precondition 

92 
What is 
a Work of Art? 
for a work of art. To be sure, that thesis is still defended by existentialists and Cath­
olic persona lists, but in the 1 930s it had already been sharply disputed by Walter 
Benjamin and Lewis Mumford, who in their discussions of art in the era of machine 
reproduction, asked: What credence indeed can be given to the requirement of 
original expression when machines turn out aesthetically pleasing products without 
limit? This argument was reinforced by the findings of art historians and ethnolo­
gists who studied primitive and Oriental art as well as that of the Middle Ages 
and found that in many eras entrenched example and canonic rule were essential 
(and sometimes more important than the artist's individual expression). 
Two more aesthetic anti principles can thus be added to those formulated earlier 
(antimimetism, pursuit of ugliness and a raw reality, and emphasis on acciden­
tality). The first concerns serial production as against individual creation. (In some 
artistic manifestos, such as the Bauhaus and the Proletcult, the denial of individual 
creation is a result of the call for artistic collectivism.) The second concerns machine 
production as against handwork. The latter phenomenon derives from an apprecia­
tion of serial and moss products as aesthetically valuable creations. And because 
of recent scientific and technological advances, the emphasis hos shifted further: 
now the focus is not so much on the impersonal product as on the productive 
forces. Do-it-yourself equipment is able to produce an object which the maker can 
and does describe as a work of art. 
The latest developments seem to be continuing this shift. Minimal art- with its 
zealously antiexpressionist tendency, now closely oriented to architecture- can 
be reckoned an elaboration of the engineering-constructivist idea. Conceptual 
art has gone further than either the depersonalized technological art of construc­
tivism or the destructive gestures of dado, and its critical stance is accordingly the 
most extreme. Conceptual artists assume that their product is primarily and rightly 
an inquiry into the troubled status of art, and that they should undertake their work 
in a manner similar to that of the critic. Dadaists sought to dissolve art into the 
life flux; conceptualists have the same aim, but they turn their backs even on the 
art market and the public. Their particular frame of reference is precisely the pre­
dominant problematic outlook of our time. 
I do not wish to bring forward every piece of evidence encouraging a new view 
of the visual arts. It is enough to show that the boundaries between the artistic 
and the nonortistic have been blurred. In poetry, a similar development has oc­
curred which is due to the incessant claims of various prose-oriented schools. The 
time-honored image, which palpably asserted its reference to an object, has been 

93 
Recent Developments 
replaced by a grid system of imaginative representations and concepts intended 
to create an atmosphere at once emotional and intellectual. Another development 
is the poetry of rebellion, which makes use of blunt idiom so that nothing will in­
hibit communication -a lyricism breaking away from the forms of melodic prosody 
and the rhythms of balanced strophes. In both of these literary tendencies, the 
old boundary stakes have become unfixed. Contemporary literary works are rather 
like rhymed reportage, vivid philosophical essays, or prose statements in which 
unusual care is taken to compose the word order. 
Many artistic manifestos have been issued to buttress such tendencies, and there 
is no need to discuss all of them here. I shall mention just two movements, futurism 
(in Russia) and imagism (in England), which sharply questioned the sense and value 
of artistic fiction. Admittedly, there are differences of theory and practice, but we 
should not overlook the kinship of Osip Brik, Vladimir Mayakovsky, and Viktor 
Shklovsky with T. E. Hulme and T. S. Eliot. They share the concept that poetry pro­
vides, among other things, an equivalent to social and philosophical attitudes. 
These attitudes are expressed not through description but through signs. Instead 
of traditional rhyme and stanzaic construction, these poets demand inner rhythm; 
instead of eidetic metaphor impressing itself on the reader with little impairment, 
they demand an abstract metaphor operating on the imaginative faculty and emo­
tions in a conceptual framework. The Polish avant-garde groupings Zwrotnica 
(Switch Station) and Linia can also be placed here. 
What does this mean for representation in writing? Employing a minimum of 
words to evoke a maximum of associations, eschewing the rhythmic-melodic heri­
tage and the "banal" images of ordinary speech, placing a premium on poetic 
craft, constructing determinate structures, and pursuing expressive means that 
lead off and away from the material world, favoring elliptical turns of phrase and 
compound effects-these are the features of an antimimetic poetics. What happens 
is that poetic and prosaic language are no longer polarized, lyrical and narrative 
communications are diminished, and the listener is urged to on intellectualized re­
sponse. There is no doubt that this poetics has a determinate relation to the his­
torical moment: it speaks for culture and against nature, for cognitive intellectual 
effort and against intuition, for a vision of the future and against the inadequacies 
of the present. 
Modern poetry, like painting, has appropriated the ugly to its aims. Although 
the distasteful fascinations in Eliot's "Prufrock" are not identical to the ugly as 
handled by the Polish poets Stanislaw Grochowiak and Miron Bialaszewski, there , 

94 
What is 
a Work of Art? 
is a common acceptance of reality and a desire to name it without euphemism, 
in its ordinary and often displeasing defectiveness. Again as in painting, accident 
has been firmly established in modern poetry. The catastrophic underlying attitude 
has erupted far more pervasively than in visual art because the verbal medium 
has much more capacity to express it. But poetry has not lent itself to machine man­
ufacture, although some parasurreal texts have been thus accomplished. Collec­
tivistic tendencies can be found, however, especially in the first decade of Soviet 
writing. 
Problems with the Old Aesthetics 
The foregoing examples were drawn from the visual arts and literature, but the 
trend is also discernible in every other field of aesthetic activity- it seems to dom­
inate our period. What is it that ultimately has happened to art in the twentieth 
century that leads us to speak of the crisis in the idea of art and that hampers our 
search for an adequate definition of the aesthetic object? The problem is both his­
torical and theoretical, and to avoid artificially separating the two aspects, we 
should construct a model -a patterning of the evidence - which corresponds as 
fully as possible to the artistic phenomena and aesthetic ideas which are cross­
pollinating in our time. 
I think the most useful framework for the model that we shall find is the pattern­
ing of aesthetic ideas in the first decade of the twentieth century. At that time the 
capitalist system, whose sociopolitical stability had been highly plausible through 
the entire industrial revolution, was deteriorating. The revelatory thought of Marx, 
Freud, Einstein, N ietzsche, and Bergson was making rapid gains, while the estab­
lished philosophical. religious, moral, and aesthetic ideas were losing credence. 
What were the traditional aesthetic principles which were under attack? 
1 .  A definite hierarchy of values exists, reflecting a settled order in the world. 
The artist must only find his own means to express the known truth. By these 
means, which a·re sensuous and imaginative, the artist confirms and gives homage 
to his own place in this order-the place, that is, reserved for Beauty. 
2. A// true art ultimately relies on mimesis. The kinds of representation may be 
different, but every artist (including the architect and the composer) somehow con­
veys his own attitude towards the social and psychosocial phenomena that he 
renders for an audience. Artists, in their own ways, intensify and condense our 
sense of being in the world, which includes feelings as well as observations. (On 
the relation between expression and mimesis, see chapter 5.) Although other aes-

95 
Problems with the Old 
Aesthetics 
thetic categories were distinguished and respected, mimesis was nonetheless ac­
knowledged to have primary significance. 
3. The artist commands a special talent which he has developed and disciplined 
over the years into skill or virtuosity (techne). His position is institutionalized -
recognized by an academy, granted advanced schooling, etc. His technique de­
marcates the artist from the ordinary person with a merely amateur interest in 
art. 
4. Art manifests on outstanding individuality. The more we study and experience 
the emanations of the artist, the more we partake of his genius from afar. The art­
ist is a kind of sacred person or prophetic spokesman. 
5. The domain of art consists of three interdependent yet distinct factors: the 
artist, the work of art, and the audience. The role of the last is to respond, as fully 
as possible, to the experience of the artist as it has been embodied in and trans­
mitted by the work of art, which is the most important element of the triad. Ars 
/ongo, vita brevis; all of the values of the preceding four points are preserved in 
this mediating object, the guarantor of the author's immortality. 
What has become of these principles, acknowledged by all only fifty or sixty 
years ago? Artists no longer defer to a fixed body of knowledge and truth, and 
much of the old religion and morality has vanished. The twentieth-century artist 
is on his own (even if in the company of colleagues), in his search for fragile but 
tenable truths, which he always considers relative. 
Mimesis? Its credentials have been revoked from a number of sides. The arts 
and crafts movement obtained a central and competing place in the sun after four 
centuries of neglect. In writing, drama, painting, and sculpture, those bastions of 
mimesis, artists came to think that representationalism was just one of their avail­
able resources, and perhaps not the most challenging or interesting at that. Appia 
and Craig altered the look of the stage. Schonberg broke with all "programmatic" 
elements in music, substituting the twelve-tone system of composition; and follow­
ing him came the composers of aleatory music, which depended on chance arrange­
ments. In film, the ideas of the traditional novel and drama held fast until the 1 950s, 
when they were dealt a severe blow by Godard, Mekas, and the "underground" 
directors. 
Look around now. Poetry becomes "concrete," increasingly graphic. In the novel, 
time and characterization are submitted to shuffling and dicing; plot and narration 
scarcely retain a foothold. Theater is the scene of ritual events and happenings. 
The upheaval grows more and more profound. 

96 
What is 
a Work of Art? 
What about artistic technique? Surely that is still in season. But consider obiets 
trouves, the work of the primitives, which if powerful is often crude, and, above 
all, the work of artists specializing in life events or in natural objects that need 
only be "set in motion" or "arranged" for the desired result to be achieved. Cer­
tainly, technique in the sense of arduously gained skill hos little meaning here, 
at least as intended by the academies of the post. 
Great individuality hos also grown doubtful, and, with it, the sacred or prophetic 
function of the artist. ls not the artist of today often a wistful iesting outsider, a 
mocker of his own pretensions and role who hides behind the technological ap­
purtenances of the age? We con see Marcel Duchamp effacing his role and then 
retiring from art entirely at the start of this unassuming route that leads to m inimal 
and conceptual art. We see the similarly modest individualities of John Cage, Merce 
Cunningham, Allon Koprow, and the nouveau roman authors. 
What of the art obiect? Surely it hos not slipped from its acknowledged place 
in the triad! The answer is that while artistic activity still becomes obiectified some­
how, the appeal of immortality just is not there as it was. The work of art is often 
deliberately conceived by the avant-garde to be ephemeral. sometimes disposable 
ofter one use, as in happenings. This changes the role of the audience profoundly. 
It is asked to contemplate less and cooperate more. Such situations, which occur 
not only at some happenings but also increasingly in fiction, music, and the plastic 
arts, ore known as "open forms." 
Some may protest that I hove concentrated here on the most freakish examples 
of current unrest in the arts. But just the fact that these ore the features attracting 
the most attention indicates, I think, that the handed-down aesthetic model has 
lost its authority. Also, the phenomena I cite hove demonstrated o staying power, 
and their vitality forbids us to treat them as extravagances, as exotic hybrids. They 
have already chonQed the pattern of the evidence on which we base aesthetic: 
thought, and they foreshadow only further change. We are required, accordingly, 
to ponder on the new aesthetic categories we think we might use -even if we may 
decide (as I do) that there is much in the transmitted (European) heritage that may . 
be rescued and refurbished. 
Towards a Transhistorical Definition 
What I want to do now is develop on idea of art which con hold its ground despite 
the current crisis. Such a definition must run a gamut of difficulties. Artists will 
voice the strongest objections-they generally hove a deep distaste for definition, 

97 
Towards a Transhistorical 
Definition 
which they feel encroaches upon their independence of action. In my opinion, this 
is erroneous, although some epochs of cultural history seem to confirm their fears. 
Historians of the arts may also protest, citing the many different developments 
in any given genre. I feel that this objection is also invalid, since the definition I shall 
propose here is concerned with ultimate regularities and does not deny the special 
characteristics of art at a particular moment. 
Philosophers of art may have the deepest misgivings. The aesthetic school that 
developed under the stimulus of Wittgenstein and especially of his last work, Philo­
sophical Investigations {l 953), holds that no real definition of art can be given. 
This school argues that the definitions we use are arbitrary; we accept, according 
to the "rules of the game," the proposition that a certain class of objects is to be 
considered art, and we proceed to treat those objects in a specific way-which is 
to say that we ought to regard them in this certain way, drawing·delight from their 
texture and rhythm, etc., without permitting ourselves a response which would 
be appropriate to other kinds of objects, meant perhaps to impart information or 
moral guidance or to perform a useful function. 
In reply to this position, many other aestheticians in the analytical Anglo-Ameri­
can school say that in any given field we may encounter variability in the object 
under investigation, but that this should not lead us to an utter distrust of defini-
· 
tion. This opinion is shared by Janina Kotarbiᣈska, who, in her very interesting 
study "Controversy on the Applicability Limits of Logical Methods" (Logique et 
Analyse, April 1 965), has demonstrated the position of Wittgenstein and his fol­
lowers to be too extreme. Her arguments are convincing to me, but they do not 
exhaust the problem. Definitions are always historically conditioned; a new ele­
ment may require that the definition be enlarged or perhaps limited. Art is not such 
an exceptional phenomenon that the concept of art must continually fall prey to 
ambiguity. If we were dependent entirely on logic, I could understand that this 
would be a situation for panic; but I do not think that the methodology should or 
even can be oriented by logical analysis alone. 
An attempt at an authentic definition of art, founded on matters of fact, is both 
feasible and necessary. It must be supported, of course, by the history of aesthetics, 
considered in close relation to the history of culture. I believe that a feeling and 
idea of art, common to diverse cultures, came about when art emerged from pro­
duction and magic and that in the subsequent history of artistic creation the basis 
of that rudimentary conception has remained, even up to the present. This rather 
astonishing situation is perhaps owed in part to some "constants" in human na-

98 
What is 
a Work of Art? 
ture, but primarily to the cumulative effect of cultural experiences. Admittedly, 
the observer is likely to be most struck by the shifts inworking artistic categories. 
But this ongoing process, with its psychological and sociological explanations, 
does not exclude the possibility of certain ultimate regularities (invariables). Neither 
unqualified relativism nor unqualified objectivism is admissible. If the idea of art, 
along with man and society, were to undergo total change in a given epoch, what 
right would we then have even to speak of a history of the "arts," and how could 
we dare to discuss their internal development? 
A number of attempts to provide an adequate definition of art have been made. 
Most have gone wide of the mark, usually because they take a single side of the 
art object as absolute. I especially value attempts to approach art in terms of an 
entire range of attributes, and this is my own purpose. I now turn to what seems 
to me the first consideration. 
A Structure of Sensuously Given Qualities A structure of sensuously given 
qualities is more than a precondition; it is the foundation for the concept of art. (We 
shall see later whether the structure of qualities is exclusively sensuous and is al­
ways directly given.) By structure, I mean in general a class of elements that com­
prise a coherent whole. The notion of a coherent whole needs to be clarified. Ac­
cording to the gestalt theorists (Wertheimer, Kohler, Kaffka), the structural elements 
do not cohere as a "sum total." Rather, the attribute of overall structure absolutely 
conditions and determines the attributes of the elements. The general purport of 
the gestalt conception has been affirmed and developed from another angle by 
modern structuralists such as Hans Sedlmayr and Roman lngarden. According to 
them, the structure exerts a fundamental formative capacity, to which the elemen­
tary qualities are subordinate. lngarden describes it as a harmonious unity. In this 
sense artistic structures may be compared with organic structures. 1 
Another concept of structure is provided by thosᣆ whose premises stem from 
information theory; Max Bense, for instance, whose most detailed treatment of the 
subject is in his four-volume Aesthetica (1 944-60). In place of the traditional macro­
aesthetics, Bense proposes a m icroaesthetics based on determ inate materials, that 
is, classes of signs that cannot be differentiated in terms of content and form. Each 
class constitutes one link of a given series; the elements of the classes have func­
tional relationships with one another that can be stated in mathematical formulas. 
Here the structuring process is statistically rational; it is distinguishable from other 
physical processes in terms of the very slight probability whereby X or Y will crop 

99 
Towards a Transhistorical 
Definition 
up. The artistic structure, like any other structure, is supplied with antientropic 
signs. Its proportion - in the exact mathematica I as in the aesthetic sense- is its 
infÑrmation. 2 
From these examples (which afford, of course, but a narrow glimpse into the 
discussion)3 the fundamental differences over the concept of structure as a basic 
philosophical-aesthetic structure can be characterized as follows: 
1. Is the structure an enumerable (and consequently quantifiable) system of dis­
crete elements, or a definite qualitative system? 
2. Is the structure, if composed of a qualitative system, something which can be 
taken in only by an intuitive grasp of the whole, or is it accessible to analytic 
modes of procedure? 
3. Is the structure an ideal-homogeneous whole, or are its particularities more 
clearly articulated in its so-called oppositions? 
4. Is the structure comprehensible only in and through itself, or rather only in the 
context of a larger system, of infrastructure or suprastructure? 
5. If the character of the given structure is defined by a more comprehensive system, 
the suprastructure, is this system then exclusively synchronic, or is it also dia­
chronic? 
6. Is the structure a logical construct, or is it an empirical given, in which case it 
may be assumed that the structuring operation is historically determinate, that 
is, congruent with the given cultural system in its diachronic as well as its syn­
chronic aspects? 
To each of these questions I would offer the same answer: only the second part 
is to be affirmed. In my view, artistic structures cannot be reduced to quantifiably 
rational classes, even if in the terms of certain systems this is procedurally pos­
sible and effective. It is also impossible to accept the intuitive understanding of 
the whole, as Dilthey and the phenomenologists would have it, since this intuitive 
procedure is not controllable. And the conception of Levi-Strauss provokes doubts 
because he acknowledges only synchronic connections between the system and 
the structure, and, in his view, the alignment of the system with a set model may 
be programmatically worked out, while, moreover, the model of any given structure 
is rooted in the recurrent systems. 
We may say this: every artistic structure signifies. Its significance results from 
the given fundamental sign system to which it appertains. Simultaneously, how­
ever, every artistic structure is expressive, that is, one can explain it - in terms of 
synchronic/diachronic norms- only by reference to the larger wholes which define 

1 00 
What is 
a Work of Art? 
its modifications and its evolutionary rhythms. Hence I adopt here the standpoint 
of Marx as he formulated his methodological theses and commentaries in Capita/. 4 
I should add that artistic structures cannot be specified in terms of their particu­
lar character and their dependency upon historical circumstances nearly as pre­
cisely as they can according to the classes in mathematical set theory. K. E. Tran!Zly 
has said in this regard that the further we depart from logic and mathematics and 
the closer we come to aesthetics, the more difficult it becomes to trace out firmly 
the basic concepts (structure, elements, and the relations between them}, and the 
greater is the trend to apprehend the structure as a whole. All the same, Tran9Jy 
wrongly holds that it is harder than in other domains of humanities to locate signif­
icant, decisivelv dominant elements and relations in the structure nf n wnrk nf n rt 
On the contrary; generally, these coherent entities possess a central focus and are 
organized according to some defining main principle. The elementary qualities 
enter it in differing orders of arrangement, to be sure, and in the most variegated 
associations with one another. I shall have more to say of this in a moment. But 
first a point that I believe more important must be clarified in the context of our 
discussion of the idea of structure. I am talking of the view which holds that the 
structure need not be harmonious. Erich Kahler has correctly pointed out that mis­
understandings can arise on this point, but he has not himself explained what 
should be meant by harmony. 
Of course, harmony m ight be said to imply the full agreement of all elements 
with one another. Unfortunately, the concept of agreement is not precise, but it 
is difficult to replace it with anything better. We can qualify and expand on it by 
pointing to its contrary, that is, to discord or disturbance among the elements. In 
saying that the elements are in a state of agreement, we mean to say that in a cer­
tain sense they are of the same kind, they possess like characteristics. They have 
potency owing not to contrast but to similarity. The totalities put together of them 
are generally static or barely dynamic. Such structures certainly have value and are 
necessary, but just as valuable and necessary are disharmonious, dynamic struc­
tures. (We owe to Mieczyslaw Wallis the distinction between two kinds of values, 
the gentle and the harsh, in which, of course, there can also be intermediate grada­
tions.} 
The problem of harmonious and disharmonious systems is linked closely with 
the particularity of the oppositions that are characteristic of artistic structures. 
In systems of the first type, opposition indicates distinct polar points of a composi­
tion (above- below, center-edge, right- left, etc.} or the unity of a whole evoked 

1 01 
Towards a Tronshistoricol 
Definition 
by .means of a dominant key, as against the multiplicity of constituent ports. In sys­
tems of the second type, the opposition is more clearly recognizable, for it assumes 
the character of a conflict. Two other circumstances permit us to speak of opposi­
tion as a characteristic trait of a work of art. The phenotype appears here asso­
ciated with the genotype-the individuum belongs to a class of determinate objects 
and, at the some time, stands out from it. And inasmuch as we encounter old and 
new elements coming into collision with one another in a work, the synchronic sys­
tem, which is a part of a diachronic system, testifies to the stylistic transformations. 
When we speak of the structure of sensuously given qualities, we think of forms, 
colors, tones, graphic signs, block-and-white signals (on the filmstrip), movements 
(in dance), etc., which, within a great totality, comprise a totality of lower degree. 
Such a totality is at a lower degree as a result of the particularity of the single ele­
ments and of their partial systems; however, as a result of the association of ele­
ments and of the partial systems, and finally of the possible contrast, dissonance, 
and even contrariety among the elements, it has its own expressive power. Hence, 
the gravitational point shifts from the structure to the qualities which especially 
catch our attention, inasmuch as it is primarily the sensuous side of the phenom­
enon which holds us. In such cases we would be justified in speaking not so much 
of a structure but rather of hierarchically or nonhierarchically structured qualities. 
Yet it would be a mistake to stress either the qualities or the structure exclusively. 
The interrelation of these two moments is so complete that they cannot be sepa­
rated from one another. 
I think, for example, of the poems of Marinetti and of Mlodotenec, which are 
sustained chiefly by a complex sound-painting. These poets hope to liberate the 
word from syntax. They aim at an intuitively comprehended interrelation of words, 
and at times they achieve a coherent totality, determined by a peculiarly auton­
omous "syntax." In op art.too, the structure cannot be parted from the qualities. 
More than that-and of this I want to speak now -that coherence is directly linked 
with what is termed the relative autonomy of the work of art. When poetry is under­
stood to be a specially ordered arrangement (a syntax or metaphor unambiguously 
differing from what prevails in the contemporary language system), when the prin­
ciples of the Russian formalists are adopted and astonishment-exciting devices are 
employed with the aim of freshening perception, when Brecht by way of invoking 
the Verfremdungseffekt, "estrangement effect," outfits his actors in masks and 
demands that they play their roles with distance so that the sense of the Lehrstucke, 
"learning plays," will be emphasized - in all these cases em phasis is placed upon 

1 02 
What is 
a Work of Art? 
the structure with all its qualities, and the structure is set apart from the surround­
ing world, as something relatively self-sufficient. 
I have underscored here the double-sidedness of the configuration to bring out 
the multiplicity of artistic structure and to note its characteristic attribute. This at­
tribute leads us at a minimum, to stress the qualities and to distinguish artistic 
structure from any related structures. It must be asked, nonetheless, which con­
crete properties shall be ascribed to the structure; from among rhythm, symmetry, 
proportion, unity in multiplicity, or the balancing of elements which incorporates 
dissonances-in brief, any of those properties that are put forward as a nearer 
description of the aesthetic system. Every one of them seems important, yet not one 
of them can be considered a sufficient characterizing trait. Nor can any ensemble 
of these attributes be deemed perfectly characteristic of the work of art. We must 
proceed here with caution, because we are considering the most different sorts of 
combination, in different genres. Only all the traits together-and we have not by 
any means mentioned every one- provide the axiological attributes of a genre. 
They are the foundation for particular modifications in the individual works. As 
concerns the qualities, the situation is akin to that with structure. Diverse theories 
of art describe the qualities variously, especially in their concrete manifestations, 
such as sonority, vivacity, attack, or their opposites. Here every single work of art 
modifies the axiological traits of a genre. 
The problem of the sensuous qualities is compounded owing to their universal 
compass. In the arts that function only, or primarily, through the word (literature, 
the spoken theater), the sensuous qualities ore "transparent." In some poetic works 
we can still elaborate a phonemic-rhythmic configuration, as with the poems of 
Paul Verlaine, the "word-melodies" of Julian Tuwim, the "irrational language" 
of A. Kruchonykh and Velimir Khlebnikov, and the Ursonata of Kurt Schwitters. 
In prose, on the contrary, the graphic signs and the phonetic signs always express 
meaning, and a definite object world is built up through their aid. For this reason 
these qualities are termed indirectly evocative. We indicate their mediative function 
in the communicating of so-called literary images- not what lngarden calls An­
sichten, "appearances" (which cannot be parted from the fictive gestalt and the 
object), but rather the particularized phenomena and occurrences that the imagina­
tion asserts and that either have happened or are said to have happened. These, 
as we know, are structured by dint of narrative, action, fable, etc. 
For certain rather exceptional readers the novel - like poetry-can be an eidetic 
experience, that is, they can actually "see," uniquely perceive (with all the senses) 

1 03 
Towards a Transhistorical 
Definition 
the events and images while reading. However, for most of the reading public 
(quite in accordance with the medium, which is basically noneidetic}, only a certain 
aura of semivisual or semiauditory correlatives adheres to the perceived complexes 
of statements. Thus, through the meaning of the text and its commingling with 
imagination, the perceptive response can, in some degree, be stimulated. Helping 
to foster an almost total decline in eidetic possibilities has been twentieth-century 
poetry, whose principle is almost the very opposite of ut pictura poesis, "let poetry 
paint." The meaningful elements in it crowd aside the eidetic iconicity- proving 
much more strong and efficacious than in the older, descriptive or narrative poetry. 
The '_'images" spring from the collision of concepts; they are more implied than 
explicitly stated. The concreteness of this kind of literature is due neither to rhyme 
and meter nor to similes and other devices but to the peculiar texture of ideas in 
metaphoric juxtaposition. 
Indirectly evocative qualities, therefore, compose the foundation of the literary 
structure. What concerns us at this point is not the linguistic matter, this graphic, 
sonorous rhythmic medium, but rather the fact that the qualities that arise from 
the semantic agglomerate afford diffused but intelligible representations of a sen­
suous-plastic world. On this account a unique atmosphere similarly issues to en­
velop the agglomerate. 
In the history of aesthetics, this problem is discussed as early as Edmund Burke's 
Philosophical Enquiry (1 757}. Broder Christiansen analysed the phenomenon in 
his Kunstphilosophie (1 901 }. His observations were carried further in The Psychol­
ogy of Art (l 925) by Lev Vygotsky. W. K. Wimsatt, Jr., vindicates and elaborates 
the approach; he describes the hyperverbal relevance of the literary medium, by 
which term he points to "the interrelational density of words taken in their fullest, 
most inclusive and symbolic character."5 The eidetic semantic world of the quali­
ties fundamental to poetry and prose is just as crucial to producing the uniqueness 
of this art as is the "empowered arrangement" which Roman Jakobson gives as 
the crucial determinant. It is to be emphasized that while the semantic qualities 
may be directly attuned to values of a mimetic type, they need not be. That they 
bear reference to the external or the inner world is obviously not tantamount to 
saying -any more than we would of the iconic signs of painting -that the content 
is comprised of reflected objects or even that these are dominant. However, "con­
tent" motifs must as a rule be made.a component of the fundmental structure of 
semantic qualities, if by form we mean the directly, sensuously given. 
The term "form" is, as everyone knows, one of the most abused in aesthetic 

1 04 
What is 
a Work of Art? 
discourse. Although it is inescapably ambiguous and vague, I cannot avoid it in 
respect to some crucial aspects of aesthetic problems. Because of the vagueness 
and ambiguity, I wish simply to state here that in other works (not translated into 
English), I have proposed that the term be applied within a specific context and 
in a specific sense: connected with its twin term, content. Now, with respect to non­
representational art, I understand by content the means of expression, while form 
in this context is the organization (the structure) of this material; with poetry or 
song, content is what provides the pattern of meaning in the verbal media, while 
form is both the sound (or graphic) patterns and the organization of the material 
as a whole; with the representational arts, content consists of the ideas, persons, 
objects, events, and their relationships given by the iconic surface or the patterns 
of images, and by form we can understand the iconic surface, the patterns of im­
ages, plus the organization of the material as a whole; and finally, with the applied 
arts (including architecture), I would suggest that by form we understand the tex­
tures, the surfaces and their shape, while by content we understand the function. 
Here, the construction is usually regarded as a formal aspect too, except in the con­
structivist version, where it becomes the content. With regard to the performing 
arts, I abandon the above terms and speak rather of "design" (e.g., score or script) 
and "execution," each of which in its turn possesses the aspects of form and con­
tent. I do not discern material (the medium} as content in contradistinction to form, 
since all materials are aesthetically significant only as they are processed into the 
work of art or as they are emphasized (e.g., /'art brut, or noise in aleatory music}, 
where they become means of expression and hence pertain to the content in the 
context of nonrepresentational art, as mentioned above. 
One final distinction is still needed here: that of form as a type pattern. 6 This 
sense applies, however, only to special cases. Type pattern clearly is a generica/ 
notion; that is, it pertains to the peculiar genre of the work of art. When we speak, 
for example, of a sonnet or a mazurka, we mean an approximate ordering of the 
whole, including the means of expression; but when we speak about tragedy, or 
we specify that a novel is an adventure tale, already we are bringing in content 
as well as form to the given "type pattern," and our prior distinctions take priority. 
I have left aside here the preliminary notion of composition, as it is, in fact, a 
definite particularization of form in the aesthetic meaning. I also have no space to 
dwell on the illuminating analysis by D. W. Parker, who discerned five chief factors 
of form (unity of the whole [organic unity], which in turn emerges from: a dominant 
motif; balance; thematic variation; and evolution}. This scheme is beguiling at first 

1 05 
Towards a Transhistorical 
Definition 
glance, but in fact, it reveals no more than what I call the particular valuational 
qualities of which the ultimate form-value may be comprised. Thus, I cannot accept 
what I take to be the subcategories he proposes as the key traits of all art objects. 
Perhaps balance, alone, might be defended as a constituent valuational quality. 
Then, however, we would have to understand by "balance" any compositional 
concretization of a given ordered whole (and dissonance, looseness, even chaotic 
pattern might be manifest). Bur surely a dominant theme, variation, and evolution 
(a sequential, "dramatic" conception, also of spatial entities) provide contingent 
valuational qualities, dependent on how the particular artist might make use of 
them. 
A Relative Autonomy of Structure Were we to restrict ourselves to the fore­
going decisive attribute, we would be open to reproach for failure to arrive at com­
plete definition. For we do encounter closed structures outside of art possessing 
the qualities that concerned us above -the surgeon's table with doctors and nurses 
standing round about it, a crowd of people suddenly running down the street 
together, a report or account of something that has just occurred. The gestalt theo­
rists have tried for this reason to establish Pragnanz, "precise compactness," as 
the particular attribute of art structures. They hold coherent systems to be those in 
which no element is superfluous and none can be replaced by another. Beyond that, 
as Max Wertheimer has it, these structures have a much sharper tendency towards 
simplicity and regularity than other structures. Such terse structures thus appear to 
be harmonious only in the narrower sense, inasmuch as they evince a surprising 
uniformity of their elements and entail not merely a harmonious, but an actually 
functional unity. (Changing one element means changing another element.) Theo­
rists find the affirmation of such a view seductive, but I doubt that it is confirmed 
in practice. We often talk about works of art without setting such rigorous require­
ments (we also grant recognition to disharmonious structures), while, conversely, 
far simpler systems can be found where the elements depend on each other in the 
tightest way, and these are not works of art. The terseness problem simply has no 
way to arise as regards the complicated structures of most works of art. If we really 
want to settle this issue, we must not merely draw a demarcation line between. 
systems whose elements closely cohere with one another and systems where this 
is not the case. 
Accordingly, the second characteristic attribute of art is in my view not so much 
a terse economy as a relative autonomy of structure. De Witt Parker and Erich 

1 06 
What is 
a Work of Art? 
Kahler term it the fashioning of a microcosm . 7 This thesis might seem to contradict 
marxist views regarding works of art. For if we speak of a work as a microcosm, 
we may be charged with adopting the standpoint of extreme aestheticism, with 
proposing the absolute autonomy of artistic value. This is a hasty and a simplistic 
reproach, however, and cannot stand up to criticism. Parker and Kahler do not seek 
to divide art from reality. On the contrary, their characterization of the artistic struc­
ture indicates a macrostructure; they declare the sociohistorical order at a given 
time to be a tangible presence. The "microcosm" is not just genetically dependent 
upon the macrocosm, then, but it can reflect, or, in more cautious phrase, express 
it as well. 
Lukdcs, in Die Eigenart des Aesthetischen (1 963), adopts a standpoint which I 
have also expressed.8 In the light of marxist historicism, I believe it is impossible 
not to accept the view that a work of art represents a "microcosm," not only in the 
mimetic sense, as a reflection of the macrocosm, but, above all, in the sense that by 
referring to the occurrence of artistic unities within a greater totality, one finds 
means to seek the determinants of these unities; whose one-of-a-kind status is only 
seemingly a paradox. These unities are somehow related to an authentic reality, 
and yet they function as though we had exempted them from reality. (Lukacs has 
strikingly termed this an An-sich-sein, "being in itself," in form only.) Although they 
are in material substance or in use-value, for example, a part of our world, they 
are at the same time opposed to this world. They provide territories in which, quite 
apart from all their other possible functions (informational, moral, practical), these 
give;i systems of qualities, whether immediately sensuous or indirect and semantic, 
subsist in themselves. A fine example is provided here by functiona I objects, which 
are changed into works of art if outfitted with special outward attributes such as 
color and proportion beyond the requirements of their use. Even in times of radical 
constructivism or functionalism, in the architecture of Loos and the young Le Cor­
busier and in Bauhaus furniture, visual values of this nature have played a role. 
We should also ascribe a relative autonomy in those cases where objects of 
everyday use or obiets trouves come to be looked upon as art. The dadaists and sur­
realists called operations of this sort depaysement (whose prototypes were the 
papiers col/es of synthetic cubism). It amounts simply to putting a given work or 
product in a context where, as a structure rendered conspicuous, it acquires an 
autotelic function. Picabia's inkwell, Duchamp's urinal, Rauschenberg's bed cease 
to be an inkwell, a plumbing fixture, a bed. 
With pop art this problem becomes particularly important. Here we are in no 

1 07 
Towards a Transhistoricol 
Definition 
way confronted with a return to figurative art, but rather with an effort absolutely 
to wipe out the boundaries between art and nonart. The magnificently got-up and 
consumed objects of everyday use, found in interior decors, in drugstores, or in 
shopwindow displays, are taken to represent a wholly proper domain for artistic 
activity. This applies likewise to the comics and advertising images in the works of 
Oldenburg, Indiana, Johns, Wesselman, and Lichtenstein. Of course, someone can 
ask whether we are not overly tolerant if we admit such productions to the realm of 
art. It seems they stem, as the cultural sociologists would have it, from a modern 
civilization that is determined by the mass media. The result is an onsla ught of pre­
fab, die-cut productions that may not claim the name of art, and a homogenized 
culture in which the easily grasped communication is king. However, I cannot re­
gard this hypothesis about the emergence of pop art as the single correct one. 
Admittedly, the reliance of the art form upon modern civilization is too complete, 
countermanding its attempt to cast that civilization wholly into question. Other im­
pulses are, however, essential to its appearance. Pop art is a reaction to the art 
of the avant-garde preceding it, especially to abstract expressionism. Hence, in a 
way it too takes up the whole problematic area which grew manifest in the twen­
tieth century with the crisis of the concept of art. As I said earlier, this art is the ex­
pression of protest against a civilization which has made of art- even its most 
devilishly difficult aspects-a commodity. 
In sum, there is no reason to deny pop art its status as art, its sublation of the 
boundaries between life and art notwithstanding. Its proponents are saying ap­
proximately: life can be aesthetic or not aesthetic; to gain awareness of this, one 
has to pick definite structures out from life. We think we are looking at objects from 
life, but they ore differently organized, they are a mockery of life, or the poetry of 
their banal ordinariness is brought to the fore. What in a certain sense constitutes 
their own world of art is thus either maintained or asserted. 
We can observe the very same process in another quarter. The mobiles of Calder, 
the constructions of Gabo and Pevsner, and the works of action painting impress 
us not as technical gymnastics, as engineering projects, or as simple, accidental, 
blindly active organizations of material, but rather as structures of sensuously given 
qualities having a relative autonomy. Here let it be said again that the moment of 
relative' autonomy coheres with qualities that are so structured as immediately to 
seize our attention. Calling attention to structure plainly means, however, focusing 
upon its internal field, upon the autotelic qualities which function independently of 
the external world. Thus, the second attribute of art constitutes a strengthening of 

1 08 
What is 
a Work of Art? 
the first. This is no more true for the immediately sensuously given qualities than it 
is for the indirectly evocative, mediated (semanticized) ones. In literature, for in­
stance, the indirectly given qualities are elements of a fictive world, constructed of 
course with the so-called vehicles of meaning. Moreover, a reflexive relation is in 
effect here; fields of qualities can be lifted the more readily out of their surroundings 
when they have a conspicuous structural organization. 
In works of prose like those by Gide, Camus, and Max Frisch (Stiller and Mein 
Name sei Gantenbein), the autonomous structure rises on a footing of philosophi­
cal reflection. There are debates on the meaning of writing itself, ironical treatment 
of the author's own artistic vision, and discussions of the dubious identity of con­
temporary man, all this giving testimony to a most thoroughgoing skepticism. With 
Frisch it gets to the point where only external possibilities (not character) are seen 
in the forming of a human being. Self-consciousness has become the outcome of 
innumerable unknown variables which at any time may affect one's existence. The 
cinema offers similar phenomena: Fellini's 8Ò on the one hand; the work of Godard 
on the other. Though intellectual reflection prevails, and thought represents the 
ground floor, as it were, this does not alter the artistic status, for the intellectuality 
here does not primarily serve the aim of cognition. It is one part of life which, in 
eluding the author or hero, calls forth in consequence self-sufficient thought and 
commentary and reflections upon itself. 
The problem of the relative autonomy of a work of art is related to the question 
of space. Space has continued importance in terms of art's own world gaining a 
depth relief against the authentic background. In most cases we are speaking of 
the extrinsic, technical means of ascribing space -the contour of the picture in its 
frame, the sculpture on the pedestal, the acting on the stage, not to overlook the 
opening credits and "The End" in film. Space of this kind was made suspect by.the 
dadaists and surrealists (Magritte, for example). In fact, the extrinsic denotators of 
space are not very important. Every work of art achieves its own genuine space 
strictly through the content of its special conspicuous structure, its intrinsic rhythm 
as evoked by the spatial, temporal, or spatiotemporal dom inants. 
A special role in the formation of intrinsic space is played by fiction, which with 
the aid of fable, characterization, and sequences of events creates an illusional 
world. And even though it is not certain where the fiction begins, the irreality of 
the narration demarcates it from what authentically was, or is. In the variety of 
reportage we deem artistic, from which all fable is excluded, the space is only to be 
had by means of a special language or particular construction. The conscious ac-

1 09 
Towards a Transhistoricol 
Definition 
centing that is common to artistic experiment is another way of winning space. 
For example, even those artists in the modern theater who have junked the fourth 
wall (Eisenstein, Meyerhold, Piscator) have not been able to do without space in this 
sense. When an actor walks into the audience or addresses the public directly (as 
in Brecht's theater), these stylistic devices only modify the space. The effort indeed 
is stronger than ever today to achieve the relative autonomy of theater, its func­
tionality qua theater and not as an illusory slice of life whose accidental witness ­
es it were -one is. 
The Artifact of Skill or Virtuosity In European culture, but not only in it, art 
has been defined on the whole as a distinctive form of activity for which one must 
possess a special aptitude. What Thomas Aquinas spake of as redo ratio factibili­
um was an unimpugned axiom until the twentieth century. But with the dominant 
role of technology in modern civilization the axiom has lost virtually all credibility. 
When it is possible with the help of an electronic bra in to produce a black and white 
diffraction spectrum upon a photographic plate -in other words, a synthetic 
hologra m - which, when appropriately illuminated, provides a full three-dimen­
sional image of the object that you can study from the most varied sight-lines and 
perspectives, then we have a phenomenon where not even the technique of devel­
oping a film correctly is a problem, for the electronic brain (programmed, to be 
sure) plays the crucial role. 
Accordingly, as we come to describe the third attribute of art, we must consider 
the modern experience with cybernetics and reformulate the classical thesis con­
cerning techne, the special ability of the artist. There are two kinds of artifact-
the direct and the mediated. A direct artifact is one which requires human inter­
vention (through the use of implements and certain skills), while a mediated artifact 
is achieved either with the help of programmed machines or by an artificial or­
ganization of natural objects. 
In Japanese ikebana, which is often cited as the classic instance of such arti­
ficed organization, flowers (and sometimes metal and manmade material) are ar­
ranged in a distinctive fashion, and impressive light effects are sought. Here we 
have a construction of an artistic structure using raw material, the artist's intention 
being to organize "naturally abstract structures." This interpretation applies muta­
tis mutandis to the obiet trouve, for here too the given formed object is shown ­
structured -within a setting. However, the obiet trouve need not, although it may, 
provide an abstract pattern. If it is not, say, a piece of driftwood (akin to the raw 

1 1 0 
What is 
a Work of Art? 
material of ikebono), but instead a much-worn pocket watch, for example, it will 
retain a semimimetic significance and have an effect rather like a pop art piece. 
The artifact can accordingly be considered another attribute of art. Yet it is more 
dubious than the two previous attributes, since a raw, unworked object can be 
designated a work of art, with the act of structuring passed on by the artist to the 
perceiver. Also, the artifact entails a twofold understanding of the techne by which 
a work of art comes into existence. By techne we ordinarily mean artistry, skill, 
or virtuosity. We assume that X or Y must have a definite talent to approach a field 
to which one must bring a thorough preparation and, most important, some promi­
nent individual gifts. But we must now also understand by techne the ability to 
program artistic tasks into a cybernetic machine. Definite talent is necessary here 
too, though of another sort, less individually predicated than in art. In a word, 
techne is not an attribute peculiar to art; it involves not so much the work itself as 
the means of disposition, the trained skill and capacity, the artist must have at hand 
if he is to make a work of art. 
I ndividual Expression Having described artifact and techne as the third attri­
bute of art, I come now to the fourth and last attribute, individual expression. If by 
this criterion we understood only the factual act of making, we should have to re­
main as wary of it as we are of techne, because it would then be a characteristic 
of the creative process and not of the work itself. 
I am of the opinion, however, that individual expression is a feature not only of 
artistic creation but of the artistic product as well. In other words, we simply cannot 
accept that X will look at the world in a certain way, think this and that about it, 
in his own way select and accent definite phenomena, and that he will express 
none of all this in his work, ·which has only had -or to speak with more caution, 
partially had -this aim in being thrust into existence. 
Of course the question arises: How is the individual expression in a work of art 
to be pinned down? It is not easy. I will return to this question; but first I must turn 
to a more urgent matter: Can individual expression be called an essential attribute 
of a work of art when it is not characteristic of such artistic productions as sur­
realist poems (e.g., "Calliope" by Ducrocq} or objets trouves? 
It is quite clear to me that in these works we are not confronted with any ele­
ments of individual expression. The artist hatches a programmatic concept, which 
is subsequently executed by putting together aleatory groupings _of words or colors. 

1 1 1  
Towards a Tronshistoricol 
Definition 
Yet the artist is involved to the extent of bestowing on the "ready-mode" objects 
on artistic meaning and setting them off in some definite way. At the Cabaret Vol­
taire, the poet Tristan Tzoro pulled newspaper snippets from his top hot and from 
them put together poems and dadaist manifestos. Tzoro come near to achieving 
what hos today been perfected by cybernetic machines. Using o kind of lottery, he 
aimed for the completely unexpected and, what is most important, on arrangement 
of elements without any personal intervention. Tzora did not give himself over 
totally to occident, however, since he himself mode the choice of newspaper clip­
pings and thus "encoded" poems. Surrealist practice is not dissimilar: automatic 
writing (much like action pointing and jazz improvisation) is at bottom an expres­
sion of the stream of consciousness; it relies on accident, and permits the untram­
meled personality of on artist (more precisely, the immediate creative process) to 
issue forth. We must u nderstand in the same way Dominguez's means of pointing, 
o method lauded by Breton as allowing the most intrinsic expression to o painter, 
who needs no longer adhere to the fixed principles of conscious, controllable inven­
tion. In both instances we have the composition of structures whose basic materials 
ore expressive qualities: however, in Tzora's case the expression is, in large degree, 
o projection of what the perceiver brings to it, while in the second case the artist's 
intervention is primary. 
This then is o gradual, rather than a qualitative distinction; but it is an essential 
one inasmuch as, for instance, we con similarly differentiate two modes in the con­
temporary happening. One mode hos been located by American critics in the heri­
tage of the collages and assemblages of Allon Ko prow; and these con not be coiled 
pure improvisations, for the artist imposes his selections on the work rather strong­
ly. The other mode is exemplified in the works of John Cage, which make maximum 
use of chance and unexpected elements and groupings. In both coses, the observer 
hos to make out for himself the structuring of the work: They ore both open systems. 
In the second case (the spectacles and ideas of J. J. Lebel ore also representative), 
however, the spectators ore more centrally invited to assert their own inventions 
within o certain schema. Events hove been staged in which the totality of elements 
in the surrounding environment participate: form, light, movement, sounds. Merce 
Cunningham's dance company hos taken port in such events, as have proponents 
of musique concrete. Art here becomes a means of playful enjoyment.9 
I look upon individual expression as the most fluctuating of the attributes I hove 
discussed, for in folklore, industrial art, and homogenized mass culture, as well as 

1 1 2 
What is 
a Work of Art? 
in the phenomena discussed above, it is frequently, if not always, impossible to 
locate it. The individual expression is usually embedded within the expressive struc­
ture which constitutes the work of art. I must add that the individual expression 
cannot be confirmed on the evidence of one work of art. A longer-term sampling is 
required for a disclosure of the peculiar stylistic attributes. 
We might seek to connect individual expression with authenticity and originality, 
thereby stressing - rightly-the unusually powerful individual expression. What 
precisely these terms mean is not easy to explain. Works which manifest openness, 
sincerity, freshness, and immediacy, are often called authentic. But, how sincerity 
might be tested remains a conundrum; while freshness requires an element or an 
entire structure to be new or to imitate uniqueness. (Whether newness itself is in­
dividually expressive must be doubted; though it awakens interest, novelty all too 
often proves at last an empty vanity.) As for originality, it is plainly equivalent to 
singularity or uniqueness. 
If I stress here the ambiguity in the concept of "artistic individuality," it is to 
make more understandable my conclusion. I find it unwise to reduce individuality 
as an attribute of works of art to newness or novelty, a concept that in turn needs 
more exact analysis; at a minimum, novelty surely means a different content or 
formal means than previously was expressed or employed. Novelty is a historical 
category; individuality is not. Novelty is an equivalent of individuality in just one 
sense, that each individuality makes its bow as "new." 
From a cycle of works, from the global entirety of their structure, we derive a 
given number of properties that distinguish the particular artist from others. The 
roots of this singularity are not subject to a theoretical definition. We can point 
concretely to these properties; we can describe and even classify them in relation 
to stylistic attributes (theme, content, form) that predominate in the relevant cultural 
sphere. What differentiates the artist from the artisan is the style that is the property 
of the artist. This style can be discovered in the constituted structure, whereby fur­
ther data accrued from the observation or reconstruction of the creative process 
prove helpful. 
Technical perfection, I should say, is no standard of artistry; it is sheerly the 
result of professional capacity in a given artistic field, such as a skilled copyist or 
gifted counterfeiter must command to perfection. So long as van Meegeren under­
stood brilliantly how to imitate Vermeer, he was a brilliant forger and no more. 
As his imitations increasingly showed their own strongly expressive properties, one 
could say that his work manifested an artistic mastery. 10 

1 1 3 
Towards a Transhistorical 
Definition 
If by the concept of individual expression we comprehend all of the foregoing, 
it will mean that we expect from the work of art at least a small degree of original­
ity. Some aestheticians maintain that a good copy has its own status and also af­
fords us aesthetic pleasure, that is, that we enjoy a faithful reproduction of a paint­
ing or a recording of a musical performance; they overlook, however, that what 
pleases us is the original. not the copy. While not wishing to impugn the pleasures 
of experiencing a reproduction, I wish to emphasize that through it the attraction 
of an original is what holds our attention; we seek experience of the original 
through all available means. 1 1  
My feeling i s  that the "fully" original works of art are those which carry to a rare 
degree of excellence the artist's individual attributes; originality may, in fact, be 
equated with exceptionally creative individuality. In other words, when we study 
authentic artists we find that every one imbues works of art with properties which 
peculiarly represent him. Some reveal themselves to the world; others discover 
themselves within the world. Still others are capable of discovering the world itself, 
whereupon they are often attracted to philosophy and science. But given all such 
differences, the attribute of individual particularity is constituent of all works of art. 
However, the term originality should not be used interchangeably with that of 
individual expression. While effecting some usually minor personal modifications, 
individual expression has to fall back on a common fund of artistic attitudes, emo­
tions, thinking, and language. Originality may be understood to imply a more sin­
gular phenomenon in art. 
In short, however much individuals may differ from one another, they still have 
much in common; the same applies to works of art, even in cases of the original-
ity which signifies genius. In such cases, the work of art differs in both quality and 
degree from other works of art expressive of a given individuality. In works we 
cannot describe as being of genius, a transmitted mode of looking at the world is 
simply modified, a few stylistic devices are reworked, this or that theme undergoes 
a divergent treatment. In works of genius, the world is uniquely seen; on entirely 
individual style is exercised. In other works, individuality is largely an affair of 
particulars; in works of genius, the work is forged almost wholly in the individual­
ity of the artist. Thus, a single sign, one trait, is often enough to distinguish the 
entire work from all others of its epoch and of past and future time. Genius and its 
unique products do not lend themselves to scalar weighing and measurement. A 
work of this magnitude cannot be more or less unique. There can only be a different 
concrete uniqueness or originality. 

1 1 4 
What is 
o Work of Art? 
Originality cannot then be imputed to every V{Ork of art. We have thus come 
across an axiological attribute with whose assistance we will be positioned to 
describe hierarchies of objects that we have already discerned to be art. 
Some Problems in Applying the Definition 
Let me summarize. We call that object a work of art which possesses at least a 
minimal expressive structure of qualities and qualitative patterns, given sensorily 
and imaginatively in a direct or in an indirectly evocative (semanticized) way. These 
qualitative patterns and the definite structure enhance each other, building up an 
autotelic, relatively autonomous whole, set off more or less from reality while it 
remains nonetheless a part of realtiy. This object, I must add, is an artifact, in the 
sense that it is either directly produced owing to a given techne or it is the result 
of some idea of arrangement. Finally, this object is somehow related to the artist's 
creative individuality. 
The axiological character of this whole that we call a work of art must be ob­
vious and needs no further comment. What I should discuss further is the grouping 
of artistic values (and the valuational qualities that support them) which are perti­
nent to a// art, as these can be distinguished from values and valuational qualities 
which pertain only to certain domains, kinds, and genres of art. This important issue 
must be taken up in a separate essay, where it can be adequately argued and 
analyzed. 
I hope it is dear by my remarks about happenings that the term "object" 
should be understood here in a broader sense than in traditional aesthetics-the 
process, which has a beginning, middle, and end, is also a kind of aesthetic object. 
According to this interpretation, the three earlier features are unquestionably 
necessary and sufficient conditions. The fourth and last, in the hedged formulation 
I gave it, can also be considered constituent of a work of art. Some avant-garde 
products do, however, erase the individual impress much as though art had re­
turned to the primitive era when no institution of the artist existed. More broadly, 
we run into trouble with the idea of individual expression when dealing with the 
many able avant-gardists who take offense when this category is broached; all 
the same, even their anonymous gestures are individually expressive in some way. 
I should stress that my concept of expression is not centered on the intensity dis­
played, for example, by romantics, expressionists, and action painters. Moreover, 
in including individual expression, I do not claim that a work of art exists only in a 
single rendition. This singularity applies only to some arts, such as painting or "hot" 

1 1 5  
Some Problems i n  Applying 
the Definition 
jazz; moreover, a solution to this problem depends on the answer given to on­
tological questions, 12 and the social context cannot be ignored in any matter of 
aesthetic axiology. 
On the basis of the definition of art proposed here, I think we may justifiably 
conclude that art provides, as many have assumed, a special mode of cognition of 
reality. We may say that the artist (within the structure of the particular fields of 
qualities) presents his own special relationship to the world, and that the reader or 
spectator monitors this relationship with approximate adequacy. This is to say only 
that every work of art is imbued with manifold references to the world exterior to 
it, and that, in its own fashion, the tachist abstraction or the purely musical struc­
ture is imbued with cognitive values as much as the genre painting or the literature 
of the nineteenth century. 
. 
We must, however, differentiate among these cognitive values. Usually they are 
linked in a more particular sense with elements proper to the representational arts. 
There they are plainly in evidence and can most readily be verified. But let us con­
sider such thoroughly modern and fascinating works as, for instance, the Tractatus 
by Jerzy Krechowicz and Janusz Hajdun, performed in the Gdansk Plastic Arts 
Theatre, or Kazimierz Urbanski's film Matter. In the latter, matter is not depicted; 
rather, a fantastic poem is created in which the continual volatility of matter, its 
cycles and genesis-with ever more distinct forms emerging from chaos -come 
before the viewer. This is certainly not mimesis, yet without doubt not only sensu­
ous qualities are presented but their objective structuring too. This presentation of 
the entrance of cosmic matter into our daily lives ever since the atom-bomb explo­
sions is the more remarkable in that the realm of physics is evoked with all the 
gestalt of a quasi-reproduction, a quasi-scientific study. Hence, the special cognitive 
values which are communicated are necessarily ambiguous. This characteristic 
(it is often believed on evidence like this) seems a fixed trait of works of art in gener­
al. We should not forget, however, that philosophical works are ambiguous too, 
as are scientific works more often than we may think. 
The cognitive but not necessarily mimetic values of art that I have emphasized 
do not constitute a separate and distinct criterion, it should be said, for they are 
implicitly integrated in the structure. 
My standpoint differs from one defended by many marxists. Hence, it seems of 
use to demonstrate in some detail why it simply is not true-as is often maintained 
on behalf of marxist aesthetics-that the imitation of reality is one of the residual 
and constituent attributes of art. Such a thesis is nowhere found among the scat-

1 1 6 
What is 
o Work of Art? 
tered aesthetic remarks, observations, and analyses in the writings of Marx and 
Engels. Nor does it follow from their methodological guidelines. One ought to be 
convinced of this on the sole basis of the discussion in the 1 844 Manuscripts by 
Marx of the emergence of art from the productive process. As for later marxist 
thinking on this matter, we can distinguish here four distinct tendencies of thought, 
which do not allow reconciliation with one another on all points. 1 3  
I n  Soviet aesthetics, which I examined in m y  work Between Tradition and o Vis­
ion of the Future (1 964, in Polish), the view hos until today remained preponderant 
that the mimetic moment is conclusive as to whether a work will or will not be art. 
Lukacs is a supporter of this view; in contrast to contemporary Soviet efforts, how­
ever, he has brilliantly worked out and explicated his standpoint. 1 4  
Another course i s  taken by those whose spokesman i n  the Soviet Union has for 
some time been Moisei Kagan. Their position is that the essence of the work of art 
is to be looked for in its effect upon all of our psychic faculties; it remains unclear, 
however, just what in the object itself is responsible for a particular reception. Per­
haps Kagan is thinking of the individual world view that, as embodied in art, can 
be expressed in the most various ways, including the representation of reality in its 
broad scope and multiplicity. 
Another position is represented by Christopher Caudwell, who holds art to be 
an individual expression of sociohistorical and likewise generally human geno­
types. 1 5 What shall pertain to art is, first of all, determined by the authentic emo­
tional content, to which the author gives expression and which can entail varying 
degrees of typification. 
The fourth conception -one very dose to my own - indicates as a constituent 
attribute of art the formal (or non mimetic) structure. This view was presented some 
time ago by Max Raphael in "La theorie marxiste de l'art." 1 6 ft has recently been 
represented by Ernst Fischer in particular. I believe such a conception to be most 
adequate to the general presuppositions of marxism. For instance, as I noted in 
Chapter I with regard to art's origins, we can observe the formation of a special 
structure, at once mimetic and formal, which Marx termed the measure (Moss) 
which corresponds to the object. Later during the historical development, that is, 
in the course of art's general and relentless autonomization, the formal aspect took 
on an integrity of momentum immediate to itself, and detached, as it were, from the 
original structure (which embraced mimesis too). This thereafter served as the 
basic condition to every one of the arts, notwithstanding that such structures might 
prove highly compliant to concrete innovations. 

1 1 7 
Some Problems in Applying 
the Definition 
Let me return once more, however, to the definition I have proposed. No single 
attribute, but rather the syndrome of all the attributes, permits us to describe a 
given object as a work of art. The complementary system of attributes is alterable. 
Only in some cases are we able to locate all four attributes unequivocally. There 
are cases where all attributes, or some, are weakly accented. The first two attri­
butes I consider fundamental and sufficient, though they do not occur apart from 
the others. The expressive structure of qualities and the relative autonomy, in other 
words, indicate a most marked individuality or else they are embodied in an arti­
fact, as I have indicated. Accordingly, we are led toward an alternative definition. 
It is not impossible that we shall want to speak of a work as art solely owing to 
the weaker attributes (individual expression, artifact, and techne). Here then the 
necessary condition would become sufficient. Yet in the light of our discussion, 
such proposals must be rejected, for even though a number of objects do not im­
mediately evidence all of our attributes, I see no reason to reject an encompassing 
definition. At the same time, I am not enthralled to any codified prescription, for in 
that direction lies a failure to come to terms with the object of study. 
This projective, or regulative, definition leads to the possibility of ordering the 
objects called works of art in a continuum. The attributes are interdependent, but 
each can be stronger or weaker than, or equal to, the others. Thus, if we compare 
the works within such a continuum, they can be said to be more or less artistic. 
From our vantage point we can maintain, therefore, that even close by the zero­
point of the continuum, a minimum for a "good" work of art has been realized. 
Here, unlike Beardsley, I do not distinguish a "good" work of art from a work of art. 
Only in degree do I distinguish "good" works of art (i.e., their fundamental artistic 
value). And unlike L. Arnaud Reid, in his study "Beauty and Significance," 1 7  1 do 
not distinguish ugly from nonugly works of art; either ugliness is a special and de­
generate variety of the work (in which case we must deal with it in the framework 
of our four criteria), or else it is connected with the axiological moments (poor inte­
gration, or not all criteria met) that enfeeble the artistry of the work. It thus appears 
that we are brought back again to the continuum construed from the fundamental 
works that we earlier proposed. L. Arnaud Reid sees ugliness as the absence of aes­
thetic value. This standpoint we have to reject as contradictory within itself. If an ob­
ject is an aesthetic object, it then entails some part at least of that fundamental value. 
The definition presented here can be applied to so-called marginal cases. When 
we try to distinguish between artistic and nonartistic reportage, an architectural 
structure and an ordinary building, an art photograph and a plain snapshot, we 

1 1 8 
What is 
a Work of Art? 
come bock again and again to the determinants I hove described. A characteristic 
example among the older experiments is the work of Mon Roy. His "ready-modes" 
ore not common objects of use, although their intent was to abolish and transcend 
the separation of art from life. His well-known Gift-a household laundry iron 
with nails glued by their heads to its flat surface, so that they protrude -was 
stripped deliberately of its use function. The celebrated photographs (Royogroms) 
were not mere pictures but visual systems, where in o special way the previously 
unappreciated light-sensitivity of the material was explored. In o sense a similar 
experimentum crucis occurs today in such artistic probes as the silent musical com­
positions of John Cage and op art. 18 
The four attributes that I hove discussed ore fundamental axiological-aesthetic 
criteria, but they do not exhaust the list of artistic values. They should be viewed, 
rather, as groundwork values, which commingle to effect o coherent whole (i.e., 
the fundamental value), which is based primarily upon the first-named attribute. 
Since my definition is centered on this combined fundamental value, which ap­
pertains to all the arts, I have not directed attention to the distributive residual 
values, that is to.soy, those appearing only in limited sectors of art, such as the 
mimetic values germane to the representational arts (the realist category would be 
comprised here), or the functional values within the applied arts. On the whole, 
o typical structure in the representational arts is multilevelled, many-vectored, and 
requires o considerably more subtle analysis than do structures of the other arts 
(think of the structure of on Arabian carpet). 
It remains to add that we hove not treated from all sides the problem of expres­
sion as on aesthetic category, particularly the question of the various expressive 
values, and the peculiarly individual impact of the work of art as o manifestation 
of the creative process. The expressive values embody, in at least two cases, on 
internalized and self-substantiated value: first, as the symbol or sign of a psycho­
logical (but by extension, psychosocial) attitude, as, in music or architecture; 
second, as on accentuation of emotional factors (in oil the arts). 
The concepts presented here will not satisfy those who expect of philosophy on 
absolute precision. All the same, I believe we con make immediate operative use of 
these concepts, their ambiguities notwithstanding. Every science con precisely 
ascertain its underlying and its controlling concepts only up to a certain point. Of 
this Aristotle wrote long ago, in his Nicomochean Ethics. But perhaps it would be 
more apt to relate on anecdote passed on by Troncpy, who at one time devoted his 
seminar in Ljungskile to the concept of structure. To on aesthetician o mathemati-

1 1 9 
Some Problems in Applying 
the Definition 
cian spoke ironically, citing Wittgenstein's Tractatus Logico-philosophicus: "What 
we cannot speak about we must consign to silence," to which the aesthetician 
tellingly replied: "What we cannot consign to silence we must speak about." 
I want to emphasize that the definition given here must be seen as an open con­
cept. Art can so greatly change that the attributes I have discussed will not continue 
to apply as a unitary group. Which attributes may have to be forsaken and which 
new attributes may take their place cannot be known. 
My aim has been to create a definition of the concept of art that would stand up 
to contemporary critical and theoretical investigations. In this sense, the definition 
given here rests upon a sociological substratum. Since any work of art is inevitably 
a sociocultural phenomenon, the sociological aspect is inextricable from the sub­
stance of its overall artistic structure, appearing in all of its particular axiological 
properties, which should then be interpreted in the context of the specific value 
communication of the creator and the many-sided public. I have also tried to illumi­
nate the problem from a more comprehensive viewpoint by giving attention to 
earlier evaluations of art, to its history and the history of how it has been con­
ceptualized since the beginning of human culture. In pursuing this historical and 
generic hypothesis I sought for the attributes of art which in spite of continual modi­
fication, have stood up until today. I have harbored no illusion that my endeavor 
would sweep aside parallel efforts, whether earlier or contemporary. I have failed 
to present proof more geometrico-nor, on that score, will anyone else succeed. 
At most I can appeal here to the historical evidence and anthropological data, as 
gathered and sifted by students of the psychobiological constitution of mankind 
and of the variables or constants that are manifested in human culture. The alterna­
tive can only be an evasion of the constraint of all definition. Admittedly, it is al­
ways possible that somebody will provide a better, more encompassing definition. 
Should anyone assert that a work of this nature is entirely without meaning or 
application, I have to ask him how it is that concepts such as atom, race, social 
order, and psyche can be fixed, while when it comes to an artistic product this is 
not deemed possible. It is significant that a large number of the scholars most influ­
enced by Wittgenstein's ideas have decided that there is insufficient reason for re­
jecting aesthetics, nor can they find grounds for a refusal to seek the meaning of 
art. 
A final problem must be mentioned. My definition - not unlike every other defini­
tion in a similar framework-does not give a reckoning of each concrete value­
quality. That would have to be undertaken first on grounds of the history of. the 

1 20 
What is 
a Work of Art? 
particular artistic genre and its theorization; second, the critics in the field of the 
particular art are much better prepared to do it; third, concrete value-qualities can­
not be fitted into a circumscribed "aesthetic alphabet, " 1 9  a fact which accords com­
pletely with the open character of our definition. In artistic practice ever-new quali­
ties are produced, alloyed with one another, and transformed again. Aesthetics 
should acknowledge these new qualities without codifying them. The function of 
artists is to transgress all definitions, which are provisional in any case and repre­
sent, necessarily, a transitional solution. Aesthetics should prove ready, above all, 
to integrate these new value-qualities into the field of values earlier recognized as 
fundamental. And if this endeavor should turn out negatively, the aestheticians 
will have made a most important find, in the very fact of a complete incommen­
surability of the present and past. I do not believe, however, that such an incom­
patibility would occur. At any rate, it has not happened yet. 
That we are living through a total crisis of values is a dubious "discovery." The 
not less important and useful assertion that what is, in fact, new today repre-
sents a creative continuance of the aesthetic tradition would be a likely result, were 
(optimally) the artists of every kind brought into discussion together and the full 
exchange of artistic, critical, and theoretical experience expedited. 
Postscript 1 967 
Were I approaching the problem of definition today I would state, first, that expres­
sion as such does not constitute a firm attribute of every work of art, although in­
dividual intervention does. How expression and individual mediation are to be 
differentiated is a topic for an amplified study. 
Second, I would give much more stress to the thesis that every work of art not 
so much "is" as "happens." In other words, every work of art actually occurs by a 
collaboration of the artist and his audience. The theatricalization of art is cur­
rently a major phenomenon. This is obvious in the happening, but it also occurs 
whenever art asserts an element of play. This ludic factor encourages us to speak 
of the quasi-ritualistic role of contemporary art. 
Today's notorious "blurring" or "dissolution" of autonomous artistic structure 
indeed stems from the tendencies just noted, which encourage skepticism about, 
or even rejection of, the notion and practical desirability of techne, form, and ex­
pression. Conceptualism is but the final step on the journey "beyond" art. Collage 
trends in film (Godard) and musical form whose shape is challengingly nonchalant, 
without beginning or end, for the listener to hear or neglect as he wishes (e.g., re-

1 21 
Postscript 1 967 
cent experiments of Stockhausen) are obvious cases in point. Yet even in these 
striking instances, the arrangement of a whole, semi-isolated in space and/or time, 
cannot be given up; thus, it follows that a work of art without structure is un­
thinkable. 
Finally, such interesting events as Genet's "theater within theater" (The Maids, 
The Blocks, The Balcony) and Robbe-Grillet's novel La Maison de rendez-vous must 
be analysed as the antipode of a ludic art. All the problems of on experience gained 
through the literary medium are highlighted rather than treated as transparent, 
harmless conventions. For Genet and Robbe-Grillet, there is no autonomous work 
of art existing apart from the perceiver, who is called upon more than ever to be­
come engaged as a collaborator. The aesthetic experience here loses its contempla­
tive character, very much as in the encounter with on art-as-play, and comes to be 
like a magical participation in the realm of comtemporary myths. 
Quo vodis, ors? This nobody knows. 

1 22 
Notes 
1 .  A convincing onolysis of the phenomenon 
is provided by lngorden in his book Dos 
literarische Kunstwerk (Holle, 1 931 ) . 
2. See Mox Bense, Aesthetische Information, 
vol. 2 (Krefeld und Boden-Boden, 1 956), 
pp. 32-51 , ond his Programmierung des 
SchOnen, vol. 4 (Krefeld und Baden-Boden, 
1 960), pp. 1 7-32. 
3. See also K. E. Trar10y, Wholes and Struc­
tures (Copenhagen, 1 959); R. Bostide, ed., 
Sens et usages du terme Structure (The 
Hogue, 1 962); M. de Gondilloc, L. Gold­
mann, J. Piaget, et ol., Genʜse et structure 
(The Hogue, 1 965); ond J. Viet, Les meth­
odes structuralistes dons Jes sciences so­
cio/es (Paris- The Hogue, 1 965). 
4. The some opprooch is token in Lukac's 
notion of Totalitat os a basis of artistic phe­
nomena within a context of historical pro­
cess, ond olso in Goldmonn's hypothesis 
concerning the vision du monde. The concep­
tions of Lukacs ond Goldmann ore, however, 
not os comprehensive os my olternotive 
working questions in respect to the idea of 
structure. As o result of my discussion, I 
must reject os unfounded the effort of L. 
Sebog, in his Marxisme et structuralisme 
(Paris, 1 964), to relate morxist historicism 
to o chance ond subjective point of view 
which he would regard, moreover, os ab­
solutely opposed to the system-creating 
tendencies of human thought. 
5. See Wimsott's article in the collection of 
essays Aesthetic Inquiry, edited by M. C. 
Beardsley ond H. M. Schueller (Encino, Calif., 
1 967), p. 33. 
6. Cf. D. W. Gotshalk, Art and the Socio/ 
Order (Chicago, 1 947). 
7. See D. W. Parker, "The Nature of Art." 
Revue internationale de philosophie, 1 939, 
no. 4; ond E. Kohler, "What Is Art?" in his 
What is 
o Work of Art? 
book Out of the Labyrinth (New York, 1 967). 
8. See my study of artistic value, "O warto· 
sci ortystycznej," in Kultura i Spoleczeflstwo, 
1 962, no. 4. 
9. See the extremely interesting article by P. 
Restony, "L'ort-jeu chosse l'ort pour !'art," in 
La Galerie des Arts (February 1 967), pp. 26-
30. Art as ploy, appearing in our time os an 
emphasis more and more upon the activity 
rather than a result (the work of ort), would 
seem on extreme cose very like the pointing 
of the chimpanzee Congo. Certainly we can­
not accept without reservation Desmond 
Morris's thesis that the opes possess a sense 
of composition and o talent for calligraphy. 
In contrast, it is obvious that they exercise 
their energies in drawing and pointing very 
much os they do in, soy, gymnastics. It is 
this other sort of question -which brings out 
the important problem of the "artistic creo· 
tivity" of the chimponzee-thot emerges 
from his pai!'lting's quite factual resemblance 
to tachism ond aleatory products. 
1 0. The notion of forgery is highly relevant 
to our discussion of individual expression. 
As concerns aleatory expression (e.g., jozz 
improvisations), forgery, hie et nunc, is ex· 
eluded. Individual expression in the sense of 
o style or manner does, to be sure, entail the 
possibility of o counterfeit; yet not every 
forger can command individual expression. 
Therefore I distinguish a rtisan from virtuoso 
forgery. Forgery con so simulate on expres­
sion in the sense of originality, that the 
counterfeiter alone can accuse his work. 
Yet, by definition, originality eluded even 
the virtuoso forgers like van Meegeren or 
Dossena. 
1 1 . See the discussion in S. Ossowski's Foun­
dations of Aesthetics, 3rd edition (in Polish; 
Warsaw, 1 958), pp. 246 ff. 
1 2. This problem hos much in common with 

1 23 
that of the identity of the work of art, and 
requires a separate analysis. J. Margolis 
makes a striking distinction (The Language 
of Art and Criticism [ Detroit, 1 965 ), pp. 49-
62) when he refers to more than one identity: 
thus, the work of Shakespeare can be treated 
as either literary ar theatrical; this aspect 
differentiates music (the mere score) from 
painting (the one and original). The concept 
of "authentic" therefore has several mean­
ings; it con designate: first, the entirely 
unique; second, the duplicable (from the 
original work, of course); third, that which 
we can adequately render from the score; 
and fourth, something that we can trace to 
the score's initial rendition. Authenticity as 
thus understood does not of course exclude 
the possibility that the rendition can be crea­
tive, not only in respect of adhering faithfully 
to the score but also as regards capturing 
its "spirit" or creating a wholly original 
interpretation. Ruby Meager in her essay 
"The Uniqueness of a Work of Art," Proceed­
ings of the Aristotelian Society, LIX ( 1 958-
59), pp. 49-70, hos further developed the 
many questions that ore involved in the idea 
af identity. Not always is it sure, for exam­
ple, which version of a work (e.g., El Greco's 
The Healing of the Blind Man) we should re­
gard as authentic, and whether we are deal­
ing with a copy when, say, Van Gogh imi­
tates Delacroix, or Rembrandt and Rubens, 
Durer. The problematic zone we touch on 
here hos occupied Roman lngorden for 
years. No one hos penetrated the problems 
as deeply nor analyzed them in such detail 
as he. However, I wont to declare my reser­
vations concerning his basic distinction 
between the work of art and the aesthetic 
object. The reader is referred to my analysis 
of lngarden's aesthetic axiology which ap­
peared in Estetika (Prague), 1 970, no. l .  
Notes 
1 3. For discussion of the constituent attri­
butes of art as considered by Marx, see my 
introduction to K. Marx and F. Engels, On 
Literature and Art (St. Louis, 1 973). The con­
ceptions here outlined do not exhaust, to be 
sure, every one of the solutions advanced 
until today. I hove not mentioned the Cze/o­
wiekowie denije put forward by Gorky, some 
Soviet scholars' notion of art as an ars ope­
randi or R. Goroudy's work D'un realisme 
sans rivages (Paris, 1 963), where art is con­
sidered not as on instrument for the cogni­
tion of the world but as a means to its ap­
propriation through mythic-creative activity. 
Garaudy goes on to add authenticity and 
freshness as constituent attributes of art. I 
shall not further examine these efforts, in­
asmuch as the first two ore overly general 
and the third is insufficiently clear if one 
considers that Garaudy holds every authen­
tic art to be realistic. All these conceptions 
are tied in in some way to remarks by Marx. 
1 4. See my essay "George Lukacs' Universal 
Principle -Mimesis," in Science and Society 
(Winter 1 968), pp. 26-38. 
1 5. Christopher Coudwell, Illusion and 
Reality (London, 1 938), and Further Studies 
in a Dying Culture (New York, 1 949). 
l 6. This essay con be found in Max Ra­
phael, Proudhon, Marx, Picasso (Paris, 
1 933). 
17. See Proceedings of.the Aristotelian So­
ciety, XXIX (1 928-29), pp. 1 23-1 54. 
1 8. I cannot toke up here the relevant ques­
tion of the idea of aesthetic experience. It 
requires a detailed analysis of changes 
which parallel the modification in the idea of 
art. Let me only state here that the feeling of 
a heightened immediacy gained from the 
materials confined in and by the definite 
structure still remains as one of the dis­
tinctive features of this kind of experience. 

1 24 
The aesthetic attitude is attentive, because 
directed to and interested in the given field 
of sensory and imaginative data (directly or 
indirectly evocative). We may doubt, how­
ever, whether the aesthetic experience now­
adays provides a "free play of psychic ener­
gy" -for the works of art so often either 
present difficult puzzles or direct us back 
into the perplexing and pa rlous environ­
ment. It is doubtful, too, whether we ever 
enjoy on equilibrium, on optimal homeo­
stasis, since avant-garde products almost 
never appeal to the fullest powers of our 
spirits and direct themselves, rather, to 
shocking and mocking us instead of helping 
us (by whatever trogicol rift) to grasp our­
selves and the world about us. Among the 
experts and connoisseurs, too, the conven­
tional response to modern art is one of a 
tense uneasiness -suggesting from another 
aspect that we need to modify our trans­
mitted criteria and ideas. We can hardly 
doubt that what was treated as constituting 
the aesthetic experience in 1 91 0-1 4 can no 
longer be accepted without serious reop­
praisol and a suitable alteration of this idea 
so that it corresponds to the extended do­
main of the arts in the 1 960s. For a further 
discussion of this problem, see chapter 1 ,  
"The Criteria of Aesthetic Valuation." 
1 9. Here I hove in mind the very important 
fact that ony definition of art as such can 
embrace the genetic attributes in but a most 
abstract form and, of course, the work of 
art in individuo not at oil. Needless to say, 
each of the stated criteria appears in one or 
another concrete form; this being true es­
pecially of the first and lost. The special 
quality of the particular criterion is not only a 
characteristic but is likewise derived from its 
association with the other criteria. This prob­
lem is described and analysed by R. Ingar-
What is 
a Work of Art? 
den in his Experience, Artwork, Value (in 
Polish; Cracow, 1 965), pp. 1 28-1 36, 1 62-
1 94. I share his position on major points, 
although I reserve until another occasion a 
discussion of some porticulars. 

Chapter 3 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Eva l uation 
Nobody, I am certain, will disagree with the observation that shifts occur in the 
valuations and evaluations that people supply with rega rd to art. Correspondingly, 
people change their minds about the frames of reference they employ, that is, about 
the reasons they are prepared to give for arriving at a particular valuation or evalu­
ation. I do not suppose there will be disagreement about that, either; but what 
specifically do we mean by "frames of reference" and "reasons"? It seems we in­
dicate a choice of characteristics-of traits, or sets of traits, which may be intrinsic, 
extrinsic, or both - by which a decision regarding value is made. 
Let us go further and grant that the choice of criteria is generally made on quite 
relativist grounds. Our personal experience, as well as the historical pattern of such 
data, should confirm this statement. In generation after generation, the idea of 
de gustibus non disputondum is sustained. And yet is there a conclusive justifica­
tion why anyone's taste should be thought invulnerable to dispute? 
Let us consider a case concerning a recently fashionable topic, pop art. Anne 
asserts that pop art has been innovative, while her friend Joan responds that pop 
art is not really art at all. Anne answers that there are no "eternal traits" that de­
fine what a work of art must be, and whether or not an object is called art is de­
cided strictly by certain people for whom it has a concrete social function in the 
given sociohistorical context. Joan rejoins that pop art is not characterized by the 
stylized autonomous harmony which many people believe is the essence of art. 
Let us look in on another quarrel. Peter calls Jackson Pollock a giant among the 
American painters of this century, but John retorts that Pollock's reputation is in­
flated and merely transient. John defends this low evaluation by stating his belief 
that theme-presentation is an indisputable criterion of artistic value. Peter responds 
that the experts he respects think composition and the color mix are the fundamen­
tal values of art. 
Such disputes, the reader will recognize, have a way of trailing off inconclusively. 
What is to dispose Anne or Joan, Peter or John, to give up a very righteous feeling 
with regard to her or his arguments? Each relies implicitly on a definite hierarchy 
of values, and each begins with, and goes little beyond, his or her previous disposi­
tion. The doctrine of de gustibus has often shown a terrifying ability to suppress 
systematic disputation in this way. Art history is indeed congested by such dis­
agreements. Nonetheless, on the stock market of values, where some rise high and 
then quickly fall, some values do become sturdy blue chips while others continue to 
The first version of this essay cppecred in Polish in Studio Estetyczne, vol. 2 (1 964). An enlarged version 
appecred in the Sarajevo journal Preg/ed, 1 968, no. 4. 

1 26 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Evaluation 
edge in and out of the market. Shakespeare was condemned, or else simply ignored, 
for about two centuries; then he gained a "universal" acclaim which has lasted to 
this day, although the reasons given for this acclaim are by no means uniform. El 
Greco was scorned by the prevailing standards of his time, but since the late nine­
teenth century his reputation has remained constant through the fluctuations of 
many modern schools. The art of primitive peoples was not appreciated until the 
cubists and fauvists came along; now their highly expressive masks and other arti­
facts are thought first-rate. 
We should not permit ourselves to be dumbfounded by the widespread evidence 
of relativism in criteria. Human reality is continually undergoing change. Our com­
mon experience includes an art history of repeated renewals; but we should study 
the continual fluctuations to discover whether some valuational and evaluational 
standards are recurrent. If some are, which ones, and why? Certainly, when we 
speak of justifying reasons and standards, we are brought directly to the problem 
of axiological criteria. The gist of solving this problem, as I shall try to show in this 
chapter, is the judicious discrimination of our valuational and evaluational pro­
cedures. But before I come to a tentatively proposed solution to the axiological 
problem of procedures, I must undertake a brief excursus into the past. 
Constituent Values, the Foundation for Ranking Works of Art 
The attitude towards the axiological criteria of art which I have just now in effect 
been discussing is the subjectivist one. Those who adopt it often look back to David 
Hume as the founder of their school. That Hume was a subjectivist is not at all 
certain, however. His renowned essay "Of the Standard of Taste" (1 757) begins, 
it is true, with a recognition of the variety of tastes and the difficulties involved in 
determining a proper criterion. Still, in discussing the permanent value of Homer's 
works, Hume said, _"Some particular forms or qualities from the original structure 
of the internal fabric are calculated to please, and others to displease," and he con­
tinued, "It must be allowed that there are certain qualities in objects which are 
fitted by nature to produce those particular feelings." 1 Nor did H ume stop at this 
general comment. He bade the r.eader look for internal and external characteristics 
which might have a definite axiological relationship to beauty or ugliness. His con­
cluding thoughts contain not a subjectivist but a relativist orientation, namely, a 
recognition that taste varies over time and space. 2 A full analysis of Hume's 
essay shows that his position was in fact anti subjectivist. He merely set aside for 
another discussion such difficult questions as: What is the nature of the ideal con-

1 27 
Constituent Values 
sumer of works of art? Is unity (implicitly taken to be an objective condition) the 
underlying feature of all works of art? Can we establish an identity of opinion 
among various generations as the sociocultural, intersubjective precondition for 
works of art? 
A glance into the work of Kant is equally instructive. His philosophy is frequently 
cited with the aim of denying the possibility of the universality of aesthetic judg­
ment. It is true that he held that aesthetic judgment lacks objective foundation, but 
we should remember that in some respects he agreed with Hume. In accordance 
with the principles of his transcendental philosophy, he argued that the constitu­
tion of our cognitive faculties is such that when there is unity of imagination and 
understanding (or imagination and practical reason) and also congruence of an 
imagined object with the organs of cognition·, there can arise an aesthetic experi­
ence of the beautiful or the sublime.3 If we recognize the natural foundations of our 
judging faculty, the antinomies of taste can be understood: taste is subjective but it 
tends towards being universal .4 
The free play of our faculties produces Kant,'s famous Zweckmossigkeit ohne 
Zweck, 
"purposiven֖ss without purpose, "  a property not peculiar to a given man or 
epoch, which results in aesthetic response not to particular colors or sounds but 
rather to forms, to unity in complexity. Thus, in a painting the artistically decisive 
element is the drawing, not the color; the latter makes its effect only through the 
senses . 5 Kant also argued that because of the constitution of the human mind (as 
he conceived it), things such as flowers and ornaments and musical fantasies (all 
of which are related to the category of free beauty, pulchritude vaga) please us 
in ways different from those of horses, people, buildings. 6 I cannot here pursue 
Kant's doctrine further, but may mention that paragraphs 30 to 40 of The Critique 
of Judgment develop these key issues. As with our exposition of Hume, the aim of 
this discussion of Kant has been to highlight one particular axiological tendency: 
the abandonment of subjectivism in favor of a belief in a comprehensible constant 
in human nature . 
Hume and Kant were interested first in establishing aesthetic values and had 
less interest in ranking them. The question arises at this point whether evaluation, 
following as it does on valuation, is in every respect dependent on valuation. The 
response which would be given to this question by subjectivists and by relativists 
is obvious, for if we agree that aesthetic values are modified according to the per­
son(s), time(s), and circumstance(s), we must logically admit that the ranking of 
aesthetic values will coincide with the valuational choices. What if we adopt a more 

1 28 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Evaluation 
objectivistic position (relationism)? (Hume's and Kant's reservations point in this 
direction.) Do we find ourselves compelled then to evaluate works of art solely by 
referring to their valuational traits? This is the question I want to consider now. 
Let us assume that we have used some definite criterion of aesthetic valuation 
to say which objects are works of art and which are not. Next, we seek a criterion 
which will allow us to differentiate among works of art as to their greater or lesser 
value. In this way we distinguish the fundamental criterion, which establishes 
value, from the graduating or scalar criterion, which ranks value. Now, in ranking 
the value do we have to consider that the scalar criteria are entirely derivative from 
the value-establishing criteria? In other words, is the statement that "X is better 
(worse) than Y" merely an extension of the primary statement that "X and Y are 
artistically valuable in such-and-such a way"? This identification does exist to 
some extent, but I shall argue that it is only a partial basis for the evaluative opera­
tion. (It will also emerge that I allow for the role of extraaesthetic reasons in scaling 
aesthetic objects and that I propose two other criteria as well.) 
Before proceeding to a detailed analysis, yet another problem has to be con­
sidered briefly. Do the experts agree with me that a distinction should be made 
between the valuating and evaluating procedures? We read in Hume's essay that 
"by comparison alone we fix the epithets of praise or blame and learn how to 
assign the due degree of each."7 Hume did not work out the differences between 
the criteria of valuation and those of evaluation; he did, however, note that works 
of art may be more or less harmonious, and concluded that those creations are 
superior which are without moral defects and religious exaggerations. The prob­
lem of the criteria of evaluation was not clearly addressed by Hume, then; and 
Kant did not squarely treat the issue either. Paragraph 42 of The Critique of Judg­
ment, long a bone of contention among scholars, suggests (in drawing attention to 
moral ideas) that what is beautiful in nature should rank above what is beautiful 
in art. Paragraph 53 alludes to a hierarchy of the arts and places poetry at the 
summit. Another rudimentary approach to ranking turns up in the axiology of 
Hippolyte Taine. In contemporary aesthetics, we may note, there is a continual 
propensity to eliminate the evaluative moment, 8 the view being that any work of 
art is characterized by its axiological singularity and that, consequently, compara­
tive ranking is not only misapplied but also harmfully misleading. 
A standpoint which supposes uniqueness to be the primary aesthetic value 
seems indefensible to me. First, the assertion of uniqueness implies a comparison 
made among objects belonging in the same class; and, moreover, comparison im-

1 29 
Constituent Values 
plies at least some shared features which can be scaled. Second, though uniqueness 
no doubt must be taken into account when the aesthetic values of X and Y ore 
weighed, we may certainly challenge the notion that singularity supplies the funda­
mental axiological principle which distinguishes a certain class of objects as art. 
My contention, which I shall argue for later, is that meaningful uniqueness is equiv­
alent to originality, which is not characteristic of every artistic work. Third, objec­
tions to evaluative procedures stem overwhelmingly from the tacit or overt assump­
tion that we grasp intuitively, without fail, the never repeated peculiarity of X. This 
assumption is arbitrary and must be rejected by anyone who does not shore a be­
lief in intuitive insight and the complete exceptionality of every work of art. Indeed 
there are numerous opponents of this one-dimensional axiological standpoint 
regarding aesthetic objects. The distinction I have offered is not stressed by them 
all, but in American aesthetics Stephen Pepper and Monroe Beardsley explicitly 
make this kind of argument. 9 Starting with the same axiological premises, how­
ever, they reach solutions to the problem of aesthetic evaluation different from 
mine. It may help to explain the divergence between us if I emphasize that my 
results are arrived at with an historicist methodology. 
Since the valuational criteria were dealt with extensively in Chapter l ,  I shall 
only recall here that I already discern a kind of propoedeutic scaling in the estab­
lishment of the aesthetic (artistic) values: These values as they appear in aesthetic 
objects will, if compared, prove to be graduated along what is in effect a continu­
um, some of whose elements will be more and some less artistic (aesthetic). Yet 
this initial aspect of ranking is not a procedure separate from the establishment of 
the characteristics of the axiological class now under examination; the evaluation 
proper commences only later on, when a continuum has already been confirmed 
on the basis of an ultimate criterion which has been chosen. For this reason, fur­
thermore, I decline to make a distinction between a "good work of art" and a 
"work of art." The latter is always in some sense "good" even if situated towards 
the bottom of the continuum which comprises artistic values. 
Let me stress that, unlike valuation, evaluation begins with the axiological cri­
terion in hand. The set of qualities which characterize the art object may be as­
sumed to provide the decisive reason to justify the ranking operation. In other 
words, if the strategy of valuation demands that we can only refer to axiological­
philosophical criteria as the ultimate justification, the evaluational strategy allows 
us to refer to already available aesthetical-axiological data. (There is a problem 
complicating this statement, which stems from those evaluational procedures that 

1 30 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Evaluation 
do not derive from the set of qualities established as constituentlv artistic; I shall, 
as I said, explore this matter in the proper place.) 
Problems in Quantifying the Constituent Values 
How then ore we to evaluate art? The initial, crucial operation in comparing and 
ranking artistic objects is the "quantification" of the fundamental artistic values 
already established. The creation that embodies the basic characteristics of art 
successfully and with a Qreater mo9nitude or intensity is the better work of art. 1 0  
Accordingly, i f  we desire to establish a hierarchy among certain works of art, we 
first must locate and acknowledge a common fund of data in terms of which they 
can be compared. The only fundamental areos of artistic value com[Tlon to all 
sorts of art are form and expression, and we should therefore give the values in 
these areas precedence of consideration. Other major areas of artistic value -for 
instance, mimesis and the construction-function-form syndrome-are distributive, 
and we should give them primary attention only when assigning rank in the do­
mains where such values are residual, in other words, in cases of representational 
art and of so-called industrial or applied art, respectively. Yet even with regard 
to the axiological fund which is both fundamental and common, the matter is by 
no means simple. 
Let us observe a few of the complexities of quantification. Assuming that our 
standard of measure (in terms of magnitude or intensity) is legitimate, we can pro­
ceed to compare, say, the expressive value of one work with that of another work, 
in order to judge which of the two is the most fully achieved. We may perhaps find 
equality in the expressive quotients of the two works along with an unequal status 
in their degrees of integrated structural compactness. Or the reverse may be true: 
the formal achievement might be equal but the expressiveness different. 
Some may think that I have reverted to traditional concerns when I carry quanti­
fication over to a domain such as mimesis or the specific functional values of an 
industrial (applied) art. For prominent here will be such evaluational guidelines 
as the diversity of elements and their unity, or the identity and discrepancy between 
form and content 1 1 or between form and function. 1 2  We could, alternatively, dis­
cuss such elements in terms of "formemes" or "iconemes" or- to go further with 
this terminology- "functemes." 1 3 
I have asserted that it is possible to make comparisons by referring to certain 
recurrent values, which may be defined objectively by the study of a sufficiently 
broad sample of works of art so as to note their common attributes. For example, 

1 31 
Problems in Quantifying 
the Constituent Values 
consider the problem of evaluating the works of Aert de Gelder, Jan Lievens, Fer­
dinand Bol, and Bartholemeus van der Heist, as compared with the contemporane­
ous early works of Rembrandt. In this case the evaluation would probably be fo­
cused primarily on the expressive values, situated in a particular compact structure 
which has a particular mimetic character. Another type of application would be 
to the sustained work of a single artist, say, Mondrian between 1 91 2  and 1 920. 
In this case the key criterion would be the simplicity and terseness of Mondrian's 
compact formal structures. As a third example, Delacroix's works might be com­
pared both among themselves, according to the criteria established in the artist's 
peak years, and then with examples taken from his predecessors and contempo­
raries, according to the criterion of the romantic expressional resources; or Ingres 
might similarly be studied and compared, situating him among his classicist com­
panions. 
Without question, Delacroix is notable for his expressive attainments and Ingres 
for his compact and elegant compositions. This leads to a most tantalizing question: 
ls there a way to make a comparative judgment of the two oeuvres? The answer 
must be no, unless a means could somehow be found to weigh the standard of ex­
pressiveness against the standard of formal structure. In the same way, Mahler 
and Scriabin can very likely be judged superior to their contemporaries in the com­
position of expressive, symbolical-metaphysical music. But how could we com-
pare that standard with the very different standard established at the same time by 
the music of Debussy and Ravel? 
It is my tentative view that great artists operate on an approximately comparable 
aesthetic level, although they develop disparate and noncomparable resources. 
The values to which they give body may differ from work to work in intensity and 
magnitude, but a lessened expressional quotient will be compensated for by a 
heightened formal organ.ization, or vice versa: Even if we could assert that Joyce's 
Ulysses, with its diversity and vigor of language, incidents, and characters, is more 
expressive than Musil's The Man Without Qualities, while neither work excelled the 
other in formal perfection, we could not thereby conclude that Ulysses is the greater 
literary achievement. Musil's work can only be measured by its own extraordinary 
merits; it is, as they say, in a class by itself. The Mon Without Qualities is a philo­
sophica I novel which deliberately achieves a highly artistic yet essaylike reflection 
on the crisis of tw1:mtieth-century culture. Its expressive and formal qualities are 
not those of Ulysses, or of any other novel ever written. 
A similar case comparison can be made between Bulgakov's The Moster and 

1 32 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Evaluation 
Margherita and Sholokhov's And Quiet Flows the Don. The expressive qualities 
of the former are due to a unique blend of social satire and fantasy that ripples 
along under the deft control of the author's world view. The writing of this marvel­
ous literary con juror, Bulgakov, is neither more nor less evocative than that of 
Sholokhov, for at this highest /eve/ of literary mastery, the only way to characterize 
the expression (or formal perfection) is according to its kind not its degree. 
In summary, a quantifying evaluation may be applied most rewardingly to dis­
tinguish the great masters from their lesser contemporaries in a particular place, 
time, school, style, and also to highlight the uniqueness of the peak achievements 
of the master artists. The reader may be annoyed by the idea of a quantifying ap­
proach to the work of Rembrandt, which set his entire artistic milieu in eclipse, or 
to Chaplin's early one-reelers, which will long outlive the ordinary slapstick film 
comedy of that time, objecting that the ineffable character of great art is impugned 
by a yardstick approach. But I do not use the term "quantification" in a literal sense. 
There are no calipers or sliderules to measure the magnitude, and no electronic 
sensors or binary calculators to provide a reading of intensities for the purpose of 
arriving at an appraisal of what is "better" in art. Let me entertain just two very 
restricted exceptions to this categorical statement: we may bᣅ able to measure 
physically, for purposes of artistic judgment, (l ) certain discrete elements (such as 
colors, sounds, and shapes), and (2) the physiological responses which correspond 
to such stimuli and cofunction with them, partly by feedback. I will concede a literal­
ness to the concept of quantification only with respect to such noncom pound 
phenomena -and here I will allow even the possibility of a strict dependence of 
aesthetic qualities on the rudimentary data that are measured. Otherwise I have 
something different in mind. 
I do not believe that turning up the electric amps for greater loudness can ef­
fectively transform a mediocre rock band into an excellent performing group. I do 
not think that psychedelic painting becomes better merely through the use of day­
glo colors. The expressiveness that I speak of quantifying is not the unmediated 
result of the "strength" of the discrete, immediately given sensuous elements. How­
ever, neither is my use of the term "quantification" a mere metaphor; rather, my 
idea is that the degree of expressiveness or of formal perfection can be assessed 
by a direct apprehension. 
Now, direct apprehension is a concept with a genealogy in aesthetic history, 
and I have already touched on it lightly in Chapter 2. 1 should only say here that 
the procedure is easi_ly_ confused with what is called intuition, but intuition is more 

1 33 
Problems in Quantifying 
the Constituent Values 
ambiguous and unreliable for it is theoretically unclarified in comparison with the 
direct apprehension of magnitude and intensity. I should note that individuals in 
the art public will without doubt have an unequal capacity for an adequate direct 
apprehension. (This aspect is elaborated briefly in Chapter 4.) In any case, even to 
the untrained amateur, the Barcelona architecture of Gaudi reveals an emphasis 
on expression rather than on formal perfection, as compared with the buildings 
of Adolf Loos, for example. Similarly, the exuberance of Whitman's poetry may be 
directly apprehended as being at an opposite pole from the restraint and delight 
in form of A. E. Housman's lyrics. And is not the looser, more vigorous form of 
Brecht's theater immediately apparent when compared with the delicately con­
structed dramas of Giraudoux? 
My proposal of direct apprehension may seem to beg the test of empirical con­
firmation of magnitude and intensity. It may be verified, however, that quantifying 
judgments of art objects are achieved in this way and that they do possess a pecu­
liar character by which any individual may try to check his own direct apprehension 
of a work.of art. If a sampling of actual direct apprehensions of a given object 
brings out certain recurrences, then the empirical confirmation of the various per­
sonal quantifying procedures will have been achieved. 
If there is a troubling aspect in quantification, as it is thus understood and ap­
plied, I would say it comes up in the distinction between form and expression. I 
consider the compositional qualities to be expressive and the expressive qualities 
to be compositional. However, when it comes time to distinguish value functions 
("this is the formal dimension, that is the expressive side") then the task of dis­
criminating for quantification becomes problematic, especially if we pass from non­
objective art to representational art, in which the expressive qualities also carry 
the burden of formal composition. I have a way of minimizing the confusion, which 
is to stress two distinct aspects of the apprehended structure: ( l )  the arrangement 
of the whole and the relationships among the elements-which I regard as the 
indices of form; and, within this, (2) the internal material - which is more or less 
expressive. 
A final observation on this problem must be added. If we consider the avant­
garde movement, especially of recent years, we cannot fail to note a calculated 
abandonment of both form and expression. In view of the aforementioned stan­
dards, applicable to art until just recently, shall we evaluate these new works as 
"worse"? I think that would be a mistake. The avant-garde premises have shifted 
the major tasks which artists face (and, by implication, those which we too must 

1 34 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Evoluotion 
face) from the field of evaluation to the most primordial issues of valuation. We 
shall get nowhere by trying to compare the values of the best happenings with 
those of the works of Kandinsky; or the values of minimal art with those of the 
works of Mondrian. The interest of the avant-garde artist does not lie in the achieve­
ment of formal/expressive merit, but, rather, in the question of the mere possibility 
of "the art activity" under varying circumstances. 
I might pull together this perspective on appraising art as follows: Evaluation 
presumes the existence of some quantum of expression and form, while its most 
propitious frame of reference consists of acknowledged works of art with a marked 
coherence of provenance and school, style, etc. It is, nonetheless, possible to evalu­
ate artists of diverse periods and countries who have formal. expressive, or mimetic 
traits in common. Entire movements in different eras may similarly share parallel 
traits. Moreover, there ore a number of characteristics that permit otherwise diverse 
works to be comparatively quantified -a common heritage, for example, as in the 
case of the influence of African and Polynesian sculpture on the works of Henry 
Moore, Archipenko, and Lipchitz . The analogical benchmark might be partly patho­
psychological if one sought to compare, say, the paintings of Van Gogh and Ernst 
Josephson. 
To this point, I hove considered quantifications that are chiefly based on a single 
feature. Of course the actual quantifying procedure must be much more compli­
cated. Still, from the simplified single-feature model we learn a crucial. lesson: 
It is futile to compare the evaluations of two works which embody incommensura­
ble (even if equally significant) values. In other words, the sets to be quantified must 
not be too unlike. The following points must be kept in mind as providing the most 
fully reliable basis for evaluation: 
l .  The works of art should be from the same period and place. 
2. They should be representative of the some general trend. 
3. They should belong to the some domain of art, and perhaps the some genre. 
4. They should hove common valuotionol qualities, since there ore numerous ways 
to realize a given artistic value. 
This last point carries further what I hove said regarding form and expression as 
the most universal referents of evaluation; namely, that within their context we 
should discriminate the kinds of formal structure and the kinds of expression real­
ized in particular valuotional qualities. With these four points, we hove an optimal 
blueprint with which to focus an evaluation. I should note that these discriminations 
may be (and frequently ore) distorted by critics who seize on blontontly similar 

1 35 
Problems in Quantifying 
the Constituent Values 
traits and, wrenching them from the context for authentic comparison, leave no 
adequate basis for assessing the tangible and necessarily complicated differences 
of degree. It is wiser to skip evaluation than to make the needed comparisons in 
a careless and crude way. We should respect on intricate complexity in the works 
of two distinct artists which we find to possess some analogous values. 
Even if we proceed with adequate caution, the comparative process is seldom 
without foggy crossroads and frustrating obstacles. We shall conclude, for example, 
that, on the whole, Terborch and de Hooch succeed about equally with mimesis 
and compact integration; yet the works are so different in their expression as to 
be incommensurable. And what of cases where the differences are not that great? 
For example, the films of Fellini and Antonioni are successfully mimetic in different 
ways: the Antonioni films are not laden with the baroque rhetoric that is typical 
of Fellini. Yet we would find it difficult to defend any standard by which we might 
compare their achievements with regard to the intensity or magnitude of expressive 
values in their work. In the functionalism of the Le Corbusier and Gropius housing 
projects (at Marseilles and Siemensstadt, respectively), we find an unevenness of 
achievement. However, neither in the functional values nor in the expressiveness 
shall we find a sharply decisive basis for ranking either more highly. Van der 
Rohe's Seagram Building in New York City might be conceded on advantage in 
terms of a painterly or sculptural value, but it could simultaneously be faulted for 
functional imperfection. 
Consider the case of X and Y which share the some (or similar) valuational quali­
ties, with X being a shade superior to Y in expressiveness and Y having the com­
parative edge in formal balance (e.g., De Koening versus Hans Hofmann, Dubuffet 
versus Burri, Aalto versus Saarinen, Penderecki versus Lutoslawski, Robbe-Grillet 
versus Butor). Here we con balance only tenuously the disparate superiorities with­
in the works of art. We can treat the irregularities among quantification sets only 
ofter we hove arrived at such a solution-in-tension. 
An important and difficult task for the historians of the different artistic domains 
is to establish specific groupings of works of art and to provide reasons for them, 
on the basis of which effective evaluations may be made. The task is the more 
challenging when several domains of the arts are to be studied, which are pervaded 
with the same style characteristics. That such studies are both feasible and highly 
rewarding is confirmed in the work of many distinguished scholars. Indeed, the best 
monographs on artistic geniuses make their most important contribution to general 
aesthetics in this area. The outstanding artistic individuality is linked to a school 

1 36 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Evaluation 
with which he shares common features. The genius is generally found to manifest 
the traits of the school to an unmatched degree. 
I have underscored some of the difficulties in deciding on a fit evaluational ap­
proach, especially the risks entailed by different but equally significant axiological 
sets. I must emphasize that the requisite care and delicacy have seldom been ap­
plied, no matter how many warnings have been issued by aestheticians and philos­
ophers. Criticism usually rushes forward, heedless of all warnings. It is easy to 
grasp why. Times of aesthetic crisis- when received ideas about art and beauty 
are in collapse, when the axiological strongholds are under attack-are alone 
capable of fully impressing upon critics the ultimate. criteria of valuation and the 
relationship between the criteria of valuation and of evaluation. For the most part, 
critics apply the criteria of evaluation in place of valuation and do not realize the 
substitution. They speak, for example, of a work's perfection, excellence, or unique­
ness, equating these qualities with constituent goodness. They are thus able to 
compare and rank all art objects (whether they are more or less art) without any 
problems or hesitation. An even more universal habit among critics is to treat 
favorite values or valuational qualities (those having an idiosyncratically personal 
or sociocultural bias) as the deciding evaluational standard; art objects are then 
compared and graded according to the presence and magnitude of these preferred 
qualities. Still another critical practice entailing neglect of the four points earlier 
outlined is artistic evaluation which refers only to the composition and response of 
the object's audience, and without pondering whether that response is predicated 
on the given aesthetic structure. (This comment is our first mention of the kind of 
evaluative process which is not based on quantification of the fixed constituent 
traits of art.) 
The muddled evaluations I have mentioned (there are others too) should properly 
be turned back. They cannot, however, be ignored, above all because much of the 
critical opinion of the past and present is of this character. Of course, nobody 
should be forbidden to evaluate in his own fashion - not so much because of the 
resiliency that many works of art have shown against erroneous judgments, as 
because of the long and horrible history of the harm exerted by any kind of censor­
ship. It is true that wrong aesthetic judgments seldom hurt the authentic work of 
art, and that where they do the effect is generally transitory. (Perhaps this also 
indicates the reason why a social unanimity is pursued in moral judgments, while 
there is a much greater tolerance for individual or group initiative when it comes to 
art.) Nonetheless, we may legitimately expect of critics that they will plainly de-

1 37 
Problems in Quantifying 
the Constituent Values 
scribe their justifying reasons to themselves and to us. Thus, the most that should 
be done to combat muddled evaluation is to encourage a more lucid methodology. 
Does Any Category of Value or Art Exert Priority? 
I shall now explore the widespread approach to evaluation which ranks works of 
art according to whether a certain valuational quality or value appears which 
merits a preferred status. I shall try to be definite whether or not the grounds exist 
for such an axiological hierarchy. For example, is a creative work described as 
applied art automatically inferior, by aesthetic criteria, to any other work which 
(assuming a parity of expressiveness and compactness) offers some depiction of 
reality? Or is priority perhaps due to applied art? Is form the primal value- so that 
a deficiency of form would inevitably make a work of art inferior no matter how 
expressively and mimetically well-endowed it might be? Or should the evaluation 
simply look to the sheer abundance of the elements which constitute the artistic 
structure? 
It does seem to be true that painting has always been treated as more important 
than the artistic aspect of dress and decor in the some period. This opinion goes 
back to antiquity's doctrine that some artistic genres and themes outrank others 
(usually they ore said to be the more pure). Certain contemporary authors snare 
this opinion. 14 It does not appear to me that such a hierarchy of artistic values is 
sound. In my view, the values of musical composition, for instance, do not os such 
contest those of literary works. Nor do peculiarly musical or literary values os such 
merit preference over the values peculiar to the Rietveld chair. Each artistic domain 
implies and merits its own distinct criteria, as does each genre within the domain, 
each peculiar artistic value, and each particular set of valuational qualities. The 
criteria should correspond to the traits being analyzed and compared. Only within 
the scope of that given frame of reference can the n:ieans be found to evaluate the 
features of art. 
We should look into another question which is related to the one above: Can 
preference be assigned to the criteria of content over the criteria of form? This as­
sumption of primacy appears in the history of marxist aesthetic thought from 
Marx, Plekhanov, and Lunacharsky to Gramsci and Lukacs. We can find an abun­
dance of misunderstanding on both sides of the debate. A priority of content criteria 
might prevail only in the case of representational art, and even here the subject 
matter exacts a superior claim only inasmuch as mimetic elements determine the 
formal and expressive aspects of the work of art. In other words, if the work fails 

1 38 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Evaluation 
to succeed in terms of the mimetic criteria understood in this way, the structural 
compactness of the given whole is weakened. We should emphasize that, if atten­
tion to content criteria is joined to contempt for form or.expression, what actually 
will be preferred are nonartistic criteria. 
What may be concluded is that the merits of works of art should be defined in 
the context of the distinctive traits of the given art domain and genre. Music should 
not be evaluated as a superior art simply because it is nonrepresentational. Nor 
should the novel be preferred as the better genre because it encompasses a maxi­
mum of transformed life content. However, counterarguments can be made. It can 
reasonably be objected that the unique work of art is potentially imbued with a 
wealth of experience, with a breadth and depth of referential data and patterns. 
Since this is so, why should not a painting by Rembrandt be compared with a 
brilliantly patterned Persian carpet? Why shouldn't Mahler be considered and 
ranked in a context including Kafka? I agree that the appeal to a fund of experi­
ence-of course objectified in a rich artistic structure - is not to be refuted. 
Yet with this we must remember that what decides an axiological superiority 
is not the domain of art, the genre, or the given value as such. The architectural 
works of Nervi, Torroja, and Candella embody a much richer experience than do a 
lot of canvases painted nowadays. The tapestries of the Polish designer Magda 
Abakanowicz are often more imbued with thought than the average play perfor­
mance. The songs of Joan Baez are more truly elaborated than numerous Holly­
wood films. Anyone can think of more examples, and they prove both that a 
hierarchy exists among the artistic values (corresponding to the intensity and 
magnitude of the evoked experience) and that the problem of judgment hinges on 
the discernment of an ensemble of values-whether purely aesthetic, or aesthetical­
moral, or aesthetical-phisosophical, etc. - rather than deriving from a hierarchy of 
subject matters, themes, artistic genres, or the like. 
Added Residual, Aesthetic Criteria : Novelty and Originality 
Mention of the magnitude and intensity of the artistic vision brings to mind the 
question of the unique artistic personality. We pass, by way of this question, to 
a pair of additional criteria that cannot be measured by a quantification of estab­
lished constituent elements. These additional criteria are novelty and originality. 1 5 
A number of theorists argue that we need not regard originality as a constant 
and constituent attribute of art. Aga inst them, we might quote Kant- The Critique 
of Judgment, paragraphs 45 to 47 -where he urges that art can be deemed beauti-

1 39 
Novelty and Originality 
ful inasmuch as it is the creation of genius and possesses originality. Kant's view 
is upheld nowadays by the school of Croce and by others who are oriented towards 
an empirical definition of art. 1 6 1 think that originality cannot be equated with 
individual expression, a trait which is constant in art. Originality should be limited 
to a more particular and uncommon kind of expression. 
While individual expression can and indeed must be assumed in the work per se, 
we shall only be able to discriminate originality-value in a context. By what pro­
cedure shall we single out this value? There must first be a determination of the 
individuality of the art object, which we discern, as I have said, by direct appre­
hension. Next there is comparison, in a twofold context: (l ) with other works by 
the same artist (so that we may more fully grasp the particular qualities of this 
artist's singular production); and (2) with works by other artists (so that we may 
crisply demarcate these distinctive qualities from those discerned in others). Origi­
nality occurs rarely; because this is so, we tend to be on the lookout for the clues 
which hint of originality as we scan those traits of works of art that are indicative 
of individual expression. Some scholars want to restrict the term "work of art" only 
to those works which possess this highly unusual attribute. I think this a pointlessly 
narrow idea of art, and find it more valid to stress the fact that originality is an 
attribute that is highlighted when it is compared with other, nonoriginal attributes 
of artistic production -form, expression, mimetic content, or form-following-func­
tion constructions. Originality is, then, neither a set of given artistic qualities, nor 
simply an individual impress on the work of art (which we tacitly assume to be 
present); rather, it is a n  extra attribute-a quality of the qualities, that is, a specific 
trait which occurs infrequently among the constituent values. 
Novelty, too, is a value distinct from the structural values which are fundamental 
and constant in every work of art. Being novel is not the same as merely being dif­
ferent. To be different is the hallmark of the value that I have called individual ex­
pression. Every work of art is different, for to some extent it embodies a distinct· 
set of qualities. When we call a work novel, however, we imply a crucial further 
step: a break and departure, whether in the use of formal structure, expressive 
resource, mimetic theme, hero, or subject matter. Novelty, like originality, is a con­
textual value: it can only be discerned against an historical background, and it is 
a quality of the qualities. 
How do we sharply demarcate the original from the novel? We could say that 
originality is observed in a horizontal framework, that is, in the context of a defi­
nite cultural system. Novelty's context is vertical, in other words, historically dis-

1 40 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Evaluation 
cerned. In both cases we have to consider the historical coefficient- in analyzing 
novelty, however, we have to consider the dynamism of civilization and culture.1 7 
The domain of art endures and also changes; what endures, however, is a tiny 
residue which has floated up from the ceaseless flux and the unrelenting compe­
tition. The criterion of newness stems from the human need to make and to per­
ceive new contents and new forms. It is, accordingly, a primary criterion of evalua­
tion among the avant-garde. The idea of novelty is central in approaching the 
plays of Stanislaw lgnacy Witkiewicz or Fernando Arrabal or the poems of e. e. 
cummings or Tadeusz Peiper. It equips us to categorize much of the value in D. W. 
Griffith's films, in Schonberg's and Webern's musical experiments, in Gordon 
Craig's plastic composition of the stage, and in Joseph Paxton's Crystal Palace. 
Novelty lies in the decision to depart from the currently available resources of 
individual expression; its value cannot be quantified in terms of art's fundamentally 
constituent values as such because the issue is simply whether (and then, by how 
much) a given case of compact structure or expressive patterning or mimesis is 
new. In this criterion there remains still one possibility of quantification. I have said 
that novelty occurs in a context; that is, newness is relative to the familiar and popu­
lar. This gives us a standard of measure, which we may use on content, formal 
innovation, or materials newly incorporated by art (e.g., plastics, chemicals, and 
electronics). In any historical period some works of art may be newer than others 
and the novelty might be an aspect (extra attribute) added to some or all of the 
constituent values. The normal process in the history of art consists of the dynamic 
arrival of the new followed by its gradual assimilation until it has become a seam­
less part of the whole cloth of the available constituent values. 
Novelty, then, may be quantified in relation to its degree of rupture with pre­
vious art history. No similar reference exists which would enable us to quantify 
the extent of originality. Art is original or it is not. Even if the originality occurs in 
a single constituent value, still, its uniqueness permeates the whole of a work and 
an oeuvre. The basis of originality lies in a distinctive way of viewing the world. We 
recognize the evidence of an exceptional artistic vision in a highly individual treat­
ment of a certain value or values. We simply cannot measure this creative phenom­
enon by degrees; we can only state and point out its presence. Accordingly, the 
terms "better" and "inferior" do not apply. 
The novel phenomenon may be duplicated, although the copy of the new will 
lack novelty (as our understanding of the historical coefficient will, of course, tell 
us); but originality can never be duplicated. Even the master forger Van Meegeren 

1 41 
Novelty and Originality 
could not achieve originality (an authenticity) 1 8  in his art forgeries. The history of 
art reveals a long series of failures to copy true originality. In contrast, novelty is 
easily copied, and its duplicates gain favor with equal facility. Both categories are 
illuminated in Alfred Lessing's "What is Wrong With a Forgery?" (in Journal of 
Aesthetics and Art Criticism [Summer 1 9651), although the author appears to oscil­
late between one notion of originality which reduces to novelty and is treated chief­
ly as a historical phenomenon, and another notion which is considered as an 
artistic phenomenon (e.g., Vermeer's specific qualities which even a virtuoso coun­
terfeiter found elusive). These notions cannot be used interchangeably; and the 
more convincing one with regard to forgery is, as I have suggested above, the argu­
ment in defense of the highly singular character of originality. 
In distinguishing between originality and novelty, we should g ive attention to 
still another question. Are these criteria mutually exclusive, or may they overlap? 
Can the presence of one heighten the value of the other? I should say at once that 
originality and novelty do often come together, especially in those artists who 
work with new form, content, or materials in a unique way (e.g., Brecht, Stravin­
sky, Gropius). From the standpoint of the historical coefficient, the originality of 
such artists is integrated with the avant-garde tendencies which they respond to 
and help advance. However, those who innovate in art often think that an avant­
garde in problem-solving must automatically produce originality. Yet it follows 
from our analysis that not all the phenomena of an avant-garde movement will 
be original in any adequate sense of the term. It does not matter which innovating 
tendency we study: there will be an abundance of works of art which offer a novel 
departure from the established constituent values and very few which may rightly 
be called original. (Consider dado. It made a dozen reputations, but Kurt Schwitters 
stands out as the most representative innovator and the most highly individual 
artist. Marcel Duchamp, whose link with dado was but partial, can even be said 
to excel Schwitters.) Thus, in the "diachronic" dimension we find that some "syn­
chronic" artistic structures urge themselves to the fore, and the result is that: (1 ) 
novelty may prove to be devoid of originality; (2) novelty and originality may over­
lap or coincide; or (3) original works may lack novelty. 
Of course, in one sense it is true that originality is always novel; yet we must 
exert care not to overextend the idea of the new, which would happen if we made 
it coincide with creativity and the uniqueness we associate with it. Instead, I link 
novelty with the avant-garde. In other words, novelty is the externally radical as­
pect of the work of art, whereas originality is the internal, permanent character of 

1 42 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Evaluation 
the work in its most positive manifestation. By novelty the artist elaborates the basi­
cally collective dynamism of the transformation of art; by originality the personal 
articulation of his style is most fully realized. Both aspects contribute to the enrich­
ment of human culture. However, the uniqueness of an individual artistic vision, if 
completely elaborated, appears to be the more enduring. The music of Maurice 
Ravel was original in this way without providing any kind of historical advance; 
and the same can be said of Alban Berg's Wozzeck. 
Paul Klee was primarily an original artist and no avant-gardist in the way Man 
Ray was. The pictographs of Klee from Schwankendes Gleichgewicht (1 922) to 
Paukenspieler ( 1 940), ascetic and at the same time dense, reveal the ova nt-ga rde 
heritage of the 1 920s, and yet Klee, just as much as Kandinsky and Miro, eludes 
comprehension in a framework of novelty. His creations afford an ineffable. en­
ticing world of lyricism and fantasy which brings us close to the archetypes of hu­
man imagination and emotions. His exquisite communication alters what might 
otherwise seem inscrutable hieroglyphs into universally comprehensible signs. 
The work of Dostoevsky provides another good case in point. We know from the 
critical studies by Tinyanov, Shklovsky, and Eikhenbaum that Dostoevsky should 
definitely not be regarded as an innovator. He moved among the tivant-garde, yet 
he drew deeply on the achievements of Lermontov, Hoffman, Gogol, and his con­
temporaries in the so-called naturalist school. In this context his personal vision 
propels the originality of his oeuvre, as has been shown by Russian scholarship 
from Mikhailovsky to Grossman and Bakhtin. The result was a unique philosoph­
ical and moral drama composed of polyphonic patterns in anguished counterpoint: 
truths of reason vs. those of faith; history vs. psychology; and the continually dis­
integrating line dividing sanity from madness, the infinity of Christ's love from 
the tragedy of the human wasteland, the. magnificence and helplessness of Good 
from the ubiquity and insidiousness of Evil. 
Still another question can be raised: Is originality tantamount to sincerity? This 
is the view of Croce and some other theorists. Beyond doubt, sincerity is a trait in 
artistic processes. It is, however, a trait which eludes verification. 19 We have great 
difficulty even when studying an artist of our own time in learning if his comments 
relating to his work are distortions {even if unintentional) of the authentic creative 
process. 20 In studying work of an earlier era, the criterion of sincerity in creation 
becomes totally unprovable. Even if we could confirm the sincerity of a single work 
of art, could we infer a standard from its attributes which would enable us to evalu-

1 43 
Novelty and Originality 
ate other art? Can we even grant that sincerity confers artistic value? If we accept 
that proposition, all of the most amateurish "artists" will be very happy since surely 
the most distinctive attribute of their work is its sincerity. 
At several points I have suggested that originality can be linked with breadth 
and depth of vision. "Vision" should not be taken to mean only some reproduction 
of the real world and the fates of men in it. Theodore Greene adopts the latter view, 
and is led by it to the untenable idea that "theme" is a decisive factor in artistic 
greatness, especially in literature, a domain which Greene admits is more congenial 
to his notion of originality than are those of music or painting, for example. 21 His 
argument thus presents us with another "special pleading" for the priority of one 
artistic domain over another. If correct, Greene's thesis would also provide a basis 
for a quantification of originality. In my judgment, however, we can find no more 
originality in Proust than in Vermeer, no more in Bart6k than in Frank Lloyd Wright. 
These artists simply are original in different ways. Yet to conclude this is not to 
take away from Greene's wholly correct observation that a wealth and profundity 
of experience should be properly acknowledged where it is distinctly imbued in art 
objects. The criterion of originality is one mode of making such an acknowledg­
ment. As we shortly shall see, nonartistic criteria also offer a relevant standard. 
So far I have promulgated three scales for use in making comparisons: 
l .  the intensity/magnitude of the constituent values; 
2. their novelty; 
3. their originality. 
Should originality outweigh novelty in a comprehensive evaluational scheme? Do 
scales (2) and (3) overshadow scale (l } in importance? Let us put the issue more 
precisely. If a given work of art has an edge over another work on the novelty 
scale, does it deserve higher estimation for this reason alone, even if the other 
work succeeds admira bly in respect to the intensity of its constituent values? Simi­
larly, is a more original work of art to be judged generally superior to any work 
which succeeds on scales (l } and (2) only? I do not see any implicit aesthetic 
grounds for affirming these propositions. The parallel scales we are using here 
must be used specifically; only in that framework can well-founded judgments be 
rendered. We may move to a comprehensive approach, that is, we may apply all 
t.hree scales, after we first take pains to start with the constant and fundamental­
the constituent- properties. Our procedural guideline will be similar to that formu­
lated earlier with respect to criterion (l } only. That is, once we have found that all 

1 44 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Evaluation 
the given works of art fulfill criterion (1 ), and that one of the works is original, or 
novel, or both, we can then consider placing them in a hierarchy. 
However, we must be exceptionally careful in this procedure, for, in fact, what 
we do here is to quantify the apprehended criteria in respect to one another, on the 
premise that the more of the value we have pinpointed, the better.· As much can 
be said in disparagement of such operations as in favor of them. On the one hand, 
the amount of embodied values seems a fit measure, since we have previously 
made the reasoned assumption that the artistically constituent qualities (conjunc­
tively or disjunctively) can be quantified. On the other hand, it seems inconceivable 
that we might find pairings of works where the criterion (1 ) is equally met all 
round, as a firm basis for the further comparison of criteria (2) and/or (3). 
Moreover, even if we should accept such a pattern for the ranking procedure, I, 
for one, would have serious hesitations about labeling as "better" the work which 
ca n additionally be described as "new." The problem in dealing with originality 
is somewhat different. If we acknowledge originality as the decisive value in estab­
lishing a hierarchy of the given works of art, we must yet guard against the abuse 
of a strategy which transgresses aesthetics, that is, one which makes reference to 
some general axiology which we implicitly assume our audience will share. Beards­
ley has spoken, with respect to elementary aesthetic judgments, of a certain ulti­
mate "area of undecidability." The present question is surely the type of case where 
the principle of undecidability should be invoked. 
We now come to the crucial question: How are we ultimately to interpret and 
justify scales (2) and (3) as additional criteria of evaluation? Do we perhaps assume 
too much in presenting them as additional criteria? The case of (1 ) was simple. The 
quantified values (and valuational qualities), in view of our interpretation and ulti­
mate axiological criteria, constituted the art object. These sa me values (observed 
as intensive to varying degrees) provide the criteria of evaluation. In contrast, 
novelty and originality are qualities which require separate interpretation and justi­
fication. Are they justifiable in themselves? That seems inconceivable. Then by what 
standard? We are put in a dilemma, and might easily be trapped into a vicious circle 
of assertion. 
I contend that the way to regard novelty rightly derives from the sociologicolly 
relativist interpretation. 22 That is, the idea of the new in art essentially means that 
what is taken to constitute novelty will change as part of the constant change of 
aesthetic values. The value of the new accordingly has a paradoxical character: it 
is permanent only in the sense of a shifting and continual renewal. If we do treat 

1 45 
Novelty and Originality 
novelty as a continually recurrent, residual value in the context of sociological rela­
tivism, then it will be every bit as much an abiding criterion of evaluation as are the 
constituently residual values of form, expression, mimesis, or the construction-func­
tion-form syndrome, for then one of our ultimate philosophical axiological criteria 
will be seen to sustain the directly apprehended, historical case for this quality. 
The justification of originality is much harder. Can we prove that this artistic 
quality, which permeates the whole of an art object or oeuvre, is beyond doubt. 
founded on any one of the five ultimate criteria in chapter l ?  Presumably, the claim 
could be made for objectivism in its sir:igularistic version- i.e., stressing one single 
element as providing a permanent foundation for beauty-that it gives strong sup­
port to the idea of this quality. However, historicists will retort that only the long­
term endurance of a given work of art, confronted with other works of the past, 
present, and future, can make manifest what is truly original. Whatever the diffi­
culty in deciding which philosophical-axiological orientation is most relevant, orig­
inality is undoubtedly sustained whether by the one or the other criterion and we 
must accept it among the criteria of evaluational operations. 
Added Nonresidual, Nonartistic Criteria of Value 
We can now proceed on the basis of the three types of residual (i.e., aesthetic) cri­
teria which I have formulated. I must, however, once again assert the need for care. 
We must not make a complacent assumption that nonartistic criteria are necessarily 
out-of-bounds. Let us in fact boldly acknowledge that many kinds of judgments on 
works of art and of hierarchies for them are relevant. Among the most pervasive 
kinds of nonartistic criteria are evaluations from the religious, political, and moral 
standpoints. 23 Should the reader be astonished to find the pertinacity of these 
standpoints affirmed here? Art is a cultural phenomenon and thus a functional part 
of social life in many respects. The ire which my view might evoke would be mis­
placed. It would instead be helpful for a so-called formalist position to recall the 
many milennia during which the formal characteristics of art (even the seemingly 
purely ornamental ones) had a magical-symbolic significance. (In some cultures this 
function has, in fact, continued to the present.) Knowing this, how can we deny 
legitimacy to the nonartistic interpretations of art objects? However, this interpre­
tation of art leaves a very important and suitable task to the aesthetician, who 
should insist that the two kinds of evaluational criteria be lucidly distinguished 
and forthrightly applied, and also should set the example. Undoubtedly, the aes­
thetician will respond to authentically artistic objects by emphasizing the criteria 

1 46 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Evaluation 
that are residually fundamental to art; but this should not, of course, be done in 
a way that ignores or narrows the discussion about the larger context of inter­
pretation. 24 
Thus, I will want to make clear that moral, religious, and political appraisals 
are axiologically relevant to art. I will add, however, that on occasion some of 
these judgments and hierarchies prove to be ideological in the constrictive sense 
of the term; they ignore, from their standpoint, the specific values of the work of 
art with its qualities and internal structure. Again, such judgments and hierarchies 
may incorrectly ignore all of the residual aesthetic values except one: A work's 
mimesis may alone be acknowledged. These are all departures from a proper and 
legitimate role for nonartistic criteria, however; and the marxists have defended 
that legitimacy in their debates with the structuralists.25 
From the dim past until today, ideas of a moral, political, or religious character 
have been organic and sometimes fundamental aspects of artistic structure. They 
occur very commonly in literature, drama, and film; less often in painting, sculpture, 
and music. They frequently amount to a philosophical raw material for a creative 
artist. They may, moreover, prove functional in the sense that they set a determi­
nate ideological direction and framework in which the mimetic materials can be 
successfully transformed. Where this is the case, we shall have grounds to con­
sider the ideational contribution in our evaluative operation. The artistic efficacy 
of the ideas emerges from the quantification of the mimesis. One determines wheth­
er the mimesis has succeeded, whether it is large in scope, and whether it is inten­
sive. Moreover, the mimetic measure of ideas has an extension to other properties; 
and the novelty or the originality of a work of art may be, in part, determined by 
this kind of ideological permeation. 
Another related and frequently applied nonresidual criterion, only indirectly 
ideological, is that of comprehensibility. It is stated not by one class or interest 
group of society; but is the response of persons in many kinds of situations who 
experience the disparity between the creative artist's objects and the expecta­
tions of the consumer of art. The gap is frequently acute. It occurs in social sys­
tems where the cultural bulkheads between the classes have been upheld for 
centuries. It also occurs in circumstances such as we know today, where the 
artists are constrained to produce a commercialized or a neurotic or hermetic 
art. 
There are changing and various reasons for the public's difficulties in achieving 
direct access to the arts; yet in no circumstances does the comprehensibility seem 

1 47 
Added Criteria of Va lue 
to me valid as an artistic criterion. It may surely be advanced as a nonartistic stan­
dard; but, when this is done, it must be with full knowledge of and respect for the 
demands which history shows the arts have the right to assert to assure their sur­
vival and growth. In other words, politico!. and civic authorities should not be per­
mitted to interfere with the residual criteria of art, although they may rightly do 
what they can to encourage a greater communicativeness in the arts. An inevitable 
tension arises between the wish to comprehend im mediately and the likelihood 
that much new and orig inal art will be baffling, at least at first and to many. Re­
sidual criteria must, nonetheless, be accorded their rights. 
That originality is a major or the optimum characteristic of art may prove to be 
less than an invariant criterion; if so, it should be reclassified out of the residual 
values. A residual status has long been implied in the European tradition, but it 
has no comparable standing in the Asian or African cultural traditions, and this 
should alert us to its likely axiological limitedness. Even in Europe it only took a 
central place in the romantic era. We should note too that the recent avant-garde 
has had little avowed stake in the most ample expression of individuality as a sig­
nificant value in its art. The masterpiece of a genius as embodiment of the hope non 
omnis moriar, has given way to Duchamp's irreverent gestures, minimal art, and 
happenings; the original ity of the avant-garde has been redirected in large part to 
destructive confrontation of established values. In the place of originality, other 
cultures have held up canons and archetypes of art, often susta ined over several 
centuries. The attitudes that lead to the creation of such works of art are very dif­
ferent from those of our society. Not the profoundly articulated personal vision 
of a created "rival world," but rather divine commandment, or a moral and social 
stability, is what receives evaluational precedence. 
Do any other nonartistic criteria appear to lay a sign ificant claim to cutting 
across class and other temporal and spatial demarcations? There are some philoso­
phies of value which seek an evaluational synthesis, reconciliation, or overview. 
Such criteria have been posited by artists (e.g., Tolstoi) as to be explicitly promul­
gated. Some aestheticians, such as L. Arnaud Reid and Rolf Ekman, hold similar 
positions. Reid arg ues that art is "significant" only when it represents great hu­
man values.26 Ekman believes the most important values in creativity are such 
critÐria as sanity, bala nce, and life affirmation.27 
Philosophical criteria seem reasonable and indispensable for art objects - but 
I still cannot call them artistic criteria, as do Reid and Ekman. It seems to me that 
Marx's general axiological approach offers the most cogent perspective for orient-

1 48 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Evaluation 
ing the criteria suitable to aesthetics. Basic to this general perspective is the premise 
that problems of aesthetics cannot be solved except in the context of certain ulti­
mate philosophical discriminations and choices. Given this premise, art's distinc­
tive and yet only relatively autonomous criteria are seen to be dependent on the 
some facts that are fundamental in choosing and formulating a general axiology. It 
must also be added that among the fundamental data determining evaluational cri­
teria are the data of disolienotionol adivity. Elsewhere, I have discussed alienation 
and the artistic currents which point toward its being superseded;28 I won't repeat 
the analysis here, but will just remind the reader that Marx's treatments of aes­
thetic problems were all formulated in reference to the problem of alienation. Any­
way, wherever an evaluative approach does refer to nonartistic qualities in art, 
a tacit aspect of aesthetic valuation becomes manifest-that in this domain the 
ultimate criteria of reference are personal moral, political, religious and philosophi­
cal viewpoints. That is to say, our evaluative judgments hinge in matters of art on 
our philosophical views (i.e., our philosophy of value) a nd it is, therefore, inescap­
able that the criterion has to be sought not in the qualities singled out as the appre­
hended constituent properties of artistic value, but rather in the general axiological 
approach. 
Admittedly, this conception of the nonaesthetic evaluative criteria implies that 
art may be judged from a big and internally contradictory range of individual view­
points; and indeed how is the reader supposed to accept any "axiological calculus" 
which ignores the individual variable? Still, what emerges from a study of the 
spectrum of general axiologies is the hope and possibility of avoiding an axiologi­
cal relativism -a form of relativism naturally encouraged by a highly varied and 
striated society. Inevitably, the relativist dimension is invoked swiftly and to great 
excess where the nonartistic criteria are discussed; there is much less of a check 
on the idiosyncrasies of conviction, and knowledge, and method. Yet we gain hope 
of clarification from the fact that here, as in other domains of value, the idiosyn­
crasies tend to cl uster around a limited number of paradigms. The individuals of 
a given time and place do not differ as greatly among themselves as an initial 
glimpse at their contradictions might suggest. Besides, over the centuries the opera­
tive political, religious, moral, and philosophical viewpoints of evaluation -at feast 
in our ethnocentric context- have proven remarkably stable; indeed, the possible 
range of approaches in each of these areas is finite and we can work towards 
their typology. 

1 49 
Added Criteria of Value 
Even with this possibility stated we must still be impressed by the continua I 
fluctuations in the way aesthetic objects have been evaluated. 29 This dynamic in 
the ranking procedure must be analyzed in terms of the characteristics of human 
nature and of culture. Althoug h the range of choices open to the judging individual 
is limited, yet it is always in fl ux, with orienting traits continually receding or emerg­
ing, always being disconcertingly modified. For this reason, the domain of art and 
of art criticism becomes one great fascinating "axiological circus." This does not 
apply only to the nonresidual criteria of the nonaesthetic evaluation of art. We have 
seen earlier that a selective, biased preference may be extended to one or another 
single area, genre, value, or valuational quality of art. For instance, sometimes 
craft criteria of constituent artistic value may be exalted by an individual or a social 
group, and sometimes expression and originality, perhaps of a strenuously insis­
tent character, may be urged to the fore; sometimes a seemingly artless represen­
tational art may be preferred, and at another time the purified forma l structure 
may command the lau rels. If today ugliness is the "in" taste, tomorrow it may be 
subtlety or the sublime or the camp or something else. 
Nonetheless, the many justifying reasons for shifts in the ranking hierarchies 
will prove to be just concretizations and particularizations, which can be related 
to an adequately interpreted and justified system of the aesthetic evaluational 
criteria. Similarly, in the case of the nonaesthetic criteria the frameworks cited will 
be particularizations of the moral, political, philosophical, religious, or other sche­
mata of thinking which prevail in the given spatiotemporal context. How could the 
justifying reasons not prove to be partial or variously accented? In its totality the 
axiological process is propelled by the fluctuations in art's paradigms; it is subject 
always to the imperatives of the here-and-now. 
Synthesis and Appl ication 
It appears reasonable that we should grant a considerable justification to the non­
aesthetic criteria of evaluation, and equally inevitable that these criteria will dis­
play a historical motivation and rootedness that renders them in some way and 
degree partial. We should not have to attribute a comparable indeterminacy to 
the residual (aesthetic) criteria of evaluation, if we bear in mind the cautions and 
distinctions stated earlier in this essay. In these axiologica l proceedings: 
1 .  We shall remember not to overleap the boundaries of the artistic values and 
valuational qualities (i.e., we shall respect the ceteris poribus). 

1 50 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Evaluation 
2. We shall toke core to distinguish, on the once hand, the full-fledged, proper 
criteria of evaluation, and, on the other hand, the subcriteria which are mistakenly 
and notoriously advanced by so many laymen, artists, and critics -and sometimes 
also by oestheticions30 -so as to legitimize their judgments on one of art's do­
mains (e.g., film), trends (e.g., realism), genres (e.g., the grotesque), or voluotiono l 
qualities (e.g., on insistent expressiveness). When a subcriterion is persistently 
overestimated, the evaluational distortion may hove o personal or o sociocultura l  
instigation; and, indeed, the insistence o n  o partial aesthetic paradigm may be 
admissible- it certainly is widespread- if we are lucid about the context in which 
we make this choice. 
3. We shall ·not feel compelled to drop the nonortistic criteria. We will simply be 
aware that these are the nonresidual considerations and we will consider them in 
that light. 
Now, point ( 1 )  is essential. Only when we have scrupulously demarcated the 
arena in which we shall propose comparisons, con we soberly hope to obtain reli­
able statements. Similarly, when we operate inside the boundaries of a single art, 
we take less risk of error than when we venture to bridge the differences among 
the arts. The risks are further reduced when within a single art we make our com­
parisons within a single style or trend, as our results can be more meaningful when 
drawn from commensurable empirical material. If such is our aim , making com­
parisons within the oeuvre of a single artist will assure us the best chance of mini­
mimizing the variables and gaining trustworthy judgments. 
It seems to me that the current scarcity of trustworthy judgments might be al­
leviated if, within the different art domains, task forces of historians and theoreti­
cians employing adequately defined criteria were to confront the problems. I do not 
make this suggestion carelessly . A careless, untena ble attitude -from a scientific 
sta ndpoint -would be one which acquiesced a priori in the subjectivity or relativ­
ity of evaluations, while on the other hand, if subjectivism or relativism were ulti­
mately legitimate, then we might forget all further systematic inquiry into aesthetic 
problems. 
Suppose that the "axiological calculus" were patterned solely by individual 
preference (which is flawed and ephemeral) or by social convention (which en­
thrones whatever has fleetingly been termed an "art object"); suppose, according­
ly, that a work of art is but a projection of transient and arbitrary human ideas 
and behavior. We should then have no basis for quarreling with any moral or 
political decree or taboo directed at art. We could not demarcate these pronounce-

151 
Synthesis and Application 
ments from the adequate criteria of aesthetic evaluation. Surely, too, such an atti­
tude is irreconcilable with the attitude and findings of purposeful research, for ­
while not overlooking the most extreme avant-garde tendencies of the present­
we may affirm that cultural history has elaborated a number of markedly sustained, 
autonomous modes of consciousness. Art structures have emerged and developed 
in the course of this historical process -and marxists should be notably prepared 
and adept in studying an'd explaining how and why. Similarly, marxists should 
have a certain edge in explaining why we seem today to be besieged by a ques­
tioning and undermining of aesthetic categories which have survived magisterially 
up till now- under the assault of such movements as impossible art or conceptual 
art. 
Before concluding this essay I must point out that I have failed to deal with two 
questions which, though pertinent to this sketch of evaluational criteria, must be 
reserved for another occasion. These a re: first, the problem of what gives the classi­
cal creative works, those which last, their enduring value; second, the problem of 
adequate criteria for the evaluation of the aesthetic experience. Still, a word or two 
on these matters may be in order. Let me outline the possible approaches. 
The works of art we call "classics" are so defined by both artistic and nonartistic 
criteria. The latter are what fluctuate most and can spark the revaluation and de­
valuation of even the most "enduring" art objects. Undoubtedly, the artistic cri­
teria also rise or fall in estimation, but they are less capricious, and it is surely 
from them primarily that the enduring character derives. Yet despite the flux in 
evaluations-despite the continually rehung "museum of the imagination," to use 
Malraux's phrase -we must, as I have argued a bove, acknowledge the special 
status of those axiological judgments which continually recur. Now, if we pursue 
the problem of "classic status" in this manner, we shall have to discriminate sever­
al types of the classic. Some ore entirely formal in character; some will distill the ex­
perience and conscience of entire epochs; some will be historically excellent in both 
ways. I thus can offer no arbitrary assumptions regarding the substantial charac­
ter of any so-called classic work of art. Each has to be investigated using some or 
all of the criteria of evaluation proposed here. Should a hierarchy be attempted 
among the works of classic status? I doubt it. They have been selected as fit for the 
highest rank, and they shou ld be regarded as paralleling and complementing in­
stead of competing with one another. 
What about the problem of adequate criteria for the evaluation of aesthetic ex­
perience? Briefly, we would wa nt to discover to what extent such traits of the ex-

1 52 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Evaluation 
perience as its intensity, its integration (the cooperation of all the psychic powers), 
and its immediacy respond to the objective features I have defined in this essay. I 
hope it has been tacitly clear throughout that we must be fully cognizant of the 
subject-object relationship. Where a choice has been unavoidable, I have opted to 
commence with analysis of the art obied. Why? Not because I equivocate as to the 
principle; rather, because an approach, a strategy must be chosen. I am fully at­
tentive to the axiological significance of the aesthetic experience - but I find it like­
wise axiomatic that within the subject-object relationship the work of art creates 
the audience, critic, or theorist, rather than the reverse. In other words, art objects 
generate the aesthetic experience, appreciations, and appraisals, and these all 
together lead fi na I ly to the eva I uative activity. 31 
A treatment of the aesthetic experience would lead directly into a treatment of 
the functions of art objects. Indeed, we would need to discriminate early among: 
(l ) the aesthetic functions which pertain to our quantified system of the funda­
mental constituents of art; (2) the aesthetic functions which pertain to novelty and 
originality; and (3) the nonaesthetic functions which are performed by the great 
majority of works of art. 
One final caveat must be added. My proposed definition of evaluational criteria 
is not intended to be a system of axiological canons which is supposed to survive 
unaltered forever. I have no desire to issue an axiological fiat. I have only proposed 
some historical and typological generalizations that have empirical references (i.e., 
that I have derived from assessing the evaluational criteria proposed by a broad 
range of individuals engaged in varied activities, and, in particular, by persons 
with a pronounced acquaintance with the arts). I concede instantly that my formu­
lations and proposais might very well be superseded by more defensible and com­
prehensive findings. I think, though, that these would have to be couched on a still 
broader foundation of sociohistorical inquiry. 

1 53 
Notes 
1 . The Essential David Hume, ed. R. Wolff 
(New York, 1 969), pp. 372, 373 . 
2. Hume ends his essays with a statement 
that is captive to the taste of his time and 
country: that a depletion of humane feelings 
and of politeness and an excessive religious 
zeal pose a threat to works of art (ibid., pp. 
380-383). This thought is contradicted by 
another of Hume's formulations, which gave 
him distance on the famous querel/e of the 
seventeenth century: that a critic fails if he 
overlooks that a given author has addressed 
himself to persons of another epoch or na­
tion and if he doesn't allow for and adjust 
the ensuing prejudices and viewpoints. 
3. The Critique of Judgment, Introduction 
and paragraphs 8, 23, 26, 27, 29, 38. 
Among the main distinctions drawn by Kant 
between judgments about the beautiful and 
judgments about the sublime is that the 
former require both exposition ond deduc­
tion because they ore concerned with the 
form of objects, while the latter- because 
they are founded in human nature (the 
purposiveness of the will) and essentially 
involve states of mind-do not require any 
further deduction from a priori principles 
(paragraphs 30, 3 1  ). I must here leave aside 
even a succint survey of the chief and con­
troversial issues of Kant's philosophy. It is 
clear though that Kant's aesthetics cannot 
be fully grasped apart from his two pre­
ceding Critiques. Specifically at issue here 
are the inconsistencies and ambiguities as 
to the basic faculties cind operations of our 
mental endowment. (Cf. the highly illuminat­
ing essay by Eva Schaper, "Kant on Imagina­
tion," Philosophical Forum, vol 2, no. 4, 
1 971 .) 
4. Kant, Critique of Judgment, poragraphs 
56 and 57. 
Notes 
5. Ibid., paragraphs 9 and 1 4. 
6. Ibid., paragraph 1 6. Using similar argu­
ments, Kant holds that regular geometrical 
figures cannot be a source of aesthetic ex­
perience, since the idea of regularity posits 
the intervention of reason (concepts of pur­
pose) and prevents the free play of imagina­
tion (paragraph 22). The core of his thesis 
lies in these propositions: Aesthetic pur· 
posiveness based only on a given form has 
its counterpart in the freedom that inheres 
to the constitution of our cognitive faculties 
by virtue of their lawfulness. But this paral­
leling conformity as though to law which is 
brought about by our understanding and 
free imagination paradoxically occurs in the 
absence of law. The antinomy is solved be­
cause of the harmony which exists within 
the human mind just as the aesthetic trans­
action takes place. With important modifi­
cations the same notion applies to the judg­
ment of sublime objects (paragraph 29). 
7. The Essential David Hume, p. 375. In the 
next passage H ume points out the unequal 
levels of taste among different peoples, 
which results in different gradations (p. 380). 
8. Cf. B. Croce, Breviario di estetica (Bari, 
1 91 3), chs. 2, 4. M. Dufrenne, PMnome­
nologie de I 'experience esthetique, Vol. 1 
(Paris, 1 953), pp. 1 7-35. E. Bullough, Aes­
thetics (London, 1 957), pp. 43-54. 
9. Cf. S. C. Pepper, The Sources of Value 
(Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1 958), ch. 1 3; 
M. C. Beardsley, Aesthetics: Problems in the 
Philosophy of Criticism (New York, 1 958), 
chs. 1 0-1 2. The distinction is also accepted 
by K. Aschenbrenner, "Aesthetic Theory­
Conflict and Conciliation," Journal of Aes­
thetics and Art Criticism (September 1 959). 
The same direction is taken by R. lngarden 
in his Studies in Aesthetics, vol. I (Warsaw, 
1 957), pp. 1 37-1 44, 1 73-1 77. 

1 54 
1 0. Cf. Pepper, Sources of Value, pp. 272-
273, 288-299. 
1 1 . We may cite the marxist tradition. G. 
Plekhanov in Art and Social Life (1 91 2) 
offered two criteria of evaluation: the hor· 
mony of an idea and its form, and the truth­
fulness of an idea. A. Lunacharsky in his 
"Theses on the Tasks of Marxist Criticism" 
( 1 928) and "Thoughts on Criticism" ( 1 933) 
also mentions on interest in formal structure, 
that is to say, in complex organization. 
In this tradition, the quantification of mimetic 
value is oriented to its cognitive and idea· 
logical aspects, and the compactness of the 
work of art is expecially considered. 
1 2 . This criteron hos acquired more signifi­
cance because of the entry of the function­
alist concept into modern architecture and 
industrial design. Even should one argue 
that the optimal solution in this domain of 
art is an optimum correspondence among 
form, construction, and function, it must be 
acknowledged, first, that there ore differing 
ways to realize the posited harmonious 
whole, and, second, that the three elements 
will be interproportioned differently in, say, 
on airplane hangar, a pants hanger, a Mus­
tang automobile, a set of dishes, and a home 
interior. 
1 3. I offer this projection on the analogy 
of the mythemes spoken of by Levi-Strauss 
in his Structural Anthropology (1 963; French 
edition, 1 958). 
1 4. Cf. T. M. Greene, The Arts and the Art 
of Criticism (Princeton, 1 940). chs. 24-25 . 
1 5. The phenomenon of genius in art was 
first formulated in this way by Alexander 
Gerard in 1 77 4. In the same period, we may 
note, another notion of genius was ad· 
vonced (by Edward Young) and was woven 
into the theories of romanticism (Novalis· 
Schelling-Coleridge). This notion looked on 
The Criteria 
of Aesthetic Evaluation 
the genius as on "original," a unique phe· 
nomenon. 
1 6. Cf. E. Kahler, "What Is Art?" in M. Weitz, 
ed., Prob/ems in Aesthetics (New York, 
1 959), pp. 1 57-1 7 1 . 
1 7. Cf. the still valid analysis of this matter 
in E. Utitz, Grundlegung der a/lgemeinen 
Kunstwissenschaft (Stuttgart, 1 920), vol. II, p. 
370; also "Theses on the Tasks of Marxist 
Criticism," in A. Lunochorsky, On Literature 
and Art (in English; Moscow, 1 965), pp. 1 9- 2 1 . 
1 8. I use this ambiguous term here in place 
of originality, although their meaning is 
often the same. Authenticity is used in this 
context as on equivalent to genuineness, 
that is, an unfeigned artistic expression. The 
two other meanings of the term overlo p 
my intention: authentic con also mean not 
forged and, in television or cinema verite, 
it con mean rendering the actual flux of reality. 
1 9 . Of course, it is possible to advance sub­
jectivist or relativist interpretations of origi­
nality and novelty. The terms "original" 
and "new" might mean one thing to X and 
Y, something quite different to a group of 
Xs or of Ys. But I shall insist that these cri­
teria be objectivized insofar as this is pos· 
sible. This is done by considering them 
against a context of historically determined 
cultural structures. Let me emphasize, too, 
that we should try to analyze originality in 
the work itself, not in the creative process. 
20. Cf. chapter 5. 
2 1 .  Greene, Arts and Criticism, ch. 24, pp. 
465-470. Even so, Greene seeks to avoid 
an equation of the value of a work with the 
artist's philosophy. We must consider-if I 
understand him -the scope of the questions 
posed by a work of art and not the sub­
stance of the answers. 
22. For a description of the sociologically 
relativist approach to art, see chapter 1. 

1 55 
23. The earliest plainly nonortistic evalua­
tions in European aesthetic thought ore in 
the writings of Plato. In his lows (Port VII, 
801 D) he writes that "the poet should not 
create anything outside of the theme ap­
proved by the authorities as decent, beauti­
ful, and good, and he should not bring his 
works before the public unless they were 
examined by a judge and guardian of lows 
and approved by them." 
24. Cf. the analyses of nonortistic criteria 
in Beardsley, Aesthetics, ch. 1 2, and in J. 
Stolnitz, Aesthetics and Philosophy of Art 
Criticism (Boston, 1 960), ch. 1 6. John Dewey 
earlier spoke of the so-called "confusion of 
values" in his Art and Experience (New 
York, 1 934). ch. 1 3. However, none of these 
authors gives adequate treatment to the 
genuine conflicts between artistic and non­
ortistic evaluations. Marxists who hove 
given detailed attention to these problems 
(Lenin, Lunochorsky, Gromsci) were con­
strained, owing to the moss cultural side of 
revolution, to give much significance to the 
criterion of comprehensibility, that is, art's 
capacity to communicate directly and effec­
tively. 
25. Cf. Romon lngorden's way of dealing 
with these matters. He treats ideas as or­
gon ic elements of works of art. However, 
he exhibits their aesthetic value only in the 
framework of the polyphonic system of the 
value qualities, thus ignoring their relations 
with the real, autonomous world. 
26. Cf. L. Arnaud Reid, A Study in Aes­
thetics (London, 1 931 ). The sign ificonce of 
works of art, Reid believes, should be de­
duced from their ideothemotic values, which 
merge with their emotional ond moral 
aspects. 
27. Cf. R. Ekman, Problems and Theories in 
Modern Aesthetics (Malmo, 1 960), ch. 1 .  
Notes 
Also his essay "Aesthetic Value ond the 
Ethics of Life Affirmation,'' British Journal of 
Aesthetics, vol. 3, no. l (1 963), pp. 54-66. 
28 . Cf. my book Between Tradition and a 
Vision of the Future (in Polish; Warsaw, 
1 964), pp. 1 84-1 90; also my introduction 
to K. Marx ond F. Engels, On Literature and 
Art (St. Louis, 1 973); and chapter 9. 
29. Cf. N. Rescher, lntrodudion to Value 
Theory (Englewood Cliffs, N.J., 1 969), ch. 9 
on the dynamics of value change. What 
Rescher says regarding the constant up­
grading ond downgrading of values con be 
applied, in the field of aesthetics, to ony 
rescaling or reronking, on the basis of tacitly 
assumed ideas of the nature of o work of 
art and the corresponding aesthetic ex­
perience. However, ot the moment of the 
"aesthetic earthquake" (such as we hove 
seen occurring especially in the post two 
decodes, although the opening of this pro­
cess con be doted to the 1 920s) the oxio-
log icol shakeup touches the fundamental 
voluotionol criteria, and this becomes prob­
lematic. 
30. Cf. New York University Institute of 
Philosophy, 7th, Art and Philosophy, edited 
by Sidney Hook (New York, 1 964). 
3 1  • It is beyond question that the work of 
art most often preserves a certain residue 
of on artist's experience and that both the 
work and the experience must meet the 
condition of some degree of intensity and 
integration. Nevertheless, I do not accept the 
view thot the evoluotionol criteria of art 
should be turned towards the connection of 
the work of ort with the creative process 
behind it. If I took this as the center of my 
attention, I should hove to address myself 
to the criteria of the creative process, and 
not to the criteria of the art object which 
hove concerned me here. 

Chapter 4 
The Obtectlvity 
of Aesthetic Judgment 
Valuation and Evaluation from Plato to Kant 
The problem of aesthetic judgment emerged rather late in European aesthetic 
thought. Plato and Aristotle did discuss some criteria of evaluation; but neither 
gave consideration to the criteria of value as these are reflected in the act of ap­
praisal. The relativity of the ideas of beauty and ugliness did provide a theme 
for the Sophists (particularly in the anonymous treatise Dio/exeis), but they did 
not try to analyze the propositions on which this relativity was based. The problem 
of the validity of aesthetic judgment was treated more fully by those Stoics who, 
following Aristotle and Diogenes the Babylonian, stressed the sensuous character 
of the response to beauty and art as the basis for value judgments. A further step 
was taken by Alhazen and Vitello in their remarks on sensations and perceptions, 
and the conditions conducive or prejudicial to the perception of such qualities as 
beauty and ugliness, but they stopped short of the question of aesthetic taste and 
judgment. 
It is remarkable that the Renaissance failed to introduce any new consideration 
of the question of how beauty is perceived. Its poetics and art theory concentrated 
on the artistic process and the possibility of knowing the essence of the empirical 
world. Alberti and da Vinci stressed the importance of what they called concin­
nitas and mimesis; they seemed to lay little difficulty at the door of valuative and 
evaluative criteria. Even Dorer treated the problem of appraisal only incidentally, 
though he devoted much concern to his search for the measure of beauty. 
Indeed, the issue which here concerns us did not begin to mature until attention 
was finally focused upon the subjective aspect of the aesthetic process. This new 
perspective can be traced to the seventeenth century, to Leibniz's notion of 
aesthetic experience as a vague knowledge of perfection and the contemporaneous 
French treatments of aesthetic taste. The focus was shifting towards epistemology 
and psychology; Leibniz and Baumgarten opened a road that runs directly to 
Kant through their analyses of the key question of whether perception is intellec­
tual or emotional. 
Another road leading to Kant started with the eighteenth-century British school 
of aesthetics, which grafted certain French ideas to its native tradition. The 
British school, under the influence of Leibniz, considered aesthetic taste to be a 
specific psychical state, and repeated the French formula of a je ne sais quoi; 
unlike the German school, however, it associated taste not with some cognitive 
process, but rather with a process akin to the action of the instincts. Some eigh-
A shorter version of this essay appeared in the British Journal of Aesthetics (October 1 966). 

1 57 
Valuation and Evaluation 
from Plato to Kant 
teenth-century English writers do, in fact, refer to an "aesthetic instinct." The 
Frenchman Bou hours, almost a century earlier, had stated that what reason sub­
sequently discovers, is first infallibly suggested by taste; and Dubas would later 
speak of the sixth sense on which proper aesthetic judgment is founded. At the 
same time, taste began to be understood as the faculty of discerning not only the 
good but also the better. We find this problem posed in France by Chevalier de 
Mere and Montesquieu, among others, and in England by Hume, Burke, and Gerard. 
The predominant concern at that time was to describe beauty's counterpart as 
a specific psychical faculty, demarcated to be sure from the domain of reason. 
Since we no longer share this concern, we believe that the especially valuable 
conviction of these men was their notion that a well-developed taste requires 
not only sense, feeling, and imagination, but also sound judgment. A concomitant 
idea which is also important for us is that taste is by no means random and unique. 
However, there was no more agreement then as to the conditions for the univer­
sality of taste than there is today. La Motte, Shaftesbury, Hutchison, and Home 
maintained that sense and feeling were the primary, if not exclusive, foundations 
of agreement in aesthetic appraisals. Others (for example, Hume, in his classic 
essay "Of the Standard of Taste") suggested that similarities of judgment in mat­
ters of art and beauty are determined not only by similarities of nature, but equally 
or even preponderantly by social conditions acting through tradition, cultural pat­
terns, and acquired attitudes. 
Such is the historical background of Kant's views; and it is with him that the 
history of this problem really begins. Kant's approach to aesthetic judgment is 
based upon the philosophical foundations laid out in his Critique of Judgment, 
and I shall here attempt to single out the main points relevant to this topic. 
The domain of aesthetics, Kant held, lies between that of the intellect, which is 
concerned with regularity in nature, and that of the practi.cal reason, which 
postulates the idea of freedom. The aesthetic domain is rendered operative through 
the judgment (a reflexive, not a determining faculty), which seeks to establish 
general principles for particular cases. Now, the act of judgment predicates a 
congruence between cognitive activity and the design of nature, and it regards 
this ha rmony as relative only to the human subject. Thus this design, or, more 
exactly, the purposiveness, is given purely subjectively and formally, without any 
directed purpose, in an image of the given object which is immediately associated 
with a feeling of pleasure; and this image is in no way at odds with the intellect 

1 58 
The Objectivity 
of Aesthetic Judgment 
as the faculty of understanding. The appreciation of beauty is characterized by 
this harmonious and free play of all psychical faculties. Kant says that the ability 
to formulate a judgment based on this pleasant experience constitutes what is· 
called taste. The judgment of taste is not a cognitive judgment- its reasons are 
merely subjective. The existence of the object is irrelevant: for what counts is 
simply contemplation, in which a state of pure and disinterested liking is achieved. 
As this liking is impersonal, it has to include (without any mediation of concepts) 
a claim to universality, and here lies the crux of the problem. The universality 
of aesthetic judgment is founded, so Kant maintains, on the constitution of our 
cognitive faculties (part I, section 9). The peculiarly aesthetic pleasure arises not 
from an object of imagination only, but rather from the harmony of imagination 
and intellect. In this way the sensus communis will arise from a subjective necessity 
(the object ought to please everyone, since I approve of it according to my judg­
ment), and not from a cultural unanimity established among different peoples and 
different epochs (section 1 7). 1 Aesthetic judgment, accordingly, is not such that 
it can be supported by arguments that would compel others to acknowledge its 
soundness. Yet although privatgOltig, it makes a claim to universal acceptance. 
Kant discusses this antinomy (sections 56 and 57) as a pairing of propositions, 
one of which locates a substantiation for taste in concepts, the other of which does 
not; and he provides an extremely simple resolution. Each of the propositions uses 
a different definition of "concepts." The concept which Kant says constitutes the 
authentic basis for aesthetic judgment refers to the subjective purposiveness of 
nature, to the suprasensuous substratum that lies at the foundation of appearances. 
I do not find Kant's argument convincing, mainly because he relies on a trans­
cendental method and purely deductive operations (sections 30, 31 ,  38), while 
repeatedly impugning the empirical procedures to which he nonetheless resorts 
when discussing pleasure as the basis of taste. Kant flatly and consistently rejects 
social conditions of judgment, but, while substituting for natural determinants 
some unexplained and a priori patterning of cognitive faculties, he nevertheless 
vacillates between a psychological and an epistemological interpretation. There­
fore, the object is wholly determined by the subject; in other words, beauty and 
the sublime are determined by taste -which yet does not seem to be explicable 
in purely transcendental terms. Finally, wherever Kant discusses those aesthetic 
judgments that draw on intellect or reason (section 1 7, on the ideal of beauty; 
or section 42, on the superiority of natural beauty over artistic beauty), he is 
forced to declare that he is stepping beyond the field of taste -since his inclusive 

1 59 
Valuation and Evaluation 
from Plato to Kant 
thesis is that the aesthetic judgment is wholly a matter of taste, with taste being 
a specific faculty based on imagination and feeling. 
Yet Kant's misconceptions are highly instructive. They marshal a wealth of 
ideas, and they evince a methodological maturity in posing the problems. We 
should note well that the problem of taste, so easily solved by Kant, is in any case 
only apparent. If we reject the transcendental method, we shall find that differing 
preferences cannot be considered logically contradictory. After all, we do not 
consider one person's liking for champagne to be inconsistent with another's 
preference for cognac. Thus, the de gustibus maxim should no longer frighten 
and discourage us, since we may talk about a contradiction in aesthetic judgments 
only where a difference arises concerning the same object and the same attributes 
of that object. Even so, Kant's sol ution of his antinomy involves a discovery of 
importance: Uniformity of experience should not be sought in a concept; rather, 
we may mo.st usefully investigate whether the human natural and social reality 
encourages a uniformity Ïth in experience and concept. Undoubtedly, this 
presents a difficult and complex question, involving as it does the "constants" 
of the human species and of its history. It would be helpful, also, to rephrase 
the Kantian antinomy to focus on the contradiction between what is unique and 
what is general in the aesthetic act and in its objective counterpart; and thus to 
discern what is really particular to these subjective and objective elements and 
what is shared by them with other members of their specific class. 
However, my critical digression notwithstanding, the fact remains that Kant's 
analysis brings to light all the main themes of this chapter: 
1 .  the subjective character of judgment, which, nonetheless, seeks for an objective 
verification in human nature (if only in the constitution of the cognitive faculties) 
or human culture; 
2. the locating of values (e.g., beauty and the sublime) as the foundation of 
judgment; 
3. the universality of the possible elements of aesthetic judgment (above all, 
the opposition between the intellect and other faculties)-this being an aspect 
of objectivity. 
Even Kant's omissions in the argument prove instructive. If writers of the 
eighteenth century were capable of raising the problem of aesthetic judgment, 
it was because doubt had already been cast on the a priori existence of a meta­
physical Beauty. They were, however, still incapable of making any clear and 
precise distinction between judgment and value, and, more importantly, between 

1 60 
The Objectivity 
of Aesthetic Judgment 
an elementary discrimination of value (with appraisal as its counterpart) and a 
judgment concerning the degree of value. Kant himself was drawn into making 
evaluative judgments, but apparently without being aware of their distinctive 
character. We find that the same trouble befell Hume before him. 
One other point is to be noted, which in the context of Kant's aesthetic system 
may seem surprising, but which is for us extremely valuable. In section 41 he writes 
of the empirical interest in beauty, which he links to the social drive and the history 
of culture. He had to scuttle this line of reasoning to sustain his philosophical 
consistency elsewhere, yet in this brief passage he indicated, with understanding, 
a status of value that was to be explored and articulated in historicist doctrines 
from Vico, Diderot, and Herder through Hegel, Marx, and Taine. 
At this juncture our brief survey may be closed. After all, it is not with the 
history of the problem of aesthetic judgment that I am concerned here, but with 
the debates today in progress. Yet a look at the background seemed essential. 
not only to introduce some of the specific questions, but to demonstrate the 
complexity of the problem. 
Now, there is an obvious difficulty involved in using the term "objectivity," 
which, in the history of European thought, has borne various meanings in connec­
tion with taste and aesthetic judgment. I would tentatively distinguish at least 
three senses of the term. 
l .  "Objective" can refer to an independence from any subject, or, strictly 
speaking, from the process of cognition. In this sense the physicist says that a 
positron or neutron is objective. Of course, nothing is knowable without a knowing 
subject; yet this sense of objectivity involves not epistemological but ontological 
questions. 
2. "Objective" can refer to a dependence of the subject on the object that condi­
tions knowledge, as is the case, for example, with sense-data. Redness and heavi­
ness present something that has firm ontological foundation, though this "some­
thing" does not exist without the human subject. We may, thus, call redness and 
heaviness "dispositional properties" of reality, understanding that these potential 
qualities are specifically actualized only in relation to the species homo. (Whether 
these qualities are responded to in a similar or perhaps identical way by other 
species of creatures does not interest us here, for the question brings up no novel 
arguments or counterarguments.) It is clear that the term "objectivity" in this sense 
has an epistemological character. 

1 61 
Valuation and Eval uation 
from Plato to Kant 
3. "Objective" can refer to a sharing by many people -be they a single popu­
lation group in a particular epoch or the whole of mankind. The second meaning 
of "objectivit( implied some universality in the attitudes of subjects. In the third 
meaning this aspect of universality prevails, embracing not only cognitive data 
(sensation, perception, concept) but ultimately also the emotional and conational 
aspects of human attitudes. 
I shall try to point out that the question of the objectivity of aesthetic judg­
ments can be solved by taking into account the second and third meanings of the 
term. There are three questions that must be answered if we are to frame the 
problem properly: What is the structure of aesthetic judgment? What are its 
varieties? What construction should be Pl:'t on the notion of objectivity with 
regard to these varieties and perhaps with reference to the structure of aesthetic 
judgments? Before we tackle these questions, however, there is still a preliminary 
problem to be solved, namely, the relationship between taste and aesthetic judg­
ment. 
The Dispositional Taste Response and Aesthetic Judgment 
In distinction from the definition suggested by eighteenth-century aestheticians 
and adopted by Kant, by "taste" I shall here mean a certain disposition and the 
actual experiences connected with it, which are not identical with aesthetic judg­
menf. This disposition belongs to the sensibilities and the imagination, which 
produce a specific and immediate response to some objects or qualities in a context 
which might be termed "aesthetic." The actual experiences connected with this 
disposition depend on the individual, on the given situation, and on the objective 
referent. At any rate the experience which I call the response of taste is not of an 
intellectual character. Different persons are endowed with different degrees and 
also with different kinds of aesthetic sensitivity; some may be sensitive only to 
literature, or painting, or music while others may be sensitive to several kinds of 
art and natural beauty. 
I believe that aesthetic sensitivity, while rooted in our natural constitution, is 
to an equal degree a cultural phenomenon. It has developed in the course of centu­
ries and is universal ·in the sense that a person lacking any taste whatever seems 
to be exceptional or even abnormal. Any such hypothesis about the genesis and 
character of taste is, of course, as difficult to verify as speculation about the origin 
of monkind. We can agree, though, that taste is both a social and natural phenom­
enon like all other patterns of human cultural behavior. The opposed extremes 

1 62 
The Objectivity 
of Aesthetic Judgment 
(postulates of the existence of taste as an aesthetic instinct or .of the complete 
absence of a natural basis for taste) should be dismissed because they both lead 
to overstatement and are both famished for lack of evidence. No anatomical re­
search has yet come up with an "aesthetic gland" or any other physiological basis 
for an immaculate, spontaneous immediacy of aesthetic experience. If a person can 
distinguish one picture or composition from another, this must ultimately be as­
cribed to his education and good memory. If he discriminates between "worse" 
and "better" works of art, this must also be attributed to assimilated standards 
of aesthetic value, recollected observation, and effective intelligence. Even the 
ability to distinguish fakes from originals must be the outcome of cultural indoc­
trination. 
However, there is no genuine sensitivity which can be acquired only and mainly 
by training, habits, and routine. Some individuals seem especially gifted in dis­
cerning slight yet distinctive variations, whether as beholder, reader, or listener. 
There is nothing mysterious in this fact. We do not puzzle ourselves if A has weaker 
eyesight than 8, or if B is physically stronger than A We admire the gifted wine­
taster, or the person whose olfactory capacities surpass the average human poten­
tiality. Aesthetic taste, accordingly, should be considered primarily dependent on 
the natural power to grasp visual and auditory nuances and variations (just to 
keep to the two so-called higher senses traditionally singled out in relation to the 
realm of art) of any object submitted to scrutiny. This also applies to the capacity 
(conditioned by the ·individual's constitutional makeup) to articulate the peculiar­
ities of a design and find out, more quickly and precisely than could other individ­
uals, what changes or shifts have occurred in the artistic structure (aesthetic object) 
he is examining. 
This does not, let me once more emphasize, allow us to postulate an aesthetic 
sensitivity functioning in an isolated and pristine way. Knowledge influences sensi­
tivity as much as sensitivity influences knowledge. Imagination and emotions 
caught up in the experience of taste- let the former be constitutionally as robust 
and lively as may be conceived -will not remain impervious to the lessons of the 
environment, space, and time. As Marx argued persuasively more than a hundred 
years ago, the human senses are molded by social praxis and correspond to given 
historical circumstances at every stage of human evolution. With this idea always 
in mind, we have to acknowledge the fundamentally natural prerequisites of 
taste. That is why taste, as it is here conceived, cannot be well-founded though it 
can possibly be learned if the propensity is lacking; refined taste, about which so 

1 63 
The Dispositional 
Taste Response and 
Aesthetic Judgment 
much has been written since the eighteenth century, is simply taste manifested 
and cultivated in favorable circumstances. Personal taste can and generally does 
succumb to outside influences to the point where no individual differences are in 
the end discernible; that is, people with different dispositions (as to their kind 
or degree) respond to the same objects or qualities as aesthetic stimuli. If individual 
sensitivity is therefore elusive, it is much easier to discern the general "taste" of 
an age or a community. Above oil, the phenomenon of supraindividual taste reveals 
a feedback mechanism, since individual dispositions are influenced not only by 
the taste responses of neighbors but also and most often decisively by prevailing 
aesthetic judgments. 
By aesthetic judgment as distinct from taste I do not mean a psychical act of an 
intellectual character that is ultimately a purely psychological statement. Rather, 
I mean a proposition which stems from a basic process of this character but which 
ultimately formulates an appraisal founded on certain more or less objective 
reasons. The logical structure of this kind of proposition may be an object for 
investigation in itself, but that would take us beyond our present concerns. Suffice 
it to say that in the experience of appraising, judging, and estimating -and in 
contradistinction to a taste response- rationality and a cognitive emphasis are 
manifestly conspicuous. Aesthetic judgment may, but need not, be the continuation 
and the climax of the experience based on taste. In fact, aesthetic judgment need 
not follow from any genuine experience but may be "borrowed" (i.e., constitute 
a mere copy of an opinion formulated by somebody else). It should also be stressed 
that taste need not always result in a verbal expression of the experience (as 
opposed to mere gestures or facial expressions signifying approval or rejection). 
Aesthetic judgment can thus be more or less remote from the experience based 
on taste. It seems to be closer if it is rendered in the form "X is likable," which 
is parallel to a psychological statement such as "I like this," since both of these 
utterances are an expression of a still vivid or only just receded experience. Of 
course, such statements may also be borrowed and should thus never be accepted 
at their face value. Aesthetic judgment proper is more remote from the taste ex­
perience, since it invokes some objective reasons to justify why "I like this" or, 
to .restate it, why "X is likable." In this instance thought processes are intensified 
and the initial existential propositions to the effect that such are my feelings or that 
such are my sentiments towards the given object yield to implicational utterances 
or even to comparative formulas describing my experiences as compared with the 
feelings of others or describing the qualities or objects actually experienced as 

1 64 
The Objectivity 
of Aesthetic Judgment 
compared with those experienced on other occasions. In each of these latter cases, 
aesthetic judgment is an appraisal, that is, a statement ascribing for certain 
reasons some values to the experience, to its objective counterpart, to the adequate 
relation between them, or to some context in which such a relation might appear. 
According to this conception, a distinction must be made between an appraisal 
which refers directly and solely to the qualities and objects considered as aesthetic­
ally valuable, and a comparative evaluation confronting such immediately experi­
enced values with some others and rating them. The former is an appraisal in a 
broader, fundamental sense, because it constitutes an element of every aesthetic 
judgment. Thus, I have arrived in my considerations of taste and its interrelations 
with judgment at a preliminary though barely outlined discernment of the basic 
varieties of aesthetic judgments. I shall now turn to the problem of the objectivity 
of taste and aesthetic judgment in general. 
I have defined taste as a specific individual experience which depends on partic­
ular dispositions in particular circumstances. The difficulty that now appears is 
how to transcend the private, intimate, and unique response which precludes 
agreement if not, indeed, communication. Both Kant and the aestheticians preced­
ing him attempted to overcome this deadlock by referring to the universality of the 
aesthetic experience. Could it be proved that taste is either some aesthetic instinct 
or a function of some definite construction of our cognitive faculties, a solution 
would be at hand. I have, however, questioned both these notions. Thus only two 
alternatives remain: either we give up taste as the determinant of the ultimate 
objectivity of aesthetic judgments, or else we consider some other suggestions. 
We must examine the latter possibility before we can be satisfied with a negative 
conclusion, for there is another naturalistic hypothesis available which is different 
from the instinct hypothesis. This is the gestalt conception, which refers the es­
sential identity of taste, despite the possible emergence of some accidental differ­
ences, to the identity of the objective qualities presented by a particular branch of 
art or by nature. (In this context, I assume that the taste experience should be con-. 
sidered as the cornerstone of aesthetic experience of any form, no matter how rich 
and complex its elements. This strategy of approach is not without peril, since much 
aesthetic experience, especially in relation to present-day avant-garde art, is highly 
intellectualized. Nonetheless, for the present discussion my tentative formulation 
will be adequate.) 
Such an assumption, supported by social and historical arguments in favor of 
common constant foundations for the cultural experience of mankind, would lead 

1 65 
The Dispositional 
Toste Response and 
Aesthetic Judgment 
us towards an emphasis on the peculiar structure of objective elements which 
may validly be designated aesthetic. Taste would then constitute the reflection 
of some such structure, instead of being the single creative force of aesthetic reality. 
It would be subject both to this structure and to those general laws of nature and 
society which tend to maintain the universal pattern and balance. It is easy, to be 
sure, to find objections to such an hypothesis. Some critics charge that gestaltism 
and similar conceptions beg the question, empirically, and that they offer a kind 
of "aesthetic phlogiston" in place of scientific explanation, since human history 
is continually changing, so that the relativity of individual taste is matched by 
the relativity of group tastes predominating at any given period. Accordingly, since 
we have no sufficient grounds marshaled here and now for resolving the respective 
claims of objectivists and relativists in favor of either, we have to keep this hypoth­
esis in reserve. 
There are, meanwhile, some other possible positive answers to our inquiry. For 
instance, it might be argued that taste is an intuitive faculty zeroing in on what 
German idealistic aesthetics calls dos Kunstsein -the essence of artistic phenom­
ena. This view seems, however, both arbitrary and contingent on an act of philo­
sophical faith. It might also be argued that objectivity is restricted to a single com­
munity or era, on the assumption that while human nature rules out the possibility 
of common tastes, history does not, if only within strictly demarcated periods and 
groups. In other words, what is here treated as objective is an individual taste 
which has been constrained and regimented for immersion in the taste of the group. 
This is, however, not an hypothesis but a simple statement of sociological fact. 
Beyond this, it is not clear why the view developed from such a statement -that 
successive but different and perhaps even opposed or contradictory aesthetic 
judgments rooted in group tastes are all equally objective - should be termed 
objectivist. This is a thinly disguised version of relativism, for all these judg-
ments either refer to the same objects or offer varying conceptions of what 
"beauty" truly is. In studying these and other claims to comprise my second 
alternative-and for a systematic inquiry, see the typology presented in chapter l 
- I  have effectively arrived at a negative response to my basic inquiry: in short, 
there is no recourse left except the reserve hypothesis, according to which taste 
is to be regarded as a consequence of natural and social laws. 
In each of these versions taste means a certain kind of choice, for the term refers 
to a person's dispositions or habits towards some thing which constitutes a proper 
object of liking. However, an orientation towards an object does not in every in-

1 66 
The Objectivity 
of Aesthetic Judgment 
stance constitute the essential content of an aesthetic experience, for one may 
merely like the object (i.e., without an aesthetic transaction occurring). Taste means 
-according to the hypothᣀsis I have held in reserve -a choice directed towards 
and set upon certain definite values, as well as a reliance on them. 
I now turn to the first of my two alternatives, to see whether and in what sense 
objectivity may be imputed to the aesthetic judgment itself. Because judgment 
is the result of an intellectual process culminating in a verbal proposition that is 
available to logical analysis, it should be much more objective than mere taste 
could ever be. On further thought, however, this notion turns out to be deceptive. 
The simplest aesthetic judgment of the kind "X is likable," may, as was pointed out 
earlier, be no more than the counterpart of "I like X" -an appraisal referring to 
one's private sentiment. The proposition "I like this," considered as purely descrip­
tive of an immediate or just receded pleasure, provides no aesthetic judgment at 
all, for it lacks any justification or criteria for taste. Even so, those who utter such 
statements generally lay stress, whether they mean to or not, on aesthetic satis­
faction, thus attributing a peculiar merit to their experience and delimiting aesthetic 
value as a peculiar pleasure. 
On what this peculiarity may be founded is hard to conjecture, since the aesthetic 
hedonists and emotionalists offer notoriously vague and evasive replies. I suspect 
that even today they pEirpetuate the French seventeenth century je ne sais quoi, 
which at its origin was a promising and stimulating mistake, but in the nineteenth 
and twentieth centuries only obscures the chief issues for investigation. Incidentally, 
I am very far from denying some peculiarity of aesthetic sensations and emotions. 
I would gladly defend the tentative term "peculiar satisfaction" if the experience 
being discussed were also closely related to the specific, semiautonomous, coherent 
structures of sensuously given, intense data (and probably to other data im­
parted by such patterns). By "closely related," I mean anchored in and evoked 
by such objectively entrenched sets of qualities. This, however, is precisely what 
the hedonists and emotionalists contest and challenge. In any case, if we acquiesce 
in the dubious conception of "aesthetic pleasure," we would have to agree that 
aesthetic judgment is an entirely subjective matter. If, however, the statement "X 
is likable" is not reducible to the expression of sheer private liking, the question 
follows: Why is it that the object or its properties (or both) engender this peculiar 
joy that we call aesthetic? Why is X worthy of special attention? We are faced then 
with the same question which we encountered in considering taste: On what 
grounds must aesthetic judgment be founded for its objectivity to be guaranteed? 

1 67 
The Dispositional 
Toste Response and 
Aesthetic Judgment 
The simple answer-that taste supplies this basis - returns us to the reserve 
hypothesis. Accordingly, the only recourse for constituting and corroborating 
aesthetic judgment is to propose and employ some definite criteria of value as the 
basis for appraisal and evaluation. Again, as in the case of taste, there appear 
the same mutually exclusive and scanty possible solutions between which a choice 
must be made. I have rejected as self-contradictory the notion that aesthetic judg­
ment is only a statement of feelings, for then judgment could only be deemed ob­
jective if it were additionally assumed that in off mankind given qualities and ob­
jects evoke similar aesthetic responses, or that off human beings react aesthetically 
in identical ways and, by their responses, create the aesthetic objects. This would 
return us to the hypothesis of universal taste as an instinct or as a separate cogni­
tive faculty. Moreover, we would have to support such an assumption by the od­
ditonal assumption that a given experience will gain adequate and identical expres­
sion in judgments formulated at different times by different individuals with 
different cultural backgrounds . 
It might also be maintained that aesthetic judgment is objective if either actual 
or potential consent exists among many persons within a strictly delimited cultural 
context; but this kind of objectivity is equally dubious. If at some time t it is urged 
that some work x is unaesthetic and at another time t' it is deemed a masterpiece, 
or if a taste T belonging to some group g champions an aesthetic ideal sharply 
opposed to an ideal asserted by a group g ' which lives in the same time and has a 
taste not differing from T, then these pairs of judgments and ideals can hardly be 
considered objective. The only objective fact here is that in each judgment some­
thing is valued by someone as aesthetically relevant. Instrumentality of judgment 
is, however, by no means identical with its validity or soundness. What has occur­
red here is a simple substitution of "We like this" for "I like this" and once again 
there are no firm grounds of objectivity. 
The root question con now be put thus: Do we refer our judgments to a set of 
consistent individual experiences, or is there something beyond these experiences 
that determines the judgment in a manner independent of circumstances? In short, 
the objectivity of judgment depends on the objectivity of values, and aesthetic 
judgment depends for its status not only on its subject (which is obvious) but also 
on its object. Thus, the distinctions between taste and judgment are of a psycho­
logical and epistemological character, while from the standpoint of axiology their 
difference disappears. In both aspects there arises at the outset the problem of 
seeking the proper, most valid criteria or standards for an appraisal. In discern-

1 68 
The Objectivity 
of Aesthetic Judgment 
ing the objectivity of taste and judgment, some reference has to be made to the 
objective qualities which stand in some definite relation with the subject who 
responds to them. M. C. Beardsley2 pointed this out when, in his discussion of the 
variations of taste and judgment, he touched on the variations of reasons. He re­
mained undecided at this point, however, although he leaned toward an improved 
instrumentalist solution. 
Going a step further than Beardsley's illuminating analysis of pros and cons, 
I would suggest that it could be concluded that a necessary condition for being able 
to say anything at all about the objectivity of aesthetic judgments is the existence 
of certain natural, social, and cultural regularities which combine to fix some bio­
logically and culturally stable ways of selecting aesthetic objects as peculiarly 
coherent structures and of producing objects called works of art. It is evident 
now that the anthropological hypothesis developed in my discussion of taste and 
since held in reserve emerges as the only remaining possibility if we are empirically 
oriented in our research. A competing hypothesis, which makes a strong claim for 
the objectivity of aesthetic judgment, alleges that an appraisal, or Wertantwort 
as the Germans designate it, intuitively responds to aesthetically valuable quali­
ties or to certain values, which are given once and for all and await discovery. 
This proposition should, however, be rejected as absolutist; its reference either 
to eidetic intuition (Wesensschau) or ultimately to experience solely by means 
of introspection, renders it unverifiable, as it hardly allows for any intersubjective 
consent. 
The Kinds and the Degrees of Objectivity 
Although my discussion has shown, I hope, that when all else has failed we may 
found the objectivity of judgment on objectively comprehended values, yet none 
of the questions raised earlier has been adequately answered or dismissed. 
Aesthetic judgments are made with reference to various patterns of value and 
enter into various relations with them, so it becomes necessary to distinguish 
their different kinds as well as their different degrees of objectivity. 
The first problem that must here be raised concerns the logical status and struc­
ture of aesthetic judgment. The argument has been made-at least from Leon 
Petrazycki through to Ayer, Wittgenstein, and their many disciples, chiefly at Ox­
ford and in the United States-that appraisals are not genuine statements. A 
genuine statement is either true or false: its truth-value may be tested by reference 
to the reality described by it. Appraisals have, according to this standpoint, a 

1 69 
The Kinds and Degrees 
of Objectivity 
different structure; they do not assert, but only persuade and exhort. They merely 
express a sentiment which the speaker wishes to import to others. This kind of 
message cannot possibly be referred to any empirical data, its only authority being 
its own proposal which it seeks to make persuasive. What is the structure of on 
appraisal? It is on assertion that "X is aesthetically valuable." (The phrase 
"aesthetically valuable" may be replaced by various other descriptions depending 
on the speaker's opinions on art and beauty.) It is another kind of appraisal which 
announces that "X is a masterpiece" or that "X is rubbish." Such a proposition 
as to the work of art's merit or excellence is coiled by this school on evaluative 
one and is considered to hove even less persuasive force than does a simple inter­
pretation of values. The lotter is always to a high degree arbitrary so that on evalu­
ation which is based on it must necessarily be even more so. 
This extreme position hos, however, been eroded even within the neopositivist 
tradition itself. Factual statements and appraisals ore no longer held to be different 
in kind, but only in degree according to the various proportions of cognitive and 
emotive-conotive elements involved in them. A proposition of a given shape (e.g., 
"this is a good table") may in one context be understood as a purely factual state­
ment and in another as a pure appraisal. Yet there is still support for the theory 
perhaps most cogently argued by Charles Stevenson,3 that appraisals ore pre­
dominantly of a persuasive nature, exhortations to prefer particular objects and 
qualities which hove been chosen and recognized as valuable. Mario Ossowsko4 
has stressed that this quasi-imperative character of appraisals reveals their weak­
ness as factual or descriptive statements. She believes that, though they con be 
substantiated on the ground of certain accepted assumptions, they cannot be 
verified since no one hos yet precisely and reliably shown any stimuli that ore 
creative of value. 
Is this line of argument convincing? Its most remarkable feature is what Os­
sowsko hos coiled "accepted assumptions." It talks about the logical structure 
of appraisal only ofter having predetermined what the values ore. This proves 
that, whatever the logical structure of appraisals is, the main issue lies else­
where. The works of the Anglo-American and Polish schools of semantics set forth 
the proposition that the philosophical or, more precisely, axiological viewpoints 
explain whether objectivity can or cannot be attributed to some types of proposi­
tion, while logical and formal considerations ore of but secondary aid on this 
issue. In this respect, the Oxford philosophers' abandonment of neopositivist 
extremism seems symptomatic. 

1 70 
The Objectivity 
of Aesthetic Judgment 
The structure of an appraisal obviously differs from that of a purely descriptive 
statement. If we did not admit this, we would have to acknowledge all elements 
as valuable and all attitudes towards them as evaluative. If I say, "This is round 
and red," and then add, "It is expressive, dynamic, and interestingly constructed," 
it requires no analysis whatsoever to see that these two propositions are entirely 
different, as the latter one expresses overtly an emotional involvement, a kind of 
"committed-to" attitudᣁ. This does not mean that appraisals lack any empirical 
justification and that they are totally unverifiable. Characteristically, this approach 
is questioned by English aestheticians from Oxford and some Americans of kindred 
views5 on the grounds either of the uniqueness of artistic values or of the im­
possibility of defining the objective identity of a work of art. Both these objections 
must be considered as extralogical in character and both have been rebutted in 
the course of later discussion. The objective identity of a work of art can be deter­
mined in both its physical and its historical aspects, 6 while the uniqueness of 
values requires only a proper judgment but does not ban universals. 
However, the most important point is that, instead of reducing aesthetic 
qualities to unaesthetic ones such as color, shape, or texture (though this is ad­
missible in the extreme cases such as musique concrete, /'art brut, or happenings), 
we must consider the aesthetic qualities themselves as susceptible to description 
and not only to persuasion. For instance, it is hardly reasonable to try to deduce 
the aesthetic value of a poem merely from the kind of words used and their 
arrangement (if we exclude such extreme examples as dado verse or the Khleb­
nikov and Kruchonykh zoumnyi yozik), but we can describe and analyze its meta­
phors and key words to justify our evaluative "persuasion." Furthermore, what is 
aesthetically valuable is usually a suitably ordered ensem.ble or set of elements 
and not a single quality. Such a set or gestalt is doubly dependent, first on the 
neutral properties and secondly on the beholding subject; the gestalt is subject to 
description and there is no doubt as to its axiological character. The many 
analyses presented over the last decades by such scholars as lngarden, Pepper, 
and Arnheim (deliberately selecting philosophers of diffeÎing schools) have 
abundantly proved the strength of this position. 
Since it is not the formal-logical structure of appraisal, but, rather, the interpreta-. 
tion of value that is basic in determining whether any judgment is or is not ob­
jective, it seems obvious that the various kinds of aesthetic judgment are dependent 
on what values we apprehend and how. I am adopting here a distinction between 

1 71 
The Kinds and Degrees 
of Objectivity 
the criteria of appraising {or valuating) and of evaluating, which I have set out 
and defended in chapters l and 3. 
Criteria of the first type serve to determine kinds of artistic value; those of the 
second type serve to compare and rate works of art. The primary aesthetic judg­
ment concerns those values that have been established as artistic. Let me remind 
the reader that, of all the possible solutions to this problem, I have found the 
historically oriented one to be the most adequate. It is to some degree consistent 
with those tendencies in Anglo-American aesthetics (as represented by Morris 
Weitz, Joseph Margolis, Frank Sibley) that deal with art as an open concept. Ac­
cording to this view, the catalog of qualities which may acquire artistic value is 
never complete, and the future creations of artists are unpredictable. However, 
unlike Weitz and others, I believe that the concept of art is definable on the basis 
of the past history of artistic endeavor and of the aesthetic awareness of human­
ity. 
Not only human nature, but also and predominantly human culture, accumulates 
and perpetuates solutions corresponding to certain formal structures (gestalten) 
and to other artistic values involved in these structures such as expression, repre­
sentation, etc. A primary aesthetic judgment is objective insofar as it relates to a 
legitimate artistic value. The proposition "X is aesthetically valuable" is an el­
liptical form of the judgment "X is valuable for such and such reasons," with 
appropriate criteria of value performing the role of ultimate reasons. Yet the 
reason revealed through the proper criterion is, in fact, a fundamental axiological 
category affirming the given character of aesthetic value. Artistic value or, more 
broadly, aesthetic value requires a specific and detailed justification, usually 
composed of a cluster of second-order reasons which particularize the applied 
criterion. An appraisal or valuation involved in such a judgment may, however, 
ignore value, and in such a case the judgment is deficient and impure. A judg­
ment that fails to point to a value is either quasi-aesthetic or not aesthetic 
but psychological, moral, political, etc. 
The syntactical and logical structure of the primary judgment now being dis­
cussed is by no means unambiguous. It may express various intentions; that is, 
its points of reference are not always the same. Propositions of identical shape 
must be considered for their meaning and not for their structure, that is, from the 
semiotic and not the syntactical point of view. The primary judgment is a particular 
proposition if it refers to some individual value as actually given and embodied 

1 72 
The Objectivity 
of Aesthetic Judgment 
in some artistic (or, more generally, aesthetic) object. Some aestheticians, especially 
those of the phenomenological school, consider this the only aesthetic judgment 
proper, as no other kind penetrates the genuine and unique essence of on individ­
ual object. However, this object is only a specimen of the class of objects, called 
works of art, which fulfill the some axiological requirements. Hence, the primary 
judgment may refer to values in an exemplary manner; that is, it may point out 
something common to a whole group of works of art and not something peculiar 
to one of them. The Italian phenomenologist Guido Morpurgo-Togliobue hos 
called such a judgment on "essential" one (giudizio essentia/e). I prefer just to coll 
it general to avoid the notion that a particular judgment misses the "essence" of 
its object. 
Another ambiguity in primary judgment is revealed when the proposition "X 
is beautiful" con be understood as saying either that a certain object is valuable 
or that aesthetic value belongs to on object. The first meaning seems to be enter­
tained by those who consider values as transcendental, as the modes of being of 
objects; the lotter, by those for whom val ues ore accidents. These positions seem 
to be reconcilable if one associates aesthetic value, as I do, with the specific 
structure of the qualities of the total object that ore given both in a sensory and in 
on extrasensory way. 
To conclude this discussion of the primary aesthetic judgment, let me remark 
that certain particular properties, or aspects, or patterns of the artistic value 
which constitutes its basis hove often in history been treated as canonic, that is, as 
unchangeable and irrevocable. In these coses aesthetic judgment becomes norma­
tive and regulative. (Morpurgo-Togliobue aptly calls it giudizio rettorico.) It 
is then deficient because it relies on criteria which unworrontedly establish some 
transient or partial specifics of the artistic value as absolute. 
I have distinguished between primary and secondary judgment, the lotter being 
evaluation proper. Evaluation treats of a series of works of art or aesthetic 
objects and ranges them according to the degree of their fulfillment of certain 
criteria. These criteria ore based on a set of artistic values that hove been estab­
lished as fundamental. In different patterns these values emerge with differing 
intensity and prominence. Aesthetic evaluation is thus objective insofar as it relates 
to those values, d iscovers and confronts them, and invokes the criteria of degree 
for its justification. Evaluation also commonly ᣂppears as on elliptic proposition: 
"X is better than Y," meaning "X is better than Y because of such and such 
reasons." In its balder form the proposition is a mere existential statement of 

1 73 
The Kinds and Degrees 
of Objectivity 
some hierarchy of values with reference to their degrees or to their kinds. The rating 
of artistic and aesthetic values surely requires a more detailed justification ­
although I should stress that the reasons acceptable in such operations have al­
ready been specified (i.e., the artistic constituents are already affirmed; in other 
words, the axiological particulars are at hand to exact their implied demands). Why 
then must our justifications be elaborated? Above all, because the artistic values 
presented to our estimates exist on multiple levels and in multiple dimensions, 
which may prove to be independent or interdependent. Another necessary point is 
that the evaluative judgment calls for both a particular and a general appraisal, 
since, without grasping what is common to the objects evaluated, it is impossible 
to weigh up their comparativevalues, while, without perceiving what is unique 
and peculiar to each, it is impossiblᣃ to reveal the appeal and strengths of the 
object which stands out of its class. 
Evaluation thus appears as a complicated cognitive process in which appraisals 
may overlap. It is even more vulnerable to deforming influences than is the 
primary judgment. Even taste depends on a choice according to some definite 
preferences and its operation is influenced by aesthetic judgments. These, if they 
are primary, reflect a decision as to what is and is not artistic; they appraise 
their objects with reference to fundamental values. In the secondary judgment, 
the concomitant appraisal of value is often directed by irrelevant considerations 
and the aesthetic motivation is often obscured or even lost. In such instances an 
evaluative judgment no longer deserves to be termed aesthetic and, accordingly, 
cannot be accurate {or adequate} in the sense here suggested. Secondary aesthetic 
judgments may also prove defective if they compare objects which are incompar­
able as to their respective values. Here, too, their adequacy is obviously distorted 
or destroyed. It is not my intention, however, to enumerate all the possible dangers 
to which the evaluation proper is exposed. I only wish to show that objectivity 
of this type of comparative judgment also rests on values and their complicated 
and multilayered interrelationships and patterns, and that it is easier to attain an 
objective appraisal {valuation} than an objective evaluation. 
Recapitulation 
It is time for recapitulation. The problem of the objectivity of aesthetic judg ment 
raises difficulties first of all because of the ambiguity of the term "objectivity" 
(a difficulty which is not confined to aesthetic discussionsi My analysis has brought 
out, I trust, that there are at least two meanings of this term involved in axiological 

1 74 
The Objectivity 
of Aesthetic Judgment 
reasoning. In one case, objectivity means universality or, strictly speaking, uni­
versal agreement, while in the second case it means truth-value. According to the 
latter meaning, aesthetic judgments should be treated as logical statements, but 
a great number of aestheticians and logicians hold that they cannot meet this 
demand. Aesthetic judgments -as we are told by the representatives of the 
analytic-linguistic school - concern emotions and conations and, even if they refer 
to some objective qualities, there is no possibility of verifying them by means of 
measurement operations. Thus the only objectivity that is available to axiology de­
pends on a "universality" which may be confined to one social group or one culture 
or may be spread over many cultures or even the whole of humanity (with the same 
sort of gradation being applicable to the temporal spread). 
My point of view is, however, different. I have proposed a solution which goes 
against this sharp distinction between truth-values appropriate to logical state­
ments and no-truth-values appropriate to axiological judgments. Chiefly, we must 
remember that axiology has a field of study different from that of physics, biology, 
or even history. The sciences deal with neutral facts which have to be stated in­
dependently of the way they are perceived. Axiology deals with values, that is, 
with subject-object data. However, this granted, I still do not see any firm ground 
for maintaining that only if these data are measurable will they afford a criterion 
of truthful statement. I have tried to argue for another distinction, one between 
universality based only on shared tastes and opinions (which in my scheme does 
not go beyond relativism) and universality that has its foundation in the relational 
equivalence of subjective and objective conditions (traits) observed in the aesthetic 
process. This adequacy might be explained by the constitution of homo sapiens 
and the historical praxis of men who repeat their experiences and so, among other 
things, reaffirm the aesthetic invariants. In this case the criteria of objectivity -
u n iversa lity and truth-reference-coincide. 7 
I am aware that the problem of the objectivity of aesthetic judgment has been 
barely outlined here. I have failed adequately to defend my "reserve" anthropo­
logical hypothesis to which I have had to resort over and over again because of the 
major sig nificance of the criteria of value and of evaluation. It is in this sense 
that Maria Ossowska seems to be right when she says that the truth or falsehood 
of valuative and evaluative judgments is generally proved by reducing them to 
some accepted assumptions. I think, however, that she is wrong in her contention 
that they are unverifiable, since these assumptions may be more or less empirical. 
No doubt aesthetics, being a philosophical and not a strictly scientific discipline, 

1 75 
Recapitulation 
leaves more questions moot than the history of literature or the theory of social 
development. Throughout the humanities, verifiability is a more difficult problem 
than it is for physics or even astronomy. Nothing ultimate can really be said in 
philosophy, if one foregoes the dubious joys of Gedankendichtung -a thought 
process colored with poetic license. The domain of values probably presents the 
greatest barriers to verifiability. The chaotic, misleading, everyday usage of terms 
and ordinary practical setting produce an exceptional confusion for axiological 
discourse, for discerning implicit attitudes towards valuation and evaluation, and 
for axiological praxis. This is the experience of aesthetics no less than of the general 
theory of values. 
The critic, the artist, and the man in the street all aspire to bring home the 
aesthetic lodestone, while the aesthetician is treated suspiciously as, at best, a 
bumbling spinner of theories. Yet it becomes his task to take into account all the 
aesthetic idola fori and to discuss them thoroughly. It is he who has to confront 
patiently the old aesthetic categories with the emerging ones, and to seek the 
continuity in the discontinuity. If he is eager, as he should be, to check his own 
procedures again and again, to seek out the results of every competing school 
(even if they refute his own premises and conclusions), to avoid consciously the 
temptation to systematize the aesthetic sphere once and forever, and always to 
stick to the evidences of life and of the painstaking advances mode by the exact 
sciences and by psychology and sociology - in this case, the aesthetician' s philos­
ophy of value might grow more sure. The assumptions he accepts will then be 
defensible to a considerable extent, even though there can never be any assured­
ness of total accuracy. 
My aim in this chapter has been, in part, to point out that the most secure way 
out of the troubles inevitably associated with the issues of taste and aesthetic 
judgment is what I term the historicist solution. This approach does not neglect 
man's natural dispositions, but it emphasizes that nature was culturalized in man's 
social history. I believe that the hypothesis which I assume as basic can, therefore, 
be fairly well tested by biopsychological, social, and historical data so that the 
aesthetic judgments based on it can be indirectly verifiable, in proportion, as well. 8 
There are several problems which I have only skimmed. For instance, the ques­
tion of preference and of choice as constituent both of taste and of the primary 
and secondary judgments needs a separate analysis. This question has been in­
terestingly treated by C. I. Lewis and several American scholars still follow him. 9 
The problem of evaluative judgments has also not been developed, though they 

1 76 
The Objectivity 
of Aesthetic Judgment 
call for at least a twofold analysis. It should be asked, first, whether the funda­
mental primary judgment does not imply a latent evaluative judgment (i.e., rating 
the objects accepted as works of art according to their being more or less artistic 
within the limits of the given continuum); and, second, whether the cognitive opera­
tions involved in a detailed comparison of more than one work need to be studied. 
There remains also the problem of whether evaluation is based only on quantifi­
cation (i.e., a presumed "magnitude") of values which are u nderstood as primary 
values. In chapter 3 I tried to show that rating, that is grading or scaling, is 
founded also on other criteria (originality and novelty). All this, however, demands 
a thorough and painstaking investigation of aesthetic values and their patterns. 
It is owing to their complexity that two differing judgments concerning different 
aspects of the same object may be equally objective. Yet if this is a self-evident 
statement, there remain much tougher problems, such as the relations of "partic­
ular" values (Beardsley's term) to one another and to the whole: Do they prove 
aesthetically operative in every context? I side with lngarden in saying that we 
are still at the initial stage of exploration of this aspect. 
Finally, in respect to Kant's antinomy of taste (which we may take on into the 
problem of aesthetic judgment), problems of major importance appear- such as 
the private character of i ndividual taste, its social aspects, and also the unique­
ness of a particular aesthetic judgment and its applicability to classes of objects 
(or what we have called its exemplary side). Possibly, these are not insoluble anti n­
o mies but dialectical oppositions which do not necessarily lead to contradictions. 
(In such matters Morpurgo-Tagliabue speaks of the paradigmaticit6 of aesthetic 
judgment.) 
I have sought to emphasize in this chapter, first, that the problem posed in the 
title is demonstrably a nd intimately linked to the issue of value and is dependent 
on the orientation to that issue. The reason for this is that the i nitial appraisals, 
without which valuational j udgment would not come into existence, are begun and 
established in the very same process by which the values are constituted. Of course, 
this also happens when new values and new appraisals, mutually interrelated, 
emerge. Second, my aim was to show that the notion of aesthetic judgment turns 
out to be ambiguous. A close analysis was needed to detach it from taste and bring 
out its various types, accordingly modifying the way in which the deceptive term 
"objectivity" is usually understood. Whether I have suceeded in presenting a sound 
or tidy argument is another matter. 
One final question of interest is the relationship between the objectivity of 

1 77 
Recapitulation 
aesthetic judgment and that of ethical judgment. Opi nions on this issue, too, 
differ. Moria Ossowsko hos drawn up a suggestive comparative table of aesthetics 
and ethics on this point. 1 0 She concludes that there is a higher standard of 
competence in aesthetics, since it is here easier to detect the "value-creating stimuli" 
or objective qualities, since aesthetic objects appear in isolation from their environ­
ment. I must admit that I do not find this conclusion entirely convincing, flattering 
though it is to my specialty. In fact, aesthetics hos been struggling for years with 
the notion of an ideal observer and can still find no way out of the vicious circle 
in which either the ideal observer is determined by public taste and judgment, or 
else some values are first acknowledged as artistic and whoever expou nds them is 
recognized as a final authority. Aesthetics, thus, hos continual difficulties with 
its standards of value and judgment, and competing views still leave the field 
contested as it has been for centuries. 
However -if I may be allowed to venture i nto rather foreign territory-ethics 
does not by any means seem to me more exposed to subjectivity of judgments or 
to universal claims of competence. Moreover, it is from Mario Ossowska's work 
that I hove learned so much regarding moral values and judgments that I feel 
the justification of their objectivity to be by no means a hopeless task. Additionally, 
I believe that the some anthropological hypothesis (based on morxist historicism) 
is applicable to both ethical and aesthetic judgments. However, I incline to agree 
with Stuart Hampshire that while ethical judgments ore expected to be objective, 
no such demand is put on aesthetic ones. 1 1 Disagreement in the former is socially 
da ngerous, while aesthetic quarrels ore thought harmless. If we odd the reservation 
that there hove been historical periods in which dissent in matters of aesthetics 
was not tolerated, Hampshire's view may be accepted insofar as it is prag matically 
sound. 
There is, indeed. no social pressure to undertake a defense of objectivity such as 
I hove here presented. Yet it does not follow from this that such attempts ore otiose. 
It is possible that people conform in their ethical judgments to avoid social dys­
function even though these judgments, as Ossowska hos pointed out, always de­
pend on different and conflicting philosophies. Conversely, it may be to maintain 
mental balance and ovoid boredom that they differentiate their aesthetic values 
and judgments even though these are more uniform than we tend to suppose. 1 2 

1 78 
Notes 
1 .  1 leove aside here Kant's distinction be­
tween the judgment of beauty ond the judg­
ment of the sublime, which involves a de­
light of the imagination and the practical 
reason. To demonstrate the antinomy in 
Kant's idea of taste it is enough to ana-
lyze his judgment of beauty. 
2. M. C. Beardsley, Aesthetics: Problems 
in the Philosophy of Criticism (New York, 
1 958), ch. l 0. 
3. See C. L. Stevenson, Ethics and Language 
(New Haven, 1 944). 
4. See M. Ossowsko, Podstawy nauki o 
morolnosci [The foundations of ethics) 
fYVorsow, 1 955-1 963). 
5. See W. Elton, ed., Aesthetics and Lan­
guage {Oxford, 1 954). 
6 .  Cf. the work of C. I. Lewis, Romon Ingar­
den, and Georg Lukacs. 
7. (Note added in 1 971 ) This essay was 
written six•years ago in polemics with the 
neopositivists; it nonetheless acceded to their 
assumptions with regard to the logical status 
of aesthetic judgment being in port "crip­
pled" due to its assertive-normative charac­
ter. Were I attacking the problem today, 
I would develop my own analysis in a more 
consistent manner, by arguing that the logi­
cal status of aesthetic judgments os com­
pared with that of so-called atomic state­
ments is not weaker but merely different. 
We con easily conceive ond argue for the 
notion that any proper aesthetic judgment 
is o kind of proposition if we interpret its 
logical status by means of the explonotion­
procedure. In other words, what must be 
done is to introduce into the explonons 
some additional assumptions, specifically 
the cultural code (its scope rangi ng from 
limited population ond time parameters, 
to geographically ond temporally trans-
The Objectivity 
of Aesthetic Judgment 
cultural parameters) which consists of 
the given system of beliefs, opinions, para­
digms, and norms, not ignoring the rules of 
longuoge adequate to the expressed ideas, 
emotions, etc. Such additional assumptions 
allow us to define o universe of elements 
pertinent to a proper aesthetic judgment. 
In this form ulation, the basic elements of 
the "universe" can be extended to what I 
term aesthetic invariants. In this woy we 
con state that the kind of objectivity peculiar 
to aesthetic judgments implies their truth 
or falsehood ond that this truth-value, in 
turn, i mplies a specific logical status in 
what they soy. In stating this, I draw on the 
most recent morxist-structurolist inquiries 
of the Polish scholars ot work in the Poznan 
circle. 
8. This "reserve hypothesis" -which I 
hove found no a lternative but to advance os 
my operative hypothesis -obviously needs 
close analysis in numerous details. I wont 
to sketch here some fundamental operations 
which could prove the validity of the hypoth­
esis. First, there should be full-scale study 
of man's transition from o creature nearly 
indistinguishable from other onimols to a 
social being (in terms of labor, or production 
ond its implements, os well as of longuoge 
in relation to emergent intellect). We might 
find some features of the human biophysio­
logical makeup which remain continuous 
through the process of exteriorizations, 
that is, which ore affirmed again and again 
during man's groduol mastery of the ex­
ternal world through techne. Skill as an 
aspect of art is on apparent constant. A 
second constant would seem to be the 
aesthetic structure (understood relationally, 
that is, with both the subject and the object 
as "adequate" data), which was caught up 
in the production processes and magical 

1 79 
rituals, and gained on initial degree of 
autonomy only later, probably in the late 
neolithic period. A third apparent constant 
is the relatively autonomous status of the 
aesthetic structure . Such structures undergo 
many changes and modifications in the 
course of history but the core traits seem to 
recur. Accordingly, I believe some cultural 
universals of mankind might be affirmed 
and I om not persuaded by the anthropologi­
cal skepticism of, soy, M. J. Herskovits (see 
Man and His Works [ New York, 1 948]). 
9. C. I. Lewis, An Analysis of Knowledge 
and Valuation (Lo Solle, Ill., 1 946), chs. 1 4  
and 1 5. 
1 0. Ossowsko, Podsawy nauki o moral­
nosci. 
1 1 . See Hampshire 's essay in Elton, Aesthet­
ics and Language. 
1 2  In addition to the works quoted in the 
text, my reading for this paper included the 
following: K. Gilbert and H. Kuhn, A History 
of Esthetics (Westport, Conn., 1 954); R. 
Boyer, Histoire de /'esthetique (Paris, 1 961 ); 
W. Totorkiewicz, Historic estetyki, vols. 
1 , 2, (Wroclaw, 1 960); F. SchO mmer, Die 
Entwicklung des Geschmackbegriffe in der 
Philosophie des 1 7. und 1 8. Jahrhunderts, 
Archiv for Begriffsgeschichte, vol. 1 (1 951 ); 
R lngorden, 0 poznawaniu dziela liter­
ackiego (Lvov-Cracow, 1 937), chs. 4 and 5, 
and his papers for the aesthetics congresses 
at Venice (1 956), Athens (1 960), and Am­
sterdam (1 964); G. Morpurgo-Togliobue, 
"Gusto e giudizio, " Rivista di Estetica (Sep­
tember-December 1 962) and "Fenomeno­
logia del g iudizio critico," ibid. (Januory­
April 1 963); S. C. Pepper, The Work of Art 
(Bloomington, Ind., 1 955); R Arnheim, Art 
and Visual Perception (Berkeley, 1 954); 
G. Lukacs, Die Eigenart des Aesthetischen 
(Neuwied, 1 963); S. Ossowski, "O su b-
Notes 
jektywizmie w estetyce, " in Festschrift for 
T. Kotarbinski (1 934), and U padstaw este­
tyki, 3rd ed. (Warsaw, 1 958); also essays 
on aesthetic concepts and questions of value 
or evaluation published in various journals 
by M. C. Beardsley, M. Weitz, J. Margolis , 
and F. Sibley from the late 1 950s until 1 965 
(when this paper was originally shaped). 


Part I I  
Artistic-Cognitive 
Val ues 


Chapter 5 
Expression 
Expression is widely reputed to be an aspect of the work of art which is as mys­
terious and elusive as it is attractive and compelling. Indeed, many scholars have 
given up or put off the attempt to encompass this problem with discursive analysis. 
Whether intimidation, deferential admiration, or plain healthy skepticism is the 
cause of hesitance, I think we certainly may share the emotion but need not let 
it make us give up the task. My approach is to proceed by c;larifying the most sig­
nificant ways in which the phenomenon is found and the term is used. 
This analysis will show, I think, that the need to come to grips with expression 
is even greater than believed; indeed, some usages treated here seldom get atten­
tion, let alone sufficient acceptance. There is no doubt that the warnings against 
abuse of this term hove been widespread. Philosophers, psychologists, and artists, 
whose purpose is to comprehend the aesthetic practice of the post and present, 
ore aware that the chief cause for the obscurity of certo(n ideas of expression has 
been the question's complicated status. Surely this acknowledged complexity is the 
ultimate reason for the general rejection of any single, unequivocal definition. 
Unfortunately, many scholars of today's ascendent linguistic-analytical school 
are so intent on avoiding error that for clarity's sake they insist on a disentangling 
logical analysis, with the matter at issue relegated to a secondary status. In the 
lost twenty years, several d istinct attempts have been made to give expression a 
single, unified definition that would be simple yet so lucid as to render the present 
diversitY of definitions superfluous; all these endeavors have been unsuccessful. 
Why? I dare soy because all shored the failing of reductionism. 
My approach will be different: First, I shall try to disentangle the meanings of 
the concept, and, following that, I shall inquire into precisely what the aesthetics 
of the post and the present hos found most significant in the data of expression. 
That is my major pion, but there is also a secondary aim, which emerges from 
an awareness of one of the pitfalls especially prevalent in my approach to aes­
thetics. In the marxist tradition the terms "expression" and "mimesis" have fre­
quently been treated as though they were interchangeable and indistinguishable. 
In the nᣄxt chapter I will show that there does exist a complicated yet close re­
lationship between mimesis and expression. The phenomena may in a sense coin­
cide, they may overlap, or they may simply complement one another-depending 
on the variety of expressiveness that is used and on the context in which the phe­
nomena occur. 
The most fundamental coherence of the categories of expression and mimesis 

1 84 
Expression 
will be found to occur with regard to the sixth meaning of "expression," as the 
term is analyzed in this chapter. 
Characteristics Shared by Al l Definitions of Expression 
Common to all of the different varieties and meanings of expression is the fact 
that although the sets of qualities, as manifest traits, occur in the art objeds, their 
effect is virtually psychic and as such they find their referents in the human sub­
ject. 1 
The expressive qualities-with their specific feeling-tones, their own "physiog­
nomy" - have usually been described by the term "tertiary" to distinguish them 
from what are termed the primary (measurable) qualities and secondary qualities 
(color, sound, etc.) of the object. Whereas in the case of mimesis the work of art 
is demonstrably connected with the outside world, in the case of expression the 
connection is with the inner world of both the artist who conveys the expressive 
"message," and the recipient who submits to the experience of the evoked ex­
pressiveness. 
The chief difficulty that must be discussed in this respect has to do with the 
artist. He makes an object which is to provide a semipsychical mediation between 
him and his audience, and we readily assume that he must be entirely sincere, that 
he is attempting to tell us what he has genuinely felt. Yet it is beyond doubt that 
artistic "sincerity" only in extreme instances approximates the sincerity achieved 
in intimacy or exhibitionism. Nor have we sufficient reason to assume that the 
expressive quality is always and precisely adequate to what was experienced by 
the artist in his creative process. 
If it is possible to speak of any correspondence here it would be between the 
artist's assumed intentions to present this or that psychic state (though they may 
fail to be embodied) and the semisentient characteristics of the given work. 2 Thus 
the only "sincerity" that is of interest to aesthetics is that which pertains not to 
a man making confessions but to an artist who determines what and how to "con­
fess." The expressive relationship between the work of art and the artist is thus 
intransitive and asymmetrical: Insofar as we reliably know a good deal about the 
artist's personality, the vicissitudes of his life, and his immediate allegiances, we 
are entitled to pass judgment on the expressive traits of his production as they 
possibly correspond to his temperament and character; nothing of the kind can, 
however, be attempted in the reverse direction. There is necessarily an investment 

1 85 
Characteristics Shared 
by All Definitions 
by the artist in the work's expressive features, but the nature of that investment 
is irrelevant; it does not matter whether the artist expresses genuine or feigned 
emotions. Alone of importance are our assumption that he intended a certain 
presentation and our decision as to whether he succeeded or foiled. 
At this point, I must stop for a moment to dwell on this issue of intention, which 
is rather crucial in considering whether the artist's expression conveys what he 
feels (sincerity in the form of intimacy) or what he has chosen to convey (sincerity 
in the artistic sense of congruity of idea and execution). I do not subscribe fully 
to the notion of "intentional fallacy,'' although in most coses it does have a bearing. 
Even in other cases where we hove documents against which we may check the 
artist's actual project of execution in the effort to discover if he intended to ex-
press himself in a certain way (Flaubert's comment "Mme. Bovary c' est moi"; the 
elderly Rembrandt's self-portraits; Modigliani's Jeanne Hebuterne), what none­
theless concerns us is not the work's relationship to the artist's experienced in­
tentions but, instead, the intentional psychic state embodied in the work. Even 
in those cases where we can speak of verifiably genuine prior intentions to create 
a certain work in a specific manner, nonetheless this pursuit leads along a slippery 
rood that takes us away from the work of art itself. 
Yet it may be argued that in such instances we might understand the expressive 
features more fully when they are referred to the artist's biography. This could be 
seriously urged with regard to Rembrandt, whose tragic sense of abandonment, of 
being mode to face the terrible wrath of God is fully documented. It would be hard 
to make a comparable case for Modigliani's picture, for neither the beauty of Jeanne 
nor the painter's passionate love for her can be confirmed in the expressive dimen­
sion of the work. However, even if we could make statements about the works of 
Modigliani, Flaubert, and others similar to the one we hove just mode about Rem­
brandt's self-portraits, my major argument would remain intact and central: The 
expressiveness of a work of art is sustained by its own composed elements and not 
by its relation to the circumstantial emotions or even the creative goals of the artist. 
If the work lacks expressive appeal to observers who know nothing about the artist, 
then it is a failure in its artistically expressive aspect. 
Thus, in responding to the expressive traits of a given work, we can and should 
assume only a hypothetical intention on the part of the artist to express this or 
that. With this formulation we make allowance for the inevitable transaction be­
tween the artist (considered whole, as a given human, creative personality) and his 

1 86 
Expression 
work, yet we prohibit any reverse inferences. I shall make no definite statements 
about the intention, its content, and its fulfillment; I shall, rather, adopt the stand­
point of the public, which observes in a work of art some intentional, semisentient 
data. Whether the artist's genuine emotions or even his true intentions are revealed 
remains a problematical but separable matter. We should bear these findings in 
mind, since, when artistic qualities are described as expressive, we frequently tend 
to take it for granted that their semisentience has some direct relationship to their 
creator's psychic life. 
We should, by the way, distinguish between emotions of the artist which are 
occasional and due to chance and which are only rarely transmitted to his works, 
and emotions which are central to the artist's temperament and character and 
which may be said to provide an expressive "signature." I believe no one will ques­
tion the role of the latter (their function is recognized in the third variant below 
and is emphasized in the fourth). With regard to this "signature," we note again 
the ambiguous role of the artist's intentions for a given work or for his oeuvre as 
a whole. The role and uniqueness of an artist must be determined largely-and 
sometimes exclusively-from a study of his works and not from his biography or 
his occasional remarks. 
There is still a catch here, however, as my conception seems to eliminate entirely 
the spontaneous subconscious or unconscious expression. To this objection I would 
reply that I do not eliminate the subconscious or the unconscious in the creative 
process, although I am inclined to interpret the latter as basically a rationally con­
trolled operation. The interrelations between the artist's unconscious and the work 
of art I find revealing for the psychological explanation of the creative personality, 
but much less so for the interpretation of the work of art. 
From these reflections it may readily be seen why the art object, with its expres­
sive properties, must be given the primary scrutiny as the mediating entity between 
the artist and his public. In mentioning the public, let me stress that expression 
entails not only the bestowing of certain semisentient characteristics on some data 
and their arrangements, but also the evoking in human agents of some authentic, 
sentient phenomena by means of those semisentient properties. Figure l roughly 
illustrates the result. 
The recipient is more or less actively cooperative; that is to say, to some degree 
he also imbues the work of art with semi psychical qualities. 3 This interaction 
hinges on three factors -the expressive qualities of the work, the human subject, 

1 87 
Characteristics Shared 
by All Definitions 
THE ARTIST 
THE WORK 
-) THE RECIPIENT 
(or PERFORMER) ----- OF ART -
·:_------
for whom 
who imbues 
which has 
the qualities 
the work of art 
expressive 
prove evocative 
with certain 
features 
semipsychical properties 
Figure l. 
and the circumstances. It is important here to distinguish natural objects and non­
artistic human artifacts from artistic objects proper, since in the former two cases 
the recipient's proper activity may be much more extensive. 
The "Empathy" Theory 
Expression is defined encompassingly by some authors as the empathic pro­
jection onto objects of images, feelings, and ideas, where the objects are usually 
exemplified by natural phenomena. This point of view is not wholly without merit; 
but as a fundamental explanation it has to be regarded as anachronistic. Admit­
tedly, I ignore the various divisions of the empathy school in this very abbreviated 
statement, which reflects the extreme formulation of the theory, and which, in fact, 
amounts to a more securely argued version of the "pathetic fallacy" which is as­
sociated with John Ruskin. 
The paradigm of this standpoint can be found in the work of Theodor Lipps and 
Vernon Lee. Lipps argued that, by virtue of the human capacity for empathy (Ein­
fuh/ung), the contrariety between the self and the aesthetically enjoyed object van­
ishes; what we enjoy in that object is ourselves (/ch Qua/itoten), our free spiritual 
vitality which we have projected onto the perceived and contemplated dance move­
ment, work of architecture, depicted landscapes, etc. He stressed the "inner imita­
tion" by which we involuntarily imbue the given object with our creative powers, 
since the artist's or the performer's activity is basically (i.e., metaphysically) not 
different from ours, the audience's. 
Lipps did not believe that there is a complex, specific connection between sense­
feelings (which would absorb an ·object's structural features) and the operations 
of empathy, and he influenced Vernon Lee to adopt a similar standpoint. She did 
question her mentor's notion of empathy as the projection of a metaphysical ego, 
and she saw greater importance in the conjuncture of the qualities of the perceived 
object and the activity of the human subject. However, she admits no contribution 

1 88 
Expression 
of a positive stimulus to the transaction by the object's "physiognomic traits." She 
goes as far as to protest that empathy must not be confused with "inner mimicry" 
(sympathy). Lee asks us to assume, then, that thE_l animation of the inanimate-for 
example, of the rising contour of o mountain - is the product of our imaginative 
faculty, and that it lacks any correlative stimulation such as the particular "physiog­
nomic features" of the mountain might produce. 
On the whole, then, the basic theory of aesthetic empathy does notice the exis­
tence of objective qualities and assert the evocative powers of the artist, but it 
stresses basically the spiritual projection of the self which alters aesthetic experi­
ence into para-aesthetic or creative experience. In terms of figure 1 ,  empathy theory 
attributes to the feedback from the recipient to the work of art on arbitrary char­
acter. The evocative quality of experiencing art is all supplied by the recipient­
subject, while none of the evocation is assigned to the object as such. The theory 
hos been analyzed so often by so many authors, that there is no point in giving o 
detailed critique here. Most vulnerable at the points its proponents think decisive, 
this version of expression seems unbalanced and, thus, the least helpful. 
The Expressiveness of the Artistic "Material" 
A second version of expression looks not to the free projection of on imagination 
but to the properties which ore indigenous to the medium of o particular art. It 
asks: What are the attributes of the selected means of expression, that is, its ma­
terials? These "captive" properties con consist of tones (characterized by intensity, 
timbre, pitch, and duration), colors, etc. The finest exposition that I hove found of 
this interpretation of expression is in Kori Aschenbrenner's Coherence in Art. 4 
Aschenbrenner's work speaks of "tendotive powers" inherent to the media them­
selves. The artist impresses his vision on these media only by employing the tendo­
tive powers in a definite context. The public, for its port, responds to the semisen­
tient characteristics in the context of the whole pattern while attending to the 
potentialities of the medium. This version of expression represents the extreme 
opposite of the empathy theory. What the elementary instrumentalities convey is 
deemed more important than what the recipient adds. Little remains to the artist 
other than the exercise of judicious selection. In terms of figure l ,  the object's evoc­
ative effect is here overstressed and the input of both the artist and the public is 
underrated. 
From this kind of discussion we may begin to doubt whether the traits called 
expressive are truly of a tertiary nature. The hue, saturation, and intensity ascribed 

1 89 
The Expressiveness 
of the Artistic "Material" 
to a given color-that is, the so-called secondary qualities, here seem to provide in 
themselves a significant expression; the same might be said of the so-called pri­
mary qualities (e.g., the pitch of a tone). According to the original formulation of 
the concept, 5 a tertiary quality was a feeling-tone which seemed a property of the 
object. The notion was subsequently developed to place emphasis on certain felt 
qualities of the aesthetic object. In this sense the expressiveness of the materials 
could be associated (assuming an inherently tendative medium) with a tertiary 
character, inasmuch as the feeling-tones are stimulated. Yet if we think in terms of 
artistic wholes, this entire distinction among primary, secondary, and tertiary quali­
ties may seem unfortunately complicated and pointless. We should then probably 
speak instead of an integral, seamless expression which includes such evidently 
physical (that is, primary) elements as the motion in dance, the contour of a build­
ing, the prosodic and metrical traits of poetry, and graphic composition. Thus, it 
seems possible to accept the second interpretation of expression up to a point, for 
it does rightly guide our attention to the coexpressiveness of the medium (material). 
In combination with the next variety and interpretation of expression, this "materi­
al" standpoint provides us with fundamental valuational qualities. 
The Expressiveness of Structured Patterns of Qualities 
Expression can also be seen as pertaining chiefly to particular qualities which are 
invested into a given material context, and are arranged so as to bring out some 
peculiar attributes and effects of the material. The crucial aspect here is the es­
tablishment of many-sided patterns, such as domination and subordination, emer­
gence and recedence, simplicity and intricacy, compactness and looseness, repletion 
and depletion, harmony and disharmony, rhythm and arrhythmia, swiftness and 
slowness, monotony and variety, contrast and sameness. All the patterns are com­
mingled in the whole to provide a manifest character which projects delicacy or 
crudity, exuberance or calmness, elegance or assertiveness, gaudiness or restraint, 
subtlety or ostentation, and so on. When we discuss these characteristics, we 
ascribe them as semisentient qualities to the given artistic wholes. This is not to 
say that we find a literal refinement, crudity, and so on; rather, we respond to their 
feeling-tones, as is exemplified by a highly complex and hardworking musical 
composition which may yet offer us the physiognomy of a simple and even idle 
moment. 
Expression as a structured pattern of qualities is seen especially well by compar­
ing the works of Pollock and Miro, Stravinsky and Hindemith, Kurosawa and An-

1 90 
Expression 
tonioni, Moore and Giacometti, Saarinen and Le Corbusier, St. John Perse and 
Essenin, Isadora Duncan and Jerome Robbins. Undoubtedly, these examples invite 
the charge of having been randomly drawn from our century with an eye to expe­
ditious contrasts. Quite so. However, the memorable and even blatant contrast is 
often the most enlightening. 
With regard to the structure of specific qualities I can say that: 
l .  All works of art are to some extent expressive. 
2. The more artistic the object, the more expressive it generally is, in its own pe­
culiar way. (Note that "expressionist" art, discussed below, is not regarded as 
inherently better than other kinds of artistic expressiveness.) 
3. Expressiveness of this kind is especially noticeable in cases of nonobjective art. 
4. Representational art is also expressive in this sense. (Note that in saying this I 
do not rely on anything that is explicitly described or depicted as emotion or its 
nonartistic outward show in this form of art.) 
This final point needs further development. Painters of the Italian High Renais­
sance certainly represented emotional symptoms of their subjects, but it would be 
difficult to argue that these pictures are very expressive. The paintings of El Greco 
and the self-portraits of Rembrandt and Van Gogh, however, are highly expressive, 
owing not so much to the features of the represented subject as to the way in which 
the paint is applied: the colors, textures, and lines of composition. To take examples 
from other media, the expressiveness of Yunichiro Tanizaki's short novel The Key, 
like that of Masaki Kobayashi's film Harakiri, has little to do with the personality 
of the hero, who is perversely obsessed by his sexual frustration, but depends on 
the way the tale is told. Tanizaki achieves an aesthetic patterning which is pervaded 
by ethical tact, refinement, and crystalline clarity. Another case: The title character 
of Peter Handke's theatrical work Kaspar is a modern, Rousseauian simpleton im­
bued with a certain distinctive expressiveness- but the primary expressive dimen­
sion is the language employed in the play, which the author toys with ingeniously 
and insidiously. Language, the rudimentary vehicle of social life, becomes the butt 
of the cosmic joke and the chief specific subject matter of the play. 
At this point, I should directly consider the problem of the artist's individual 
style or manner and its equivalents in the art object. The more such objects we 
have from him, the more we can observe to what extent he reverts to the same or 
similar arrangements of his materials and media. It thus becomes easier to detect 
his "signature," his singular patterning effects, within the expressive result. (I shall 

1 91 
The Expressiveness 
of Structured Patterns 
of Qualities 
return to personal expression and the latitudes in which it operates in discussing 
the next two variants of expression.) 
What is the significance of this third variant in terms of subject-object relation­
ships? The expressive traits are here entrenched in the object itself. The implications 
of this solution are brought out by the gestaltists, and Rudolf Arnheim especially, 
with great skill. The artist supplies those properties of the object which possess 
semisentience, and it is through these objective properties that he evokes feelings 
in his public which are more or less similar to the emotions that he experienced in 
his creative endeavor (or, to be more exact, the emotions that he intends should 
carry his artistic '.'message"). The imminent status of expression gives the character 
also of the "symbolism," by which I mean the meaningful aspect of the particular 
qualities and especially of their patterns. "Symbolic" meaning depends on the con­
ceived correspondence between the pattern-forming mind and the patterned status 
lent to both inanimate and animate worlds. 
Do we learn from gestalt theory with sufficient explicitness and persuasiveness 
whether the artist's expressive signs, implanted in the art object, gain a commen­
surate emotional and meaningful response from the public? The complexity of the 
problem demands a separate study, but I do feel that we should be rather skeptical 
towards the answers provided by the gestaltist school. However, regardless of the 
disputes in progress concerning the genetic background, and whatever the ulti­
mately most convincing hypothesis, we shall certainly have to acknowledge the 
fascinating, even astonishing phenomenon of the seemingly psychic qualities tnat 
inhere to some art objects. 
I am emphasizing this third version of expression because of its centrality. The 
more so because it is related not only to the feeling-tone of particular qualities and 
their patterns but also and ultimately to the achieved artistic whole. In a word, the 
given work of art is in some way expressive of more than its concrete attributes; 
the achieved total expression is the "polyphonic" result of the consonance or dis­
sonance of the commingling feeling-tones. No serious aesthetic inquiry today can 
pass it by, as can be demonstrated by reference to Mikel Dufrenne's Phenomeno/o­
gie de /'experience esthetique ( 1 953). I believe that this version is essential to un­
derstanding the variety and richness of expression as artistic value. There is no 
limit to the possible concrete, inherent "physiognomies," which might range from 
abstruseness to crystalline clarity, intricacy to simplicity, suavity to crudity, con­
sonance to dissonance, monotony to brilliant charm. Integral to the traits of the 

192 
Expression 
entities ore often multitudinous specific sets, or patterns, of voluotionol qualities. 
Even if a scholar were to make a catalog of all the patterns or qualities and how 
they could be concisely pinpointed or infallibly achieved, I doubt he could do it. 
Indeed, it is hard to pinpoint the precise relationship between the voluotionol quali­
ties (and their patterns) and the varieties of the expressed physiognomies. This 
trouble in describing any stable and reliable correspondences may help to en­
courage the widespread view among oestheticions that the expressive values ore 
ineffable. 
There is obviously no contradiction between what I hove just written and my 
earlier judgment that the medium (materials) may prove inherently expressive due 
to some distinctive properties. I do not see how we con deny the expressive appeal 
which is inseparable from the established tone of certain instruments (a violin or 
flute) or the texture of some substances (wood or metal) or certain rhythmic meters 
(iambic or spondoic). The worm and the cool ranges of the color spectrum ore wide­
ly accepted. Musical annotation assumes a similar expressiveness: andante, presto, 
vivace, con brio, etc. Yet it seems no contradiction to insist on the primary hegemo­
ny of the expressive composition (the entirely given formal structure). As I remarked 
while discussing the second version of expression, the medium (materials) will 
rarely appear to claim pride of place as the exclusive or even foremost voluotional · 
quality. Usually, it is incorporated and modulated with other dimensions of the 
given artistic whole. Even if the material proves foremost in some simple patterns, 
we will find trouble in ascribing to it a definite, single expressive value. Harsh and 
high-pitched notes (tones) con produce feelings of terror, anxiety, or just displea­
sure. Worm colors con evoke a feeling of joy or perhaps boredom. A room interior 
dominated by aluminum may give us a slight frisson, a sense of irritating fragility, 
a soothed lassitude, or perhaps a dull exasperation. In oil of these coses, the ulti­
mate expressive evocation undoubtedly derives from the totality comprised by the 
qualities and the structure plus the context in which the artistic whole functions. 
I nterpretive Expression 
Expression may also be understood to refer to the singular characteristics of a par­
ticular dance or music performance; that is, to those characteristics inherent in the 
process-like "objects" that ore achieved through interpretation and that ore conse­
quently derived from the idiosyncrasies and the creative method of the particular 
performers. 
We must be careful here again to ovoid equating expression with the spontone-­

1 93 
Interpretive Expression 
may simply be feigned; or (as in the case of theatrical acting, where the Stanis­
lavski technique, with its psychophysical exercises is especially pertinent) they may 
be deliberately stimulated so as to induce the para-authentic experience. Often a 
performer can perfectly duplicate a certain pattern of embodying a particular 
work of art i n  performance after performance . There is ample reason to believe 
that this is not due to the artist's having brought his expression into the tightest 
possible relationship with what he genuinely experiences. Performers, it may be 
observed, are capable of growing as "cool," as distant from the "object" they are 
producing for us, as is the painter, composer, or playwright. 
We should likewise be clear about the bifurcated character of the expressive per­
formance-object. Inherent in the nature of the expressive qualities of this sort of 
work of art is a constant process of remolding . An exact "replica" of the enduri ng 
matter of the work is a fatuous notion; a rote duplication of earlier successful per­
formances is all but impossible, and probably undesirable . The specificity and 
idiosyncrasy of each successive performance -the individual touch, the manner 
and style -modifies the expression that is implied by the musical or the dance 
score and, at the same time, confirms or even enhances some of the expressive 
traits of that score. 6 We praise in their own right the interpretive styles of a Heifetz 
or a Richter. However, we also seek in their interpretive performances the expres­
sive characteristics we know exist in the compositions they play. 
The expression of a theatrical performance presents a more complex problem, 
and I shall focus here only on the artistic personality of the play director. (Let me 
stress that I use the term "personality" only to indicate the particular and distinᢿtive 
traits that are manifested in the work of an artist.) We may agree that the approach 
of Olivier or Brook to Shakespeare is undoubtedly expressive, and where the direc­
tor or stage designer is guided by a developed philosophy of the theater (as is 
true, for instance, of Craig, Appia, Brecht, or Lebel) this expressiveness may well 
appear to be increased. The director's expression necessarily has a different em­
bodiment from that of the dancer or violinist, since he does not usually appear in 
the actual performance. This circumstance prohibits any encompassing statements 
about the expressive quotient of the theater director. 
The productions shaped by some directors do display a complete control. Where 
this happens we see a collective, unified performance, and nothing short of this 
can entirely realize the director's expressive vision. At this degree of integration, 
theater, like music and dance, may be analyzed in terms of ensemble expression. 
We should not forget the protracted collective assimilation and preparation of 
i
i id
hi h
l
di i
bl
i
I
h
h

1 94 
Expression 
expressive coherence and intensity of the ensemble becomes at times more con­
spicuous and more decisive than the original invention, that is, than the individual 
expression of the initiator. Common to the Peking Opera, the ballet of Jerome Rob­
bins, the Moscow Art Theater under Stanislavski, the Berlin Ensemble of Brecht, 
and the Grotowski or Bread and Puppet theaters, are coherent and distinctive com­
positions of expressive performance qualities. A unique collaboration must pervade 
the work of the companies -even if ideas supplied by one person have organized 
the ensemble's expression. 
The Expressionists 
In the preceding notions of expression, every art object or performance has offered 
a potential case for discussion. We turn now to a version which has restricted ap­
plication. Its relevance extends just to one particular class of works -those that 
may be variously described as dynamic and harsh, highly intense and dramatic, 
pervaded with dissonant elements, skewed to the morbid and ugly and fugitive. 
Normally, we find this doss of works (and performances) contrasted with works 
expressive of a static harmony and a concordant beauty. The latter, it is argued, 
ore impersonal achievements while "expression" (in this understanding of it) is 
proof of a deliberate eschewing of self-control and a wish to embrace the dynamic 
and the spontaneous. 7 
This special version of expression was particularly fostered by the so-called 
expressionist movement in art, which encompassed the work of the Brucke and 
Blaue Reiter groups, Wedekind, Strindberg, Benn, and Mahler. The tendency flour­
ished primarily in Germany and Scandinavia. However, we should not overlook the 
antecedents and legacy of the school. Some philosophers wish to apply to this 
propensity of art the comprehensive name romanticism. I do not care for that term 
in this context, since it applies more aptly to a specific era in art. Yet the propensity 
itself does exist and, moreover, is permanent; there is a long line of artistic realiza­
tions which show expressionist traits. The artistic pendulum swings to reinforce 
this propensity at times when social stability is weak, when civilization is starting 
to shake and religious (metaphysical) syntheses are being dispersed by the urgent 
problems of the day. It should also be noted that a preference for"the works of art 
in this legacy may emerge entirely apart from any concrete interest in the art's 
themes- in its social and psychological conventions and its metaphysical content. 
A taste for expressionism may develop on the basis of its inherent organizing 
expression. 
I
d
t
l t thi
i
f
i
i h th
h I h
d i

1 95 
The Expressionists 
the other versions so far discussed, I should probably speak of its being manifested 
to a certain degree instead of being categorically different. I should probably spea k 
of the "more intensively expressive" traits which appear in some art objects- such 
as paintings by Van Gogh, Rouault, Soutine, or Chagall; surrealist poetry; Goudi's 
buildings, Witkiewicz's novels and plays -as compared with some others. To use 
this formulation, of course, does not eliminate but, rather, qualifies the restricted 
sense of this version of expression. 
The Expression of Psychosocial Equivalents 
The lost version of the concept of expression that I shall discuss involves psycho­
social equivalents. Here, the art object is studied in relation to the socio historical 
material abroad at the time and place of the work's origin, which has been internal­
ized, experienced, and felt by people then living, and transformed into correlated 
expressive attributes by artists. Here, in other words, are the expressive equivalents 
of social moods, intuitions, beliefs, strivings, and opinions; every work of art is, to 
greater or lesser extent, treated as a symptomatic and emblematic depository of 
the life of society, including especially its mythology and its ideological conventions, 
which, having given rise to feeling-patterns, function back and forth across the in­
definite boundaries of the rational and the irrational. The artistic personality is 
here considered as a mediator between these ubiquitous but diffuse attitudes and 
psychosocial patterns, and a work of art in which certain correlative expressive 
attributes appear. The activity of the artist points in two directions: to the materials 
of historical experience and to their expression in art; to the artist's what and why 
and also to his how. We must not confuse this version of expression with any of the 
others. It considers the work's particular qualities so as to refer them to a collective 
social subject, and in doing this it discovers an historical objectivity in the expres­
siveness itself. Here, the expression is not only a palpable stimulus to aesthetic 
exr:ierience in the recipient; it is also a manifestation of a sentient world antecedent 
to itself. 
It is essential to note that this idea of expression is not confined to the rendering 
of the aforementioned moods, intuitions, beliefs, goals, and opinions; it also extends 
to some extent to the description of overt behavior, to the extent that this behavior 
corresponds to the internalized sociohistorical data. Thus, patterns of life style are 
themselves considered "expressive," that is, potentially adequate to convey the 
inherent social psychology. This version of expression thus draws on both internal 
and external phenomena. 8 
h
h
f h
bl
?
d
d
h
h

1 96 
Expression 
"mimesis" and "expression" hove generally been used interchangeably by morxist 
writers, following the precedent of Hegel and Taine. Plekhonov provides a signifi­
cant case of this confusion of terms; and his influence on early Soviet aesthetic 
thought was decisive on this issue, as on others. However, as a legacy it has had a 
lucid defender and explicotor in George Lukacs. Both in his early writings and his 
late major work Die Eigenort des Aesthetischen ( 1 963), Lukacs, drawing on the 
work of Wilhelm Dilthey, sought consciously to reconcile the identity of the two 
categories; that is, he subsumed my sixth aspect of expression within his universal 
category, mimesis. He accordingly (and arbitrarily, I find) proceeded to outline the 
presumed mimetic character of music, dance, architecture, landscape gardening, 
and the applied arts. I cannot go into my reasons for differing with Lukacs here;9 
however, I should like to point out that in my view the nonobjective arts are un­
questionably expressive -and it is precisely through their expressive traits that 
they relate to the social world at the time and place of their origin. Nor is psycho­
sociologicol expression absent from literature, theater, or cinema; but here, it is 
chiefly projected through the representation of the social psychology of the charac­
ters of the fiction. 
Here, then, ore two aspects (representation and expression) of a single view­
point holding that the experience of a given society con be rendered in nondiscur­
sive, artistic "messages." These aspects ore generally complementary and tend to 
confirm the social meaningfulness of art because, whether congruent or confluent, 
both hove their referents in the substratum of a specific place and time ("climate" 
is the common, vague word for it) which is pervasive in the style of both art and 
life. In the representational arts, the two aspects may merge, and we then find that 
on expressive manner (or style) which describes {and.typifies) emotions, hos been 
organically united with mimetic description and realistic typification (as for exam­
ple, in Stanislaw Przybyszewski's novels, Strindberg's ploys, or Von Gogh's Chair 
or Shoes). 
A difficult question must be faced here: Why should reality be granted to a col­
lective social subject, and why should it be presumed capable of being the emo­
tional progenitor of the expressive qualities of a work of art, when I hung back 
from attributing a definite relationship of this kind with regard to individual ex­
periential data? Is this not o double standard? I think not. There seem to be solid 
reasons for linking expressiveness with a social substratum. First, let me recall that 
although I did not reject the possibility of a correspondence between the expres­
siveness of the art object and on artist's genuine experience, I said that the emo­
i
i
l i
d d b
h
i
h
i
h
ll f
d
b di d i
hi

1 97 
The Expression 
of Psychosocial Equivalents 
object, are of much greater importance. Moreover, impressive evidence is at hand 
from many sources to substantiate the statement that no artist can divest himself 
of ties with the substratum, or act independently of the climate containing him as he 
grows to adulthood, lives, and works. It should also be noted that the social feelings 
at issue here, that is, the climate suffusing the work of art, consists not so much of 
the subtle, more elusive and marginal emotion in the context of the society, as of the 
popular conventions, the shibboleths. In a word, this substratum -which of course 
does not exclude the other modes of expression -consists of the modes of thinking, 
feeling, and behavior displayed in the "public theater" in which all must be actors 
to at least some degree. (Perhaps the ancient category, decorum best suggests the 
applicable frame of reference.} The artist may use these resource materials as ex­
pressive building blocks, with a number of varieties of intention: at times he totally 
identifies with the building blocks; more often he adopts a certain distance from the 
more publicly acknowledged modes of social feeling. However, precisely in order to 
communicate his own intended emotions, the artist will need to rely to some degree 
on the use of the recognized community expressions of feeling. 
This interpretation somewhat parallels the hermeneutic idea of a direct connec­
tion from the Zeitgeist through a mediative artistic personality to the work of art. 
There is one aspect of the hermeneutic approoches- Verstehen durch Nocherleben, 
understanding through empathic experiences-which may be accepted if freed of 
the irrationality which is its implicit nature; this is the view which states that, in 
order to understand fully a work of art (and its context}, we must reconstruct the 
contemporary modes of feeling, striving, and so on (together with the predominant 
mystifications, and the arti"st's individual response to and solutions in this climate}. 
Marxism makes major use of this approach. 
Almost certainly, the work will prove to have no simply deciphered and direct 
causal relationship to the given social psychology. A great number of artists bury 
their social feelings, distort them, try to elude them; but these strategies should be 
taken into account as on analysis is developed. However, whether the emotional 
expressiveness is genuine or is feigned by the artist, whether he attributes it to him­
self or to certain others- none of this matters for the present analysis. The a rtist 
may have his buried, distorted, elusive relationship to the publicly shared emotion 
of his time; yet the imprint of the collective social subject will be registered. Art is in 
every case symptomatic, for the artist's subjective response is never purely idiosyn­
cratic; it always hinges on the given collective social subject, either positively, nega­
tively, or evasively. 
h
b
d
f h
l
h
ll d d
ht
f h
h

1 98 
Expression 
between mimesis and expression? I said then that the two categories have a close 
and complicated relationship: they may coincide, or overlap, or simply complement 
one another. If what I have said in the preceding few paragraphs is correct then so 
was that opening formulation. 1 0 
Conclusions 
In my opinion, version three (relating to formal and material valuational qualities 
structured into a comprehensive pattern) and version four (relating to interpretive 
performance) - both of which emphasize the artist's "handwriting," that is, the 
expression peculiar to him -seem to be the fundamental aspects of expression. 
Version one, as I have tried to suggest, does recall to us the part played by the 
recipient's empathy in some cases of expressiveness (especially in relation to na­
ture, as in the case, for example, of landscapes imbued with a significance through 
our moods); but it is outdated in its basic claim for universal application. Versions 
two, five, and six, while disparate in application, seem about equal in weight: from 
the morphological point of view we must pay attention to the expressiveness of the 
media (materials) of art; from the stylistic point of view we must take an interest 
in whether some expressive properties are more expressive than others; and from 
the point of view of artistic genesis and function we must take an interest in the 
psychosociological expressiveness of art (here there is a link to the related issue of 
the comparative meaningfulness of art). 
The aim of this essay has been deliberately modest. Certainly there are other 
substantial points of view on expression that did not fall within its scope; they all, 
however, seem to be derivative in one way or another from the six concepts here 
distinguished. I fully realize that these six deserve more ample consideration. They 
require further clarification, quite possibly some correction, but certainly develop­
ment and elaboration. If the reader finds any hint of definitive statement in the 
essay, I urge that he excuse it as a slip of thought and pen. Finally, among the is­
sues not grappled with here which are, nevertheless, basic to the elucidation and 
proper rating of the concepts treated, I must call attention to the whole (and per­
haps crucial) question of the genesis of artistic expression - its favorable conditions 
for emergence, its process of interiorization and then exteriorization, the place of 
nature and of social history in generating and evolving the expressive symbols, 
etc. Onto these obscure passageways, I have not even opened the door. 1 1  

1 99 
Notes 
1 .  Nelson Goodmon in the excellent third 
chapter of his book Languages of Art, (In­
dianapolis, Ind .. 1 968), hos done much to 
dispel the occult aura clinging to the idea of 
expression. He a nd I agree that the problem 
of expression is basically distinct from that 
of the depiction or description of the world, 
although we use differing methods to treat 
the question of the lotter, denotational 
operations. I accept and mean to build on 
Goodman's statement that expression is a 
"metaphorical exemplification," by which he 
indicates an insentient property that is in­
vested by o symbol, which has a sentient 
frame of reference. 
2. In this sense, we should distinguish be­
tween artistic expression and ordinary ex­
pression (an example of the latter is a smile 
as a sign of genuine joy). In ordinary life the 
only porollels to artistic expressions ore the 
so-called professional signs of expression, 
and, insofar as we find a diplomat, lawyer, 
or other professional "intending" (acting) 
these expressions, we are reminded of works 
of art. 
3. An interesting question which cannot be 
dealt with here concerns the character of 
the emotions which are experienced as aes­
thetically expressive. I assume that in most 
cases the recipients really do feel on authen­
tic sorrow, joy, pain, or delight. I understand 
why the Aristotelian notion of catharsis is 
part of the foundation of European aes­
thetics, for art may so move us that it re­
turns in dreams or otherwise haunts us. 
Nonetheless, the emotions do differ from 
those in ordinary experience. Their ambigu­
ous status derives from art's virtuo/ity (or 
more narrowly formulated, its fictionolity). 
Due to this characteristic, Coleridge's notion 
of suspended disbelief is also relevant to the 
Notes 
emotions aroused by the cinema, music, 
poetry, etc. This is not so m uch o function of 
the presence of given expressive traits, as it 
is o characteristic of aesthetic experience on 
the whole. 
4. I om indebted to Professor Aschenbrenner 
for allowing me to examine his ingenious 
argumentation at the manuscript stage. 
Other works that refer to this point of view 
are: T. M. Greene, The Arts and the Art of 
Criticism, 3rd ed. (New York, 1 952); D. W. 
Gotsholk, Art and the Social Order (Chicago, 
1 947). The wealth of examples supplied in 
these books relieves me of the need to men­
tion others. 
5. Cf. B. Bosonquet, The Distindion Between 
Mind and Its Obieds ( 1 91 3); S. Alexander, 
in Encyclopedia Brittonico, 1 4th ed. 
6. This is not the place to analyze the "per­
sonal touch" of a painter or writer, although 
these too, of course, have the potential of o 
uniquely expressive style or manner. In the 
visual and literary arts, however, the indi­
vidual expressiveness is rather directly a nd 
fully imbued into the ultimate art object. 
Only as o secondary question will we per­
haps be drown into discussion of the idio­
syncratic latitude of the literary or painterly 
artistic process. In the performing arts, for 
obvious reasons the processual idiosyncratic 
expression is o question high in priority. 
"Processuol" means here "interpretive"; 
and, to be quite clear, we should note that o 
twofold expression occurs. Our attention is 
focused on the question of the extent to 
which the interpreting artist preserves and 
at the same time modifies the primordial 
expression which is the musical score or the 
stage or film script. If he improvises, how­
ever, then the expression that is achieved in 
the process of performance falls under our 
third category. I might odd that sometimes 

200 
the reverse occurs, yielding results treasured 
by the student of such matters. By this I 
mean on ably expressive description of some 
person's interpretive performance. A famous 
case is Proust's interpretation of the violin 
concerts of Venteuil. We may recall too 
Proust's expressive account of Elstir's point­
ing in which he first stresses its expressive 
qualities. Whot we hove here, then, is a 
two-layered, intensified expression - Proust, 
the writer, representing the work of his 
fictive heroes, the artists -within a single 
coherent entity (object). 
7. In my view, this notion also forms the 
basis for the viewpoints of certain contem­
porary avant-garde artists who claim pro­
grommoticolly to turn away from "expres­
sion," even while the critics who examine 
their work tend to emphasize the differences 
among individual practitioners (even the 
most impersonal of them) and persistently 
find traits that should be termed expressive. 
A good current example is minimal art. Its 
founders and practitioners, as well as sym· 
pathetic art journalists and critics, soy that 
minimal art is nonphysiognomical, flat, 
technological, linear and geometrical, archi­
tectonic, etc. (Cf. G. Bottcock, ed., Minimal 
Art: A Critical Anthology [New York, 1 968).) 
Some minimalists proudly relate their work 
to serial, systemic thought. Forerunners are 
claimed in Duchamp, Molevich's suprema­
tism, and constructivism. However, the Batt­
cock book also brings out that many sup­
porters of Kenneth Noland, Barnett Newman, 
Ad Reinhardt and Tony Smith do find their 
minimalism expressive. Direct acquaintance 
with the works is confirming; for the act of 
making "cool" art devoid of symbols and 
individuality in itself serves to imprint a 
feeling-tone. Harold Rosenberg and Richard 
Wollheim allude to this oblique expressive-
Expression 
ness, when they see connections between 
minimalism and dado or mention its con­
spicuous gesture. In the present framework 
of analysis, version three and especially 
version four are applicable. 
8. The concepts of Wilhelm Dilthey may 
well be judged useful in the discussion of 
psychosociologicol expressiveness. See also, 
for example, E. A. Lippman, "The Problem 
of Musical Hermeneutics: A Protest and 
Analysis," in S. Hook, ed., Art and Philoso­
phy (New York, 1 966) pp. 307-335. Lipp­
man refers the significance of musical sym­
bols to a community of understanding and 
emotion. i:Je locates an ultimate basis in 
nature for the human tonal experience; 
however, he stresses, and calls primary, 
the importance of sociocultural conditions. 
Lippman finds these to be the source of the 
multiple meanings in a given work of art, 
as well as of the variety of styles, and the 
predominance in a given period, of certain 
trends. 
9. Some of the points at issue are treated in 
my essay on Lukacs in Science and Society, 
Winter 1 967. 
1 0. This essay was finished in 1 970. I later 
read Alon Tormey's The Concept of Expres­
sion (Princeton, 1 971 ). Tormey excellently 
defends the third version of expression pre­
sented here, which is oriented to formal 
properties. I have only praise for his discus­
sion, and also for his argument, very like my 
own, that mimesis and expression should be 
distinguished, since the portrayal of expres­
sive actions is not tantamount to expression 
proper (cf. pp. 53-55, 1 38-1 39). However, 
in chapter 4 and 5 Tormey finds to be un­
warranted the imputation of artistic expres· 
siveness to the intentional state of the in­
dividual human subject; he presumably 
would thus reject the imputation to a collec-

201 
tive human subject. I do not find enough 
validity in his counter-arguments to justify 
o negation of versions six and four in my 
analysis. What is Tormey's case? He shows 
there is no way to disprove that the expres­
sive physiognomical qualities of o given 
work of art have direct reference to analo­
gous intentional states that ore experienced 
by artists. (All the same, Tormey himself 
cites the case of Corl Nielsen to demonstrate 
that a depressed musician con produce a 
humoresque.) Yet both his proof and ex­
emplification are insufficient. Why? 
First, there exists o body of literary proof 
(especially apparent, perhaps, in the cases of 
romantic irony and the so-called Kunst/er­
roman where the author's alter ego is the 
hero) to show that the artist's creative ex­
periences do have a direct effect on what he 
may express in his work. 
Second, it even is possible to introduce 
some irrefragable examples in which the 
expressive properties of a work of art clearly 
have their direct source in the artist's ex­
periences-in what he very possibly truly 
felt and, in consequence, what he intended 
to objectify as a creative reality. One such 
instance is Adam Mickiewicz's desperate 
longing for his homeland embodied in his 
epic poem Pan Todeusz; or, more recently, 
E. M. Forster's posthumous novel Maurice 
dealing with homosexuality, which was the 
author's own anguishing problem. 
A third, the absence of any guarantee that 
the imputations will be well or ill founded 
may have mixed implications. In other words, 
the impossibility of disproof doesn't exclude 
that the correlation does exist! 
Fourth (and here I refer the reader to a 
fine discussion by Tormey in chapter 2), we 
do indeed impute behavior to certain inten­
tional states, if the referable doto con be 
Notes 
observed in complex patterns that conform 
to our hypotheses. Since this is so, why con 
we not soy the some for artistic expressive­
ness? This is especially true where the pat­
tern -documents left by the artist or his 
associates-confirms that the artistic expres­
sion hos a plausible relation to the expres­
sive psychic character. If this line of argu­
ment is correct, then the proper conclusion 
is that the equivocal ambiguities of "expres­
sion" ore irreducible-and in addition that 
version six should be retained. 
1 1 . Of importance for these questions, 
besides the gestoltist view, is the Jungian 
hypothesis, which sees expression as shaped 
by the archetypal mythology of mankind. An 
interesting conjecture is set forth by Harry S. 
Broudy in his essay "The Structure of Knowl­
edge in the Arts," in R. A. Smith, ed., Aes­
thetics and Criticism in Art Education (New 
York, 1 966), pp. 23-45. Broudy discusses 
"imaginative schemata" that give rise to 
aesthetic experiences, and to symbolic ex­
pressiveness in particular; he sketches o 
genetic explanation which relates both to 
the natural human situation and to man's 
nurturing in society. 
In the marxist literature, particularly So­
viet, on the question of the genesis of ex­
pression, a sociological explanation is usual­
ly advanced, although a natural propensity 
that generates expression is not wholly 
excluded. In the Soviet musical aesthetics of 
the 1 920s and 1 930s, when a theory of ex­
pressive qualities formulated by Boris As­
safiev prevailed, the natural side of expres­
sion was widely acknowledged and ana­
lyzed. Recently, o few marxist aestheticians 
(among them Ernst Fisher) have revived the 
issues centering on the origins of expression, 
and have emphasized the affinity of the ex­
pressive traits in art and magic. Indeed, it is 

202 
reasonable to hypothesize that the major 
source of motivation for expression is the 
impulse to animate the inanimate, combined 
with the peculiar response to a likeness 
(similis simili gaudet). Thus we too, in our 
civilized state, find it "natural" to respond 
to the objectified semisentient qualities. 
Still another pertinent theory concerns the 
habits that we pick up and retain while for­
getting their origins. It is, for instance, in 
this way that we come to associate certain 
qualities with the fears and joys that fas­
cinated us in childhood; when gওown up we 
find these same qualities fearful or joyful 
and do not quite understand why. This 
theory is, however, not adequately incisive; 
it helps in determining neither what it is 
that makes us respond in a particular way 
nor why this response occurs. 
Are the expressive associations that we 
internalize merely accidental and circum­
stantial? Are they dependent on given here­
ond-now social situations and our corre­
sponding behavior? Are they perhaps based 
on a capacity or propensity for animistic 
magic? Or on some inborn schemata? Are 
they perhaps constituted by a patterning of 
reality which, while modifiable in particulars, 
is confirmed and entrenched by continual 
mutual exchanges among human agents and 
finally comes to be based on a common 
semiotic stock and praxis, shaped in turn by 
a centuries-long cultural tradition which has 
some regularities that may be "universal" 
(i.e., shared throughout the species)? In 
short, ore these expressive traits of a tran­
sient or a constant character; and, if con­
stant, then to what extent are they of a natu­
ral or a cultural origin? The phrasing of this 
final question con help us remember that the 
problem of the genesis of aesthetic expres­
sion cannot be resolved short of working to 
Expression 
solve the question of the origins of human 
culture and art in general. 

Chapter 6 
Mimesis and Real ism 
Mimesis as a Cog nitive-Artistic Axiological Category 
Semiotic interpretation has invested aesthetic discourse not only with a new termi­
nology but also with new problems. The semiotic character of the art object and 
the interaction between signifiant and signifie are questions which have been thrust 
into the foreground and have become the focus for discussion of such issues as: the 
linguistic or quasi-linguistic nature of the artistic message; the autonomous struc­
ture of the art object and of its referents, if any, outside its own reality; the de­
notative and connotative function of a sign message; and the relationship between 
"form" and "content." It can be seen from this short list that the semiological set in 
aesthetics has by no means banished the traditional concerns. If anything it has 
lent them a fresh vigor by extending the area of argument with the addition of new 
perspective, as is mode evident by the controversies over connections between art 
and language in the strict sense, their similarities and differences. This debate, set 
in motion in Paris by Roland Barthes and enlivened by Christian Metz's studies of 
the film message (d. his Essois sur lo signification au cinema [Paris, 1 968]), has 
spread within aesthetics. A particularly stimulating contribution has come from 
Mikel Dufrenne, who devoted the second half of his Esthetique et philosophie (Paris, 
1 967) to refuting the view that art can be regarded simply as /angue. Though the 
following remarks are tangential to that field of discussion, I must acknowledge 
my great debt to the authors just mentioned; and I have likewise profited from the 
three-volume collection of essays issued by the Tortu, Estonia (U.S.S.R.) study cen­
ter, Trudy po znokovym sistemom ( 1 964-67). 
The subject I propose to discuss is a venerable one. Indeed, many aestheticians 
would call it outmoded. The semiologist may well find it hopelessly incongruous, 
not to say repugnant, for I intend to treat mimesis as an axiological category. Nev­
ertheless, there can be no doubt that there are parallels with the semiological in­
vestigations of the signification of works of art, particularly in their denotative 
aspect. The student of aestÍetics does not, we should note, apply himself in the first 
instance to the matter of signifiont and signifie. These two aspects of the sign, 
which in the case of art (as Metz and Dufrenne would presumably agree) can only 
be separated out in the abstract, are apprehended by aesthetic analysis through 
The first part of this essay {on mimesis) appeared in Semiatica, vol. II, no. 1 { 1 970); the second port {on 
realism as o kind of mimesis) appeared in W!.(>6tczesno!.5. Moy 1 970, and in English in Jeon G. Horrell 
and Alina Wierzbionsko, eds., Aesthetics in Twentieth-Century Poland {Lewisburg, Po., 1 973). Both parts 
hove been reworked and expanded. 

204 
Mimesis and Realism 
valuation of the integral sense of a work. Be it added (and concurring again with 
Dufrenne) that this integral sense cannot be established without relating the work 
to the reality beyond it. Nonetheless, the questions asked by aesthetics differ from 
those of semiotics not only in wording but also in substance, being directed to the 
following points: 
1 .  Can mimetic value be specified, and if so, how? 
2. Does mimetic value of itself determine the artistic achievement of the object of 
which it is an attribute, or is it dependent on other values? 
3. Does mimetic value enrich the total artistic value of the work, or does it collide 
with other specific values to the impairment of complete aesthetic satisfaction? 
The Varieties of Mimesis The literature on the subject of mimesis is, as in almost 
all cases connected with the history of aesthetic concepts, a lesson in ambiguities. 
The nuance which Erich Auerbach lent to this category in his book of the same title 
need not trouble us here since the author himself, no doubt advisedly, avoided a 
precise definition of the basic topic of his study. The three great traditions which 
relate to mimesis in European aesthetics -the Platonic (representation of appear­
ances, or of what is sensuously given in reality itself), the Aristotelian (representa­
tion of the essences of things), and the Democritean (representation of the actions 
of nature)-are still current today. The endurance of the first of these can be de­
tected not only in contemporary art doctrines predicated on the close imitation of 
aspects of the objective world (which usually means some variant of naturalism), 
but also in those like op art that call for a running record of everyday experience. 
The Aristotelian tradition leads to the kind of aesthetic system today embraced by 
Lukacs, who gives perhaps the supreme example of such an approach. The Demo­
critean tradition reaches through the Renaissance idea of natura naturans to con­
temporary structuralist ideas. According to Levi-Strauss and Barthes, /'activite struc­
turaliste involves a patterning and modeling of structures in accordance with rules 
derived from the surrounding world. Outside of these three traditional heritages, 
mimesis turns up-often enough without the term being used - in the latest theo­
ries of cinema, in their references to illusion being pushed to its utmost limits not 
only through the employment of moving images but above all through the evoca­
tion of the vagaries and confusion of the flow of life, this sense of the here-and-now 
being attributed quite rightly to the mechanical means of reproduction used. 
Of the formulations just cited, the most problematical is the legacy of the Demo­
critean tradition, since it is to be doubted whether men imitate the "actions" of 

205 
Mimesis as 
a Cognitive-Artistic 
Axiological Category 
nature. If they sing or build it is because they are a part of nature and predisposed 
to certain concomitant modes of behavior. Should the mimesis of molding a vessel 
in the shape of a shell or of carving an axe head to look like a beak be offered in 
evidence, this is something which could equally well point to mimesis in the Pla­
tonic or Aristotelian sense. To put it another way: When we refer to the veritable 
actions we stretch the meaning of "imitation"; where the term is feasible it refers 
surely to an outwardly perceptible simulation of "appearances" or of whole struc­
tures. 
There are likewise scime formidable snags in the attribution of mimesis made by 
the theorists of "nonfigurative" a rt. To contend, as they do, that nature is repre­
sented in the works of Malevich or Kandinsky in the 1 91 Os, or in the abstract ar­
rangements of color in Pollock, can hardly be regarded as more than a metaphor. 
However, the cubists could legitimately claim that they were observing nature, since 
their movement did not make an extreme break with the depiction of reality. In 
other words, we can talk of some version of mimesis as long as artists have re­
tained some conception of nature, even if they have discarded its Renaissance 
model. Nothing, however, supports those critics who are wont to supply their own 
metaphysical justifications to a composition. Even if we do find such metaphysics 
coming from a painter himself-Mondrian, for example, maintained that the geo­
metrical, rational reality of his pictures m irrors an ideal. horizontal-vertical orᢽer 
in the world - it is fair to ask whether there is any corroboration for such a belief. 
Again, if the idea is that an artist like Pollock is giving utterance to his anxieties in 
the violent collisions of colors, lines, and forms, we have to consider whether this 
is not a matter of expression rather than mimesis. Finally, those who adduce the 
resemblance between some works in the abstractionist canon and photographs in 
biology or physics textbooks forget that this is not conclusive evidence of a process 
of reproduction. All it need mean is that the artist has been influenced by science 
exhibits, or that a kinship of sensation and thought between the scientist and artist 
has brought about a parallelism of the matter communicated. 1 
It is possible that some {though doubtless not all) modern artists derive their . 
"abstract motives" from reality itself, that is, that they are concerned with a study 
of color, form, and space relationships. There is, however, no way of authenticating 
these points C'f reference even if they sometimes are there. The difficulty is that 
mimesis can be judged not on the basis of the supposed intentions of the artist but 
only by the artistic structures. There must be some bore minimum of mimetic ele­
ments in them for this catᢾory to be applicable. 

206 
Mimesis and Realism 
I l l usion in Art The most extreme version of mimesis involves reproduction with a 
special apparatus. At once the question arises: Is there such a thing as the perfect 
likeness, and would it, in any case, provide an artistic value? If we consider the 
cinema's "reflection" of reality, we cannot help but conclude that it is not an ab­
solutely exact reproduction since there is an inevitable process of distortion: in the 
first place, the visual and audio recording is still less than perfect; second, the image 
registered on the celluloid is two-dimensional; and third, even when color is used, 
there is always a certain unmistakable artificiality to it. None of this vitiates the 
notion of a "copy" as the term is used of the figures in a wax museum or the dum­
mies in a shop window. However, a moment's reflection is enough to make us 
wonder whether even these are the examples of replicas that they appear to be. 
After all, the whole point of a dummy is to create the illusion of something being 
what it cannot be. 
Where the same result is sought by pop art, we might speak of it as a mock-up 
which mocks; for the point, made as though between quotation marks, is to im­
prove our sensitiveness to the goings-on in ordinary life. Indeed, pop art is not 
oriented to any hope of total illusion but rather to byplay at the borderline between 
fiction and the phenomena of the present cultural context. The larger aim (where 
we may speak of one) is not to create an artificial aesthetic realm corresponding 
to the world's data; it is to "aestheticize" our encounter with life's flatness and 
ugliness. We should, accordingly, expect no experience of illusion with pop art, or, 
at most, we should expect it only in the initial phase that sets up our subsequent 
and central response. 
Yet there are many kinds of illusion. Some can be classified as belonging to a 
sensory dimension, and we may treat them as pertaining to the constant features 
of human response; others rely on individual idiosyncrasy; others stil l  on the re­
sponses of whole groups, strata, nations, cultures. To what extent and in which 
sense is art (or at least its representational heritage) truly dependent on illusions? 
Does any resemblence whatever to the world we know (whether inward or out­
ward, whether the object of description or of depiction) involve us in, or merely in, 
the make-believe attitude? Ernst Gombrich devoted a whole book to proving that 
art is based on illusion, and that its degree depends on prevailing cultural stereo­
types and the anticipations associated with them. He argued that it is a mistake 
to say, for example, that Constable's paintings are a truthful likeness of the English 
countryside; a close comparison of Wivenhoe Pork, Essex ( 1 8 1 6) with a photograph 
of the same scene demonstrates beyond doubt that Constable did not reproduce 

207 
Mimesis as 
a Cognitive-Artistic 
Axiological Category 
his subject. Nor indeed, according to Gombrich, did the photograph. 2 All art de­
pends on certain conventions, on knowing as much as on seeing, and the two pro­
cesses are inseparable. 
Gombrich's argument outraged the gestaltists, and no wonder, for it was a direct 
assault on their theories. In the dispute between Gombrich and Arnheim, I side 
with the former when he says there is no such thing as an "innocent eye" which 
perceives the world spontaneously, unguided by culture. However, there seems to 
be no need to go to the same extremes as Gombrich, whose fascination with the 
"sociology of knowledge" a la Mannheim and Popper led him to dismiss, luckily 
with less than complete consistency, any tenable concept of nature whatsoever. 
Did he not himself make the point that Constable's pictures bear more of a likeness 
to the English landscape than do the free-hand sketches drawn by children?3 Also, 
a comparison between the painting and the photograph of Wivenhoe Park is no 
more interesting than a juxtaposition of the latter with the original, for we are 
dealing with a continuum whose.limit is the landscape itself, frozen, of course, in a 
particular instant of history, the further stages being its various, more or less faith­
ful, renderings. 
Thus, it is not the case that the ultimate test is the cultural context and the pro­
jection of our anticipations. Even though our habits of looking at art and our stan­
dards of j udgment have changed, we have a tendency, which Gombrich himself 
concedes and proceeds to examine, to interpret even a picture like Mondrian's 
Broadway Boogie Woogie {1 942/3) along mimetic lines. In my view there is slender 
j ustification indeed for this example, unless we make the rationalization that the 
painting represents the rhythm of the streets of New York. What is more instructive 
is to match the instance of the Constable against certain illustrations reproduced 
by Edward Fry in his anthology of cubism : the photographs of the houses in L'Es­
taque painted by Braque in 1 908 and a view of Horta de San Juan which we know 
from the Picasso painting (1 909). Undoubtedly there is a perceptible element of 
mimesis in these pictures, but we need only glance at the Constable (and its orig­
inal) to see how much more emphatic it is there by comparison . Fry also juxtaposes 
photographs of W. Uhde and Daniel Kahnweiler with Picasso's portraits of them 
(1 91 O); if certain resemblances can be made out in a pinch in the former case, there 
are none whatsoever in the latter. 
Mimesis and Film Thus, if art involves "illusion" in Gombrich's sense of the 
word, the mimesis attendant on its creation still requires closer definition. Might 

208 
Mimesis and Realism 
the reproduction provided by the cinema be as much removed from Wivenhoe Pork 
as is the Constable painting from Braque's Moisons a L 'Estoque? In stressing the 
highly reproductive nature of film, theorists have usually settled on the observation 
that it alone among art forms is capable of capturing the flux and haphazardness 
of life. Yet it is revealing that in neither theor/ nor practice has the idea of absolute 
spontaneity proved viable. 
In the twenties, Djiga Vertov, editor of Kinoprovdo and author of Kinogloz, 
preached the supremacy of documentary over dramatic-psychological art due to 
its maximum objectivity, among other reasons. However, if we look at his first 
manifesto, We ( 1 922), we will at once see that the creational factor stole to the 
forefront of his thinking in his call for a cinema which was to set its sights on "the 
new heroes" and penetrate revolutionary processes. His paean to "dynamic geom­
etry" also betrayed a specific cast of thought. By 1 926 he was openly advocating 
the editing of selectively observed facts, while in 1 930 he recollected in an inter­
view for Kinofront that he hod practised a patently purposeful and rhetorical art, 
that he had been interested not in imitation of the fortuitous but in the "enthusiasm 
of facts."4 This was also the temper of his films The Sixth Day of the World (1 926) 
and The Eleventh Year ( 1 928). 
Another emphatically mimetic theory is developed by Siegfried Kracauer in his 
Theory of Film (he uses "realism" synonymously with "mimesis"). Kracauer held 
that the proper function of film is the direct reflection of the stuff of life as revealed 
in all its tumult, a communication of the physical reality of the world. 5 He was thus 
led into the awkward predicament of being forced to debar tragedy from the cin­
ema and to uphold broadly the Lumiere "line" to the exclusion of Melies and the 
whole avant-garde. What is more, while conceding that even the documentary ap­
proach must embody a creational germ, he arbitrarily sought to fix a point at which 
"creation" becomes inimical to film. Beyond this point he placed not only avant­
garde experimentation, but also any kind of philosophical or ideological intrusion 
by the artist; yet in his conclusions he flew in the face of his own argument by prais­
ing some highly deliberate, socially concerned, intellectually imaginative films (for 
instance, the work of Eisenstein, Chaplin's Monsieur Verdoux, Kurosawa's Rosho­
mon, Bergman's Wild Strawberries). 6 If we set aside the central dilemma in Kra­
cauer's theory-the unresolved contradiction between the principle of reproduction 
and the patterning of the material of film - and examine his constructive analysis, 
we will find a partial truth of great consequence. This is his demonstration that 
film can give a more profound and convincing picture of the real movement of life, 

209 
Mimesis as 
a Cognitive-Artistic 
Axiological Category 
its fortuitousness, its welter of events without beginning or end that knit almost 
unassisted ("row material," "found story") into fragmentary, unpredictable strands 
of fiction that intertwine and overlap. Mimesis in the sense of the reproduction of 
reality by means of a film camera is, therefore, a specific value which cannot be 
reduced to other types of representation. 
This is the crux of the Andre Bazin's argument, in Qu'est-ce que le cinema? On­
tologie et /engage (Paris, 1 958), that ever since Citizen Kane ( 1 941 ) the cinema 
has approximated the open-endedness of reality, its indeterminacy and mystery. 
Bazin's analysis of the evolution of the cinema shows, nevertheless, that m imesis in 
the sense of a registration of the authentic, inchoate course of events and the phys­
ical reality of the world is not a property of all films, while the rise of television has 
taught us that it appertains to other art forms as well. The demarcation between 
these arts is here immaterial; what we are interested in is a version of mimesis that 
cannot be described as the simple duplication of recognized realities, but that 
amounts, rather, to their reproduction, insofar as film can preserve, despite the 
shift from one frame of reference (reality) to another (art), the texture, space-time. 
structure, and rhythm of change of actual persons and events. If art can indeed 
impart the illusion of communing with reality itself, it is here at its most potent 
and complete. From what has been said, however, it will be understood that the 
illusion is produced not merely by the camera's ex tempore recording of the hurly­
burly of life but in equal measure by the controlling hand of the artist. However 
self-effacing, his presence is revealed in the camera angles, the casting, the or­
ganization of takes and sequences, etc. In short, the film artist transforms - in 
lngarden's phrase-the material for a work into the material of a work. 
The points outlined here have been very thoroughly explored by Christian Metz. 
His analysis of the difference between the impression of reality given by the photo­
graphic material and the impression fabricated from this material by a fictive reality 
(diegese) roughly approximates the distinction I have drawn between a mimesis 
of sensory appearances and mimesis involving a reproduction of the flux of life and 
its haphazardness. By "diegese" Metz means something more precisely understood 
than the "image of reality" with which Bazin had replaced the "reality of the image" 
achieved by editing and construction. Film fashions a near-real but imaginary 
world, and so is intensively related to, and simultaneously at odds with, the actual 
material of cinema, with all that is contributed by the signifiants, and with what is 
denoted on the most immediate plane of the work. The cinema, Metz says, invari­
ably preserves "/a mondite, " but at the same time it keeps transforming this mimetic 

2 1 0  
Mimesis and Realism 
material, rising above it not only as a result of a fil m's intrinsic connotations but 
also in the denotative aspect. Willy-nilly, diegese is involved in the generation of 
discourse. Thus, Metz is fully alive to the internal dualism of film, dispellinQ the 
dilemma that defeated Kracauer. He does this by making mimetic value - my term, 
not his -only one of the elements, however cardinal, of film art. 
Not that the film director who pursues mimesis should entirely try to subordinate 
himself to the fortuitous either. Very often a work of "illusion," in the sense of the 
utmost verisimilitude, is achieved by a deliberate and judicious artifice. De Sica's 
Umberto D, which Kracauer so admires, was no documentary. The aspect of resem­
blance was very carefully planned and followed through. This provokes us to ques­
tion whether reproduction is an artistic value only to the extent that it is the outcome 
of the artist's intention, or whether artistic value also adheres to the undoctored 
image of reality. The first alternative runs foul of the generally accepted rule in aes­
thetics that the artist's intention cannot be said to provide the corroboration of 
mimetic or any other value. If we are to go by the work itself, however, the second 
possibility must also be discarded since its standard of value is the accuracy of 
representation of a kind expected in a trial record or a report with strictly informa­
tional aims. 
The case for unadorned, documentary mimesis being an artistic value might be 
made if we assume either that reality itself is of artistic value and the director and 
his camera are merely intermediaries, or that the act of reproduction as such attains 
it by sheer technical excellence. Neither of these conjectures seems tenable if we 
expect mimetic value to possess a specific character. The point is that in the first 
case-quite apart from the debatable assumption of "beauty" that exists outside 
art (the whole course of aesthetic study suggests that art is the soil in which we 
cultivate aesthetic responses to natural and social phenomena, extrapolating the 
artistic standards of a given period) -the most we could agree to acknowledge 
would be a derivative value, a sort of surrogate. If we say that a specific value lies 
in the perfection with which the reality is reflected -the feature we distinguished 
in the second alternative-we are then talking about the attributes of reproduction 
rather than the end product or, to be more accurate, we are transposing the prop­
erties of the former on to the latter. In any case it is by no means obvious why the 
quality of the reproductive process should redound to its aËsthetic merit. Since 
machines excel human beings at this activity, and a skilled craftsman will similarly 
be more proficient than someone who is out to create something new and personal 
rather than duplicate what is already there, the second alternative as such must 

2 1 1 
Mimesis as 
a Cognitive-Artistic 
Axiological Category 
also be struck from the list of aesthetic pluses. Reproduction should only be re­
garded in terms of artistic value in strict relation to syntagmatics, the specific mar­
shaling of the elements expressed in the "language" proper to cinema (Metz 
shrewdly observes that film is "/angage, " not "/angue"). In short, the reproduction 
to be found in a newsreel has primarily a cognitive value. If invested with an ar­
tistic message, however, that value can no longer function on its own; that is to 
say, it ceases to be anything unless organically embedded in a parole (the term 
used by Metz). If this holds for cinema and television, it is a fortiori all the truer of 
mimetic works in the traditional fine arts or literature. 
The Cognitive-Artistic Value We must, thus, regard mimesis as an axiological 
category which requires a semiological interpretation. A work that possesses the 
attribute of representation assumes sign status because of something that lies 
outside it. However, this semantic relationship is embedded in the semiotic system 
constituted by the structure of that particular work, the idiosyncratic fabric of 
a given medium of expression. It might be said then that mimesis is an a rtistic value 
to the extent that it enriches a work by means of truthful relationships to the ex­
ternal world. 
The concept of "truth" is used here principally with regard to the denotative 
function (in both signifiant and signifie), while "enrich" is intended to underline 
the fact that "artistic truth" is not as such constitutive of art, being contingent on 
other fundamental values with which it interlocks in an indivisible nexus. 
The term "denotation" is often used in an unclear way by philosophers. I define 
it to indicate reference from a given sign (or ensemble of signs) to a model or mod­
els in the real world, a reference which is generally of an iconic character (iconi­
cism also extends to sound patterns in extreme cases of onomatopoeic analogues) 
or rendered through a verbal medium to which some relatively stabilized idea­
image is attached. To denote thus means to use depiction or description to repre­
sent something cs having certain determinate characteristics, although, as I shall 
try to bring out below, representation may also to some extent be schematic or 
distorted (e.g., it may include "phantasmata"). It is the resemblance to the ac­
knowledged model which provides the focus for the representational object. 
I must once more stress that producing a resemblance to something is not equiv­
alent to copying, it is not sheer make-believe. To hold that the experience of illusion 
ensues from a maximal blurring of the possible distinctions between the given sign 
and the thing represented, is to speak of something other than the experience of a 

21 2 
Mimesis and Realism 
work of art. I am brought back here to ᢻ point I sought to make previously: Since 
mimesis obviously has a denotative function, it can achieve artistic status only as 
it coalesces with the fundamental artistic value, in other words, with the expres­
siveness of the so-called formal structure. The more achieved and conspicuous the 
fusion, the greater is the artistic value of the mimesis. Sheer denotation may equally 
well be characteristic of a diagram, a traffic sign, an auditor's statement, or a 
prize-fight gong. Even a photographic approximation requires something "extra" 
to be termed artistic photography. 1-l'Owever, let me note that, once fused into the 
total artistic structure, mimesis provides a new aesthetic dimension which some 
critics and artists quite arbitrarily and prejudicially overlook or deny. 
These questions are central to John Hospers' Meaning and Truth in the Arts 
(1 946), which is still one of the best studies of mimetic values (there given the 
blanket term of "representation"). Hospers makes it plain that those who deny that 
such values pertain to art are unable to distinguish a merely illustrative function 
of the work from it symbolic content, which is sustained solely by colors, lines, 
sounds, words, and their meanings. In other words, while causing the specific sub­
stance of the work of art to disappear behind a mimetic theme, they proclaim, 
contrary to all experience, that only combinations of sense-perceived elements 
or semantic units without any referents in reality can form the aesthetic stratum. 7 
Hospers' proposed distinction between artistic values in a "thin" and a "thick" 
sense seems most apposite, at all events more to the point than the misleading 
suggestion that "formal values" alone are proper to aesthetics.8 He added -and 
this corresponds with what I hᢼve argued in slightly different terms-that the 
boundaries of mimesis cannot be fixed in any hard-and-fast fashion since the dif­
ferent arts continually shift on a continuum from· representation to non representa­
tion. 
When Hospers proceeds to substantiate his case with specific examples, he 
makes another point which seems most helpful to a clarification of our argument: 
The demarcation between the representational and nonrepresentational arts can­
not be set according to an identifiability of the relationship to the external world 
that would require verification in specific realities, in a specific original. 9 This prop­
position accords with the idea of artistic truth which Hospers says is inevitably 
oblique and vague ("truth to," as opposed to the "truth about" of science). The 
category of mimesis embodies the sui generis, dual status that infects the whole 
work; it does not forfeit its cognitive nature since it directs the attention to some­
thing beyond the work, nor is it reducible to purely informational value. Artistic 

2 1 3  
Mimesis as 
a Cognitive-Artistic 
Axiological Category 
"truth" is predicated on the presence in some form of material counterparts (in the 
case of iconic signs) or symbolic analogues (in the case of conventional signs) in 
external reality; at the same time it is so elusive a quality that it cannot, even when 
its raw material is language, be formulated in a statement that can be scientifically 
validated. 
Mimesis and the Fanciful Can we then regard as mimetic the work of Bosch 
or Melies, say-to keep to arts which work through iconic signs? Does the appear­
ance of grotesques within an artistic structure rule out representation of the world? 
For instance, if we see stones flying about the cinema screen, firing at flowers from 
catapults and then being assembled by the breeze for a meeting, will we say that 
reality has been represented in such an erratic flight of fancy? Hospers rightly ex­
tended the province of mimesis with the argument that reference to concrete orig­
inals is not its sole possible condition, although it is clear that in portrait or land­
scape painting or in the historical novel such a requirement might be in place. In 
the cinema a correspondence between the "material for a work" and the "material 
of a work" is all the more certain in view of the mechanical reproduction involved. 
In all these cases, however, it is assumed -at least tacitly-that the real world 
manifests itself in art through a likeness of both objects and occurrences. If we go 
further and allow mimesis to embrace fantastic images of reality, are we not com­
mitting a violation of reason as well as terms? I think not: fantasy and fable do not 
float entirely free of reality; the stones and flowers in my example are not make­
believe, nor is what posses between them or the course of the action. What is 
startling -and inclines the adult mind to metaphor-ore the properties invested 
in the stones, and it is this that produces the distortion of mimesis. 
Here we approach a new problem which I can only mention in passing, that of 
symbolism strictly so-coiled. All I shall say is that the category of mimesis does not 
in itself explain the symbolic function of a work. Mimesis is its foundation but the 
interpretation of symbols can only be made in reference to certain historically deter­
mined semiotic rules. 
Since nothing has yet controverted my assumption that mimesis varies in kind 
and degree, I would suggest calling the work of artists like Bosch, Chagall, or Me­
lies "mimetic-in-port" and, taking this idea a step farther, treating many of the 
paintings of Klee, Miro, or Picasso as examples of a "semi mimetic" reality. Much as 
it may still be denied by some, there is no disputing the mimesis of such works as 
Picasso's Girls of Avignon, Three Musicians, and Guernico, Klee's Conqueror 

2 1 4  
Mimesis and Realism 
(1 930), or Mire's Siesta (1 925); by comparison Klee's Waverer (1 938) or Mire's 
Head of a Man ( 1 931 ) are only putatively mimetic, while the compositions of 
Mondrian from 1 91 4  to 1 9 1 9  or Wladyslaw Strzemiriski in his "unism" period are 
amimetic. As I have emphasized, it was these works which Mondrian held were a 
proper representation of reality (a view incidentally still ardently upheld by Hans 
Jaffe, one of the leading authorities on De Sti;Q. 
The Scope and Limits of Mimesis Therefore, it is clear that the grading of mi­
mesis and the demonstrating of its aspects does not go far enough . Mimesis always 
relates to reality; we must, therefore, define what we mean by reality. It should 
by now be clear that the field of reference for mimesis as I understand the category 
is our reality, both natural and social, as made up of concrete obiects, events, pro­
cesses (internal as we// as external, when the former are described or depided), 
and situations, appearing in various segmentations, in certain inward and outward 
relationships, in simple or complex structures. 
I am aware of the epistemological and ontological pitfalls of such an oversimpli­
fied model. The problems with which Gombrich wrestled in his book concern not 
only the process of perceiving the world but also an overall analysis of the develop­
ment of human knowledge. When he says that we interpret as we perceive, he is 
touching on an issue that goes beyond the limits of psychology. 
Every act of knowing is governed by at least three things: the object on which it 
fastens; the subject in the sense of the generic capacities for apprehending the 
world; and the current state of knowledge. There is a fourth point-individual 
modification -which, crucial though it is to an account of the creative process and 
aesthetic response, can be passed over here. Those three basic conditions are 
enough to reinforce my earlier argument that mimesis is not the passive copying 
of reality in the manner of a mirror. In reproduction no less than in semimimetic 
works, imitation is accompanied by a certain creative element. However, Gombrich, 
as well as other writers like Francastel and Strzemiriski, have drawn far more ex­
treme conclusions from such subject-object conditioning concretized in an historical 
context, since they question the meaningfulness of any single concept of reality 
on account of its being modulated by the degree of visual awareness or, in broader 
terms, being a projection of a sum of human knowledge. The trouble with this case 
is that it absolutizes the active element in human perception. 
Leon Chwistek, whose position in the arguments on this subject seems sympto­
matic, rightly stresses the plurality of the realities among which we live. However, 

2 1 5  
Mimesis as 
a Cognitive-Artistic 
Axiological Category 
if we scrutinize the four types of artistic reality he distinguished (the reality of things 
as seen in the ordinary, normal way- naif art; of things as discovered and de­
scribed by science-the Renaissance pattern; of impressions- impressionism ; and 
of the imagination -the avant-garde since fauvism and cubism), the first point to 
strike us is that each of them is in some way mimetic. They owe this quality to the 
presence of objective elements. In everyday reality, and also in the sphere of im­
pressions and imagination, there is at most a distortion of these elements and their 
interrelationships. The obvious question which springs to mind is which of these 
realities is the most mimetic, and the answer would be what Chwistek calls "physic" 
reality. The term is a misleading one, however, even though it accurately places 
the antecedents of this model of reality in science. The snag is that it is concerned 
not with the depiction of atoms and neutrons, but with things as seen macroscop­
ically, in the way they impinge directly on our vision. Now it may well be wondered 
whether such perception is indeed "ordinary" or "normal." considering how dif­
ferently it has been recorded by primitive culture, for instance, or that not so long 
ago Picasso's paintings were, despite their palpable mimesis, almost universally 
decried as the antithesis of representation. Doubts of this kind might be answered 
by saying that, although mimesis has been variously interpreted in the history of 
culture, in the cases of both primitive art and Picasso we are dealing with bodies 
of work which contain mimetic elements. 
We need only specify exactly what is meant by the "objective" reference of art 
to reality to make this proposition acceptable. Such an agreement will not be se­
cured simply by means of a terminological convention. It is surely significant that 
primitive peoples were intent on representing the world of objects even if they dis­
torted them and that Picasso retained its components though abandoning the Re­
naissance formula of perspective. Although reality is variable, being dependent on 
the communal perceiving subject, on altering stereotypes and on fiats that x is true 
and y untrue, it still contains certain common features. Their absence would pre­
clude communication between people and ages. It is this reality, that is, one founded 
on certain macroscopically perceived constants and at the same time modified by 
individuals, social groups, nations, races, and periods of history, to which the cate­
gory of mimesis should be referred. In short, my case for the mimetic properties 
of art does not in any way imply a commitment to the anachronistic psychology 
which maintains that sensations, ideas, and their associations combine to reflect 
at an ever higher level obiectively visible realities. Mimesis is predicated on a con­
stancy of perception anchored to anthropological principles, to a treatment, that is, 

2 1 6  
Mimesis ond Realism 
of the objective world angled to the recurrent modalities whereby people enter into 
active intercourse with the world. However, mimesis cannot be accommodated by 
the narrowly empirical bearings of an atomizing psychology which sees the outside 
world as a welter of instants submerging the identity of both perceiver and per­
ceived. Mimesis requires at bottom a projet, to use an existentialist term, a com­
posite view of realities which, by a feedback, it reaffirms. 
Accordingly, the reality to which the artistic sign refers is not, nor can it come 
to be, as verifiable as is scientific research. This is true, first, because, as has al­
ready been pointed out, it rarely corresponds to some concrete original; second, 
because the subjective factor is clearly prominent; and third, because the value 
sought by the artist is seldom a carbon-copy similitude -the reality of nature is 
always presented through a filter of social reality. In the case of iconic signs, the 
painting, sculpture, or film can be compared to the original subject while the cul­
tural context which helped guide the artist's attention to that particula r object a0d 
encouraged him to see it in a particular way can be, as it were, understood. 
A fine example with which to develop this argument is Akira Kurosawa's film 
Rashomon. This splendid work has unanimously been interpreted as the artistic 
equivalent of the philosophical debates of today concerning the relativity of reality 
as it is perceived by different individuals. What we experience in the film are three 
versions of a single event, with no one version capable of being singled out as 
the definitive account. Nonetheless, some common points recur in all three versions 
of the dramatic events and they all have the same mimetic amplitude (the persons, 
the setting, the details of the scene, etc.). This may appear too easy a defense of 
my standpoint, but it suffices to remark that this and other Japanese films, and 
Indian films too, which in many respects we find exotic and strange, are yet com­
municative and allow us to respond with recognition to their fundamental materials 
(which are undoubtedly of a mimetic character). With this fact in mind, we may 
take Rashomon as a relevant parable. 
As another example, take the recent discussions among semiologists concerning 
the syntagmatic and paradigmatic dimensions of film. (See the work of Barthes and 
Pasolini.) The problem of nature versus or cum culture takes on very high priority 
in these discussions. The crucial issue may be formulated as follows: While it is 
true that we recognize the structure of a work of art owing to cultural paradigms 
(the "Western" adventure; the Samurai tale), it should also be obvious that there is 
some potential both in the objective world around us and in our human capacity 
for perceiving the world which gives us access to the fundamental planes of every 

217 
Mimesis as 
a Cognitive-Artistic 
Axiological Category 
movie, letting us discern the fantasy of Walt Disney from on acutely realistic ren­
dering, a genuine human face from its distorted mask, and so on. Of course, the 
only wise solution of the issue must be to state the interconnection of the cultural 
and natural aspects. The same is true of the traditional fine arts. 
We can always anticipate natural foundations to mimesis. As I dwell on a land­
scape by the seventeenth-century Chinese painter Tsio Che-pico, I fail to perceive 
as much or with as wide ramification as would a native appreciator. One hos to 
learn to grasp the structure of such a work in a dynamic, processual way so as to 
follow the artist's itinerary on the vertical scroll from the bottom-right. Yet anyone 
must recognize the contours of trees, of a bridge spanning a river, of a shelter in a 
volley, of a lowering mountain. Similarly, a Chinese viewer would harbor no doubts, 
when shown Giacometti's bronze Public Square ( 1 948), that the weirdly elongated 
figures represent human beings, nor would he fail to discern that Mondrian's Com· 
position in White, Red and Yellow (1 938) is amimetic, while Rouault's Homo Homini 
Lupus ( 1 944) represents a person against the background of a dramatic landscape 
with a blood-drenched sun. It might be objected that the Asian peasant could well 
understand the Giacometti scene as a gathering of ghosts, or that on African na­
tive, for example, could read into the Mondrian a landscape, and that he might fail 
to grasp Rouault's depiction if the death penalty in his culture does not involve 
hanging. These reservations cannot be treated lightly; yet what is stressed in each 
of these instances is either a lack of basic relevant knowledge, or the superimposi­
tion of irrelevant knowledge. It is my argument that, where shared knowledge may 
be assumed (and the third-world peasant is increasingly lettered; he knows more 
and more about the death penalties that other cultures mete out), the responses of 
various individuals will be more or less similar. In my Giacometti example the spec­
tral interpretation would, paradoxically, confirm that human beings have been 
recognized, and that the mythical world of on afterlife is consistently modeled on 
apt earthly experiences. 
Mimesis and the Semantic Signs of Literature Difficult as may be some of 
the problems in the visual arts, it would not do to finish with mimesis as such with­
out confronting the even greater complexities of those media which employ the so­
called conventional signs. Whatever else the representational arts may have in 
common, there is no denying that they differ quite markedly as they relate to their 
raw material. In poetry or fiction, it is the denotative function which again provides 
the source of mimesis. However, just as the mediation of signs is never detached 

2 1 8  
Mimesis and Realism 
from the linguistic context, from the cultural tradition or the aesthetic conscious­
ness, so denotation cannot be divorced from connotation, least of all in the signifie. 
A work is composed of signs and, indirectly, of their meanings, and, by virtue of its 
particular syntagmatic organization, it constitutes an interverbal reality furnished 
with simple or complex semantic components that combine into a superior struc­
ture. What are its points of reference? lngarden's answer, and that of the formalist 
schools (in Russia down to 1 926 and the American New Criticism} is that there ore 
none in external reality. This seems quite incompatible with the evidence of the 
novel. It is revealing that as the interests of the Russian formalists shifted and they 
turned from the analysis of poetry to prose, the question of "syuzhet" began to 
engage Shklovsky and Eikhenbaum-their studies of instrumentation, linguistic 
(nonrational language} and lexical elements yielded to investigations of subject 
matter.. 1 0  
The subsequent history of this doctrine, especially in its Prague version, has 
shown that the idea of examining the message of a novel purely in terms of an 
isolated syntactic-semantic structure in which only the interplay of words and the 
meanings glancing off them matter will hardly pass muster. The work of Muka­
rovsky, an active disciple of the structuralist school, is instructive here. Ever since 
his report to the 8th Philosophy Congress, one of the cornerstones of his aesthetic 
views has been that every work performs two functions simultaneously: one auton­
omous; one communicative. Out of this duality comes the special tension in the 
structure of the work and its perception. On the communicative level, he has placed 
all the story elements (umeni tematick6, obsahov6). 1 1  In his studies of poetic lan­
guage, particularly that of fairy tales, he has emphasized that not only the seman­
tic whole, but also its components, have as much a connotative as a denotative 
strain. Each element of the work appears in relation to another and in consequence 
the meanings accumulate, though each word and sentence points to a reality out­
side it. The denotative aspect of the sign has a static nature, the semantic dynamic 
being carried by the connotative one. The antinomy between the two yields the 
peculiarity of the messages of novels and poetry, though it is much more evident 
in the latter. In this way we have crossed into the realm of poetry, and here too it 
seems feasible to talk of elements of mimesis. Mukarovsky treats the fable, none­
theless, in the same way as any work of poetry and,mutatis mutandis, would pro­
ceed similarly with the nineteenth-century novel in which plot is all-important (the 
construction of a reported reality apparently in process of unfolding) or with fiction 
in which a narrator's account or a dialogue structure is uppermost. 

2 1 9  
Mimesis as 
a Cognitive-Artistic 
Axiological Category 
My earlier distinctions compel me to grade mimesis also within the province of 
conventional (symbolic) signs. In suggesting that the denotative nature of the work 
be made the basis of mimesis in literature, I am not simply acknowledging that one 
of the properties of all nouns is to designate. On that score, any piece of verse could 
scrape by as mimesis, unless avowedly nonsensical, like the poems of Aleksei Kru­
chonikh or the jingles which Stanislaw lgnacy Witkiewicz interpolated into his plays. 
As I see it, mimesis is a quality inherent in the whole of a work, in that specific 
property (the "higher meaning structure") which makes the connection to the more 
complex patterns in the reality beyond. These higher meaning structures are invari­
ably inventions-of objects or persons and their relationships , of events, situations, 
some developed theme, and so on, depending on the genre of poetry or prose con­
cerned. Only secondary in this respect are such questions as: the substance of the 
message itself; the degree of independence of its particular elements; the tense, 
person, and "purity" of the narrative voice; or the possible interaction of pictorial. 
elements with sounds and meanings. 
All that matters here is the degree of mimesis obtained in accordance with the 
rules of syntax as they affect both syntax and meaning. Consider this passage from 
Miron Bialoszewski's Grey Eminences of Rapture: 
The stove too is beautiful 
It has tiles and grillwork 
It can be ashen 
silver 
grey-almost drowsy .
.
•
 
especially when 
it shuffles sparks 
or when it dies .
. . 
It is obvious that this is significant verse, that it uses verbal signs to animate 
surfaces just as iconic signs do in the visual arts. When we come to the out-and-out 
wordplay of a poet like Khlebnikov, however, we find m imesis evaporating in the 
clash of dissociative semantic segments. In such a case the collision of the images 
evoked by the common nouns and the whirligig of meanings they set spinning make 
it more rewarding to analyze the relationship between the creative subject and his 
work rather than that between the welter of signification and external reality. 
Even when semimimetic elements appear in Khlebnikov's verse, as, for example, 
in The Spell of Laughter ( "laughers laughing laughs who laugh laughily"), they 

220 
Mimesis ond Realism 
ore still eclipsed by the linguistic experiments and instrumental acrobatics. When ­
to move away from poetry -we read Simone de Beauvoir's comments in Lo force 
de /' age on her own writings, Les mandarins among them, it is hard not to be 
struck by the affinities between the outobiogrophicol and the fictional elements. 
Although she emphasizes (and rightly so) the difference between authentically 
experienced and imaginary reality, the degree of m imesis which pervades her 
novel seems quite notable in comparison with so much other contemporary fiction 
(e.g., the work of William Faulkner). 
It would be tempting to conclude that in poetry mainly the depictive (ut pictura 
poesis) tendency, and in prose mainly the narrative (epic or dioristic) tendency, 
dominates or is all-pervasive and sets the manifest pattern with respect to the 
mimesis. These ore, in fact, prevalent modes, and the artistic techniques which do 
bear on the mimetic rendition of the reality. Nonetheless, these conclusions must 
be tempered by two major reservations: 
l .  Depiction or description, in the present context, means something quite other 
than description in a scientific sense. A sociologist who prepares a report on the 
voting pattern or the crime rote in Son Francisco, describes in a mode quite dif­
ferent from that of a poet or novelist. The poet will view Son Francisco through the 
1-subiect; the fiction writer understands the city through the modality of his charac­
ters. This is true even of the historical novel; in Sienkiewicz's Quo Vadis, for in­
stance, Rome is described otherwise than it was by the Roman historians of Nero's 
day-it is treated in a fictitious frame of reference. 
2. A prevalence of the descriptive tendency conditions on enhanced, 9r height­
ened, literary mimesis but does not in itself constitute that distinctive characteristic. 
Here again, as in the nonverbal media, we should see mimesis as extending further 
than the phenomena customarily so labeled. Mimetic elements con be glimpsed in 
lyrical novels and theater pieces as well as in lyric poetry; and the fantastic setting 
of fairy toles or of science fiction makes sense only within a context of mimetic 
plenitude or paucity. In short, the literary "higher semantic structures" ore depen­
dent on more or less ample "mimetic substructures." Elimination of the mimesis 
occurs only in the most extreme, exploratory, and inventive efforts to elude the 
conventional sign-syndromes. It is symptomatic that this has so for happened al­
most solely in poetry, whereas in prose the single instance I have so for noticed is 
the recent practice of the Te/ Que! group (e.g., Nombres by Phillipe Sollers, Circus 
by Maurice Roche), in which the semantic and syntactic patterns of language ore 
calculatingly distorted. However, it seems highly dubious whether these works 

221 
Mimesis as 
o Cognitive-Artistic . 
Axiological Category 
should be called novels. I think that the explications provided by Jacques Derrida, 
a leading Tel Que/ theorist, in la dissemination (1 972) legitimizes my doubts. There 
is, likewise, good reason to assert that "concrete poetry" is basically not poetry_ 
Its factual value is one of graphic and sound patterns; and, considered from the 
viewpoint of literature, it raises a significant artistic gesture of protest against 
poetic dogma; but this is a rebellion which has already crossed the frontier beyond 
poetry. 
Mimesis and the Rendering of Essences Although cognitive values have 
been traced in all the varieties of mimesis examined here, I must now add that 
they only come into view in this way when we focus on the Aristotelian tradition 
(among those distinguished at the beginning of this essay). If the idea of mimesis 
is directed at the essence of things, it comes to be a medium of knowledge on a 
par with science or philosophy, or even superior to these, according to some aes­
thetic theories which maintain that it plumbs the haecceitas of objects, people, and 
events, capturing as well the basic meaning of historical processes. If the concept 
of truth in the philosophical sense can be extended to artistic perception, this is 
an aspect from which the latter merits analysis. Mimesis thus described appertains 
alike to the visual arts, literature, cinema, or theater. Whether literature digs deeper 
into the essence of reality than does painting, and cinema more deeply than either, 
thanks to the potency of the medium of mimesis, is a question I shall pass over here 
except to say that I feel it is wrongly put. All these arts have the power, each in 
its own way, to get to the heart of reality. Of course, they do vary in the range of 
their explorations, but no evidence has yet been produced for ruling that the 
broader the area of reality covered by an art form, the deeper its fathoming goes. 
Mimesis as the representation of the essential features implies a substantial modi­
fication of our way of talking about the relationship of art to reality, the idea having 
undergone a shift of meaning which makes it more apt to talk of the transmutation 
rather than the reproduction of reality. Mimesis in the Aristotelian version surely 
postulates an active process of perception in the sense of a highly selective attitude 
which generalizes through particulars, compressing complex processes into con­
crete situations and a multiplicity of social types into a single exemplar. 
In a discussion with the Paris semiologists, principally Barthes, Mikel Dufrenne 
has made the point that there is no factual basis for a belief in the absolute autono­
my of the work of art. It is, of course, possible to consider the signification of a 
work solely in terms of its syntagmatic content; but it should be realized that such 

222 
Mimesis and Realism 
an interpretation is bound to be truncated. In an essay on literary criticism which 
argues the need to elicit the sense as well as structure, Dufrenne recalls Husserl's 
Sinn-von and very properly underlines the dualism of meaning of all artistic com­
munication. I quite agree with him when with certain echoes of Mukarovsky's semi­
otics, he opposes the reduction of a work to a system bearing no relationship what­
soever to external realities and protests against the idea of criticism solely as a 
meta language for testing les volidites (Barthes), unconcerned with the establish­
ment of any kind of verities. Nevertheless, Dufrenne seems to couple his insistence 
on the communication through the work of art of truth about the world with a 
dismissal of mimetic values. The difference between his position and mine hinges, 
at bottom, more on philosophy than on aesthetics. In his dispute with semiological 
structuralism he comes down on the side of the subjective sense which the artist 
lends to his work, that is, his idiolects which embody a singular style. Here, too, I 
can endorse each of his propositions; what I cannot accept is the way he is led 
in his emphasis on the primacy of the expressive qualities to put mimetic values 
·beyond the pale of art. His standard work, Phenomenologie de /'experience es­
thetique (Paris 1 953) explains why he has taken this course: Art, he writes, like 
science, though in a different way, gives coherence to the chaotic matter of reality. 
The world (le monde) is not reproduced but created in relation to an existential 
design and to l'affectif, which is given a priori. Thus, if art represents anything, 
it is only to the extent that it expresses the attitude of the artist who objectifies 
through /es sensibles what is basically unreal. Accordingly, if I take issue with Du­
frenne it would not be in terms of aesthetics, since we would be arguing about the 
basic premises and conclusions of the phenomenological-existential theory, of 
which he is a leading exponent. It should be emphasized here that views of mimesis 
as an aesthetic and axiological category do have their roots in the holder's philo­
sophical system, as can be seen from the case of Dufrenne which I have advisely 
cited. For that matter, this is not unexpected; my whole point has been to show 
that the concept of mimesis embodies a certain (explicit or implicit) view of reality 
in the argument for a greater or lesser correspondence between a world being 
portrayed and its reflection in the work of art. Accordingly, while I believe the artis­
tic process to be of a subject-object nature, this does not mean that I disown Du­
frenne's claim for expression, which is an element of every work of art. Where we 
part company is over the philosophical judgment which induces me to maintain 
that mimetic values con and should be separated from expressive ones, and that, 
in the case of works of a certain aspect, the former are more conspicuous. 
1 2  

223 
Mimesis as 
a Cognitive-Artistic 
Axiological Category 
Summation So Far In the foregoing pages I have tried on the one hand to bring 
out the varieties of mimesis and on the other to answer the questions posed at the 
beginning. In summing up thus far the following points might be made: 
l .  Mimesis is an artistic category involving a specific type of value and never 
appearing in isolation. This value springs from a truthful. that is, analogous repre­
sentation of external reality, here understood as a complex pattern of elements 
(statically and dynamically given, usually taking the form of concrete animate 
or inanimate objects and their interrelationships, all occurring within a given space­
time continuum) registered macroscopically and as adequately as the state of 
knowledge permits. These elements also embrace inward reality where it affords 
the artist's model up to the same extent as the behavior of specific persons and the 
world of objects. In other words, a literary account of someone's happiness or a 
portrait of a sad expression are as much a mimetic theme as a description of Paris 
in Balzac or Zola, or Michelangelo's statue of David. It must be emphasized that in 
talking of analogues in art I consider their referents to be not objects in general, 
since that would include colors or combinations of colors, but objects in the veri­
fiable form of "bodies," animate or inanimate, which have certain inherent quali­
ties and are associated with states, events and, above all, the relations between 
them. Thus the first step in grasping what mimesis means is to select for it a uni­
verse with definite characteristics . .  1 3 
· 
2. The mimetic sign is truthful in the sense that there is a correspondence be­
tween it and the reality signified (iconically or conventionally). The degree of this 
correspondence varies and is the standard for distinguishing the different kinds of 
mimesis graded along a continuum. (a) The continuum begins with the vestigial 
equivalence which we have called "semimimetic" because of the difficulty of recon­
structing the phenomenal structure from the content of the work itself; 1 4  the domi­
nant patterns of the semimimetic work are also decisive in bringing about this 
fantastic cast of the whole. (b) A different and fuller correspondence occurs when 
only some elements belonging to an artistic object have a completely recognizable 
relationship to external reality (this concerns appearances in iconic art principally). 
(c) A third variety of mimesis is the direct, integral reproduction of appearances, as 
in the visual arts primarily, or indirect reproduction by means of certain semantic 
wholes, as in art forms whose sole or predominant material is language. Repre­
sentation of this type is not uniform: it runs all the way from maximum fidelity to 
the outside world to extreme formalization or schematism. All reproduction is to 
some extent, however minute, schematic, but the fuller the treatment of external 

224 
Mimesis and Realism 
realities, their components and relationships, the less obvious this schematic struc­
ture is. (d) A special kind of mimesis is the representation of real life in all its flux 
and inconclusiveness. The camera makes cinema and television capable of produc­
ing images in which the appearances of persons and things, situated in the context 
of space-time mobility.and change, transmit the rhythm of reality itself to the work 
of art. (e) Finally, there is the mimesis which is concerned with essences, a kind of 
transmuting representation which may accompany any of the preceding vari­
eties. 1 5  
This continuum of five varieties of mimesis i s  constructed on the basis of the 
artistic-cognitive criterion of the identifiability of the reality depicted and the pene­
tration of its fundamental attributes. If I were to adopt a purely artistic point of 
view-that is, if I were to consider the augmentation of the creative factor-the 
scale would be arranged differently; it would begin with reproduction, go through 
the representation of appearances from utmost fidelity to marked distortion (or 
schematization), and culminate with the antipodes of semimimetic art and art 
which is directed towards essences. It should be stressed that this growth in the 
creational factor is not the only measure of the enhanᢷement of artistic value. An­
other criterion might be the degree of structural consistency. However, it is obvious 
that cognitive-artistic value and purely cognitive value do not increase symmetri­
cally. At any event, neither of these scales admits the possibility of treating mime­
sis merely as a copy of reality. Even the concept of reproduction is not a mechanical 
duplication of the outside world, but an exploration of its authenticities. 
While we can talk - in the case of a mimesis based on appearances, semiappear­
ances, or imitation of the rhythm of life -of a representation either in a faithful 
or a distorted form, mimesis in the Aristotelian sense should be described as trans­
mutation, since it seeks out and visualizes the meaning of reality. In this kind of 
mimesis the subiective factor is cognitively most active. In the case of semi mimesis, 
on the other hand, the subiective factor is directed away from apprehension of the 
outside world. This issue has come up before, and I showed then that resemblance 
or similitude, although it is the chief aim of representation (the denotative function), 
is yet artistically insufficient by itself. Recently, conceptualist-minded artists have 
presented us with such moot cases as plain pictographs or seismograms, which 
they tell us are works of art. Here we are wholly beyond mimesis and into an ex­
treme gesture of the avant-garde intended to debunk a cultist attitude towards 
art and the art market. 
3. Mimesis, being an integral element of the whole artistic structure, can be sepa-

225 
Mimesis as 
a Cognitive-Artistic 
Axiological Category 
rated out only in the abstract. If the work is representational, mimesis subsists in 
its entirety; indeed, the formal and expressive elements through which mimesis 
has been achieved become, as it were, transparent. In consequence, there is gener­
ated a twofold tension: (a) between the semiotic situation in itself and the semiotic 
situation which points outwards to nonartistic reality, and (b) between the pattern 
of formal elements which commands separate attention and the overall artistic 
structure which reabsorbs and neutralizes it. The first antinomy has been the sub­
ject of frequent and perceptive analysis by Mukarovsky. It has recently been em­
phasized in the work of Julij Lotman, who approaches art objects as structures 
of dialecti_c opposites: the virtuality of the world as represented in the object con­
trasts with the reality of the object per se, the resemblance of the object to some­
thing real contrasts with its fictional status, and the syntax of specific elements 
building up an inward rhythm contrasts with the semiotic design which appeals 
outwards to both author and recipient. 16 The second antinomy was long ago ex­
amined in a classic inquiry by Roger Fry. Analyzing Daumier's Gare St. Lazare he 
drew attention to the way in which the plastic and mimetic values were at the same 
,. 
time meshed and in competition with one another. 1 7  Due to the semiotic context, 
the problem of the cultural coefficients of mimesis is no less fundamental than is 
the presumed natural human potential for recognizing the substance of a repre­
sented world: in fact, the former molds and modifies the latter. The rendering of 
mimetic traits always follows a particular code within the sociohistorical (environ­
mental and circumstantial) setting. In the case of primitive art, for example, the 
modern viewer demimetizes what the original social group readily experienced as 
a pictogram. Another, if tricky case is provided by the stereotyped movie, to which 
many fans will respond "over"-mimetically. A sophisticated viewer will take the 
formula western or detective film for relaxation; the naive audience may treat it as 
being true to some life which they cannot experience directly and may, therefore, 
discuss it seriously. 
4. In the works now under consideration, signifiant and signifie tend to dis-
rupt the unity whose inherence to art was so justly emphasized by both Dufrenne 
and Metz. The point is that there is a field between the denotative and connotative 
functions which polarizes as much as it unites them. The unquenchable antinomies 
I have indicated in mimetic works enrich their fabric, but if they grow too sharp 
they fracture the structural whole and detract from the value of the work. One 
instance of this is when illustrative motives overrun a work and turn it to moralizing 
or propaganda. Another equally jarring example would be aggressively obtrusive 

226 
Mimesis and Realism 
accentuation of the devices used to organize the artistic structure. From the view­
point of mimesis, the former case is of greater interest. I have assumed that mimetic 
value is not to be referred strictly to some concrete prototype, although in certain 
genres and in certain works such an eventuality cannot be excluded. Nevertheless, 
artistic truth is generally understood not as a duplication of here-and-now facts, 
but as an approximated or generalized representation of the specimens of a given 
class and the relationships between them. The closer mimesis approaches to the 
exact reproduction of particular occurrences, objects, or persons and the familiar 
interactions between them, the nearer it comes to purely documentary art. The 
further it moves away from this, the closer it draws to fantasy and the obscuring 
of the genuine relationships between people and objects. 
5. Mimesis has been called an artistic-cognitive value and this emphasizes its 
sui generis nature. Cognitive value, however, is not an element of mimetic works 
alone. It resides in all art if only by virtue of being a special type of communica­
tion implicating the artist on the one hand and the structure itself on the other. 
Still, mimetic works seem to have a quality lacking in others -the ability to refer 
not only to themselves and their authors, but also to the reality they denote. This is 
why any account of mimetic values must give a special place to their cognitive am­
plitude-which is after all the source of that oscillation within the sign structure 
noted in the third of our conclusions. 
The ideas which I have developed in the preceding pages depart from the argu­
ment I set out in an earlier essay "Le realisme com me une categorie artistique" 
(Recherches internationales a la lumiere du marxisme, no. 38, 1 963). Nowhere is 
this more true than in the treatment of the semiotic nature of the work of art, which, 
in that essay, I viewed in the light of traditional semantic analysis, but which semi­
ological research has now shown to require thorough reappraisal. It is quite clear 
that I was wrong to argue that the universal sign-like characteristic of works of art 
is solely a matter of each of them being a token (or index). I can also now see that 
the division into semantic and nonsemantic signs is rather antiquated since some 
kind of cognitive meaning attaches to every work of art; any inquiry into these 
problems should thus be shifted to the complex relationships between denotation 
and connotation, between syntagmatics and paradigmatics. Indeed, the main lin­
gering problem in the analysis of the category of mimesis (as of the category of 
realism) seems to be that we must establish the paradigmatic elements which allow 
us to accept a corresponding (analogous) relationship between the work and what 

227 
Realism as 
a Mode of Mimesis 
may be regarded as not only its basis but also its model. Of course, this is not para­
digmatics within the strict meaning of Saussure's /ongue, but in the sense of cul­
tural stereotypes which in a given context govern the reading and interpretation of 
a certain semantic content. That culture does determine our understanding of na­
ture needs no further explanation; it is, I may simply emphasize, a question of car­
dinal importance in apprehending mimetic values. The point was brought out in 
the second volume of Trudy po znakovym sistemon by V. Toporov, L. Zhegin, and 
B. Uspensky in their examination of the space composition and design of paintings 
from the Buddhist and Byzantine spheres of art. The fact that the artist nonetheless 
tries "to return to the self and to nature" despite the codes laid down by a given 
culture is on indication, however, that transmitted paradigms do not ultimately 
cbnstitute the foundations of art. 1 8  This still leaves unanswered the question of 
when, in what circumstances, and in which arts, the depreciation or the upgrading 
of mimetic values is evidence of spontaneous urges on the port of the artist to over­
come the existing paradigms arid when it, in fact, perpetuates them. Studies along 
these lines seem to go beyond semiology, though in such matters, too, it may well 
shed light on aspects of our subject which ore still shrouded in obscurity. 
Realism as a Mode of Mimesis 
Marxist aestheticions have not reached a consensus in their understanding of the 
notion of realism. The opinions now current, however, all agree that it involves a 
transmutation of reality. What does this transmutation mean? In my view, the idea 
of realism includes the selection of real phenomena, the extraction of their charac­
teristic and typical features, and the representation of these traits in a "condensed" 
way that directs attention to deeper meanings, that is, to the coherences which in­
clude and yet transcend the surface appearances of phenomena. Further, the trans­
mutation of reality implies on organized formal structure, whose limits ore indi­
cated and whose traits ore nourished by a particular subject matter; which is 
absorbed by these so-called content values and which, in turn, lends on autonomy 
to these values in relation to the world of their real referents. Artistic activity in this 
dimension attains a twofold domination of the world: psychosocial and technical­
moterial. 1 have said elsewhere (in controversy with Andre Malraux) that this ap­
plication of the term realism is tantamount to "creationism." 1 9  
Is my notion of creationism opposed to what the reader may have thought of as 
the definition of realism? This would be reasonable only if the reader were to un­
derstand realism in terms of a certain nineteenth-century mode of fiction and its 

228 
Mimesis and Realism 
manifestos, which do, in fact, seem incongruous with the artistic methods and 
creative advances of the twentieth century. However, more and more present-day 
marxist authors are turning decisively away from that anachronistic concept of 
realism. 20 Accordingly, the artist is understood to imitate not so much natura 
naturata as natura naturans. He contributes to the creation of the social reality 
even while he is created by it. However, to regard realism as an artistic category 
presents us with complexly involved problems. I cannot here offer an exhaustive 
analysis, but I should like to offer a tentative outlining of my point of view. Once 
again, I regard what I wrote on this topic in 1 963 as inadequate. 2 1  I believe the 
following remarks are much more responsive to the problems. 
Higher Semantic Structures The question of realism cannot be posed correctly 
if we have not initially defined what is meant by "mimesis"; especially since realism 
becomes at times virtually reduced to mimesis. Indeed, an intermediary realm exists 
between mimetic art and the art I have classed as realist. However, as carefully 
as we can we should demarcate realism within the context of mimesis for analytical 
purposes. I shall want to do this in light of the example of modern aesthetic 
thought and practice and, moreover, with an awareness of the sharp differences 
among the core philosophical attitudes (and even among the specifically historio­
graphical orientations) discoverable in art. Realism, then, is a distinctive category, 
which invokes (as does mimesis) a relationship of analogy; it is chiefly distinguished 
however, not by a stress on the form and exterior look of objects, or on the vigor­
ous and helter-skelter unfolding of developments, or on the intricacies of the inter­
relations of objects, persons, and events, but, rather, by attention to typical mo­
ments, in other words, by an evocation of some essential aspects of reality. 
Obviously, this decisive kind of analogon or correspondence relationship does 
not exclude other criteria from being applied to realism. However, other criteria 
are not indispensable to the artistic constitution of realism. Realism and also other 
modes of mimesis can be spoken of as artistic categories only in the sense (and to 
the extent) that they link more or less effectivelY. (i.e., intimately and organically) 
a content and an ensemble of expressive means with a represented segment of 
the world. This is to say that we have not an interpolated, indigestible cognitive 
structure that happens to be situated in a work of art but, instead, a representa­
tion (meaning-structure) which is imbued with the fundamental elements that we 
term art's "language." 
This seems to be a notable characteristic of art: its media and specific means of 

229 
Realism as 
a Mode of Mimesis 
expression have, as it were, the faculty of absorbing the conveyed content, and 
vice versa. Perhaps it might be retorted that the "language" is always crucial, even 
in the case of symbolical-mathematical formulas. This is, in fact, true; clarity and 
consistency do hinge on the manner in which a thought is conveyed. Nonetheless, 
outside of the artistic domain, the vehicle of the message is to a great extent inter­
changeable, or else it is entirely transparent (as in logic or mathematics): the em­
phasis always falls on the communication of the given idea. However, art is con­
stituted by the communicated idea with the indivisible whole being irreducible. 
Here, then, the language is no mere "garment," it is the integral "body" of the 
artistic message. A further sense of language must be also emphasized. This is its 
aspect which the French semiologists term "parole" -the idiomatic, personal way 
in which the artist's ideas are presented. The contemporary avant-garde often side­
steps this idiomatic utterance, preferring a deliberately anonymous expression of 
the artist's problematic situation. Nonetheless, the very fact of a peculiarly indi­
vidual language (which is termed one's own style) best elucidates why the cogni­
tive relation of the work of art to the world is inseparable from the artistic structure 
as a whole. For the cognitive value is here fused with so-called formal and expres­
sive values, and more than that, this whole is suffused by an individual valuative 
approach, heightening the subjective (both personal and social group) perspective 
towards the objective reality. 
Lukacs spoke of this feature of art as anthropomorphic. By the means of a sensu­
ous and expressive medium, an individual tries to capture the totality of the world 
around him (with himself at its center) and to recreate it with the self-contained 
totality of a poem, novel, painting, or musical composition. In every case the work 
is composed of a system of signs which, in a way apt for its medium, asserts two 
simultaneous fields of reference: one field interior and closed, the other exterior 
and open. A tension results between the structural (syntactic-semantic) plane and 
the structural-semiotic plane, in other words, between the form-and-content of the 
work on the one hand and the form-content syndrome and its sociological referents 
on the other, and we may say that this antinomy, which is characteristic of all mi­
metic (including realist) works, is paralleled by a tension between the represented 
(virtual) world and the representable (real) world. 
Closing in on the problems of realism, I must say something further about lin­
guistic (literary) signs. These seem, on the face of it, less adapted to the functioning 
of mimesis (and realism, of course) than are the pictorial (iconic) signs, which quite 
directly facilitate the choice of materials and the shaping of the analogy-models. 

230 
Mimesis ond Realism 
Literary signs are accepted as meaningful only by common consent, that is, they are 
conventional. Given the linguistic tradition, the moment in that tradition, and the 
attendant cultural context, it is possible to find in the conventional (literary) sign 
its significant function and also its denotative function. To the conditioned or deter­
minate character of the denotative function, we owe the possibility of a mimetic 
and likewise a realist category in the arts and also the possibility of describing a 
variety of denotative properties along appropriate scales. It seems impossible to 
discern any principles of mimesis (including for realism) through isolating and 
studying the semantic elements. Failure hos met the research into the cognitive 
content of literary works which tries to analyze the logical value of the propositions, 
whether one by one or in combination. 
The attempts of the Anglo-American analytical school (e.g., Weitz and Margolis) 
are characteristic. To dote they have not succeeded in deducing the represented 
world through the method of distinguishing purely predicative propositions from 
other propositions which they discern as fictional. To speak of "implied truth" and 
"implicit meaning," and to categorize it as a kind of truth differing from that of the 
sciences, simply does not follow from the logical analysis of, say, a sequence of 
utterances by Mr. Pickwick or perhaps of the dialogues between Sherlock Holmes 
and Dr. Watson. 
How then are we to embrace and surmount the total meaningfulness of these 
complexly interconnected and ramified unities, especially in their reference to extro­
literary reality? It appears that we must make up our minds to admit certain "high­
er" level "semantic figures" or "semantic systems," to use the terminology of Polish 
authors with a structural-semiological orientation. In other words, the unit of analy­
sis must be the character, the character grouping, the leitmotif, the action, etc. 
(along with the interrelations among these elements). 
I must also say a complementary word about how the analogy-model of a liter­
ary work may be discussed. Take this proposition: "A man descended by a twisting 
street towards the steps which lead into the largest square of the city." We may 
surely ᢸxamine the link to reality of this language unit in abstracto; in other words, 
as o proposition which lacks a concrete amplifying and determinate context. How­
ever, it seems difficult to speak of a mimesis os such when such propositions are 
met away from a larger representation, that is to say, apart from a more extensive 
semantic totality. We have in that sentence a relation of reference, which asks for 
a greater context. In a pictorial work, any selected fragment will yield a sufficient 
relation of reference if it has distinct contours and a relation of analogy to objects 

231 
Realism as 
a Mode of Mimesis 
or persons in the real world. Not so in a literary work, where the entire structure 
has more or less to provide the context for the reference. 
Consider the case of a mimetic painting, a landscape. What parallels it as a prop­
osition? Not the statement, "A tree stands on the shore of a river." A paralleling 
proposition would be one which defines the subject of the painting, for example, 
"View of a Bank of the Vistula River Near Warsaw." (Mimetic value, I should add, 
is never the result of a recognition of "proper names," for even in an historical 
novel or a work of artistic reportage the real persons and events are transmuted by 
being set into a fictive world which, as Roman lngarden has remarked, generates its 
own objective logic. Any literary work makes a new patterning of the represented 
world and employs, accordingly, "common names.") 
I cannot discuss in detail here the structural difference between prose and poetry, 
a problem which is pivotal since, in the twentieth century and especially in poetry, 
there have been notable modifications in the semantic functions (cf. chapter 2). 
Nor can this be the occasion for fully discussing the ultimate ontology of the literary 
work: the peculiar status of its depicted world. I may, however, remark as follows. 
The depicted world con be constituted solely by means of propositions (though it 
cannot be reduced to a sum of semantic propositions and sequences); and it cannot 
be considered apart from the given linguistic and cultural tradition. In this way, 
fictions clearly reveal their semiotic dependency. The ontology of a representational 
world derives, then, from the broader ontological world of the cultural context; 
but to this I must add that a fictive world differs from nonfiction in this context 
because of its peculiar code. On the one hand, the fictive world is a creation of the 
particular consciousness that endows it with meaning and value; on the other hand, 
the fiction transcends that consciousness. It might be said (to use Husserl's term 
in a modified way) that every fictive world partakes of on intentional character, or 
(to use a different angle of approach) that the full mimesis of which I speak is real­
ized only because of the code and rhythms of a fictive world, but that the fictional 
structure, in turn, is viable only because of the mimetic potentiality. 
I have perhaps stressed overly the distinction between iconic and linguistic signs, 
and it will lend some balance to reemphasize that both kinds ore translatable from 
one culture to another. 22 That the differences which sequester the iconic and lin­
guistic conventions do not stop communication does not mean that the cultural 
context lacks an effect on the way we apprehend realism or mimesis in general. 
Rather, we cannot accept the idea of adequatio res et intellectus as indiscriminately 
applicable. On the contrary, within a given social context some relationships of 

232 
Mimesis and Realism 
analogy can be apprehended outside the prevailing code or convention which 
determines the way the artist must relate to reality and the reality to which he must 
relate. The only "convention" which cannot be dispensed with in this respect is that 
which has emerged in human cultures on a natural basis. Mimesis, accordingly, 
has its appeal through what is generic in the culture-and thus in nature, through 
the mediation of the culture. 
The Anafogon of Rea lism Now realism is distinguishable as an artistic cote-. . . .  
assumed a different aspect, however, and from the end of the sixteenth century, 
gory from other forms of mimesis because its analogy-model may, although it need 
not, be solely composed of the mimetic elements. I mean that, on the evidence, a 
realist creation can include aspects of fantasy-and the expressed conviction that 
God, angels, devils, tree-spirits, and other such things exist. The crux or principle, 
I repeat, is that certain selected social. psychological, or psychosocial phenomena 
are epitomized by realism; and such epitomies may (have to) be expressed also 
with distortions or an upending of the real objects and persons and their relation­
ships. As examples, I think at once of the powerfully imaginative typificational 
achievements of Dante's Divine Comedy or of the Polish romantic school. The essen­
tial, we see, takes full control of the gravitational center. 
It should be unnecessary to add that I suggest no version of "essentialism," 
which is the view that certain qualitative moments (and perhaps their systems) 
may be discerned, either eidetically or discursively, which make it possible to say 
once and for all how phenomena come about. By "essential," I only mean what 
may be empirically apprehended in a context of natural and historical regularities. 
These empirical and recurrent traits of nature and history as grasped at a given 
time are what entitle us to discriminate objects, actions, processes, and relation­
ships from one another (always, of course, in a relative framework). Undoubtedly, 
the ultimate choice of historical criteria of the essential leads us to social philoso­
phy (and ideology) for justification; and we shall discover quickly that, if broad 
agreement on the idea of mimesis is hard to come by, we can scarcely hope for a 
consensus regarding the concept of realism. The neo-Thomist, the existentialist, 
and the marxist have basic philosophical differences, and these differences have a 
determinate ideological dimension. Accepting that we cannot achieve a broad con­
cord in regard to realism, we should also overtly acknowledge that behind the 
aesthetic judgments lie differences in philosophical tenets and, most commonly, 
also in ideological bias. 

233 
Realism os 
o Mode of Mimesis 
For the marxist, realism chiefly involves the social domain, or, more broadly, the 
psychosocial field - and within this perspective, natural phenomena too can be 
regarded as "essential," that is, as highly significant for the persons living in a 
given time and place. For the idea of the "typical"-traditionally linked by marxist 
thought with realism - always takes a functional definition within a framework of 
historically determinate human praxis. The philosophical assumption (We/tan­
schauung) cradling this concept of realism is that "the real" is entirely in the con­
text of the material universe (diesseitig), accepting that the context by no means 
precludes religious faith, "unreal" images of reality, "mythologizings" of innumer­
able kinds, the conviction that the individual is the sovereign realify, etc. According­
ly, the question which I start with as a marxist when confronting a realist work is 
not, "What about this individual artist, who has certain philosophical or political 
beliefs about the world?" but instead, "What are the essential phenomena as this 
work envisions them, and to what extent do the criteria of 'the real,' psychosocially 
and sociohistorically considered, sustain or explain the judgments active in the 
work of art?" 
Principles of Realism in the Twentieth Century I do not place much store in 
the scholastic controversy which seeks to declare whether the realist should depict 
just what at bottom predominantly is, or instead what is emergent in the develop­
mental processes, however presently exceptional it may be. Apt as a comment on 
this debate, I believe, is an observation by Marx in the third volume of Capital, 
that many varied versions of the typical (or of typification) are useful and feasible 
in the context of an epoch. We may use the marxist notion of realism, accordingly, 
in attempting to answer the question: Typical in what respects? 
It would be hard to withhold the description "typical" from works as obviously 
diverse among themselves as Kafka's The Trial and Gorki's The Mother, Sholok­
hov's Virgin Soil Upturned and Hemingway's For Whom the Bell Tolls, Mikhail 
Rom m's Nine Days of the Year and Fellini's 8 1/2. In each work there appears a 
social structure which is treated encompassingly (as a totality); and, within the 
limits set by this structure, different kinds of standpoints of consciousness probe 
the crevices and cruxes of the historical moment. 
Kafka, for instance, is at once critical of alienation and its tragical victim-witness. 
The French marxist Roger Garaudy was quite right to reject the condemnation 
meted out to Kafka by Soviet aestheticians. If, indeed, by "realist" we mean one 

234 
Mimesis and Realism 
who sheds light on key phenomena in a particular sociohistorical setting, how are 
we to refuse the realist title to this genius? We do require an author to be more 
than the stoneblind victim of the processes that engulf him; and if he is to master 
in imagination the events occurring around and including him, he must arrive at an 
interpretation that somehow transcends these processes. Kafka is successful on 
both counts. (In contrast, it is doubtful whether the nouveau roman authors sustain 
the critical distance needed to survey the situation in the world which is their sub­
ject matter effectively.) 
What of the Fellini film? It uses excellent dramatic means to study the artist as a 
problematic and preoccupying theme. At least since Gide's The Counterfeiters 
such autothematism has been well established in fiction. With the novels of Alain 
Robbe-Grillet and Nathalie Sarraute the focus shifts to the making of a metalan­
guage, fused with the narrative line but primarily aimed at enabling self-<:ommen­
tary by the mind that composes the text. The project is as illuminating and success­
ful in the very best examples of the nouveau roman as it is in 8 1 /2. It must be 
emphasized, however, that Robbe-Grillet, for example, does not say anything rele­
vant to the reality context to which he still refers. Conversely, Fellini does not simply 
and at length affirm that the how of ?iscussing and composing reality has lately, 
for many, taken priority over presenting the what of reality. He proceeds instead 
to depict the displacement as itself a revealing integral symptom of our present 
value crisis. The problem of artistic practice is knitted into the encompassing social 
practice. Accordingly, as was Kafka in another time and context, Fellini is a critical 
realist. In Fellini we see beyond doubt that the great realist is a "creationist" at 
the same time; not content with providing a bare description of social reality, he 
brings various perspectives to bear on it, which enhance the artistic stature because 
they reveal and they transmute it. 
A mere chronicle or improvised reportage cannot be regarded as an art object. 
In contrast, even the works of art termed naturalistic must include some generaliza­
tion, that is, a selection or combination of key or secondary phenomena. As an 
example, consider the rudimentary mimesis that is found in eyewitness television, 
home movies, and the still experimental home videotapes (the apotheosis of all 
this is the chronicle An American Family, shown nationwide on American educa­
tional television in 1 973 with great audience response, and notable for its socio­
logical data but not for its artistic composition). Yet even here some evidence of at 
least a selective attitude usually appears. Still more is realism distinguished by the 

235 
Realism os 
o Mode of Mimesis 
attitude with which it regards reality; an attitude which - rather often resulting in a 
portrayal implicitly at variance with the artist's expressed political, philosophical, 
and religious convictions -not only is selective, but (this is decisive) merges with 
and "gets inside" some essential processes of the social world. In this way artistic 
realism may at times contribute, through its audience, a certain impetus to the 
further transformation of social life. 
The empathetic-creative integration with the social processes (which need not 
be primarily gained through activity, but may be vicariously achieved) is, in my 
opinion, indispensable to the realist method. This is a primary reason why it is so 
difficult to achieve an artistic typification. On this basis it appears necessary for a 
realist artist to get energetically involved with comprehending many aspects of the 
world as it is, the better to extract and to condense organically what is recognizably 
"typical" into an onologon, a "rival" world whether fictional or nonfictional. The 
classical German aesthetic school spoke of the typical as dos Besondere, or dos 
Allgemeine im Einzelnen, translatable as "generalization drawn from individual 
traits," and also as "individual traits that imply generality." One or the other em­
phasis may be appropriate, depending on the given typification. A continuum of 
possibilities from the especially general to the especially particular occurs within 
the criteria of the realist school. 23 
At the same time, this involvement in the social world, whose various aspects 
he is probing, will frequently provide the realist artist with a critical means of going 
beyond that "given" social world. What I mean is perhaps most clearly demon­
strated by the practitioners of socialist realism in its early, authentic version. Such 
realists might often come to a deliberate creative decision to affirm (and hopefully 
assist towards full emergence) those aspects of social reality which they believed 
could and should be furthered. How would they do it? Chiefly by means of scourg­
ingly critical portrayal of other, backward or apathetic yet typical aspects of 
reality, which set a brake to the developing human potential. (My reason for dis­
tinguishing between periods and modes of socialist realism is set out in chapter 7.) 
Real ism in Past Eras I have outlined the central principles of realism with refer­
ence to examples from the twentieth century. The same criteria of typicality and 
encompassed perspectives are relevant to the works of other eras. In ancient times 
realism had a mythological and in medieval times a theological skeleton. In line 
with my criteria, Homer and Dante achieved classical works of realism. The context 

236 
Mimesis and Realism 
and the patternings of human cultural consciousness were changed by the era of 
Shakespeare and Cervantes and again by the era of Moliere and Lessing. Decisive 
in each differing social context, however, is the correlational "adequacy" between 
the literary work and typical traits of the sociohistorical structure. As for the artistic 
mediation, it must rely on, and be achieved in terms of, the prevalent cultural pat­
terns (with all due allowance for idiosyncratic ᢹodifications by individuals). By this 
I mean the patterns of consciousness that are characteristic of the given social 
whole and that dominate (with variations along a continuum) all institutions and 
conduct, all customs and life-styles, all modes of thinking and feeling. 
Further, in light of the factor of transformation in the characteristics of realism, 
we may look in every instance for the sociohistorical dynamism. This processual 
understanding of an incessant flux of established but fading traits, which are inte­
grated with and yet in tension with developmental or novel elements, enables us to 
discern the specific rather than the abstractly postulated character of the typical. 
It also allows us to see definitely that social history tends to foster certain patterns 
of consciousness rather than others, and that, on this basis, social history itself is 
tendentious in its essential direction; there ultimately appears a latent (or manifest) 
directed dynamism of history that is beyond the control of individual will. I mean 
that, beyond the occurrence of change-sequences, certain permanent transforma­
tions occur which do lead in turn to something definite. A roughly vector-like move­
ment forward can be detected, and in this sense the ideas of progression and retro­
gression are sensible and even indispensable. 
However, these generalizations supply no premise for dogma-oriented talk de­
claring, say, the priority of a positive hero over a negative hero. The crux of realis­
tic representation is whether the heroes (of whatever description) or the circum­
stances (whatever they are) have been conceived to reveal the fundamental 
conflicts of the given time and place. For the same reason - if one thinks seriously 
about it -the question of whether sociopolitical events should have the top pri­
ority is secondary. The essential events of an era can be approached from many 
different sides: frontally, as, for instance, in the novels of Balzac or Tolstoi (who 
for this reason were celebrated by the marxist classical authors); or indirectly as 
with Goethe's character Werther, who is a very typical middle-class German of the 
eighteenth century, or Diderot's sentimental dramas, which typify the prerevolu­
tionary French tiers etat. Pushkin's Eugene Onegin caught the social patterns of 
the upper class of its day; and a generation later Gogol's Inspector General bitingly 

237 
Realism as 
a Mode of Mimesis 
satirized the rotten and crippling Tsarist bureaucracy. In sum, the central problems 
of the time can be as characteristically revealed through a depiction of the habits 
and social psychology of a single social class (ascending, descending, or in its full 
powers) as through a portrayal of open class conflict, with its political and ideo­
logical articulations. 
The same is the case for figurative (representational) painting and sculpture, 
which is fortunate, since the art patrons of history often commissioned their own 
portraits, and their intentions often guided the solutions which painters and sculp­
tors found for their problems. (It should be noted that this usually occurred with 
more than halfhearted compliance from the artists.) Nonetheless, the range of real­
ist portraiture extends beyond the likenesses of monarchs and princes by Van Dyke 
or Velazquez and of bankers by Matsys. The realist tradition is also defined by the 
etchings of Hogarth and Goya, and the pa intings of Goya, Daumier, and of David 
both before and after 1 789. All of these examples are related (no matter how dif­
ferently the ways) to the decisive social and political realities of their times. Per­
haps still more interesting are works by the Dutch still-life painters and by the 
fifteenth-century Italian landscapists, which presage the future dominance of the 
urban bourgeois patriarchate and the decline of feudal power. I cannot expand on 
the visual arts here, and must refer my reader to L 'Absolu et la forme, my polemic 
with the philosophy of art of Andre Malraux, for an elaborated presentation of 
this field of realism. 
Real ism and Alienation What does demand attention here is the question of 
whether the achievement of realist art always requires a critical and even hostile 
attitude to the "mother's breast" of the social reality into which the artist or the 
writer is born and raised. Formulated in this way, on the basis of evidence already 
presented, the answer clearly has to be no, realist portrayal needn't be antagonis­
tic to society. The statues of Phidias and Myron are not, the Canterbury Tales of 
Chaucer are not, the portraits by Franz Hals and the novels by judge Henry Fielding 
are not. Nor are the (early) realist works about the October Revolution. Our domi­
nant modern idea of critical realism should not cause us to overlook the funda­
mental change of attitude among artists-and the traits of realism -which accom­
panied the rise of capitalism. Leave aside for the moment the folkloric and plebeian 
artistic traditions. It is then possible to agree that up to the sixteenth and seven­
teenth centuries, the principal artists all shared in the dominant, ruling-class con-

238 
Mimesis and Realism 
sciousness of their times; we can search from the Renaissance all the way back to 
the Altam ira and Lascaux cave depictions of preclass society without finding any 
objects of art which "dissented." The bust of Queen Nefertiti did not, nor did the 
sarcophagic bas-reliefs of the Egyptian dynasties, the Ajanta shrine sculptures, or 
the Chartres or Bamberg cathedral sculptures. 
Two tendencies of history in the modern period altered this situation for art 
generally and for the realist method in particular: 
l .  As capitalism established new relations of production, the inherent social con­
flicts broke out, as Marx described, and the pace of socioeconomic development 
accelerated, with both the tempo and the instability creating an unprecedented 
skepticism about matters that had once seemed settled or natural. 
2. By the end of the eighteenth century, the artist 's role had begun to shift towards 
that of the social outsider. 
This latter transition was very slow. We can perhaps see in the figure of Hamlet 
the start of the alienation of a once-consenting art. It is tempting to see him sym­
bolically as the first modern intellectual, displaced by the skepticism that wedges 
between his traditional sense of duties and privileges and the social core which 
had held people like him fast since cooperative species life began. However, I dare 
not compare Shakespeare to his character; at least, not too closely. 
We might more reasonably equate Cervantes with his adventurers Don Quixote 
and Sancho Panza. Both (for different reasons) are displeased with the class in 
power a nd the social climate. Sancho Panza emerges from the long-abused masses 
and displays the earthy wit that enables the survival of the plebian poor. The Don 
of La Mancha has grown restless with the faded cloak of privilege which fails to 
comfort him in a new world of mercantile habits. Quixote, like Janus, looks both 
back and forward in history to seek for utopian satisfactions. With such a cast in 
his major novel, we may be certain Cervantes was antagonistic toward his era. 
Yet artists continued on the whole to acquiesce to the social hegemony from the 
fifteenth to the seventeenth centuries. 
Only in the nineteenth century does an institutionalized breach appear, clothed 
in the ragged and motley colors soon understood by the social classes as "the 
Bohemian way of life." Meanwhile, the breakdown of the aristocracy, that tradi­
tional class of patrons, continued apace. The industrial and merchant capitalists 
devoted themselves to further accumulation, to the comparative neglect of refined 
pleasure or status display. With their old footing eroded, artists were little en­
couraged to pledge allegiance to these new social pillars. To argue that the "out-

239 
Realism as 
a Mode of Mimesis 
sider" writers, painters, architects, and so on were capable of stripping themselves 
of illusions and prejudices would be ridiculous . Yet as the contention in society 
rose, we can see beyond any question that their loyalties wavered and grew am­
biguous. Before the dawn of the twentieth century the increasingly anxious and 
skeptical dwellers in Bohemia had felt the ancient, class-anchored status of their 
calling grow socially indeterminate. 
I have briefly surveyed the sociocultural evolution of the artist's trade (omitting 
many aspects and nuances) with one single aim: to give perspective to the modern 
artistic consciousness as the context, premise, and mediator of critical realism. The 
indeterminacy of that situation and its correlated awareness have fired in many 
artists a fierce thirst for utter independence . Others have no less bountifully com­
mitted their awakened sense of freedom to an historical idea and an immediate 
program of social transformation. Such artists include Mayakovsky, Brecht, Neruda, 
Guillen, Aragon, Meyerhold, Siqueiros, Leger, Eisenstein, and Pasolini. Each has 
made his own distinct choice of a life and creative method. A personally defined 
Communist commitment is coupled with a critical attitude towards official doctrines. 
If this sketch is accurate in its essentials, then we may conclude that the differing 
frames of reference of ancient, medieval, and modern society have been accom­
panied by some distinct (particular) standards for the character of realism. The 
realists of antiquity and the middle ages display not even a trace of critical distance 
from society. Yet it is precisely this critical distance which becomes the telltale 
dimension and criterion as we come nearer to the present. At the same time, while 
the breakdown of former certainties and the experience of the emergent, alienating 
conditions grows more excruciating, the temptation also grows to "find an easy 
out," that is, to market a remunerative banal art, supported in turn by a clever 
and interesting yet necessarily conventional career within the increasingly "estab­
lished" bohemian or even "left-wing" tradition. 
Those artists who take realist depiction seriously travel a more difficult route: 
they attempt to become part of the cutting edge of their culture and to probe deftly 
and deeply the aching or cancerous nodes of the day. I need scarcely add that 
artists in socialist-based countries are by no means so touched by grace that they 
can afford the luxury of effortless transportation on the coattails of history. The 
institutions they encounter require the continued vigilance of a critical realism. 
Events make clear beyond any doubt that advances in technology may enhance, 
a mong other means, the capacity of institutions to be cruel. The trend towards 
technocratic efficiency and cooperation in production and distribution that was 

240 
Mimesis and Realism 
enthusiastically and seductively envisioned by the American socialist Edward 
Bellamy in Looking Backward (1 888) has, i n  fact. entrenched a frequently night­
marish bureaucracy whose methods are often those of complacent tyranny. Indeed, 
an incessantly critical orientation towards the world is an imperative resource of 
the modern sensitive and thinking individual. No artist and certainly no realist can 
venture to conceive that his context is exceptionally privileged. 
In this appraisal, the features of realism emerge as historically dependent on the 
awareness of the contingencies of the human situation. Realism is moreover in­
creasingly bound up with the broadening of the social and political scope for acting 
on those contingencies. Artists and other creative intellectuals have more and more 
joined in revolt aga inst the vestiges of an institutionalized inhumanity; the realist, 
accordingly, takes pains to witness what is problematic and especially what is 
hypocritical and fraudulent. Realism also comes ultimately to embody -owing to 
this same broad and long development-that wealth of human potentials which, 
however often oppressed, maimed, and defeated, can never be wholly lost due to 
their irrepressible, Promethean source. Just here I should perhaps stress again that 
the interpretation I provide is premised on a definite philosophy of history. My 
orientation stems from the marxist heritage, which emphasizes not a fatalistic ac­
ceptance of mechanistically interpreted social "necessities," but, rather, the human 
person as the potentially creative historical factor. 
I want to emphasize that the division of the critical from the earlier, noncritical 
epoch of realism is no better than approximate, and needs closer study and verifi­
cation. I am also certain that the distinction and shift is more relative than ab­
solute, and occurred along a protracted and subtle continuum. The same might 
be said with regard to the transition of more recent critica l realism to a transcen­
dent, even "utopian" mode. I certainly do not want to imply a low opinion of the 
aptness and achievement of rᢺcent, well-observed, yet not especially rebellious 
realist attitudes; and I also note that more distant periods offer many attractive 
portrayals of a disalienated world which are in a nostalgic vein: Shakespeare's 
mellow island at the eye of The Tempest; the fantasies that animate Cervantes' 
characters; the idyllic isles of Watteau; the visions in Goethe's Faust, Part II; or 
the Surrealist dream in our century. Yet with all the qualifications stated, we must 
still recognize the emergence in the last century of an .unprecedented trend towards 
"thinking-about-today-in-the-light-of-tomorrow," which we can understand as 
the extension and development of a recurrent concern by realism for the inherent 
tendencies of transformation in social history. If this aspect of realism has become 

241 
Realism as 
a Mode of Mimesis 
more compelling, it is because we hove o i l  g rown more aware of history's pitfa l ls 
and seductive mazes, post which h u man beings sometimes try too bruskly to direct 
their steps. 
Final Clarification and Prospects It will be clarifying to compare the funda­
mentals of real ism as distinguished above with the idea of realism discussed by 
Romon Jakobson in an interesting essay of 1 921 (included in Todorov, Theorie 
de la litterature); a sim ilar idea is presented in the work of Roger Garaudy and 
Andre Mal raux, and it purports, simply, that rea lism should be considered to occur 
as a property of every creative work which is new from the standpoint of the extant 
social situation and artistic conventions. What happens if we accept this argument? 
We must then accept all innovations as "rea l ism" regardless of their sociohistorical 
content. "Realism" would then be juxta posed to the continuation of a ny existing 
convention in art. What is more, al/ "realism" would be accordingly g iven high 
marks, since the achievement of novelty has been lent a positive connotation in 
itself. There is a certa in attraction to this viewpoint; and we cannot quickly dism iss 
it because, as already noted, there is enough ambiguity to the function of realism 
in margina l  and in emergent contexts so that we ca nnot simply foreclose its possi­
ble manifestation as novelty. However, at the same time we must try to avoid super­
ficial, trivial, or eccentric uses of the term. From the marxist standpoint there is 
little basis for equating the idea of real ism with a rtistic novelty in a g iven historical 
context. Realists indeed may rely on ti me-honored means of expression; and, con­
versely, the mere fact of producing a real ist novel in a "new" era does not guaran­
tee a positive ach ievement. 
Let me restate the tra its of realism as I disting uish it: 
l .  It is o conception which impl ies a philosophical orientation with ideological rami­
fications. 
2. It interests itself, to be sure, in the fundamental traits recurrently operative in 
human culture; that is, it seeks what is "essential" to social life (there is often 
controversy about what is essential). 
3. It assesses socia l life in an historically concrete and socially relative interpreta­
tion, wh ich assumes not a fixed human nature but, instead, a dialectical emer­
gence of new modes of consciousness on the basis of sem ista bilized contradic­
tions. 
Thus, whatever degree of human universal ity may emerge in realism ("truth to 
human nature" - the Ang lo-American aestheticia ns who write of real ism apply 

242 
Mimesis and Realism 
this term extensively) has its prem ise in a developmental perspective which respects 
the continua lly chang i ng h istorica l contexts and contents of the human species. 
Such matters as love, death, success, and failure, recur, but they a re continually 
modified; the persons a nd circumstances of "the real" and hence of realism are 
transformed. This kind of human universa lity may at ti mes be represented through 
mere mimesis. Some mig ht even a rgue that its unadulterated, complete represen­
tation can only be m imetic; yet a knowledge of works of art suggests that merely 
m i metic representation is, by compa rison, flat, unevocative, incomplete, puerile. 
Again, however, an intermediary zone occurs between realism and other kinds of 
m i mes is. 
If I have been clear enough, the reader will see how the demarcation of mimesis 
of other kinds from the mimesis which concretizes rea l ism is founded on interpre­
tation with a philosophical and sociohistorical basis . However, I should a lso say 
a word here about how realism - both as a rtistic practice (method) and as a rtistic 
doctrine- relates to the tradition of artistic methods a nd programs (in the two 
fina l notes to this chapter I go into it a bit; let me say something here in an exposi­
tional fashion). My 1 963 essay " Le rea lisme comme une categorie a rtistiq ue," 
wh ich I have already mentioned, pointed out that in the range of aesthetic doc­
tri nes, realism occurs between idealism on the one hand and naturalism on the 
other. The idea list (Zuccari, Bel lori, etc.) have proposed an artistic prog ram in which 
an " inner design" is sought out; their artistic procedure is chiefly regarded as cosa 
mentole. Naturalism (with Zola as chief spokesman even today) argued that em­
p irical data must provide the primary orientation for the artistic method. Now, this 
j uxtaposition of the doctri nes may furn is h a schema of some usefulness, and that 
is precisely what I said in 1 963; however, I must now add that it is an antiquated 
and insufficient clarifying device: we must, instead, seek the tens ions experienced 
by each a rtistic method, that is, study the praxis which results from the use of a 
working generalization of one or another kind. I have a l ready done this for the 
real ist method, in describing a "continuum" from the historically specific to the 
historically abstract. 
What of naturalistic praxis? Its working generalizations have only an oblique 
contact with social history as it develops. The human being is considered a fixed 
entity with eternal problems of love, death, hatred, sorrow and the l i ke, and natu­
ralism may assume (as in its nineteenth-century formulation) that man tends above 
all else to an animal and biologica l fate. Another variant of natural ism, quite com­
prehensible where there is no context of historical or other extensive thought, lo-

243 
Realism as 
a Mode of Mimesis 
cotes the human being in an intimate community where chance details cause 
epiphanies of far-reaching effect. 
At the other extreme of working generalization, idealism (a kind of rhetoricism) 
as an artistic praxis starts from abstracted ideas of man in his relationships. The 
specifics of history drop out while ideas move onward of their own impetus; the 
key figures are spokesmen of concepts to be proven. This didactic plan may so 
ha mper a work as literature that it becomes more an essay or inspirational sermon; 
or what presumably should have been a figurative painting becomes only the il­
lustration of a concept. 
Today, literature displays a tendency to allegorical devices and to parables with 
an archetypal outcome which often eliminates the living hero and the experienced 
event. This seems to me one symptom of an increase in schematic working generali­
zations. Why should this artistic shift have occurred? Perhaps most importantly be­
cause the avant-garde has started to question the semiautonomous, sensuous 
status of works of art as such. The realists, however, remain ardent believers in the 
function of the semiautonomous, specifically artistic objects . 
It may be replied that today even realists often seem to bring in allegory or par­
able. That is true, but when they do, the telling of the tales still occurs in a social 
and historical matrix; as a matter of praxis the schematized understanding merges 
with a "content" of collective experience , imparting a pervasive philosophical irony 
and grotesquery . I can mention two Polish authors, Stanislaw lgnacy Witkiewicz 
and Slavomir Mrozek, who integrate their quite unmistakable outlooks with a 
sociopolitical environment. Witkiewicz deploys the tragic and farcical character­
istics of Poland between the two world wars; Mrozek draws attention to some 
surreal if not absurd aspects of the Polish socialist experience. This is representa­
tive for the wing of modern realism which relies on its knack for philosophized 
expression. 
Realism also continues to draw for positive gains on a "you-are-there" method , 
with results which often have the force of immediate experience, and also on the 
naturalist practice of lending animal traits to some characters. In both cases, it 
is the context of the artistic whole which is decisive, not the particulars of the ar­
tistic presentation. Zola's practice has often been more influential than was his 
doctrine, and despite their vaunted biologism, his novels are strongly laced with 
social criticism, a tradition which points, for instance, to Edward Albee. 
I hope I have demonstrated this about my schema of artistic techniques: what 
we should look for first is not the presence of a dodrine of idealism, naturalism, 

244 
Mimesis and Realism 
or realism, but, rather, the kind of artistic praxis that predominates. A given device 
may serve a particular limited, productive purpose. Meanwhile, a pervasive work­
ing generalization, which stresses either the sociohistorical patterning of experi­
ence or the specifics which frequently are perceived as the products of chance or 
fatality, can set the commanding aesthetic tone. 
I have shown that typification is ultimately opposed to a perception of reality 
as either fatalistic or dominated by chance: yet the demarcation of realist from 
other kinds of mimetic portrayal is so delicate that both techniques are often found 
deployed almost inseparably. Although typification is a flexible, capacious tech­
nique, there ore limits to its digestive powers. These limits were to a consider-
able degree clarified by Lukacs in his numerous essays on realist practice; however, 
his acumen left him when he came to the literature of the avant-garde. His arti­
ficial barring of the avant-garde was disputed by Ernst Fischer and Roger Garoudy. 
Both marxist critics demonstrated that Kafka and Joyce were as much involved 
with typification (each in his own frame of reference and on his own terms) as 
was Gorki or Thomas Mann. 
I agree with this assessment. Appropriate for a fully adequate treatment of the 
problem would be a broad, specific, multileveled analysis and interpretation of 
all the pertinent and disputed works. In painting the same analysis and interpre-
· 
tation might serve to dispel the controversies around "modernism." We might, 
for example, study the realism of Rouault, which is a realism both despite and, 
in some ways, because of his devout Christianity, as compared with the realism of 
Bunuel, which is based on a "Christian atheism" obsessed by visions of the ob­
scene and the holy. Another stimulating angle of approach might analyze, say, 
the works of Kafka and Giacometti for their intimations of rebellion. 
Having just come to this starting point, I must draw to an end. Alas, everything 
that could be managed within this overly compact chapter has been of a theo­
retical character. Yet I must take a last moment to tell the reader that I should not 
have attempted a defense of realism along the foregoing lines if, indeed, I did not 
find that realism could in this way be established as a definite artistic category, 
with its particular equivalents in the immediately given objects of art and litera­
ture which afford us the concrete cognitive-artistic values. 

245 
Notes 
1 .  Cf. L. L. Whyte, Aspects of Form (Lon· 
don, 1 959) and G. Kepes, Structure in Art 
and in Science (New York, 1 965). None of 
the scholars (or the artists from various fields 
who appear in the second book) contributing 
to these works find any evidence of scientific 
discoveries being directly imitated in twenti­
eth century art. However, they all do em­
phasize the dependence of art on science 
(not, incidentally, a feature of our age 
alone). If the debts are particularly heavy 
in the twentieth century, it should be added 
that it is not only on art that science has 
exerted a potent influence. It should also 
be noted that both books sensibly under-
line the point that the presence of these 
dependencies is neither exclusive nor domi­
nant. The overriding trait is the parallel 
trends in art, science, and philosophy to­
wards a new vision of man and his rela­
tionship to nature. An interesting analogy 
of this type between mathematics and point­
ing has been drawn by M. Porebski in 
Kubizm (Warsaw, 1 966) and between cub­
ism and phenomenology by G. Habasque 
in Le cubisme (1 959). It is also a fact, as 
Duchamp among others has corroborated, 
that the futurist representations of the 
rhythm of movement were based on the 
time-exposure studies of the French physiol­
ogist E. J. Marey. 
2. E. H. Gombrich, Art and Illusion, 2nd ed. 
(Princeton, N .J . , 1 961 ), pp. 53 ff. 
3. Ibid., pp. 299ff. The same approach was 
developed on this question by Nelson Good­
man in the first chapter of his The Languages 
of Art (Indianapolis, 1 968). I concur that the 
visual perception cannot be predicated on 
the pristinely innocent eye, wholly with-
out dependency on cultural stereotypes. It 
now seems even commonplace to state that 
Notes 
we do see or hear phenomena under the im­
press of our prior knowledge of the world, 
and, therefore, that our perception com­
monly undergoes some modification. Yet no 
sufficient arguments are advanced either by 
Gombrich or by the scholars he cites, to dis­
pute the existence of o "normal vision." Of 
course, psychophysiologicol permanency 
cannot be defended as ogoinst all cultural 
paradigms. It seems, rather, that the psycho­
physiological considerations induce a certain 
skeletal "symbolic communication" that is 
common to mankind. We must, however, dis­
tinguish between symbolic systems relevant 
merely to o given time, place, social grouping, 
and so on, and cultural factors which ore 
permanent in their recurrence. (For example, 
for the unicorn to hove a new recognition 
and fascination in every generation, it is 
necessary, among other factors, for every 
individual born to hove some knowledge of 
on animal and of the closest actual species.) 
Goodmon states (p. 33) that "nature is the 
product of art and discourse"; I should odd 
that it is in this sense that we undertake the 
classification and characterization of most 
objects and their relationships in a habitual 
way. These habits eventually become so 
ingrained in us as to overleap historical and 
ethnocentric factors. Basically, then, we con 
only "imitate" nature inasmuch as certain 
tendencies of our perception remain con­
stant. 
Let me incidentally note also that my 
usage of the term "denotation" differs from 
that of Goodman. Representations of a uni­
corn or of a character such as Mr. Pickwick 
are denotative even though neither exists. In 
each case there is a cluster of prototypes 
sustaining the representation. We can refer 
to a model of o human being or an animal 
(the more general framework of abstraction) 

246 
and (at a more specific level) we can further 
point to some mimetic traits of the rhinoceros 
and hippopotamus in the image of the uni­
corn, and to certain typical features of the 
middle-doss nineteenth century Englishman 
in the image of Pickwick. I also differ from 
Goodman in my use of the term "realism," 
which I locate in another dimension. His 
emphasis is right in part: in the idea that a 
likeness depends on the given culture and its 
semiotic systems, as well as on the conven­
tions of realism in the given period. How­
ever, I qualify his emphasis for several rea­
sons: 
l .  As I hove just indicated, in port a like­
ness is not reducible to cultural stereotypes. 
2. Although I agree that realism isn't at 
all a matter of the faithful rendering of on 
absolute and constant reality, yet it still may 
hove correspondence to some soc:iohistoricol 
constants; and here the conventions or 
"standards of representation" would mean 
more than merely a c:onon for depicting or 
describing reality, as we con proceed 
through the semiotic: paradigms to discern 
the basic problems of the time and place, 
the modes of thinking and feeling which re­
veal the whole social fabric. 
4. Cf. D. Vertov, Stotyi Dnevniki, Zomysly 
(Moscow, 1 966), pp. 45-48, 94-97, 1 22-
1 24; or Film Culture, no. 25 (1 962). 
5. Siegfried Kroc:ouer, Theory of Film (New 
York, 1 965), pp. ix-xi, 1 2-23, 33-40. 
6. Ibid., pp. 262-3 1 1 .  
7. Prior to Hospers a similar interpretation 
was outlined in W. Abell, Representation and 
Form (New York; 1 936) and T. M. Greene, 
The Arts and the Art of Criticism, Part Ill 
(Princeton, 1 940). Later come M. Weitz, 
Philosophy of the Arts (Cambridge, Mass., 
1 950) which followed corresponding princi­
ples. All of them emphasize that the aes-
Mimesis and Realism 
thetic surface (that is, the ordered material 
of a work composed of the elements rudi­
mentary to a given art) does not ac:c:ount 
for the whole wealth of artistic values. An­
other excellent argument supporting 
this position is provided by Goodman in 
Languages of Art, chapter 6, where he lays 
stress on art's cognitive values. Goodman 
insists that we should be continually atten­
tive to the "symptoms of the aesthetic:" 
(syntactic: density, semantic: density, syn­
tactic repleteness, exemplification). How­
ever, he urges discernment within the con­
text of on artistic whole of the particulars 
of representation, which he holds must be 
imprecise but not ineffable. 
8. Cf. J. Hospers, Meaning and Truth in the 
Arts (Chapel Hill, N.C., 1 946), pp. 1 3- 1 4, 
1 08-1 1 0. 
9. Ibid., pp. 23 ff. 
1 0. Cf. T. Todorov, ed., Theorie de la littera­
ture (Textes des formolistes russes reunis) 
(Paris, 1 965), and V. Shklovsky, Khudozhe­
stvennaya proza: Rozmysleniya i rozbory 
(Artistic: prose: reflections and analysis) 
(Moscow, 1 96 1 ). 
1 1 . Cf. J. Mukorovsky, Studio z estetiky 
(Prague, 1 966), pp. 85-1 60. See also the 
distinction drawn by Max Bense, in his 
Aesthetico (Boden-Baden, 1 965), between 
two types of artistic: sign: Zeichen von Etwas 
and Zeichen for Etwas. The latter corre­
sponds to my notion of mimesis. 
1 2. This some problem appears in a differ­
ent version in the attempts to universalize 
mimesis as a category applicable to all arts. 
A revealing example of such on interpreta­
tion can be found in G. Lukdc:s, Die Eigenart 
des Aesthetisc:hen (Neuwied, 1 963), where 
at the same time he occentuates the princi­
ple of the representation of reality and 
shifts the emphasis to what he c:olls "Ab-

247 
bild des Abbi/des " in relation to music, 
architecture, and landscape gardening. 
This "gedoppelte Mimesis, " as he puts it, 
is really an expression of collective states of 
mind objectified in a given work. Such o view 
is, of course, o far cry from that of Dufrenne. 
Lukacs' position has its roots in Diltheyism. 
Nevertheless, in both coses, utterly opposed 
though the aims are, expression comes un­
expectedly to supplant mimesis: Lukacs 
quite simply substitutes the former for the 
latter in the instances just mentioned. If, 
however, we are willing to treat music and 
architecture as omimetic arts (in keeping 
with Dufrenne) it is, among other reasons, 
because in such arts as literature, theater, 
film, or figurative pointing, mimesis forms 
a basic component of their axiology. To 
argue against Lukacs (universalizotion of 
mimesis) might, therefore, be to argue 
against Dufrenne (elimination of mimesis). 
1 3. I do not ta ke colors as such into ac­
count because they cannot hove a recogniz­
able mimetic correspondence to o referent 
model in external real ity, but only to color 
in general. It is true that pa interly technique 
includes the term couleur locale. This is in 
contradistinction to, say, the Byzantine ap­
proach or the impressionist and postimpres· 
sionist experiments with color. We tend to 
forget that our "normal" way of seeing and 
rendering colors is in conjunction with the 
objects they adorn. In short, the blueness of 
the sky is different from the blueness of 
water, the pink hue of the rose is different 
from the pink nose of somebody with the 
sniffles. The same remarks apply to move­
ments and shapes. This is one reason why 
the dance, which suggests objects or events 
and their relationships, is so fascinating. 
Oriental dance even has evolved conven­
tional scorings of movement. Similarly, the 
Notes 
great mimes (e.g., Ma rcel Marceau) have 
learned to express themselves semimimet­
ically. There seems to be less of o troubling 
problem as regards sounds. Their onomato­
poeic usage is rather rare and extraordinary. 
Incidentally, o single sound is incapacitated 
in this sense; there must be a sequence of 
sounds to imitate a birdsong (Beethoven) 
or e speeding locomotive (Honegger). The 
noises introduced in avant-garde music by 
Varese, Cage and the "concretists" ore not 
mimetic signs, their aim is rather to erode 
the boundary line between everyday life and 
art patterns. 
1 4. This statement should not be taken to 
mean that the artists who contrive at a semi­
mimesis hove no concern for the mimetic 
result. A widespread opinion up to the pres­
ent holds that the element of mimesis in 
some avant-garde art is only a feeble pre­
text, o mere expedient. This canard dies 
hard. In fact such avant-gardists as Picasso 
and Klee continued to refer to real phenom­
ena as they sought deliberately to stress 
the full aesthetic significance of deformation, 
that is, of their promulgation within the 
modern European heritage of a trait endemic 
to Ocean ion, Asian, and Mexican primitive 
art. We may also see modern semimimetism 
as heir to the archaic and medieval achieve­
ments in our tradition (with what expressive 
results, the reader may consider). A related 
point, which I think even more important to 
state, is that the human figure, and other 
objects, did not enter neutrally into the work 
of Picasso or Klee. Both artists positively 
sought this kind of iconography as one way 
to express their grasp of the world. Mimetic 
elements might also be used, of course, as 
a decorative element (and they were only so 
used by a number of followers of the avant­
garde pioneers). This fact does not cancel 

248 
the justness of our continuous scale running 
from semimimesis to the most profound 
mimesis. 
1 5. We bring in realism under the blanket 
term of mi mesis due to certain crucial com­
mon features, hinging on the analogon 
representation, that is to say, a peculiar, 
cognition-oriented correspondence between 
the artistic structure and the extra-artistic 
reality. However, realism -as I shall later 
explain-differs basically from mimesis, with 
respect to the philosophical justification. The 
idea of mimesis as such refers to generic 
traits perceived through human pϩxis (com­
munication of all kinds, including behavior); 
while realism is a concept dependent on defi­
nite notions of the character of historical 
processes and their ultimate regularity. 
1 6. Cf. J. Lotman, Lektsyi po strukturalnoy 
poetikye [ Lectures on structural poetics) 
(Tortu, 1 964), pp. 1 8-29. Lotman under· 
takes a semantic (and model) analysis of the 
likeness relationship between art and reality 
(pp. 30-40). 
1 7. R. Fry, Some Questions in Aesthetics 
(1 926), quoted in Transformations: Critical 
and Speculative Essays on Art (New York, 
1 956), pp. 20-23. 
1 8 . Cf. Metz's essay "Le dire et le dit au 
cinema: vers le declin d'un vraisemblable," 
in Essois sur lo signification au cinema, 
pp. 222-244, and Dufrenne's remarks on 
artistic individuality bursting through the 
confines of a given code of meaning (Esthe­
tique et philosophie, pp. 1 03-1 1 2, 1 33-
1 58). 
1 9. See my book L 'Absolu et lo forme; 
L 'esthetique d'Andre Malraux (Paris, 1 972); 
earlier editions were published in Polish 
(Cracow, 1 966) and Italian (Bari, 1 971 ). 
20. I discuss this question in Between T rodi­
tion and a Vision of the Future (in Polish; 
Mimesis and Realism 
Warsaw, 1 964), chs. 3 and 4, where I offer 
a critical commentary on the viewpoints of 
Soviet scholars. See also, among Polish 
studies, the works of Henryk Markiewicz 
and Stefan Z6lkiewski, and, among other 
studies, particularly those of Ernst Fischer 
and Roger Garaudy, and Georg Luk6cs' 
Die Eigenart des Aesthetischen. Lukacs' posi· 
tion seems the most persuasive, since he is 
the first to have brought an analysis of such 
thoroughness to the peculiar nature of 
artistic cognition (dos Typische als dos 
Besondere, A//gemeine im Einzelnen -
the typical o s  the special and the general 
in the particular) and such scientific mastery 
to an analysis of the mimetic phenomenon 
as it is tied in with the formal foundations 
of art. {In this book he describes the latter 
as a For-sich-sein.) Nonetheless, Luk6cs 
mistakenly- in my opinion - broadens the 
mimesis concept to include all of the arts, 
as part of his judgment that mimesis is o 
constituent property of art. Moreover, he 
opposes (however consistent it may be with 
his premises) avant·garde tendencies, which 
he sees as undermined by decadent traits. 
In D'un reolisme sons rivoges (Paris, 1 963) 
Garaudy rightly defends the connection of 
the avant-garde with realism, but his analy­
sis of realism is inconclusive. Garaudy 
describes, as factors contributing to realism, 
the conscience de ce qui manque and also 
the will to partake of /'octe crşateur d'un 
monde en train de se faire; possibly he is 
influenced in this by Sartre and by Mikel 
Dufrenne (Phenomenologie de /'experience 
esthetique ( Paris, 1 953), Part I, ch. 4, and 
Part IV, ch. 3). He blurs art in general into 
realist art, I believe arbitrarily. I do, however, 
agree with Garaudy's consideration of art 
as being at once myth and cognition, that is, 
os being a project which transcends and 

249 
supersedes the existing reality while at the 
some time offering fundamental knowledge 
of that reality. Even so, Goroudy forgets 
that this "mythical" or '.'utopian" feature is 
not a constant one, not constituent, even for 
the post two centuries. In other passages, 
Garoudy states that anotper determinant 
of realist art is labor, a proposition which is 
overly vague. (Does he refer to an artistic 
remaking of reality, or some general opera­
tional artistic deeds?) At any rote it would be 
exceedingly difficult to resolve into a coher­
ent unity the visionary, technical, and cogni­
tive aspects of such an analysis of realism 
(as I sought to demonstrate at greater length 
in my essay "Garaudy: antynomie prome­
teizmu" [Garaudy: The antinomies of Pro­
metheism], Wp6tczesnoU [Warsaw], 1 967, 
nos. 1 0  and 1 1  ). 
Other instances that seem to me to pre­
sent an abusive usage of the concept of 
realism ore: Lucien Goldmann's interpreta­
tion of Robbe-Grillet's Les Gommes, as well 
as his other interpretations of the nouveau 
roman that accept the works' "realism" on 
the basis that they express (ore representa­
tive of) on absolute reificotion; and the re­
curring idea in contemporary art theory that 
a nonfigurotive art is the more profoundly 
realist. The error in the latter case lies in the 
notion that the structure of cosmic matter is 
being reflected in what is only superficially 
"abstract" art. As for Goldmann, he holds 
that the homology between the economic 
structure and the structure of the literary 
world is a prime criterion of value. However, 
the homology criterion (even supposing the 
reified world of Robbe-Grillet is the counter­
part of the technological reificotion of today) 
must prove arbitrary in many coses. 
Moreover, this kind of mimesis tokes no 
account of the social consciousness which 
Notes 
resists the devastating fetishism in our time. 
The creators of the "new novel" consider 
themselves realists, it is true; they at any 
rote employ this notion in the sense of on 
overthrow of stereotypes and conventions, 
in the sense of a fresh and direct apprehen­
sion of the world. Whether we ore thus 
presented with new content or with new 
forms, or both at once, is not clear. Probably, 
the lotter solution is favored by Robbe­
Grillet and by Nathalie Sorroute, whose 
views differ in other respects. In any case 
the uncertain aspects of this proposition 
ore not what concern me now. Despite the 
polyvolence of the term as examined here, 
it would be difficult to accept a definition 
which would categorize as realist a litera­
ture that creates its own independent reality, 
or that assumes that, while the world exists 
to be sure, it is the "point of view" defined 
by the hero which gives it meaning in every 
case, or that, finally, treats human beings 
impersonally, as but objects emergent from 
chaotic flux. 
2 1 .  In the essay "Le realisme com me cote­
gorie ortistique." 
22. By extension, it appears to me that to 
explicate the mimetic properties of art we 
need not rely on on older psychology which 
bifurcates the cognition process in terms of 
two separate units (subject and object) 
and mechanically totals up the sensations, 
representations, associations, etc. Rother, 
we may proceed, by developing the assump­
tion that human perception -due to anthro­
pologically recurrent (cultural invariants) 
factors- is remarkably stable. As noted in 
the first chapter, perception is active; that 
is, in ways dependent on prior socio I ex­
periences, it is selective and interpretive of 
the given here-and-now reality. At the same 
time, perception is determined by the com-

250 
mon human condition (for, although each 
person individually filters the stimuli, the 
choices and the decisions involved ore large­
ly predicated on the sociocultural context) 
and also- ond here of most pertinence-
by the recurrent aspects of the social praxis 
of the human species. Mimesis-as I expli: 
cate it-correlates primarily to this latter 
frame of reference. This understanding of 
perception is corroborated (as is the finding 
about mimesis) by the most recent scientific 
experiments. 
The conclusions of existential phenome­
nology also lend support to my understand­
ing of mimesis, which is predicated on the 
marxist notion of certain invariants that con­
front human praxis. Precisely if man per­
ceives the world situationally, in active 
encounter with it (being able to perceive the 
field of objects in a synthetic manner, and 
reaffirming his human proiets, in large 
measure thanks to the reiterative nature of 
the train of situational patterns), mimesis 
then would appear most credible as an 
artistic category appealing in a similar 
fashion to individuals from diverse cultures 
and from different epochs. This is a problem 
I deal with at full length in my book L 'Absolu 
et /a forme . .  
23. There is, in this case, a continuum be­
cause, while the general traits prevail in 
some realist works (hence the notion of 
individualized generalization), in others 
the particular traits predominate, making 
the variant notion, generalized individual­
ization, applicable. Of course, the optimal 
and ideal sphere of typification is that where 
the A/lgemeine and the Einzelne comprise 
on entirely organic and compact whole. This 
happens with the great masterpieces of 
realist art. However, works of individualized 
generalization (e.g., the ploys of Friedrich 
Mimesis ond Realism 
Schiller) tend towards a kind of art we moy 
may term schematic and abstract, while 
realist works of generalized individualiza­
tion tend the other way, towards naturalism 
(Zola is an example). Of course the notion 
of a continuum should not be reduced to 
our two extreme instances selected more or 
less at random. It is meant to indicate the 
diversity of realism. (See the discussion of 
this topic with reference to Luk6cs' views in 
G. H. R. Parkinson, ed., Georg Luk6cs [ New 
York, 1 970], especially in the essays by 
Mesz6ros, Pascal, and Pa rkinson.) 

Chapter 7 
Art and the Theory of Art 
The Vicissitudes 
of Socialist Rea l ism : 
A Little Lesson i n  History 
Wh ich Should Not Be I gnored 
There are obviously only three distinct possible relationships in time between art 
and theory: either the course of events precedes theory, or they develop in combina­
tion, or theory anticipates the appearance of the new artistic current. This tem­
poral factor is quite fundamental to the relationship between the two phenomena. 
In the first case, the art theory introduces nothing new to art, and serves only 
to explain an artistic process that has already flowered. At most, largely through 
critical studies, it helps the public understand the new works unexpectedly arising 
in the field of art, and plays the role of popularizing these new works, in the best 
sense of the word. 
In the second case, the art theory elicits and crystallizes new artistic phenomena, 
defines their significance and depth, gives us the philosophical, social, and historical 
key to them, and demonstrates the ways in which they are new and different from 
previous phenomena. In this case, theory and art develop on a par. Very often the 
same person practices both, sometimes availing himself of the former in his creative 
revolution, sometimes of the latter to affirm his conceptions. 
In the third case, theory becomes the dominant mode. It speaks of what should 
be, indicates the path that it is necessary for art to take, and leads art to that path, 
deaf to all objections and protests. When it adopts this approach, theory always 
manages to find a certain number of obsequious zealots. 
This classification is simplified; very often the cases are entangled, or one of 
them ends by metamorphosing into another. Nevertheless, the history of art and 
the history of thought do provide many examples ᢶf these basic patterns. Aristotle, 
in his Poetics, speaks of the long historical process of development of classical 
tragedy and Greek comedy. Do Vinci and Durer advanced a new art and at the 
same time a new aesthetic theory. Diderot and Lessing proceeded in this same 
manner two centuries later: they attacked Boileau, Corneille, the Abbe D'Aubignac, 
and Gottsched, who, fortified by Aristotle's Poetics, had fossilized dramatic art into 
a dogma. Similarly, in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries Lomazzo and Zuc­
cari imposed certain canons on the plastic arts. Toward the mid-seventeenth cen­
tury the French Academicians, led by Le Brun, succeeded them, and in the eigh­
teenth century it was the turn of the neodassicist Mengs. There are countless 
examples; in each generation at least one of the relationships is asserted as va lid. 
This essay is based on my preliminary study of this topic, "Against the Prophets of Catastrophe," pub­
lished in Mys Filozoficzna [ Philosophic Thought], 1 957, no. 3. It was translated by S. Alexander and 
published in Diogenes, no. 36, and is here pu blished with some modifications and a 1 972 postscript. 

252 
The Vicissitudes 
of Socio list Realism 
A study of the more or less parallel courses of the histories of art and of aes­
thetics shows that when art hos marched on the very heels of artistic theory, or 
to the some rhythm, artistic theory hos hod a positive effect in stimulating artists 
and society. In the third case, theory-generally the result of on artistic current 
already out of date - hos prescribed rigid rules to art, and, in order to cut a figure 
as epigones, its proponents hove condemned newly mode works. Such theory­
dog motic by nature-serves as a broke on the development of art, offering the 
public false, limited, and obsolete criteria of appreciation. 
· 
The third case often occurs in connection with what is coiled acodemicism. The 
academies were launched in Italy in the sixteenth century and were supposed to 
promote discussion in the inner circles of artistic groups.1 These institutions quickly 
assumed a different aspect, however, and, from the end of the sixteenth century, 
they hove served to set up rules-a hierarchy of subject matter, the priority of 
certain formal means of expression -and to enunciate the quantum of science in· 
dispensable in order to be considered on artist sensu academico. They have, in this 
manner, transformed living and fruitful art theory into doctrine. Their merit in con­
ferring a social status on the artist ceases to have any significance when compared 
with the wrongs they have committed in setting up codes for the creation of art, 
for, as soon as any doctrine became official, not only in the artistic but also in the 
social and political sense, it was bound to become corrupt. 
Moreover, it is not by chance that academic doctrines had the official. cultural, 
and political support of absolute power (originally through the might of the Medici, 
later-and more importantly- in France). These doctrines were openly conformist 
to the spirit of the court, favorable to the status quo of social life, or at least not 
very dangerous from the social point of view due to their decayed idealism and 
their reliance on assertedly immutable models. When David rebelled, in terms of 
his kind of classicist art, against the social and political order of his time, he under­
mined the Academy of Paris. 
A striking example of the corruption of aesthetic doctrine is provided by the 
Jesuit domination of art during the period of the Counter-Reformation. Academic 
doctrine had merely issued decrees; here, the politically dependent aesthetic doc­
trine went to the point of interdiction. Academic doctrine pretended that it alone 
possessed the privilege of truth; politically dependent aesthetic doctrine made of 
this truth an inviolable taboo. Academic doctrine punished art which departed from 
established canons by subjecting it to scorn; politically dependent aesthetic doc­
trine threatened, in similar cases, direct or indirect reprisals. The latter is, therefore, 

253 
Art and the Theory of Art 
a phenomenon which hos much more to do with the police than with culture. The 
Council of Trent ordered the unleashing of a merciless bottle against heretical art; 
from then on, pointing depended strictly on the Holy Scriptures. 
Does all theory end in time by becoming distorted and molded into doctrine? 
Does all corruption of theory derive from the fact that it depends on political pow­
er? It is very dangerous to reply here, ex promptu, to questions that should be 
examined under all their historical and notional aspects. Nevertheless, it remains 
true that the chronicles of artistic and aesthetic ideas (e.g., Lionello Venturi, History 
of Art Criticism [ 1 964 ], or Katherine Gilbert and Helmut Kuhn, A History of Esthet­
ics [ 1 954]) lead us to the conclusion that oil art theories gradually succumb to a 
tendency to doctrinizotion, and that there hos been corruption whenever there hos 
appeared the more or less despotic domination of a privileged social group. 
The acceptance of Renaissance theories of art by the school of mannerism and 
the Jesuit Counter-Reformation would seem to indicate that the emergence of 
doctrine does not always compromise the principles of art. An art theory might be 
correct, ahd yet a doctrine may be derived from it which is no more than a lot of 
uniustifioble and false directives. 
Contrary to widespread opinion, the number of aesthetic solutions is limited. 
All theories may be summed up in a few essential a nd juxtaposed theses, which 
are already present in the works ot the pre-Socratics: the beautiful representing 
the order of things in the cosmos and the Beautiful representing the inner order in 
an artistic work; the Beautiful which is the reflection of reality in a work; the Beauti­
ful perceived by the intellect and the Beautiful as the pleasure of the senses; Creation 
born of inspiration and Creation which is the child of skill (techne). The artistic 
theory of the Renaissance reverts once more to Aristotle's conception, transmitting 
it, enriched, to Diderot, Lessing, and Herder; and these theories lead through 
diverse nineteenth-century aesthetic currents- romanticism, critical realism, natu­
ralism -towards the conception of socialist realism. 
The aesthetic theory of the Renaissance correctly demonstrated that: artistic 
methods are methods of research; art requires technical competence as well as 
imagination and knowledge; there is nothing which should not interest the artist; 
art is as agreeable in terms of sensation and emotion for him who creates it as 
for him who perceives it; to be on artist is to plunge oneself into the quest for truth 
and to work towards the establishment of lows of taste and aesthetics; there is 
no beautiful work locking on inner balance of all its components. 
I may be told that these ore generalizations without any deep foundation, that 

254 
The Vicissitudes 
of Socialist Realism 
they are, in fact, so foundationless that I might just as readily proclaim and demon­
strate their contraries. Indeed I might, and arguments of this sort have often been 
used. It is necessary, however, to check the correctness of these aesthetic princi­
ples according to other criteria; we must neglect the distortions resulting from 
corruption, and consider what made the works of art which gave life to these 
principles fruitful, comparing this concretized aesthetics with the arguments of the 
opposed aesthetics. 
Thus, there ore always two tendencies present in the history of aesthetics. Art 
theory advances, modifying and enriching its results with the rational examination 
of art. Continually reflecting concrete circumstances, it emphasizes new discoveries 
in art, discoveries of a scientific, aesthetic, and social nature, interlinked one with 
the other. However, after a while, theory coagulates into doctrine. Its principles 
slough off as catechisms; instead of guiding art, it orders it. In this doctrinaire in­
carnation, theory begins to resemble those "aestheticizing" moralizing concepts 
which ore opposed to it, and which confuse art with science. 
Where there is social and directly political subjection, corruption is a less regular 
occurrence than is metamorphosis into doctrine. 2 By imposing a theory, and de­
claring it to be the only valid one, the ruling class justifies the application of the 
punishment of ostracism or, in cases of insubordination, physical force. All these 
postulates and prohibitions issue from an Institution headed by bureaucrats, who 
ore thereby elevated to the rank of supreme connoisseurs of art. 
Is Socia list Rea lism an I nvention of the Devil? 
A brief excursion into the history of aesthetic thought will permit us to view social­
ist realism in another light than that of the polemicists who up to now have had the 
last word. Socialist realism is part of the best artistic and theoretical inheritance 
of the past, despite all the distortions which recent historical circumstances have 
forced it to u ndergo. It started a new art, nourished on new social, political, and 
cultural ideas. It responded to questions and moved in the forefront of the needs 
and aspirations which life, not intellectual speculation, was engendering. Then, 
as the new works were born, they were analyzed and confronted with those of 
preceding epochs, and thus a new aesthetic theory crystallized. This theory is not 
of the type that outruns artistic facts; it is the balance sheet of what already exists. 
Why should Gorki be judged from the point of view of 1 956 when the historical 
circumstances of his work were altogether different? Gorki's theoretical efforts 

255 
Is Socialist Realism 
an Invention of the Devil? 
were, in fact, much closer to those of do Vinci, Dorer, Diderot, or Lessing than to 
those of the defenders of a lying and toadying art. 
Everyone interested in the subject knows that magnificent art works were created 
before 1 934 and that the Soviet Union was at that time the inspirer of new experi­
ments in form a nd content. Those who connect the birth of socialist realism with 
the year 1 934 have no respect for the current of history. First of all, the artistic 
aspect was already underway much earlier. There are those who would even place 
it in the period around 1 906, when Gorki's Mother appeared. Second, the theoreti­
cal aspect, although only formulated at the time of the first Congress of Soviet 
Writers in 1 934, also dates back to the earliest years of the Soviet Union. 
Thus, that argument is false which would have it that it is possible to determine 
whether the theory of socialist realism is good or bad according to the artistic 
products that follow its proclamation. What we must do is exactly the opposite. 
To know whether a theory is correct, we must confront it with the creative works 
which have determined its aesthetic pronouncements; and, in this particular case, 
there are universally recognized masterpieces. 
We might refuse to apply the term "socialist realism" to the creative work of this 
period before 1 934. There are those who propose other terminology: "art of the 
socialist epoch," or "socialist art." However, this is not merely a quarrel over 
terms. ·The burden of proof that "socialist realism" is an inadequate term falls 
upon the adversaries and not the partisans of the expression. What do its adver­
saries tell us? They admit that socialist realism, in its initial conception, and not 
after its bureaucratic corruption, is not a style and should be defined as such. Thus, 
this realism did not initially preach any prefabricated poetics, although it is now 
often reproached with having been taken as a "creative method" which led even­
tually to a stylistic norm and to rules concerning the construction of a work, and 
which also imposed a certain norm of interpretation, that is, a way of seeing, of 
understanding, and of appreciating things in a manner conforming to historical 
and dialectical materialism, according to the latest meaning given to it. 
Conversely, the opinion according to which realism3 is, above all, an attitude 
towards reality is justified, although it has not been demonstrated with precise 
analysis. Certain thinkers interpret the term in this way. Thus, Stanislaw Ossowski 
declares there is realism "where there is a search for artistic values on the plane 
of correlation between the work and the object represented."4 Ossowski's realism 
is provided with cognitive values. Roman lngarden emphasizes the same thing, 

256 
The Vicissitudes 
of Socialist Realism 
although indirectly, through an analysis of the various ways of apprehending the 
truth of a work. 5 
In 1 91 7, new social conditions arose and, with them, the life of man was com­
pletely changed, including his ways of being, thinking, feeling, and wanting. Dif­
ferent relationships ar:nong people were born, different problems took on impor­
tance, and different ideas were formed. A new social ontology determined a new 
philosophical, scientific, a nd artistic epistemology. The artist synthesized these 
trends into a historical truth which was the essence, at the same time, of his own 
individual quality. He shared this characteristic with his contemporaries, for they 
also thought and wanted the same things, or almost the same things, as he. The 
term "realism," therefore, deserves to be retained for reasons other than that of 
tradition. It is the counterpart of the realism of past centuries, a realism that was 
quite as engage as that of Gorki, Sholokhov, Mayakovsky, Eisenstein, Pudovkin, 
Vakhtangov, Deni and Moor, Deineka, Pimenov, Pietrov-Vodkin, and Grabar during 
the initial fifteen years of socialist reality. We might search for another name for 
their creative work, but I doubt that a better one could be found than that which 
they shaped themselves, and which, subsequently, was so unworthily compromised 
and slandered. The essential question is not "Is the name correct?" but "Does 
there exist a group of common factors in the best creative work of this epoch, and 
does this group of common factors distinguish this creative work from that pre­
ceding it?" In my judgment, we can respond to the latter question in the affirmative. 
Before the thirties, an open struggle between different artistic trends went on 
in the Soviet Union. There were those who defended the prerevolutionary posi­
tions. The majority, however, acknowledged a new reality and expressed their 
acknowledgment in various ways. 
We may find rational ideas and ideals just as much in the different efforts of 
the Proletcult, of Dziga Vertov, of the Fexy, of Meyerhold's and Vakhtangov's 
theater, of the group "The Four Arts," and of the OST painters, as in the despotic 
plans of RAPP, the comprehensive writer's organization set up in 1 928. The ideas 
and ideals led, if sometimes with many zigzags, to the birth of masterpieces of so­
cialist realism. Although different artistic groupings contested with one another, 
they all held the conviction that the creation of an ideological and revolutionary art 
was indispensable. They were motivated by an awareness of poverty, famine, and 
toil, as well as a pride in the victory won at the Winter Palace. They lauded the 
heroism of those who had been the first to construct a new world, who had been 
alone and besieged, but convinced that they would soon succeed in convincing all 

'2.57 
Is Socialist Realism 
an Invention of the Devil? 
humanity to travel the same path. The new hero of the time was the popular 
masses; and the problem of work came to the forefront. Some wanted to create a 
new plastic art in the factories, to popularize the sense of beauty in the streets and 
workshops; others were fascinated by easel painting and its sometimes lyrical, 
sometimes epical, modes of expression; but the arguments of both camps reckoned 
with, and on, a new public. 
It is notable that the new experiments in form in the Soviet Union during the 
first ten years after the revolution were always backed up by social and political 
arguments. Their creators wanted these experiments to serve the revolution, re­
flecting its essence and helping to create a radical transformation of taste in aes­
thetic matters. Obviously, it would be absurd to assert that all the works created 
during this period were realist in the sense that the word "realism" was given 
around 1 932-34. Nevertheless, diverse artistic currents-the cult of the machine 
(the beauty of construction), the cult of the social masses, the cult of politics-as­
the-guide-of-art- were fused into works which will last in the history of art: Maya­
kovsky's poems; Potemkin; Storm over Asia; And Quiet Flows the Don; Forward; 
Lyubov Yarovaya; posters by Deni and Moor; graphic art by Favorski and David 
Shterenberg; revolutionary painting by Deineka and Pietrov-Vodkin; sculpture by 
Shervoud, Shadr, and Moukhina. 
I do not intend to attempt a listing here of the aspects of realism which allow 
us to call it socialist. Undoubtedly, we are dealing with a cluster of aspects which 
might be extended, and cannot be set up according to arithmetical rules. The fea­
tures that I mentioned above suffice, it seems to me; they may all be found, al­
though visible in different degrees and in different contexts, in Soviet works of the 
epoch of rapid transition. 6 Socialist realism was not an invention of the devil, tend­
ing tq destroy artists who claimed their right to the most elementary independence. 
It was, rather, a product of life, a reflection of truth expressed in myriad ways, 
and often subject to exaggeration -there were as many manners as searchers (or 
groups of searchers), but their vision and form were always intended to satisfy 
the millions of people who were then opening their eyes to art. 
Before proceeding to recou nt the gradual emergence of the theory of socialist 
realism, I want to dwell for a moment on a problem still troublesome to many 
scholars of the subject. The issue is whether the turn in Soviet cultural policy which 
occurred in 1 932-the date is generally contrasted with 1 934-did not already 
mark the beginning of the end, the start of the downhill slide for artistic achieve­
ment. The argument which fixes on 1 932 usually states that, before this date, there 

258 
The Vicissitudes 
of Socialist Realism 
were competing artistic groups, none of which had the decisive approval and pow­
er of the Party behind it, while with the gradual rise of socialist realism to the level 
of artistic dogma (starting in 1 932) the party gained total control over the artists. 
I find that this interpretation departs from the historical data and, moreover, 
neglects the dialectical background. First, we must remember that the last genuinely 
unbridled discussions of art policy took place in 1 925-26. A central instance of 
these debates was the one sponsored by the Press Department of the Party Central 
Committee (May 9, 1 924), devoted to cultural policy in matters of literature. The 
chief speakers were Aleksander Voronsky, editor of the respected Krasnaya nov, 
which published many nonparty but sympathizing writers; and Ivan Vardin (pen 
name of I. V. Mgeladze), for the pugnacious Na postu group which sought the 
meeting and which wanted full party control of literature and decisive backing 
of proletarian artists aga inst the poputchiki (fellow travellers). It is interesting to 
note that Trotsky, Bukharin, and Lunacharsky sided with Voronsky. The Party 
Resolution which came out of the discussions was a compromise. "Na postu" was, 
however, still chastised for seeking to vulgarize and monopolize policy according 
to its lights. The June 1 925 Resolution of the full Central Committee of the Party 
took a similar stand. 
What happened in the following years? The leverage shifted towards the Na 
postu position; its proponents terrorized literary life, slandered Voronsky, caused 
Zamyatin to emigrate, humiliated Pilnyak and pushed Mayakovsky toward suicide. 
Given this setting, the official and unofficial Party declarations of 1 932-34 were 
remedial and positive; only this fact can explain why they were received so widely 
among artists as an improvement of the situation. Simultaneously, of course, these 
declarations opened the possibility a now-centralized terror. The Party could usurp 
the last remnants of the ar:tists' autonomy if it chose. The handwriting was on the 
wall for the avant-garde movement in Russia, which was now labelled ultra leftist. 
However, for any student of Soviet culture in these years it must be clear that the 
opportunity for experimentation had been dwindling since the m id-l 920s. 
Programs Derived by Artists from Their Work 
To study the formation of the theory of socialist realism, we can turn to a mass 
of sources-for example, the collection of documents concerning the Soviet plastic 
arts in the years 1 91 7-32 in I. Matsa, L Reinhardt, and L Rempel, eds., Sovietskoie 
iskusstvo za 1 5  liet. Materialy i dokumientatsia (Moscow-Leningrad, 1 933). We 
may here trace the main lines of development of the first decade of Soviet plastic 

259 
Programs Derived by 
Artists from their Work 
arts in the manifestos issued by the various artistic groupings, in the events in­
volved in the birth, development, and decline of these groups, and in the facts about 
exhibitions and art instruction. The outline of the following five years is more super­
ficial, and the work is not lacking in lacunae even with regard to the first years. 
Nonetheless, the volume constitutes a very rich vein of authentic data. The chief 
editor, Ivan Matsa, although an eminent art critic, contents himself with a very 
modest contribution; he prefers to present a picture of the times through brief intro­
ductions to each of the three parts of the book. After analyzing the materials pre­
sented, I am led to the following conclusions: 
1 .  During this period,. Soviet art was always accompanied by theoretical reflec­
tions. That is to say, each group sought to justify its practice with a program. 
2. The program of socialist realism was present from the twenties on, though 
it had not yet been defined by that term. Artists spoke of "revolutionary realism" 
or "proletarian realism." Such groups as Novaia Organizatsia Zhivopistsov, Krug 
Khudozhnikov, OMCh, OST, Oktiabr, which had been partisans of easel painting 
and monumental frescos, put these ideas into practice. Even where the program 
was not fully realized, it was articulated. 
3. The members of AChRR, a group continuing the traditions of the pieried­
vizhniki (travelling exhibits), also made use of these ideas as "heroic realism"; the 
interpretation, then, was highly flexible. 
4. These ideas were not utilized when it was a matter of applied art (with the 
exception of the RAPCh), for it was believed, correctly, that they were as strong as 
their subject only in the case of an art representative of reality. 
5. The theory of socialist realism as it was understood in 1 934 took up ideas 
which had been promulgated from before the birth of RAPCh, that is to say, con­
cepts stated by the poputchiki of the groups Oktiabr, OST, and OMCh. The most 
varied, and often contradictory, elements-on the one hand, the doctrine of com­
municativeness, and, on the other, the doctrine of continuous formal experimenta­
tion -enter into this theory, put forward, we should note, after a defeat for sec­
tarianism. Without amounting to the proclamation of a new era, this theory did 
constitute the balance sheet of fifteen years of bitter disputes over the determina­
tion of what proletarian art should be. 
The argumentations and artistic programs in this collection prove that the inter­
pretations and the consequences of these ideas were being worked out well before 
1 934. The theory of socialist realism -as the facts testify - was put together gradu­
ally, in combination with the irregular development of Soviet art during the first 

260 
The Vicissitudes 
of Socialist Realism 
fifteen years of its existence. These historical facts also point out some weaknesses 
of the theory, such as the fact that the term was borrowed from literary theory and 
could not be extended to oil domains of art. 
Even in terms of the literary programs, beginning with Krasnaya nov, Na postu, 
and RAPP, the premises and conclusions were not unequivocal. Different and con­
flicting currents within the larger trend of a literature committed to the side of the 
Soviet state, produced such formulations as: the spontaneous cognition of the 
Soviet reality must be primary; or, literature must be a class weapon based on 
dialectical materialism; or, a committed proletarian writing will "infect" the feelings 
and thoughts of readers by means of its subtle sociopsychologicol fictions. The 
latter position, bolstered by the ideas of Tolstoi and Plekhonov, was urged by RAPP 
ideologists, who laid the foundation for the theory of socialist realism. However, 
the remaining conceptions were also incorporated into the program of socialist 
realism which was advanced by Zhdanov. 
It is incorrect to say, then, that the Zhdanov theses of 1 934 amounted to on 
arbitrarily imposed code. They only represented a generalization of the some kind 
as the theoretical generalizations of the twenties. They were so lacking in precision 
that the Oktiobrists and the members of OST would hove been able to subscribe 
to oil of them. The codification of the theses as a closed system took place later; 
for the plastic arts, only in 1 945. 
From Lenin to Gorki and Zhdanov in 1 934 
Gradually, as the art developed, so too did both the programs derived by artists 
and the theory of socialist realism. Meanwhile, what was the status of inner-Porty 
attitudes? Many scholars hove, of late, emphasized a demarcation of the era pre­
ceding Lenin's death in 1 924 from the following Stalinist era. It is quite true, as I 
hove already indicated, that the lost wide open party debates on cultural policy 
took place in the year or two following Lenin's death; but it would be wrong to 
speak on this account of an arbitrary imposition of dogma or a turnabout of prin­
ciples during this era of transition. ft would be more appropriate to contrast the 
views of the Lenin circle with those expressed at the First Congress of Soviet Writers 
a decode later. I shall later discuss the fundamental differences between the Lenin 
and Stalin eras as these ultimately emerged. First, and so as to deter unwarranted 
conclusions, I would like to indicate some principles of Lenin's cultural politics that 
pointed towards socialist realism. The corruption of this theory into an adminis-

261 
From Lenin 
to Gorki and Zhdanov 
in 1 934 
trative formula was only conditioned by the epoch that followed. Its later form was 
almost entirely in contradiction with Lenin's aesthetic theses . 
During the years 1 91 7-24, Lenin, although primarily concerned with political, 
social, and economic problems, very often expressed his opinion with regard to 
cultural matters and indicated his view of the possible new roles of culture in so­
cialist society . Above all Lenin aimed for the popularization of culture. That is why 
he attacked the adepts of the Proletkult who were ignorant of the cultural heritage 
of the past. That is why he emphasized several times that the proletariat, unlike 
the Roman plebs, wanted not an amazing or modish "circus" but a serious art, 
in the best sense of that word. That is also why Lenin demanded an art that could 
be understood by the masses. The sympathy that Lenin felt, on the one hand, 
for literature like that of Gorki and Barbusse, and, on the other hand, for the then­
famous plan of "monumental propaganda," is another reflection of the proposi­
tions he maintained. We also know, from his discussions with Clora Zetkin , that 
Lenin neither loved nor understood contemporary art. 
Luriachorsky, an art critic very sensitive. to literature and a connoisseur of all the 
new artistic currents of his time, defended the ideals of the avant-garde and thus 
laid himself open to sometimes heated debates with Lenin. 7 We need only examine 
Lunacharsky's works to realize, however, that despite the often very serious tone 
of his polemics with Lenin, they defended exactly the same basic aesthetic princi­
ples.8 
During the years 1 926-29, while still Commissar of Education, Lunacharsky 
conceived of himself as the executor and continuer of Lenin's policies. I do not 
believe that his views sprang merely from the official post he occupied . On the 
contrary, I am certain that his opinions were the result of reflection, the personal 
debates he was in the habit of having with himself. In "The Cultural Tasks Which 
the Working Class Must Assume" (1 91 8), he early took up Lenin's ideas. Here 
briefly is his reasoning: A proletarian culture exists. It results, and will continue 
to result, from those artists who have become involved in the revolution and the 
building of socialism. Their art is an art of struggle; and soon it will also be prac­
ticed by workers and peasants, who will begin to narrate their experiences, much 
as Gorki and Martin Anderson Nexo·have done. 
Lunachorsky wrote in "Art and Industry " (1 924) of the aesthetic pleasure given 
us by clothing, furniture, dwellings, machines, and the look of streets . He dreamt 
of a world soon to come, in which two brothers, the artist-technician and the tech-

262 
The Vicissitudes 
of Socialist Realism 
nicion-ortist, would create the conditions necessary to revolutionize aesthetics. 
That was an idea in the marxist tradition which Julian Morchlewsky had statÊ 
before the October Revolution; and, in the first years after, it was very popular 
among th.e Soviet intelligentsia. The plastic arts were to influence the surrounding 
world, organize space in the widest sense of that word, coexist with man in his 
everyday life, and turn aesthetics right-side round. Lunochorsky was, therefore, 
on the side of those who ore for contemporaneity and who seek above all to give 
art on applied character, directly relating it to architecture. 
However, Lunochorsky a lso approved of the AChRR group in its objection to 
modern "autonomous" art. It is notable that artists of the Cezonnist group Valet 
Karo and of "The Four Arts" group passed into the AChRR group without the least 
pressure exerted on them. The AChRR group could count on Lunachorsky's favor 
because its followers were creating a revolutionary art, on art of the era, compre­
hensible to the public and very popular. In "On the Value of Formal Art" (1 926), 
Lunochorsky disavowed academic epigonism as much as cultivated decadent art. 
He recognized the formal value of experimental art but asserted that, under the 
circumstances, it was possible to bedazzle people without being able to satisfy 
them. Above all, he declared, the hunger of the contemporary public must be ap­
peased, and appeased with new nutriments. However, until the new forms for the 
new basis of things appear, "it would be better to make use of Turgenev's and 
Pushkin's classic language rather than on indecipherable language." 
Such were the opinions of a man who made war with Lenin to defend the rights 
of art and the right of formal experiment, the man who popularized expressionism, 
cubism, futurism, and purism in his writings, and demanded, in 1 926, in a fine 
speech entitled "Let Us Be Careful Vis-0-Vis Art," that an a ppeal to the current 
aesthetic level of the masses should not be used as a basis for the rejection of dif­
ficult works of art which will at some point in the future be comprehensible by and 
easily accessible to everybody. 
On some questions, Maxim Gorki's opinions were unlike those of Lunachorsky; 
Gorki had no use for a Western European contemporary art whose principal (and 
decadent) aim seemed to be to seek new means of expression, for he held that 
a popular art should above all bring forth a proletarian art. However, it is signif­
icant here to note the way in which the opinions of Lunacharsky and Gorki both 
led towards-the 1 934 formu lotions. 
Some of Gorki's aesthetic opinions were arrived at before the October Revolu­
tion. In his 1 909 study "The Annihilation of the Individual," he contrasted the opti-

263 
From Lenin 
to Gorki and Zhdanov 
in 1 934 
mism and sense of collectivity stimulated by folk literature with the sense of loneli­
ness and decay evinced by the works of Sologub, Artsybashev, and Kuprin. If he 
proposed folk literature as a model, it was because he found it optimistic, healthy, 
and moral, speaking the same language as the masses, expressing thoughts and 
sentiments similar to theirs. It was not a question of mechanica lly imitating the 
style but of adopting a comparable moral attitude. In "The Self-Taught" (1 91 1 }  
and "Introduction to the Works of Proletarian Writers" ( 1 91 4), he emphasized 
that literature must represent the truth of life, and the writers best able to repre­
sent this truth would be those arising from the formerly oppressed classes. 
Many of Gorki's postrevolutionary speeches already foreshadow his 1 934 re­
port. I will cite only the most important. In "On the Proletarian Writer" (1 928), he 
wrote that the new art must poeticize collective work a nd must take cognizance 
of the fact that man is capable of the most beautiful deeds and that he can influence 
the flow of history, inspiring it with the most beautiful human ideals. The same 
year he declared in "How I Learned to Write" that romanticism was no more than 
a simple reaction against realism on the part of those who saw life in the large, 
that is to say, those who saw man, how he desired to live, and what his ideals 
were: In "On Socialism Realism" (1 933}, Gorki contrasted bourgeois literature, 
dominated by selfishness, the quest for material pleasures, and the war of all 
against all, to humanist literature, dominated by a striving for the common good, 
for social well-being in preference to personal comfort, and for interpersonal 
coexistence on the basis of rational and cordial friendship. 
Was that the universal opinion? No. Gorki's personal opinion then? No, not that 
either. In his articles, Gorki was expressing the aesthetic opinions of the majority 
of Soviet artists. These opinions were born of the tempestuous discussions which, 
over a period of more than ten years, had revolved around the basic question: 
What must the art of our epoch be, and does existing art truly correspond to con­
temporary needs? 
In 1 934, Gorky and Zhdanov drew up the balance sheet of these discussions. 
Let me here cite the key ideas of their reports. 
Gorki: "Myth is an invention. To invent means to extract the essence out of a ny 
given combination and transpose it into an image. In this way realism is born . . . .  
If to this essence one adds, following the logic of hypothesis, what one would like 
to see achieved, and introduces it into the created image, then one obtains romanti­
cism, which is the foundation of myth and is very useful for its revolutionary effect 
on reality . . . .  

264 
The Vicissitudes 
of Socialist Realism 
"Work must be the principal hero of our books. It is that which must fashion 
man and shape him to the demands of modern technique . . . .  We must learn to 
treat work as a creative art. 
"Socialist realism claims that to live is to act, to create, to continually develop 
in man his most personal gifts in order that he may triumph over natural forces . . .  
to assure his happiness on earth 
.
.
.
.
 "9 
Zhdanov: " . . .  The line must be well-known in order to be able to represent it 
honestly in litc:rory works- not in a scholastic, superficial manner, not in the style 
of objective reality; it is necessary to represent reality in its process of revolutionary 
evolution . . . .  That is precisely the method, in literature, and in literary criticism, 
which we coll the method of socialist realism. 
" . . .  Yes, Soviet literature is tendentious . . . .  
" 
" . . .  To be on engineer of human souls is to hove one's feet solidly rooted to the 
soil of reality . . . .  Our literature is firmly set on the hard ground of materialism, 
but romanticism is not beyond its ken; only, it is a question of a romanticism of a 
new type, revolutionary romanticism. 
" . . .  You have a choice of weapons. Soviet literature is able to make use of all 
kinds of weapons- forms, styles, and methods of artistic creation - to exploit 
their diversity and the richness of their forms." 1 0  
In my opinion these statements may b e  summarized into three cardinal propo­
sitions: 
1 .  Contemporary life, in all of its aspects, provides the subject matter of art, and 
it is the artist's role to prove responsive to this subject matter. However, artistic 
truths ore always of a personal character, and they must result from individual 
discoveries. The artist arrives at his truth through a synthesis of contemporary 
facts; he either estimates existing reality or involves himself in the future by detect­
ing new phenomena. These truths are tendentious because reality is tendentious; 
and the artist is fundamentally obliged to choose between past and future. (Zola 
hod wished to be a passive chronicler, but to make on honest account of events 
he found he had to speak out for socialism.) Anticipating socialism of necessity 
involves intuiting the form of the future human personality and depicting its in­
cipient stages in the setting of the present. Thus, the developmental person or 
model is not merely an invention of the theory of socialist reolism.1 1  
2. Engage or ideologically progressive art can rely on the expressive means that 
best suit the artist. If the doctrine of realism has anything to say with respect to 

265 
From Lenin 
to Gorki and Zhdanov 
in 1 934 
the specific means, it is only that artistic form is desirable and efficacious from the 
ideological point of view, since it gives a kind of translucence to ideas. 
3. An art fulfilling conditions (l ) and (2) has not only a positive aesthetic but 
also a positive moral effect. This effect is not without importance because art can 
thereby help us to understand life better and to live better. 
It seems to me that I have not abused my rights of interpretation in the above 
exposition, and, if it be true that such ideas may be drawn from Gorki's and Zhdan­
ov's reports, then these reports are completely acceptable. They take up again the 
excellent aesthetic tradition extending from Aristotle, through the theoreticians of 
the Renaissance and those of the Enlightenment, to the Russian revolutionary demo­
crats. Whoever might consider the tradition bad, will, nevertheless, concede that 
this aesthetic reappears with implacable regularity at every decisive turning point 
in history, every time new social principles manifest themselves. It is an aesthetic 
which also distinguishes our epoch. I will not deny that its main ideas are presented 
in generalities; it is that which gives them both their strength and their weakness. 
Today we know that it is the weakness which has ta ken over. 
I nstitutionalization of the Doctrine 
The First Congress of Soviet Writers marked a turn away from the promulgation 
in some quarters of the slogan "with us or against us," that is, from the increasing­
ly orthodox fashion of dividing writers into marxists and nonmarxists which gen­
erally accompanied the practices of putting art and political ideology on the same 
level and attempting to stifle any criticism of events in the Soviet Union.1 2  How­
ever, some of the formulations in Zhdanov's report already foretold that those who 
thought of opposing the inducements to orthodoxy would run into difficulties. 
Zhdanov pressed the proposition that Soviet literature possessed an avant­
garde quality because it was engendered in an avant-garde society. This thesis 
was false; it put in question the law of the unequal development of art and of 
society which Marx had earlier advanced. It was in the name of this thesis that the 
Hungarian Jozsef Revai "demonstrated" in 1 950-51 that Lukacs was not a marxist 
aesthetician. 
. 
This thesis wou\d have it that not only was Soviet literature automatically better 
• I  
than the classic literature of past centuries, but also that contemporary bourgeois 
literature was decadent and deprived of all value. Therein lay theoretical over­
simplifications which were to lead to dangerous practical consequences. A bulk-

266 
The Vicissitudes 
of Socialist Realism 
head sealed against any penetration of the art practiced in Western Europe and 
the United States, a state of suspicion and scorn for whatever ca me from beyond 
our camp, served only to diminish socialist culture. Furthermore, Zhdanov uttered 
his ideas in a tone and way which rendered them decrees. He spoke not only of 
what was but also of what should be. A theory of art which goes from description 
and synthesis to the setting up of norms supported by terms like "must" and "neces­
sary" is skirting the abyss. From this point it is but a short way to the command: 
"Here is what is permitted and here is what is forbidden." 
However, in 1 934 these aspects were not as perilous as they were to become 
later. The evolution of socialist realism toward its "institutional" version was gradu­
al. A date which might serve to mark the definite dominance of this "institutional" 
version is the year 1 936. To be more specific, this point of no return was marked by 
the article "A Chaos of Sounds Instead of Music," published in Pravda in January 
1 936. The subject of this fulmination was Shostakovich's opera Lady Macbeth of 
the Mzensk District. 
What strikes us in this article is that, instead of entering into a discussion with 
the artist, it simply pronounces an anathema permitting of no appeal. Moreover, 
the principles of realism, feasible and discussable in terms of the representational 
arts, were, without on offer of justification, carried over into an attack on the ex­
pressive characteristics of the musical score. It was official now that socialist real­
ism was the only tolerated artistic current in the Soviet Union. A limited group of 
people were granted the privilege of deciding what was socialiᢵt realism and what 
was good or bad art. This small circle had had conferred upon it the right to repre­
sent the aesthetic opinions of the entire nation. It is not astonishing, therefore, 
that Zhdanov referred to this article at a conference of Soviet musicologists held 
in 1 948 under the auspices of the Central Committee of the Party. The year 1 948 
was the epilogue to what had begun twelve years earlier. 
Lenin had mentioned in his writings the possible intervention of the Party in 
matters of art, but he never spoke about forbidding experimental art. Lenin had as 
much confidence in artists as in the mass of the people. This confidence stemmed 
from his belief in the irresistible and persuasive advances of socialism. Lenin wrote 
that one could not be independent of society but that the socialist regime would 
permit artists to choose freely. In Lenin's time socialist realism was not the only 
current, but one among many artistic currents. Lunacharsky defined Lenin's policies 
vis-a-vis art in the 1 926 article mentioned above, in which he recommended be-

267 
I nstitutionol ization 
9f the Doctrine 
having with great prudence every time it came to a question of deciding the value 
of a work of art. 
In "On the Freedom of Creation in a Socialist Regime" (1 91 8), Lunacharsky gave 
the impression that the artist would be free as a bird. This view derived from his 
conviction that artists, aware of society's new needs and deeply involved in the 
new life, would abandon intimacy ("everything which is secret, interior, personal. 
untranslatable into any language") for rational clear art marked by personal senti­
ments but dedicated to the common cause. He knew at the same time, to his great 
regret, that certain creative artists would find it very difficult to set themselves upon 
the path of socialist art. His article ended with these words: "Before reaching the 
socialist paradise, perhaps we shall have to rest for some very bitter time yet in 
purgatory." 
The main documents of the Zhdanov period -the small volume containing 
Zhdanov's speeches and the resolutions of the Central Committee of the Party 
concerning literature and art from 1 946-48- prove that Lenin's point of view had 
been abandoned. Ideologically progressive art became synonymous with making 
propaganda for everything good, while omitting to mention anything else. Even 
if Zoshchenko's and Akhmatova's writings did deserve to be severely criticized, it 
should have been necessary all the same to tolerate their existence. The mainstream 
group of writers- Katayev, Paustovsky, Fadeyev, Ehrenburg, Olesha, Tvardovsky, 
lnber, etc. - should have been able to continue producing different kinds of creative 
work. Zhdanov would, however, allow no tolerance. He launched and sanctioned 
the principle of monopoly around a single official idea. 
Muradelli's opera The Great Friendship was accused as a pretext to subdue 
what was called the "formalist coterie." Suddenly one learned that it was forbidden 
to practice a modern art because it was addressed only to an elite. What were the 
formal models which became, instead, de rigueur for Soviet art? The mogutchaia 
kutchka in music, the pieriedvizhniky in painting, Tolstoi and Chekhov in literature. 
Although it was not maintained that one must comply with the ideological princi­
ples underlying the creative works of the nineteenth century, the artistic language 
of that time was openly imposed, under the pretext that it was the only language 
which could be understood by the masses. Moreover, those who dared to defend 
different opinions in art were accused of subversive activity. Zhdanov spoke as a 
dictator in 1 948; he used epithets instead of relying on arguments . . 
Thus were the principles of socialist realism transformed into their opposite. 

268 
The Vicissitudes 
of Socialist Realism 
The doctrine of truth became a doctrine of Byzantine prostrations before inviolable 
commandments from the highest authorities. One had the right to see what was 
good and to dream how that might become better still, but it was expressly for­
bidden to take notice of what wasn't going well. Thus, literature and art, seeking 
to avoid whatever could not be praised, lacked truth. 
The theory of the diversity of genres, styles, and forms was changed into a 
theory that served as apologist for a single style. "Epigonism" was openly culti­
vated. Art was conceived of in an academic and conservative manner. Experiments 
in new forms were looked upon as diabolical inventions because they were also 
being carried on by contemporary bourgeois artists, who were damned by defi­
nition. 
Finally, the theory of the moral influence of art was replaced by the theory of 
the submission of artistic ideas to the political aims of propaganda and agitation. 
There was no question of culture but only of the politically extolled social cult. 
This doctrine- let us call it Zhdanovism -did not admit of any other aesthetic 
interpretation. Nor was its activity limited to.the field of culture; politics supported 
it and was thus able to menace recalcitrants not only by barring their road to liveli­
hood and glory but by subjecting them to repressions. Every artist had his supervi­
sor, an institution charged with seeing to it that the artist did not choose any "false 
steps." There were factional specialists in publishing houses, editorial boards, and 
agencies to guide the decisions of the creative artist and to point out to him the 
right road -and the risky spots. An entire hierarchy of aesthetic overseers was put 
to work. Everybody, from the critics to those representing the final court of appeal, 
helped to implement the administrative mills. Every theoretician, furthermore, had 
his supertheoretician a nd every critic his supercritic. 
The Sources of Corruption 
I would distinguish two dimensions to the corruption of the theory of socialist re­
alism: one heteronomous; the other autonomous. The first led to the events so 
many times discussed since the Twentieth Congress of the Communist Party of the 
Soviet Union. The second has to do with laws immanent in the development of 
aesthetic theories. These sources were not independent of each other. For Zhda­
novian theories to achieve such interiorizing power, both causes had to be active 
simultaneously. 
External sources which directly contributed to the corruption of the Zhdanovian 
doctrine were: 

269 
The Sources of Corruption 
l .  the conception of socialism as built and already achieved and impeccable; 
2. the conception of the intensification of the class struggle; 
3. the conception of art and literature as phenomena fully subordinate to the same 
social rules and interpretive procedures as politics. 
Zhdanov's idea of socialist realism as already achieved (see his speeches of 
1 934) implied that there already existed in reality more than a developmental 
model; there was, in fact, a fully worked out and immutable model for aesthetic 
representation. This idea lly beautiful world in turn justified the call for a kind of 
Platonic realism in literature and art. Then, alleging the intensification of the class 
struggle as a pretext, all art "alien to the socialist camp" (as the phrase then went) 
was calumniated; those carrying on experiments in our own camp were distrusted, 
and a cleavage was then brought about between Soviet culture and the rest of 
contemporary culture. This doctrine was no less Platonic than the one preceding 
it, for it substituted, in place of an enemy who could be recognized, a frightful 
enemy, entirely invented from head to foot. Finally, the last of these ideas debased 
art and science to the level of ancillae politicae which implied the same discipline 
vis-a-vis authority, the same duties, the same tactic, the same elasticity in aban­
doning former positions to occupy new ones, and the same criteria of judgment 
as in political questions. 
What were the immanent causes of corruption? I wrote earlier in this chapter 
that art theories tend by their natural evolution to gravitate towards dogmatism. 
However, in the case of socialist realism, this would not have been able to occur 
so quickly, and in such a way, without the intervention of the external factors. It 
is also to these external factors that we must attribute the eventual resemblance 
of this doctrine to that of the Jesuit Counter-Reformation. 
I also discern another immanent cause that helped to speed this transformation: 
the fact that the aesthetic institutions were founded on the implicit priority of the 
educational function of art. According to the 1 934 definition, the educative in­
fluence must spring from a work's truth and its beauty stricto sensu. However, 
this theory was formulated in so imprecise a way that it was easy to reverse it. 
Here is the reasoning on the point as one finds it in Gorki and more precisely in 
Zhdanov: It is important to educate our public because truth and beauty are its 
birthright; the artist, however, is not the proper one to determine the ultimate char­
acter of this truth and this beauty. That duty falls only to the supervisory group 
acting on behalf of the people. How could this interpretation have arisen, contrary 
to the more elementary aesthetic principle, long honored in Russia especially, which 

270 
The Vicissitudes 
of Socialist Realism 
might be formulated thus: "To utter the truth in the most beautiful possible form"? 
Here is the principle as it came to be understood: "To educate by means of art in 
as communicative a way as possible." 
It was not a question of a conscious plot by the enemies of socialist culture; nor 
even a plot by high functionaries with limited ideas who did not understand that 
the truth of beauty and the beauty of truth always have had something to teach, 
and that one could shape the public by such mean.s as well as by means of ugliness 
and lies. Here are the real causes of this situation : first, the fear of unveiling the 
entire social and political truth, coupled with the assumption that art could influ­
ence thoughts, sentiments, and public action in an immediate and lasting way; 
second, the fear that honest art, irresistibly borne toward discovery, in subject 
matter as well as in form, would remain incomprehensible to the masses; third, 
the fear that a handful of thrown pebbles might cause an avalanche. 
The first of these causes is entirely external. The difficult conditions in which 
socialism was being built provoked continual tension. It was a matter of not dis­
couraging people, of not permitting distrust and doubt, and art was made use of, 
among other expedients, to attain this goal. The fear of being criticized with regard 
to shortcomings led to the political terror. 
As for the second cause, the conflict between the avant-garde tendencies of 
artists and the backwardness of their public is a permanent characteristic in history. 
However, this split nowhere else attained so dramatic a character as it did under 
the socialist conditions in the Soviet Union. There the masses were particularly 
backward and the artists, finally free to devote themselves unconditionally to the 
search for new forms, made rather rash use of their experimental practice. 
Lenin was aware of this conflict and he defended the masses; he demanded 
that art be modern and comprehensible at the same time . Lunacho rsky struggled 
with the same problem. Sometimes he tried to resolve the dilemma by giving satis­
faction to both parties; at other times he followed in Lenin's tracks. For example, 
in his article on Deroin (1 927), despite h is great admiration for the artist, he ex­
pressed some reservations with regard to the modernism of his work because he 
found it devoid of revolutionary elements and not very "accessible." According 
to Lunacharsky, in order to be understood by the masses an artist must make use 
of the language of classical forms, the language used by Michelangelo, Tintoretto, 
and Rubens. Before him, Gorki had condemned Dostoevsky in the name of the pri­
ority of the educative function of art. Zhdanov, at the time of his attacks against 
Zoshchenko and Akhmatova, declared that an art which is content to criticize can-

271 
The Sources of Corruption 
not be pedagogical. He refused to approve the "formalist" group exemplified by 
Shostakovich because, he said, they committed the sin of false originality. Music 
of genius is always accessible to everybody at first hearing, he affirmed. The music 
the "formalists" were writing was degenerate because it was strange to the Soviet 
people and difficult to understand. 
From Lunocharsky to Zhdanov, then, the some arguments recur, and what gave 
them birth was a genuine social conflict. This conflict was sharply etched in the 
speeches of Mao Tse-tung at the forum of artists and writers held at Yenon in Moy 
1 942. There he asserted that the only criterion to be kept in view is the culture of 
the workers, peasants, and soldiers, that is, that in interpreting life and truth in 
artistic language one must, above all, toke account of the audience for which it 
is destined. Mao did distinguish two types of artistic recreation, one very easy and 
the other more difficult, but he declared that the duty of the Porty is, above all, 
to popularize art and not to elevate it excessively. He thus openly favored utilitar­
ianism (according to which the value of a work is to be measured above all in terms 
of the public response it finds) and resolutely set political above aesthetic criteria. 1 3  
The Party and the Artists 
The thesis of the priority of the educational function of art is bolstered by the thesis 
of the directing role of the Porty in the field of art; and, reciprocally, the direction 
of the Porty seems that much more indispensable in the field of art to the degree 
that artists are aware of fulfilling ideological functions. The Party "defends" the 
mosses against any art that does not choose to be communicative, and guides the 
artists lest they should lose contact with the masses and foil to confront the more 
important problems, that is, those most useful from a social point of view. 1 4  
None of these doctrines, all closely interconnected, seem correct to me. I under­
stand Porty "direction" with regard to art in on entirely different way. The priority 
of the pedagogical function strikes me as deadly to any rational aesthetics. If the 
Party has a legitimate role, it is to be a source of inspiration and partnership, rather 
than a political organizer. To intervene in matters of art with the authority of a 
regular tribunal or court of appeals, even with the best intentions in the world, 
is to harm artistic growth. 
The Party leadership has the right and the duty to discuss problems with artists. 
However, this discussion must have the character of a freely argued polemic con­
ducted among equals. If a work of art seems harmful, let another artist or critic, 
Party member or not, speak up and justify the criticism. Let the accused have the 

272 
The Vicissitudes 
of Socialist Realism 
possibility of defending himself. Let truth be revealed in public discussion. Judged 
in this way, a work of art submits its worth to proof in the face of society. If, on 
the contrary, it is the leadership of the Party-composed of eminent persons, but 
specialists in matters quite different from art-who decide whether X is socialist 
realist or not, then the situation becomes perilous. It is all too easy to make random 
judgments and thus create havoc. Even if a connoisseur is found in the group of 
politicians, everything is not settled. Once a mistake is made, art pays for it in time 
and expense. Today, it seems to me, the widespread consensus is that a group 
of Party leaders cannot represent the aesthetic aspirations of an entire people. 
If we interpret Party leadership in matters of art as it has been interpreted up 
till now, we inevitably arrive at the doctrine of the priority of the educational func­
tion of the work of art. This is a risky doctrine in terms of aesthetics, because these 
rigid norms make it possible to excuse all kinds of inadequacies in a work just so 
long as the work keeps its compact with an ideological point of view. Moreover, 
even the genuine ideological commitment of the artist may be displaced by a merely 
tactical agreement with the latest officially proclaimed "Party line." fi istory demon­
strates that the least durable and most circumscribed aesthetic systems are those 
depending on the priority of the pedagogical function. 
The educative influence of a work derives from its content values integrated 
with its structure and aesthetic values sensu strictu. Each artist has a personal 
way of discovering the world, of giving it proportion, form, and color; he judges, 
stimulates, and obliges us to think and rethink about certain aspects of things, 
whether it be by recalling them to us or by making us discover them; he charms us 
by his language and composition. Therein lies the essence of the moral function 
of art. This function can only come from creative freedom. The artists must be 
aware of this freedom, must feel it instinctively and cling to it. Creative work truly 
serves the cause of the Party if it represents the truth of life in adequate aesthetic 
forms-and not if it merely follows Party directives step by step. If socialism is the 
most humanist regime, it is because it can create the most tangible and favorable 
conditions for the creation of this art. If the masses are to be educated, they must 
have not only communicative art but also-and perhaps I should say especially­
difficult art. 
The theory of socialist realism, in my opinion, does not at all imply that the teach­
ing role takes priority over art's other functions or that Party authorities must have 
the last word with regard to art criticism. The artist and the public play coequal 
parts in the great process of evolution and need no mediators. The artist's work 

273 
The Party and the Artists 
is ultimately the expression of that evolution and, insofar as it is so, it educates both 
artist and public. 
Altogether, socialism as it has been so for practiced and experienced is in need 
of further study. I do not know if I have succeeded in this chapter in the task of ex­
tricating the theory of socialist realism from the Zhdanovian cocoon that has en­
veloped it. Let us hope that Soviet scholars, who are in the best position to know 
the source materials, will write a history of art capable of proving that the essential 
elements of this theory have remained unimpaired. 
The theory of socialist realism must be an "open" theory. By this I mean that it 
must be ready to enter into controversy with other modern theories with regard 
to such problems as have here been set forth; and it must stand comparison with 
new artistic phenomena. This comparison must rest on the principle of nonaggres­
sion, that is, it will not be simply a question of affirming, per fas et nefas, that every 
work of value is socialist realist or that every socialist realist work is an artistic 
phenomenon of high value. 
Postcript 1 972 
I have no doubt that the foregoing part of this chapter carries the imprint of the 
time when it was written, which was the Winter of 1 956. As the reader will easily 
gather, I was involved in the polemics over what should be meant by the concept 
of "socialist realism." Why did I get into the discussions over this question? On 
the one hand, at that time the very thought of a socialist realism was under vehe­
ment attack from some Polish critics (and I should remark that many of their pens 
had been used prior to October 1 956 to subscribe blindly to everything which is­
sued from Party headquarters). On the other hand, their Soviet counterparts were 
content to defend socialist realism in a merely hagiographical manner. 
Given this situation, my own emphasis-and I concede that today's reader may 
find it less inclusive than he might desire-fell on the theory's emergence and, 
in particular, its relation to an artistic evolution which, more than simply ante­
dating the developed principles of socialist realism, indeed interacted with and 
encouraged numerous variously convergent reflections on its artistic practice. I 
focused on a few carefully selected theoretical and critical texts -the most pivotal 
as I then believed (and still believe). If, for example, I referred to Zhdanov's and 
Gorki's speeches of 1 934 to the exclusion of Bukharin a nd Radek, it was not so 
much because the latter names were then on the Index (as they still are), but in­
stead because of the substantial agreement among all the spolesmen. Bukharin's 

274 
The Vicissitudes 
of Socialist Realism 
speech far surpassed the other official reports at the Congress in terms of intelli· 
gence, breadth of scope, and sensitivity to poetry, yet it embraced the same princi· 
pies that I analyzed in my 1 956 essay. 
I have decided to leave the foregoing text substantially unchanged, for I believe 
the views there set forth are still fundamentally correct, though the stress of the 
argument is now dated and insufficient. The reader may, moreover, judge to what 
extent my pioneering study has been subsequently validated. The intervening years 
have given rise, particularly in the Soviet Union, to many essays concerned with 
socialist realism. However, few successful attempts have been made to dig into 
the real course of evolution, and the earlier standpoint has prevailed, correspond­
ing to the trend towards so-called re-Stalinization. 
In 1 972, the theory of socialist realism still remains a sacred cow. Nothing can 
be said that is genuinely critical with regard to its vicissitudes and the emergence 
of Soviet literature, fine arts, and music. Equally resurgent has been the opposite, 
equally extreme, view: that of antimarxist Western scholars who will not admit 
to seeing anything sensible or valuable in this artistic current. They treat socialist 
realism exclusively as an official, vacuous doctrine imposed on writers, painters, 
and composers by an authoritarian regime. In consequence, whatever they opprove 
of they discuss as more or less a departure from socialist realism. Both of the ex· 
treme approaches, I feel, are mistaken. Accordingly, the 1 956 essay, in my view, 
continues to perform a corrective function in the present context. 
Nonetheless, there were issues I did not take up at all which now appear to me 
to be pivotal for the study of the integral and ongoing evolution of this doctrine. 
In sum, my central thesis above is: the body of theory which came to be called 
socialist realism arose gradually, as a natural outcome of the literary and artistic 
experiments which should be dated to as far back as the work of Martin Anderson 
Nexo or Gorki's The Mother (1 906). It is perfectly evident, however, that the devel­
opment of both the artistic tendency and its counterpart in theory (not to mention 
the interplay between them) has had a primary dependence on the socialist reality. 
Now, the crucial point with regard to this fundamental fact is the extent to which 
the Soviet artists (especially the writers) were able to render equally the positive 
and negative sides of the system-in-the-making, and, similarly, how much they 
were able to testify to the strivings to overcome defects or reversions before they 
might become mortally dangerous to the socialist ideals. It would prove highly 
fruitful to adopt such a perspective and in its light to rewrite the history of Soviet 
literature and the other domains of art. The approach has yet to be applied. Those 

275 
Postscript 1 972 
"inside" the Soviet cultural establishment are either apologetic or teleologically 
blinkered, behaving as though the present moment were a pinnacle to which all 
the meandering previous roads were destined to lead by a route of distortions or 
mistakes that were, moreover, inevitable. Those who stand "outside" the Soviet 
culture seem so totally biased they can scarcely credit that many (and among them 
major) artists who were involved in the Soviet reality were neither bribed nor ter­
rorized to do so, but grew to be spontaneously and sincerely committed. 
Let me then try to sketch some elements of such an approach. 
The Bourgeois and the Transitional Novel 
The chief point at issue in the pre­
socialist novel, as Lukacs has superbly demonstrated in his Theory of the Novel, 
is the problematical individual. (I would only add to this thesis that, in the best 
of these works that oppose the containing social reality, a possibility does appear 
for the hero to attempt to transcend the situation in a search for lost, genuine 
values.) 
In the socialist framework, the theme of the problematic individual could not but 
be continued, but the angle for the study of the conflicts shifted. The individual now 
came to be regarded in his transition from a rejection of the new era, through a 
time of Hamlet-like doubts, to an ultimate commitment. Much of the most enduring 
Soviet literature deals with this theme. Novels which give excellent and typical 
examples were written by Olesha, Leonov, and Ehrenburg, while the model fiction 
treating this transition, as nearly all agree, is Alexey Tolstoi's The Road to Calvary. 
However, the new epoch also called forth another kind of hero, not explored 
within the bourgeois n·ovels studied by Lukacs. This hero was the peasant whose 
entire world was shaken by the revolution. Pilnyak's novels deal conspicuously 
with this subject matter; while the paradigmatic work representing the torments 
suffered in the countryside during these years is Sholokhov's And Quiet Flows the 
Don. This epic novel points, moreover, to a definite outcome to the epoch of shat­
tering transition. Where the heroes of A Tolstoi not only grew reconciled to the 
Soviet reality but actually began to participate actively in it, Sholokhov's chief hero, 
Grigori Melekhov, was defeated -yet the Soviet reality advanced to new achieve­
ments. 
The conflicts portrayed by these modes of fiction - involving intellectuals or 
peasants who resisted the new social system -were revelatory of considerable 
historical truth. Meanwhile, the peasant authors adopted, for the most part, the 
stance of fellow travellers, seeking to strike an inward truce with a reality that was 

276 
The Vicissitudes 
of Socialist Realism 
not entirely comprehensible or acceptable to them. Such tales, then, hove a thematic 
gravity that is not identical with the core themes of socialist realism. Examples are 
abundant: Trenyov's Lyubov Yarovaya, Fadeyev's The Nineteen, lvanov's The 
Armored Train, Furmanov's Chapaev, Makarenko's Pedagogical Poem, Ostrovsky's 
How the Steel Was Tempered, or the more symbolic and very paradigmatic drama 
by Vishnevsky, The Optimistic Tragedy. I n  such works we do see the main trend 
of the socialist-organized artistic vision; however, the characteristic that I have 
mentioned as the crucial point for writers functioning in a socialist reality is, to a 
large extent, lacking or unfocused, and that is an awareness responsive to the 
negative aspects of the new epoch . 
Works in the socialist mainstream for the most part treated the negative side as 
something wholly exterior, pertaining only to the prior circumstances against which 
socialist men and women had to act. Negativity was solely attributable to the 
obstinacy of outlived social forces, which might continue to intervene or to present 
obstacles, but which would only temporarily hold up the advance of the revolution­
ary program. 1 5 
"Insiders" and the Negative Side of Reality: Babel and Mayakosky Hence, 
we must further scan the literature of the revolution to define instances where 
writers who were completely identified with the socialist P.urpose and active in it­
let me call them "insiders"-were yet sensitively open and alert to the defects and 
dangers which the postrevolutionary era carried within its own forces. Now, if 
we do structure the pattern of a developing Soviet literature as I have here out­
lined, it seems to me that two great authors will deserve special attention for ful­
filling this function . They are Vladimir Moyakovsky and Isaac Babel: Babel for his 
collection of stories Red Cavalry; and Mayakovsky particularly for his satirical play 
The Bathhouse. 
Red Cavalry seems to be one of the most adequate and deeply felt portrayals 
of the experience of the revolution. The savagery and ruthlessness it vividly porᢴ 
trays ore justified not only with respect to civil-war norms but also and especially 
in terms of a response to a past of horrors: the recollected centuries of oppression, 
hunger, poverty, and ignorance imposed on the masses. The author encourages us 
to try to consider even the most nightmarish , inhuman bloodshed from the stand­
point of the just passions of exploited people. However, Babel the revolutionary 
enthusiast is also Babel the penetrating ironist: the swift revengers of post mis­
chief are inarticulate, the movement forward is a narchical movement, and the 

277 
Postscript 1 972 
elemental drama of redemption resounds like a warning bell. We ore very far here 
from the mystique that permeated Blok's The Twelve, which portrayed "the red 
terrorists" as the apostles of a new Eden. Babel espouses the ideals and ideas of 
socialism with all his being; there is no doubt of that. Nonetheless, he scrutinizes 
the messengers of his hope with no trace of dreamy self-deception or religiosity. 
Seeing the still backward masses with his clear vision, Babel realizes that there 
con be no guarantee that socialism will ever become fully embodied. 
The completed image that Babel gives us of the revolutionary carnage is reminis­
cent of the articles published by Gorki during 1 91 7-1 8 in Novaya Zizhn. Gorki 
was then at odds with Lenin; he argued with foreboding that the tide of anarchy 
could only incite the Bolsheviks to ever more dictatorial steps. In other words, Ba­
bel's vision, like the political editorials of Gorki -speaking from the inside of social­
ism and in the name of its aims and ideals- presents a warning for the fate of 
socialism, which hos as its reference the political immaturity of the mosses. It seeks 
to forefend the iron dictatorial rule of a tight circle of professional revolutionaries. 
Red Cavalry, of course, does not harangue: "Look here, to destroy is much 
simpler than to build." This is a trivial insight and, beyond any doubt, not appro­
priate to times of revolutionary upheaval. No, another much more fundamental 
and serious issue is paramount here: the destroying grows thoughtless and be­
comes perilous even to the avengers when the mosses, who alone con sustain it, 
lock a constructive self-awareness. Insofar as the mosses do lack this quality, the 
stopgap of a bureaucratic authoritarian regime becomes inevitable. Lenin most 
ruefully experienced this realization in the lost years of his life. 
Moyakovsky's play offers a case which is complementary to that which Babel 
implicitly demonstrated. Mayokovsky attacks overtly the genus of the Soviet bureau­
crat and the cynical or hypocritical slogans and phrases that hide the vilest career­
ism, incompetence, and isolation from the mosses. The Bathhouse might be called 
the first (albeit satirically exaggerated) portrayal of the coming Sta linist regime 
which would be built on double-talk and ruled by degenerated new-style managers 
for whom "socialist ideology" hod become wholly dissolved within a banal con­
formity. Lenin, who was not favorably disposed to Mayokovsky's futurism due to 
his own traditional tastes in art, nevertheless praised the sardonic Mayokovsky 
poem "In Re Conferences," critical of functionaries who confused and complicated 
the discussion of serious matters by endless futile chatter. The Bathhouse was 
another blast against the worm within the socialist democracy, the worm of in­
digenous pedigree. 

278 
The Vicissitudes 
of Socialist Realism 
On the one hand, it might be charged that Mayakovsky's sensitiveness to these 
elements of Soviet life, incurably anchored in his individualism, never became en­
tirely coordinated with the prevailing gregarious and shibboleth-edged way of 
life. In this regard, we may recall Lunacharsky's article written following the poet's 
suicide. In this obituary, Lunacharsky spoke of the two "souls" inside Mayakovsky: 
one, that of a subtle lyrical writer striving for intimacy; the other, that of a rhetorical 
collectivist ready to enroll his muse in the proletarian cause. It was as though the 
poet could never play these two strings in unison, concluded Lunacharsky; too 
great a distance separated them and the gap was both unbridgeable and tragic. 
On the other hand, it might be advanced that the obstacles and pitfalls which 
faced the victorious Soviet dictatorship a nd which were daily becoming more evi­
dent were especially acutely registered by the seismograph of Mayakovsky's in­
dividualism. ("Individualism" is simply a clumsy term we use here to point to this 
poet's artistic perceptiveness, his open-mindedness and independence of judgment.) 
As an ardent, tenacious socialist, the "insider" Mayakovsky made an heroic effort 
to retain access to the reality of the collectivist lodestone. 
"Outsiders" and Antiutopias : Zamyatin Having considered Babel and Maya­
kovsky, I should also think about another work which represents, to some extent, 
the area I am exploring: Yevgeniy Zamyatin's novel We. Zamyatin's case is dis-
tinct: he was neither a proponent nor a friend, but, rather, an opponent of social­
ism. Zamyatin bears witness only to the negative side of the new reality. His skepti­
cal "outsider" stance forces his exclusion from the history of socialist realism. None­
theless, the cogency of his perceptions requ ires that we cope with his novel -the 
more so since, beginning in the thirties, it became impossible for "insider" works 
on the order of Red Cavalry or The Bathhouse to appear. 
While mentioning chronology, I should stress that all three works came out of the 
first decade after 1 9 1 7, when Soviet culture flourished conspicuously and drew the 
eager interest of the avant-garde of art the world over. Another point to note is 
that We was the earliest of the three works (1 923), which suggests that its doubting 
Thomas author was exceptionally keen in spying the bacilli of what would become 
a ravaging pathology only later. Rewards only for those who follow rules, g lorifi­
cation of "beneficial" state policy with its pervasive control mechanisms to protect 
the citizen from the impious thought or deed, a horrid Jacobin passion for the flaw­
less Ordered Society: from these trends was produced the push -fortunately, never 
carried to the end -towards transforming the socialist society into an anthill. These 

279 
Postscript 1 972 
possibilities were evident even at the start, yet only an estranged and attentive 
intelligence could then assemble the many hints into the cautionary shape of a 
relevant antiutopia. 
However, having said this it has to be added that We is even more pertinent to 
the future of Europe as a civilization than it is to any given Soviet phenomena. The 
cutting edge of the Zamyatin novel, as of Orwell's later 1 984, is oriented to the 
contradiction between the technical rationalization of society and human instincts. 
Zamyatin, depicting the prejudices of Reason, did not set any national boundaries 
to the scope of his implications. His route led through a landscape of collectivist 
gigantism and crushed personal rights in Soviet Russia, but his ultimate nemesis 
was the homogeneity and anomie of the century. Poland had a like-minded author 
in Stanislaw lgnacy Witkiewicz; England, in Adieus Huxley, who warned of a 
"brave new world" of Calibans. Zamyatin spent many years in Western Europe and 
he had a distinct notion of the suprarational civilization that rose from the carnage 
of World War I. What he did not grasp were certain facts evident to Lenin; in par­
ticular, that the socialist-tending Soviet people could not survive against their bour­
geois foes without a strong dose of "Americanization." Stranger to the new social 
system that Zamyatin was, he did not grant to the communist constructive zest its 
deserved value, and he erroneously identified "revolutionary puritanism" with the 
terrorist norm itself. 
He also proved largely mistaken with regard to the way Soviet Russia would 
actually turn out. Modern equipment and technological knowledge certainly could 
not eliminate the irrationality of an administration that was to prove wasteful 
and inefficient. The Stalinist nation-state may indeed remind us of one or a nother 
of the twentieth-century antiutopias- but the resemblance to the place described 
by Zamyatin, where D-503 constructed a vehicle for the cosmos (a prophecy 
equally applicable to the United States) or to the 1 984 of Orwell is only partial. 
Zamyatin seems to have been guided by the aim of parodying the proletku/t ideas 
of Bogdanov and the fantasies of the Kuznitsa group. By contrast Orwell directly 
oriented himself to social reality, which, perhaps not surprisingly, turned out to be 
more "imaginatively" ghastly than the creations of artistic inventiveness. 
Socialist Realism in the 1 930s and 1 940s I have already explained, I hope 
satisfactorily, why I make a dividing line at the middle of the 1 930s. I should stress 
that I am not at all of the view that no good Soviet art has been produced since that 
time. On the contrary, much good art has been produced and it has not been con-

280 
The Vicissitudes 
of Socialist Realism 
fined only to the sphere of the nonobjective arts, where Soviet talents have been 
able to express themselves more freely and expansively. In the context of represen­
tational art, it is enough to mention the later writings of Sholokhov, and especially 
the masterpieces of literature, theater, and film that bear witness to the Soviet 
heroism during the Second World War. No one, except the prejudiced, can deny 
the bravery of the Soviet people, who without any question saved the whole of 
Eastern Europe from the subjugation and partial extermination envisioned by the 
Nazis. Another fact that must be emphasized in this period is the encouragement 
given by the Soviet power to literature and the other arts among a number of re­
cently illiterate, or nearly illiterate nationalities within the borders of the Soviet 
Union, peoples which would not otherwise have stood on their cultural feet. 
Nevertheless, in the 1 930s a changed model of the socialist system emerged and 
gathered strength. On the whole, artistic production lost great impetus, zest, and 
unrecapturable values. Criticisms of the emergent model were not possible, even 
though it was evident that the socialist system had begun to function against its 
own ideological premises. In place of rendering the anxieties and tensions asso­
ciated with the gigantic historical confrontation, in place of posing penetrating 
questions to the entire wÉrld and to the communists themselves, Soviet artists now 
merely reproduced ready-made formulas. The revolutionary enthusiasm of the 
1 920s had vanished, the charisma of the politics and art also receded, the aware­
ness of an only-too-evident backwardness was officially abandoned, and the naive 
but glorious faith (closely related to an ascetic, collectivist-minded egalitarian com­
munism) that the world could be made over in a short time was replaced by a 
slogan about the enemy within. Three propensities of thought (the utopian vision 
of a disalienated world in the process of coming into being, the spontaneously 
revolutionary spirit, and the self-disciplined attitude), which were a mutually inte­
grated and a substantial aspect of the Soviet scene from 1 91 7  until the early 1 930s, 
and which we may be positive bulk large in the genuine marxist world view, disap­
peared. This is the reason for the great disproportion between the first and the 
second stages in Soviet literature and art. There are plenty of masterpieces in the 
former; since the middle of the 1 930s there have been, alas, only a few. 
Russia in the late thirties and early forties offered both an abundant basis and a 
necessity to treat in fiction the proliferating negative aspect of the emergent social­
ist potential. However, due to the historical conjuncture, there was little likelihood 
that a socialist-minded Zamyatin would appear. If nothing else, a nationwide net­
work of informers and security police stood in the way. Then, too, the possible 

281 
Postscript 1 972 
"insider" satirist or muckraker would surely have conceded priority to the bitter, 
heroic struggle with Nazi Germany. A Communist hod no choice but to defend 
with all of his power the existing Soviet state even with its waywardness and atroci­
ties. The "insiders" elsewhere too-the radical leftists of the world - judged that 
they had no right not to protect the aberrant fledgling system, which was being so 
relentlessly assaulted. To defend the "besieged fortress" unconditionally was, 
seemingly, a way to encourage revolution at home; besides, the foes of socialism 
cooked up so many unjust accusations that it was often hard to tell at what point 
one should start to lend serious consideration to their possible justness. Anyway, 
if one did begin to attempt such finer discriminations would not bourgeois propa­
ganda simply sweep the field, since it always seized on the tiniest Bolshevik mis­
takes to ridicule the whole idea of Communism? Given the circumstances, the many 
inducements to remain silent could not hove been surmounted by the "insiders." 
Ex-Communists and the Negative Side of Reality: Koestler As the ruthless 
censorial activity under the guise of constitutional low continued, the only literature 
to tell the negative part of the truth about the Soviet Union was brought out by 
ex-communists. Disoppointed, frustrated, and haunted by the cruelties of the Great 
Purge, these persons now proved to be as inimical to the Soviet Union as previously 
they hod been friendly. What they reported could not really stand as a truthful 
representation of the socialist organization of society, since they offered but a 
partial - if crucial-truth, seen through the filter of prison and labor-camp ex­
periences. In this regard, I think of Arthur Koestler's Darkness at Noon or the Mem­
oirs which document the experience of Alexander Weissberg-Cybulski. 
Koestler deserves closer attention. Darkness at Noon makes a suitable choice 
of subject matter; its hero, Rubashov, and the situation in which he becomes in­
volved embody the fundamental cancerous growth upon the Soviet system. He 
is o lifelong communist, on active participant in the struggle, who is imprisoned 
by the security police although they are fully aware of his innocence of the imputed 
crimes. 
Now, unquestionably among the chief characteristic features of the degenera­
tion of the regime were the 1 936-37 purges and the subsequent "show trials." 
Yet even though his subject matter bears extraordinary promise, Koestler handles 
it in a way that is inadequate. Rubashov is presented as one of many necessary 
victims steamrollered by the Great Totalitarian Machine. At first glance, the lotter 
might seem like the incarnation of the Hegelian "cunning of history," which does 

282 
The Vicissitudes 
of Socialist Realism 
not respect the intentions of individuals since only the suprapersonal processes 
can decide the right or wrong of human deeds. However, if we study the ideological 
structure of Darkness at Noon more closely, we shall see that Rubashov succumbs 
to the treacherous reasoning of his interrogators, Ivanov and Gletkin, even though 
he refuses to give credulity to the two intertwined and manifestly false principles 
that then dominated the official creed of society. 
The first of these principles held that communist authorities were certain not to 
commit any errors owing to the institution that they represented. What this, in fact, 
meant, was that the tactics and strategies of the day had supplanted the priority 
of genuinely ideological values. The second principle held that if one's views coin­
cided with those of the enemies of the socialist system on any point whatever, even 
when those enemies told the truth, then one had automatically betrayed socialism. 
What this really accomplished was the creation of an atmosphere conducive to the 
concoction of the fattest lies at Party headquarters, so long as they could be judged 
advantageous to communism. 
Now, Rubashov believed in neither principle, although to the end of his trial 
he remained committed to communism. Why then did he surrender? He did so 
because, in place of the two points of propoganda just mentioned, he has agreed 
to substitute and bow to two points that were, in fact, their philosophical counter­
parts: first, that the Party is the very embodiment of universal reason, the actual 
instrument propelling History; second, that History is never the agent of errors, and 
that the Party can, therefore, never be mistaken. Since Rubashov had already ac­
cepted these propositions, he was internally defeated from the outset. I do not wish 
to underrate his remarks on the exhaustion of the old guard (to which he belongs), 
nor the harsh interrogative methods of Gletkin, nor Rubashov's past (his twisted 
logic and ethics which -as Koestler stresses-trap him into a full understanding 
of his oppressors' stance). However, what we see from Rubashov's past record is 
that his approach to marxist ideology- his critical mind, sense of fallibility, per­
ceptiveness, and curiosity notwithstanding - has been based on blind discipline. 
His self-defeat thus rests on a genuine meeting of minds with his first Public In­
vestigator (and old comrade), Ivanov. There is nothing out-of-the-way in Ruba­
shov's recurrent thought that he could be in Ivanov's place, and Ivanov in his. 
Consequently, we are not surprised that he accepts Gletkin's defense of the bas­
tion of revolution at whatever cost, even when the cost is the murder of allies who 
have developed just a few doubts. 

283 
Postscript 1 972 
Rubashov's philosophy of h istory, like that of Ivanov, sees but a single dilemma: 
the opposition between Christian ethics, which speak of the sanctity of the indi­
vidual, and collectivist reason, which regards the individual as the remainder of 
"one million divided by one million" and, hence, escapes from moral scruples and 
the "metaphysical brothel" of the emotions. The marxism of Rubashov·is, thus, 
entirely fatalistic, a hyperrational experiment for rescuing mankind by enslaving 
it first. 1 6  It is in this light that we must understand Rubashov's insistence that he 
must "own up" to a self-abasing confession of nonexistent crimes before the tri­
bunal, or his struggle with Gletkin (whom he calls a Neanderthal man), which is 
but a desperate expedient for convincing himself that the juggernaut of history has 
to bear down on any believer deviating from the Party line of the day. 
Koestler seems to take up the stance of. the "insider," since he views the events 
incessantly through the pince-nez of Rubashov, but, in fact, his porte-parole is the 
ex-White Guard officer, the prisoner from cell number 402 who explains that honor 
lies in decency rather than usefulness. It is from this figure's perspective that we 
observe the Stalinist massacre. "The red wolves devour one another": this might 
be the motto of Darkness at Noon, and it means that history, once it is judged by 
socialist principles, has to be approached with Machiavellian methods, with human 
beings regarded as but expendable sacrifices in the drive towards the great goal. 
Koestler, of course, questions that goal; and Rubashov perishes with the anguished 
question of the sense of his death. Nothing remains for the reader at the end but to 
don a sarcastic smile for the comprehensible but futile self-sacrifice of the chief 
hero. 
Now, it might be argued that my critique is blunted, since Koestler desired pre­
cisely to show why the prominent Bolsheviks bent the knee during the purge trials 
of 1 936-37. I do not deny that occurrences such as the capitulation by the fictitious 
Rubashov did, in fact, happen; and Koestler quite likely achieved his artistic inten­
tion. My criticism is in this sense external. Darkness at Noon is the dramatic story 
not so much of a man punished for what he neglected to do (as Rubashov at one 
point characterizes himself) as that of one who is a self-aware scapegoat. The tragic 
rendering of the same subject matter (and only this, I think, would prove truly ade­
quate) would be to incorporate a point-by-point refutation of the strictly determinis­
tic and pragmatic marxism of Ivanov and Gletkin. To defend and preserve the bas­
tion of revolution is the communist's duty, but the question of means becomes in 
political praxis the question of ends. 

284 
The Vicissitudes 
of Socialist Realism 
How could the palpably tragic background to Koestler's novel have been realized 
in it as a n  authentic parahistorical drama? This could have been done by present­
ing Rubashov as an insurgent ideologue-as one who confessed h is oppositional 
approach, and regretted his previous inactivity-all this as a problem relating to 
further adhesion to communist ideas. Rubashov need not have been persuaded 
to confess to crimes; he could hove waged irrepressible conflict. The tactics of the 
moment would collide with the basic foundations of the socialist doctrine. 
Perhaps it seems that I am asking a presentation of the time-honored conflict 
of ought and is, of ethics and politics. Yet just this conflict should be superseded 
in socialist theory and practice. Socialism properly offers no a priori claims of where 
and how it will emerge and unfold. Only in concrete human praxis is it called forth 
and defined. From the telling experiences of the existing socialist-based systems 
we now know the full brunt and truth of the ideas that Lenin, Gramsci, and Lukacs 
set out theoretically much earlier. We realize today that in political life since the 
thirties we have had to struggle through a tragic rift between the purely pragmatic 
(instrumental) premises and the profoundly ideological premises of socia lism. In 
the political and theoretical acts of Rosa Luxemburg and Karl Liebknecht we see the 
proof that ought and is may make on integral whole. 
What we have, in fact, is a clash of two "layers" of reality; for Marxism affirms 
that politics must be at the same time ethics, and that, deprived of its "oughts," 
socialist praxis will produce a truncated and distorted democracy governed not 
by the genuine delegates of the masses but by bureaucrats. 
In short, Koestler's novel was couched in a pessimistic attitude, which acceded 
to the inevitable triumph of the Ca libans. We will do well to compare it with a latter 
book, Arthur London's The Confession. It is not the documentary aura that gives 
to London's work its superiority, for Koestler could easily defend his story line by 
referring to numerous documents. 1 7 London obtains the edge by the different 
pattern he lends events. H is protagonist surrenders to the accusations against him 
only as a form of rite. He still recognizes, as his accusers recognize, that it is a 
staged phony spectacle from start to finish. The physically coercive torture leads 
the tale to the plane of ideology, and marxist humanism, while besmirched here, 
is not entirely trodden into the obscurant mud. Indeed, the very fact of the publica­
tion of The Confession testified that its marxist ideas are vigorous, and that no loud­
ly trumpeted catch phrases amplified by the holders of official power ("with us or 
against us") can shut the mouths of committed Communists. However, strictly 

285 
Postscript 1 972 
speaking, London should not be placed a mong the /itterati; he is writing as an ex­
politician. 
Critical Realism : Solzhenitsyn Where shall I find a more definitive instance 
of the artistic testimony I seek? My immediate choice could be Alexander Sol­
zhenitsyn, and in particular, the novels The First Circle and Cancer Ward. 1 8  No 
one, up to the present, has matched his skill in capturing the panorama of the Sta­
linist period. What many studies have sketched, what Orwell's remarkable parable 
Animal Farm presented concisely, is here represented in full circumstantiality. Sol­
zhenitsyn's world, where the "more even" crew have staked out their strongholds, 
and where fear, apathy, and conformity are enforced by squads of paid and volun­
teer informers, is not without lighter moments. This is true not only a mong the 
zeks - political prisioners -who have for all intents passed over the threshold of 
further risks, but also in the ordinary walks of life where suspicion still reigns. It 
is, in fact, Solzhenitsyn's method to deploy those of his figures who are endowed 
with a sense of human decency and dignity rather equally between the labor camp 
and the workaday world. 
Yet it must be added that the novels of Solzhenitsyn are not couched in the so­
cialist world view, whatever their descriptive 1 9 and analytical merits. They bring 
out the horrid truth that was concealed for so many years (and, as of this writing, 
is still covered up). Still, it is only a partial truth that they reveal. 
Solzhenitsyn does not lay stress on the positive achievements of the Revolution. 
He does not make much of what caused (and still causes) many thousands of sin­
cere Soviet citizens to give their energies to communist ideas and goals. For exam­
ple, Levka Rubin (in The First Circle), a man firmly committed to the marxist doctrine, 
is provided no moment in which to explore his motives. H is conviction can, thus, 
have the appearance of complete irrationality, of springing from only his personal 
and noble commitment. In Cancer Ward, the author's spokesmen, Kostoglotov and 
Shubanov, choose the ethical type of socialism that makes a retreat to the ideas 
popular in the era of the Second International. 
Thus, I cannot agree with Lukacs (though I subscribe to most of his superb 
analysis) when he concludes that the practice of socialist realism is revived in Sol­
zhenitsyn's works. I want, rather, to distinguish between a critical realism within 
the framework of socialism (Solzhenitsyn surely is the paragon of this tendency), 
and an integral socialist realism, which still awaits a latter-day revival that will 

286 
The Vicissitudes 
of Socialist Realism 
equal the examples, presented earlier, of Babel and Mayakovsky. From the late 
thirties to today there gapes an abyss in Soviet literature which separates the 
artistic image from reality. 
Accordingly, I cannot make a smooth amalgam of Solzhenitsyn and even the best 
instances of studiously optimistic fiction. There are, of course, contradictions be­
tween the two extremes which prevent us from doing so. However, even more im­
portant is the fact that it is impossible simply to "add" the two "halves" of the 
truth to one another. They won't total up to a whole. The optimists push heedlessly 
for the official version of reality, while Solzhenitsyn is quite justly obsessed by the 
spectre of Stalinism, which, alas, has still not vanished. What is lacking is o dialec­
tical comprehension of the very core of the extremes. 
Conclusions and Prospects A time has to come when the root questions illumi­
nating the vicissitudes of Soviet-style communism will be asked. The pros and cons 
will then be explored in their wholeness. A deft understanding will then illuminate 
this long-sustained and many-faceted drama; and characters and situations will be 
brought into view which people will admit are worthy of the pen of a Dante. 
Who will be the artist capable of meeting the challenge of this subject matter? 
It seems to me certain that he will possess either intuitive insight into or developed 
awareness of the modes of alienation evinced in socialism. The basic questions 
that await the socialist realist are not easy ones of the order of "What is wrong?" 
or even "What is its cause?" {Orwell's Animal Farm gave replies which have not 
yet been surpassed at this level of perplexity.) Rather, the core of the questions · 
posed till now is to be found in the living, indivisible flesh of the socialist experi­
ᢲents with their successes and defeats. It is impossible to disregard all that has 
been achieved since 1 91 7. That would be as paranoid as to close one's eyes to the 
gradual decay of the sociopolitical patterns which, however vital and necessary 
at one time, have become since the late thirties a rust eating into socialism and 
severely obscuring its attractiveness. 
This observed, it still must be remembered that Russia since 1 91 7  has been the 
fatherland of socialist revolution, a watershed in the history of mankind. This is 
o reality that I find absolutely relevant not only to communist artists and intellectu­
als, but also to all the sincere leftists of the world. That the revolution resulted in 
bread, clothing, telephones, refrigerators, etc.- a  much higher standard of living, 
obtained in o relatively short space of time, for millions of people-this is disre­
garded by stubborn opponents, who maintain that all this would hove been 

287 
Postscript 1 972 
achieved even if there had been no Bolshevik takeover (an argument which has 
always seemed to me sheer speculation). However, beyond those gains, there has 
been widespread education, democratization of culture, and, above all, awareness 
that the ordinary people are the legitimate heirs of history. 
In light of the Stalinist regime it may seem cruelly jocular to emphasize the latter 
issue. It nevertheless has to be raised, for, despite all the distortion, the Soviet sys­
tem does imbue its people with the sense that full equality is their birthright. In 
other lands there is tacit acceptance of inequality based on property, power, etc. 
The socialist system is permanently committed to instilling the opposite values; 
and the result is that millions of citizens have become highly sensitive to the dis­
tinction between "even" and "more even." Also, it cannot be overlooked that up 
to the present the existence of the Soviet Union hos incited and supported all the 
revolutionary movements of the world, and has exerted a necessary pressure on 
the capitalist empires to evolve towards milder internal and external policies. Last, 
but not least, it should be recalled that the Soviet twenties remain, in the domain 
of the history of the arts, a highly intense, vigorous, and stimulating period. The 
direct impact of the art of this period on /'art engage elsewhere has not yet entirely 
faded. All these unquestionable achievements were, to be sure, interwoven with 
some negative aspects and merged into a complex whole. That is why no technique 
of mere accounting (debit and credit) can be conclusive here. The dialectics of so­
cialism have to be grasped to the very roots. Only in this way can the accumulated 
alienations and also the weed-shoots of newer alienations be shown. 
I have spoken of the alienations peculiar to the socialist regime. In this matter 
I may refer to Marx, for whom it was clear that no concentrated political power 
could in itself embody the socialist ideal, regardless of its legal and institutional 
paraphernalia. That ideal is to be accomplished by man's freedom among other 
free individuals through a collective effort. Marxism hos always been considered 
by its best philosophers to be the apt heir to the long humanist tradition. This 
means that, for from treating the individual as a manure to be spread according 
to law on socialist institutions to make them strong, the highest aim of marxism 
has been to enable fulfillment of the individual potential; if it cannot do this it has 
failed. 
What should be the nature of individual activity in relation to alienation? Opti­
mally, this activity will coll into effect a world view oriented towards an ideal; that 
is, on attitude which, when absent (or given only rhetorical place, or treated as a 
utopian dream), leaves a void, a gap not to be adequately (i.e., humanely) filled 

288 
The Vicissitudes 
of Socialist Realism 
by any legal or institutional forms or guarantees. In this situation, the vocation 
of the artist (as of any intellectual) who is committed to Communism must be to 
reinstate the world view, that is, to make of it a bread-and-butter sort of aware­
ness and issue, and to impose the problem of this view on the politicians who are 
inclined to relinquish it. 20 
Some will doubt that the communist artist could hope to project such a vision, 
since he is embroiled with an everlasting censorship. How can he expect to be per­
mitted to act in these circumstances so as to embody this world view in a telling 
fashion? The splendidly courageous example of Solzhenitsyn has shown there is, 
in fact, space in which it can be done, and socialist realism certainly has oppor­
tunities elsewhere in the world. I have focused on the Soviet Union because it is 
a very instructive case, and, moreover, none but a Soviet artist could expect to 
portray the most ample truth of the perplexed fate_ of socialism in state power. All 
the same, socialist artists hove appeared worldwide. I could hove also discussed 
Brecht, O'Casey, Aragon, Neruda, or Fuentes. Moreover, in the so-called Third 
World, the issue of socialist realism is not only a present-day problem but probably 
one for the coming extended period as well. Indeed, if in history ex Oriente lux, 
yet in literature it seems difficult to guess from just where might emerge the first 
dialectical try at the socialist-oriented synthesis I have described. 
It occurs to me, as a final point, that some may reproach me for an emphasis 
on literature only. I will plead that in the literary field the problems of socialist 
realism have risen to a culmination, and they highlight most poignantly oil of the 
avenues and byways that I hove tried to delineate, however clumsily and briefly, 
in this postscript. 

289 
Notes 
1 • See N. Pevsner, Academies of Art, Past 
and Present (Cambridge, England, 1 940). 
2. Stanislaw Ossowski hos discussed this 
phenomenon in his Socjo/ogio sztuki [So­
ciology of art] (Warsaw, 1 936), p. 3 . 
3. This idea possesses multiple meanings. 
Its varied history and its applications to 
various areas of art demand a special study. 
See my article "Is It a Question of Facts.or 
Words?" Studio Filozoficzne, no. 4/7, 1 958, 
as well as the preceding chapter. 
4. S. Ossowski, U podstaw estetyki [The 
foundations of aesthetics] (Warsaw, 1 949), 
p. 1 1 4. 
5. See R. lngorden, Szkice z fi/ozofii /iteratury 
[Essays on the philosophy of literature] 
(Lodz, 1 947), pp. 95-1 1 7. 
6. The questions of collectivity and employ­
ment ore also found in nonsociolist litera­
ture. However, there the problems hove no 
cardinal meaning for the hero and his atti­
tude. They really begin to count only in a 
socialist regime; then, the position that one 
tokes vis-a-vis these problems becomes the 
social and moral criterion by which every 
individual is judged. 
7. See J. S. Smirnov, lz istorii stroitielstva 
sotsia/isticheskoi kultury piervyi pieriod 
sovietskoi v/asti [On the beginnings of so­
cialist culture in the first stages of Soviet 
power] (Moscow, 1 952); P. I. Liebiediev, 
Sovietskoie iskusstvo v pieriod innostronnoi 
voiennoi intiervientsii i grajdanskoi voiny 
[Soviet art in the period of the intervention 
and Civil War] (Moscow, 1 949). 
8. See A. V. Lunachorsky, Statii ob iskusstvie 
[ Essays on art) (Moscow-Leningrad, 1 941 ). 
9. M. Gorki, On Literature (Warsaw, 1 951 ), 
pp. 26, 39, 54. 
1 0. A. A. Zhdanov, Speech on Literature and 
Art (Warsaw, 1 954 ), pp. 8, 9. The Gorki 
Notes 
and Zhdanov speeches of 1 934 may both 
be found in English in H. G. Scott, ed., Prob­
lems of Soviet Literature (New York, n.d.). 
1 1 . That is to soy, show man as he is ­
Euripides-or as he should be-Sophocles ­
occording to Aristotle's definitions in his 
Poetics. 
1 2. See Stalin's early letters to Bill-Belotser· 
kovsky (February 2, 1 929), and to Bezy· 
mensky and Gorki (1 930). 
1 3.T.·t. Moo, Duties of the Artist and Writer 
(Warsaw, 1 956), pp. 28, 32, 35, 42. For an 
English version see Mao Tse-tung on Art 
and Literature (Peking, 1 960). 
1 4. The pretension of politicians to advise 
and guide artists dotes from very for bock. 
Diogenes Loertius tells us in his Liber de 
vita et moribus philosophorum that Solon 
hod already reproached the first Greek 
tragic author, Thespis, for distorting the 
historical truth and, therefore, harming 
society. Plato banned poets from his ideal 
"republic" in the name of a sovereign ideal 
because they were capable of distracting 
citizens from serious matters, inviting them 
to superficial sensual pleasures. The Church 
fathers defended artists against the tempto· 
tion of Satan by applying ecclesioticol and 
lay powers. 
1 5. It shou Id be noted that the majority of 
such works treat the theme of the 1 905 
Revolution, the October Revolution, or 
the Civil War. Therefore, the stork contrast 
of the sympathetic and hostile forces was a 
justifiable artistic strategy. It would be dif­
ficult to deny to Eisenstein's Potemkin or 
Pudovkin's Storm over Asia the rank of 
masterpiece. This disposition of fictional 
forces remained for some time typical in 
Soviet representational art. 
1 6. See R. Conquest, The Great Terror: 
Stalin 's Purge of the Thirties (New York, 

290 
1 973), the chapter titled "The Problem of 
Confession." We learn from this erudite and 
documentary work that a distinction has to 
be drawn between a confession extracted 
by unbearable physical torture (he who 
confesses does not recant because he holds 
the irrational belief that this tactic may save 
his life), and a confession of uncommitted 
crimes which is, nonetheless, made in good 
faith. If, as we are told, Koestler's novel 
primarily centers on the Rakovsky and Buk­
harin cases, the relevance of this distinction 
is increased. Their seeming ly incredible be­
havior in the dock can only be explained 
by an obstinate and blind party-mindedness, 
and by their belief in the mechanistically 
inevitable processes of history. This is clearly 
shown in a purported comment of I. Smirnov, 
an accused "accomplice" of Zinoviev and 
Kamenev who came to trial in August 1 936. 
Smirnov betrayed a confusion over the mat­
ters under examination, and when it came to 
the execution of himself and those con­
victed with him, an event that stunned many 
others, he calmly stated (it is reported): 
"We deserve this for our unworthy attitude 
at the trial" (Great Terror, p. 1 70). Rubashov 
too "deserves" h is death; this is why he is 
not a genuine opponent of Gletkin. 
1 7. Koestler could, for example, point to 
the attitudes expressed by Karl Radek, one 
of the most brilliant of the origina I Bolshe­
viks (and a purge-trial victim), in his speech 
to the 1 934 Writers Congress. Unity of pur­
pose called for "subordination of all indi­
vidual considerations," Radek argued. 
"When a man thinks that he is only up­
holding some individual shade of opinion 
against the Party, a political test will always 
show that he is upholding interests alien to 
the proletariat." Radek spoke of writers' 
work using soldiers' imagery, invoking a 
The Vicissitudes 
of Socialist Realism 
discipline which, so he confessed in the same 
speech, he had himself learned to accept. 
1 8. I pass over Boris Pasternak's Dr. Zhivago 
owing to that artist's particular approach. 
I agree with the critics who find nothing 
antisocialistic in the novel, and who ascribe 
the ban on it to a post-Stalinist bureaucracy 
which wanted to see the Revolution only 
pompously celebrated. Even so, at bottom 
Pasternak's idea was to see the individual 
at cross-purposes with history. His novel 
suggests that nothing else matters save the 
the individual human condition indepen­
dently arrived at. Times of social upheaval 
and breakthrough ore hard on this sole 
self-determination, suggests Pasternak. 
His work -and I leave apart its artistic 
merits -cannot be seriously discussed in 
the framework of socialist real ism and its 
fellow travellers. 
19. Many fastidious critics look on Sol­
zhenitsyn's style as a museum-piece doting 
from the nineteenth century. It is, nonethe­
less, a deliberate choice, serving to draw 
together the realities which even the news­
reel and television have glimpsed in a se­
lected and arranged context that tends to 
hide the obsolete and negative side of life. 
The artistic method of Solzhenitsyn will for 
this reason be praised in the future by the 
scholars and readers who, thanks to him, 
will be able to visualize the mundane facts 
of the Stalinist epoch: the style of dress, 
living spaces, habits, etc. 
20. I presume that Roger Garaudy had this 
tenet in mind when he writes (in his Marxism 
in the Twentieth Century [ New York, 1 970), 
ch. 5) about artistic creation in terms of 
"myth." Georg Lukacs also discussed this 
problem. In fact, it recurs throughout his 
intellectual biography; but, perhaps poro­
doxically, it comes forward most strongly 

291 
in his philosophy rather than in his aesthetics 
and literary criticism. In his Theory of the 
Novel (Berlin, 1 920) Luk6cs explicitly deals 
with the problem of "ought" and "is" in its 
artistic dimension, but this trend of inter­
pretation vanishes from his later texts on 
the arts. (See, on this point, the analysis 
by I. Meszaros in G. H. R. Parkinson, ed., 
Georg Lukacs [New York, 1 970], pp. 34-
85.) 
Notes 


Part I l l  
Genesis and Functioning 
of Artistic Val ues 


Chapter 8 
Art and Society 
It is banal and can even be misleading to say that the problem of "art and society" 
is a basic one for marxist aesthetics. The phrase gives no clue to the traits that 
demarcate the marxist standpoint from other positions with which it may be con­
fused and, consequently, marxist aesthetic thought has often and erroneously been 
regarded, at a superficial estimate, as a sociology of art, on_ the whole or primarily 
(if with distinctive tenets). 
The nonmarxist discussions on the matter-which the reader may know are few 
and rarely well informed or considered -tend to lump the marxist standpoint to­
gether with a sociologism emphasizing the economic and political influences on 
artistic creation and its productions. 1 Undoubtedly, a polemicist can easily adduce 
evidence which seems to justify the saddling of marxist aesthetic thought with this 
description. Those who most willingly accept the label, however, must be unaware 
that nothing was more alien to the structure of inquiry as developed by Marx than 
a strictly sociological conclusion. To be sure, the methodology of Marx incorporates 
the tenet of a dependency of art on its material setting and on class conflict. What 
is ignored by commentators who argue, for instance, from the indubitable sociolo­
gism of Plekhanov, seeing it as generally representative of the marxist approach, 
is that other, well articulated versions of the marxist standpoint exist which have 
not been prone to simplification and reductivism. 2 
We would expect marxists to provide accounts of their own aesthetic heritage 
that are more complex and penetrating, but this is not entirely the case. One ad­
mirable exception is Mikhail Lifshitz' The Philosophy of Art of Karl Marx, which 
in the 1 930s presented the philosophical dimension with much cogency and clarity. 
Also, the philosophical underpinnings of Georg Luk6cs numerous theoretical 
inquiries into literature have often been cited. 
Yet even this latter, seemingly unequivocal ca!ie is questioned by the Italian 
marxist Galvano della Volpe and his followers, who contend that Lukacs' philo­
sophical school must be considered a special mode of sociogeneticism. Other epi­
sodes in the history of marxist aesthetic thought are much less understood, and this 
gives rise to unanchored discussion in which sociological and philosophical aspects 
are jumbled incoherently. At the most fundamental plane, for example, we may 
be told that marxist aesthetics is guided by a materialism that is both dialectical 
and historical: yet the injunction is often so nebulously presented that we are given 
This essay was originally written for the plenary session of the International Congress of Aesthetics, 
Uppsalo, 1 968. It hos been published in Italian (1 969) and was slightly revised in 1 970. 

296 
Art and Society 
no clue as to which aspects and implications of art phenomena relate to historical 
and which to dialectical materialism. 
These are not negligible distinctions in the marxist perspective , yet the dialectical 
emphasis of materialism tended to disappear entirely from aesthetic discussions 
in the era of the Second International. Even today, when we hear commonplace 
mentions of art's specific cognitive relation to reality, or the dependent relation 
of art to the material conditions of social life, are we always sure that the cohÈrent 
interrelations of dialectical and historical materialism are being kept in mind? 
We could be more certain they were if a clear awareness of past failures to make 
distinctions were more demonstrably part of these present interpretations. We 
must not forget that under Plekhanov's influence, aesthetics in the Soviet Union 
in the 1 920s and till the early 1 930s was ᢳithet explicitly or tacitly identified with 
the sociology of art. 3 This situation did not abate until Lenin's aesthetic views 
were given prominence, when the issue of specific artistic cognition came to re­
place the stress on the social conditioning of art. 
Types of Sociologica lly Oriented Analysis of Art 
In what ways, then, is marxist aesthetic thought different from a sociology of art? 
Or, to put the question in another form: How does marxism approach the issue of 
"art and society "? What weight does the sociological dimension have among the 
other methodological features of the marxist approach? 
To define an answer, we should start by considering the four principal ways in 
which sociological orientation to art may be interpreted: 
l .  Investigation may be directed only to behavioral patterns and institutions 
connected with works of art. Specific topics may include: the distribution of art to a 
public; the identities and the interests of the persons in that public; the social back­
ground and the occupational prestige of the artists; the attitudes displayed by civic 
authorities towards both artists and audiences; the influence of the public upon 
the selection of the subject matter and the communicativeness of art. 
In sum , this version of sociological inquiry is curious about the incidences of 
various kinds of artistic occurrence; the procedures are identical with those which 
would be employed in a study of divorce, for example, or meat consumption. 
2. The inquiry takes OFI a new aspect if we define the sociology of art as the 
discipline that provides the means of studying the genesis and the function of art, 
particularly if we allow this definition to include the responses to a given work of 
art through several varying periods. In this research procedure, the given work 

297 
Types of Sociologically 
Oriented Analysis of Art 
(usually in its content rather than its form) yields the basic point of reference. How­
ever, the. focus of attention is not the work of art in itself, but rather the creative 
process as it relates to a complex social conditioning, or the process of reception 
as manifested by the contemporary and later generations. 
3. The sociological inquiry changes again if we choose to look at the given work 
of art as "a document of its time." The artistic content of the work would then be 
stressed, although the form as it relates to social reality might also conceivably 
be considered. How is a work of art to be sociologically interpreted in the context 
of its time? This may be done in the terms of the category of mimesis, or in terms 
of the category of expression, or by employing both of the categories. 4 Which 
aspects of reality will be matched with which corresponding features of the work 
of art? That depends largely on our underlying attitude or philosophy. The aspects 
of reality to be dealt with may include: a social milieu (the habits, moods, prefer­
ences, and idiosyncrasies of the time and place); the specific moral, religious, aes­
thetic, and philosophical ideas; the conflicting political attitudes and convictions; 
the stage of technology and mastery over nature. 
4. Finally, the sociological orientation to art may be defined as an inquiry into 
the isomorphic structures that are socially conditioned; that is,.the study of various 
semiotic systems in the same time and place context. The stress shifts here to the 
work of art considered as semiological data grouped together by certain aesthetic 
rules and conventions. Content and form are treated as inseparable as a matter of 
principle. At most, the particular work may be treated (a la Saussure) as a parole 
in relation to the /angue to which it pertains. The student with sociological inter-
' 
ests will especially look into the langue aspect, and how it compares to other semi­
otic systems. Conventionalized modes of behavior or comparative epistemological 
models within the period may be considered. 
These are four different versions of the "sociology of art." However, only ver­
sion ( 1 )  con be totally subsumed by that description, in my view. The remaininÇ 
three should instead be categorized as aesthetics responsive to a sociological input. 
Indeed, in any strict sense only version (2) can be discussed as plainly sociological 
aesthetics. The remaining two versions probe much further and deeper into aes­
thetic questions, on the manifest assumption that every artistic phenomenon is also 
a social phenomenon which is to be explained in the cultural setting ·of its time. 5 
These four variants cannot be fully compartmentalized -that is obvious. Their 
inquiries overlap. Both (1 ), the sociology of art, and (2), a sociological aesthetics, 
want to know the response patterns of various publics. Moreover, (2) assumes the 

298 
Art and Society 
existence of peculiarly artistic traits though it does not explore them as do (3) and 
(4). The latter in turn are modes of inquiry sustained by the standpoint that they 
hold in common with (1 ) and (2)- namely, that a determinate connection can be 
shown between artistic and nonartistic structures. 
Yet it is fair to state that the sociology of art, strictly understood, does not take 
an interest in artistic values. In contrast, a sociological aesthetics in the rigorous 
sense is concerned, at least chiefly, with the genesis and function of artistic values; 
and the final two approaches-those belonging to aesthetics proper, as I see it­
apply directly to precisely those values, though the artistic values are interpreted 
by different methods. Beyond the dichotomy of approach, both (3) and (4) are 
versions that investigate artistic qualities, whether of "form" or of a "content" 
that is constituted by the specific cognitive component in a work. 
Undoubtedly, versions (2) and (3) have proven notably characteristic of the 
marxist standpoint, and version (4) has joined these two in recent years. It should 
be evident that any exegesis concerned with just one of the approaches has to 
be reductionist; in other words, it will simply fail to encompass the fecundity mani­
fested by the complex history of marxist aesthetics. 
Aesthetics, Responsive to a Sociologica l  Input 
Version (2) could perhaps be most starkly exemplified in the early Soviet writings 
of Joffe, Friehe, and Pereverzev, who went to great extremes with the idea of 
sociological aesthetics. Following the main methodological doctrines of Plekhanov 
and simplifying them, these theorists placed total emphasis on the genetic aspects. 
They argued that if we assume the ideological equivalent to be the crucial compo­
nent of a work of art, then the external factors at work on this component must be 
regarded as the main topic for analysis. In this way both the form and content 
were reduced to a reflection of certain dear-cut class attitudes. Note, however, 
that even what the Soviet Union was to call "vulgar sociologism" in the l 930s6 
in no way confirms Thomas Munro's assertion that the sociogenetic method is de­
ducible from economic determinism. Indeed, the economic factor was seldom used 
as a last resort to clinch an argument. The key point, instead, was considered to be 
the class position of the artist. This, in turn, was usually defined by his social ex­
traction, which was said inevitably to define and limit his given artistic world view. 
It may, thus, readily be seen how these theorists arrived at their formulas depicting 
such ideas as: the strict class subservience of particular styles and forms; the artist 
as spokesman for the psychological-ideological strivings of a particular class; and 

299 
· Aesthetics, Responsive to 
a Sociological I nput 
the existence of a tripartite cycle for art, defined by the development of a given 
social class from its rise, through its peak, to its fall. 
If in debates Friehe was dubbed a "dialectician"7 as distinct from the "mecha­
nist" Pereverzev, the ascendency of Friehe was accorded on ground of his mixture 
of genetic analysis and functional analysis as well as the greater sophistication 
of his genetic analysis, which not only noted stratification within a class, accom­
panied by differentiated artistic world views but also admitted an assimilation of 
the artistic achievements of a declining class by a rising class at another place 
or at another time. In other words, Friehe argued that in an altered ideological 
context audiences may find in a work a meaning different from that intended by 
its author and determined by his age. 
This is not the place for a critical analysis of the methodological propositions 
of marxist sociological aesthetics (understood in the strict and most stark sense). 
This critique has already been made by exponents of the other approaches I have 
mentioned, and, undeniably, it has been accurate and effective. I should add that 
it would be unfortunate if, in attacking the absolute and oversimplified idea of 
the dependence of art on class ideology, we were to cast this kind of relation­
ship under a cloud altogether. If Arnold Hauser's excursion onto this terrain in 
The Social History of Art (1 953) was bound to draw strong criticism, that was 
not so much due to what he said as to what he left out-that is, the omission 
of mediating factors such as the individuality of an artist or an artistic tradition. 
Be it noted that Hauser's Philosophy of Art History ( 1 958) in effect withdraws his 
notions of the primacy of the social or, strictly speaking, the class determinants 
expounded in the earlier work.8 
The sociogeneticists have been engrossed by the external context of the work, 
while other authors, su.ch as Lukacs or Lucien Goldmann, have proceeded from an 
analysis of the substructure specific in the work. Nonetheless, it is not the case 
that the former have totally ignored the specific cognitive content of art, or that 
the latter have passed lightly over the question of genesis. However, it is evident 
that the sociogeneticists' schematic approach has resulted in treating the "slice 
of reality" that is transformed in the work of art in a very limited fashion; while 
the approach of Luk6cs and his followers has led to the view that first-rate artists 
usually transcend the perspective of a given class ideology. 
I might add that this latter approach can be characterized as equivalent to a 
return to Marx and Lenin. Marx, in discussing Balzac, and Lenin, in writing of 
Tolstoi, subordinated genetic analysis to a cognitive approach; and both sought 

300 
Art and Society 
the cognitive specificity of the artistic message. Perhaps the reader should also be 
reminded that Lukacs, with his friend Mikhail Lifshitz, was a major figure in the 
Soviet aesthetics of the mid-l 930s; together they did much to revive the broader 
Marxian (i.e., philosophical) methodology with regard to art as against the domi­
nant sociological (Plekhanovian) principles. Neither then nor at present can this 
controversy be said to have been ephemeral. The outcome lives on (or does not 
live) in the quality and character of theory available to guide what has proven to 
be an undiminishing discussion. 
In this regard, it should be remarked that an artistic Weltanschauung, "vision 
of the world," does, indeed, tend to prove ambiguous. If we extrapolate from a 
given work a certain world view, this does not imply that we shall find its author 
was or is the standard-bearer of a definite ontological, epistemological, historio­
sophical or sociopolitical system -though in the history of literature and art, such 
instances have certainly occurred. The derived world view simply provides us with 
the way the artist has come to define himself in the social world, according to 
Lukacs and his school. The artist's position with regard to the immediate conflicts 
of his particular age, it is argued, will be immanent in the structure of his work: 
the choice of heroes, the primacy of certain motifs, the resolution of the plot, etc. 
Very often, such an artistic point of view restricts itself to the posing of meaning­
ful questions, which_ are left unanswered. In other words, the relationship between 
art and society is here worked through primarily in terms of the cognitive dimen­
si_on of a work, and the genetic aspect is brought out indirectly. Each work of art 
reflects an entire society with its characteristic political, social, ethical, and ideo­
logical attitudes- but only after .this society has been passed through a double 
filter: the first being the individual artist and the second being his social grouping 
or class (these two perspectives being superimposed). From such treatments of the 
problem of art and society, one would be logically led to a stress on realism as 
the category that links the content of a work of art with the sum and substance 
of a specific historical phase, and a stress on typicality as the most adequate 
method to understand this nexus and to transmute it into the intrinsic world of the 
work, that is, to make from the life of society a literary or pictorial fiction. 9 
Theorists who employ a sociological aesthetics according to version (3) describe 
the work of art as a distinct structure-a structure situated, however, within the 
prior and encompassing structure of a social consciousness considered in its en­
tirety and possessed of a dominating world view. They take up an attitude towards 

301 
Aesthetics, Responsive to 
a Sociological Input 
inquiry which is as much one of understanding as it is one of explaining. The point 
to be made here is that, according to this interpretation, the superior structure 
antedates the artistic structure that is, nonetheless, the chief object of its study, 
while to extricate the meaning of this object means likewise to open up for one­
self-as ci kind of feedback- a deeper apprehension of the larger whole that is 
the social consciousness-which in turn sharpens one's comprehension of art. 
The last research approach (4) that I distinguished above is also anchored to 
assumptions of this order. However, its points of difference are equally marked. 
Note that with version (4) the structure to which the work of art is referred is not 
an historical process that is at a certain juncture yet activated with its own dynam­
ics; but, rather, it is an established system of signs. Explanation here consists of 
a discernment of the relationship between the extant code in force and the sense 
of the particular work, while understanding involves on apprehension of the actual 
message as a set of signs characterized by an interaction between the signifiant 
and the signifie (sometimes translated into the traditional terminology of the "form" 
and "content" relationship). Much sharper emphasis is given in this interpretation 
to the relative autonomy of the communication, and attention is also clearly drawn 
to its artistic specificity. 
The inspiration for this last order of sociological analysis has come from various 
sources-from Saussure through Jakobson to Levi-Strauss; and in the marxist 
tradition probably above all from so-called Russian formalism. In short, the semi­
ological-structuralist strain in modern marxist aesthetics is descended as much 
from the works of Yuryi Tynyanov and Viktor Zhirmunsky as it is, say, from Lev 
Vygotsky or M. M. Bakhtin. 1 0  An analysis of individual mediations is excluded 
in this interpretation because the inquiry is concerned with signs pertaining to a 
specified system rather than with expressive symbols. It amounts to a Kunsttheorie 
ohne Nahmen "art theory without names." Moreover, since a strict reciprocal de­
pendence between the wider semiotic universe and the set of specific artistic signs 
is admitted only within the framework of an established semiotic model of the 
world, the problem of antecedence-that is, the determination of a work by some 
anterior factors- is dropped from the field of inquiry (though, be it noted, not in 
any way invalidated). Since this approach concentrates on the structure of the work 
itself to the exclusion of any "documentary" or "expressive" function whatsoever, 
the emphasis will be on the immanent nexus of the elements (what lngarden has 
aptly called "subject matter coherence"). 

302 
Art and Society 
For a paradigm of this trend of theoretical investigation, I would cite Bakhtin's 
book on Rabelais, 1 1  an explication of his work on the semiotic model of medieval 
carnival culture. The methodological principles of this approach have been ex­
pounded in the Soviet Union by writers grouped at the research center in Tortu. 
1 2  
Similar methods have been tried in numerous essays by marxists in Poland (Stefan 
Zolkiewski, notably), France, and Italy. It should be added that Galvano della 
Volpe's Critica de/ Gusto (Milon, 1 960) undoubtedly pointed toward this trend of 
inquiry and solution. 
The I ntegrated Marxist Approach 
The approaches I have outlined may seem mutually exclusive. A closer analysis, 
however, reveals that they can be treated as partial yet complementary solutions, 
which, added up, offer us an integral approach in the sociological dimension; in 
other words, a comprehensive interpretation of art and society. The starting point 
of this analysis would be the fourth approach, which considers the artistic com­
munication itself and its semiotic connections. The intermediate link would consist 
of an inquiry into the symbolic, mimetic, and expressive relationship between the 
work of art as a whole and the given historical reality. This stage cannot be reduced 
to a specific system of signs; rather, that system should be seen to dovetail with 
what is called the "content" and "form" of the artistic structure. That content, in 
turn, is mediated by both the dominating world view and the individual creative 
personality. The last stage would consist of an inquiry into the genesis and func­
tion of the given work on the given sociocultural terrain. Here I cannot even begin 
to outline the methods by which the several stages of the study could be verified 
against one another. Nor can I explore the danger from eclecticism that can loom 
large with a synthesizing operation of this kind. 
What is important, in the present context, is to point out that all three of these 
versions of a sociologically oriented aesthetics in the special sense I have distin­
guished, are clearly in the tradition of marxist thought. They are all constituent 
of that tradition, however one-sidedly they have been accented in the history of 
the marxist doctrine as a result of specific external influences. If we consider the 
methodological and aesthetic conceptions of Marx and Engels, we shall see that 
the problem of, for instance, the class determination of art (in both senses, the 
genetic and the functional) was among the chief topics to interest them. There is 
evidence for this in The Germon Ideology and The Holy Family, and also in their 

303 
The Integrated Marxist 
Approach 
observations on numerous writers' world views. It is equally easy to demonstrate 
that the next approach that I singled out is announced with the comments by Marx 
and Engels on Greek art, Shakespeare, Balzac, and Goethe, and their well-known 
discussions of realism, for example. Conversely, there ore no aesthetic observa­
tions that directly point to the lost of these approaches. A semiotic interpretation 
con, however, be extracted from Marx's recommendations of o method to use in 
studying the origin and evolution of capitalist society, and from Engels' remarks 
on the method applied in Capitol. 1 3  What was the external stimulation in the de­
velopment of morxist sociological aesthetics? Studying the history of European 
aesthetics, it becomes obvious that version (2), sociological aesthetics in the strict 
sense, was advocated by the sociogeneticists and sociofunctionolists of the late 
nineteenth century; that in the work of Luk6cs version (3) was vivified and 
strengthened through the influence of Lebensphilosophie; and that the semiotic 
variant, as I have already noted, took on special importance with the inspiration 
of the Russian "formal" school and contemporary structurolism. 14 
I have already suggested that the term "sociology of art" should be reserved 
only for inquiries that treat works of art no differently than any other object. The 
three types of sociological orientation to which I have given fuller discussion lead 
me to the question of whether morxist aesthetic thought is totally encompassed 
within their limits. Were this the case, I could rephrase the statement of the problem 
set out at the start of this chapter to the following: I cannot accept the interpreta­
tion of the morxist aesthetic doctrine in the one-sided terms of either Plekhonov 
alone or Lukacs alone or Bakhtin alone; and, furthermore, it would be wrong to coll 
the morxist position a "sociology of art" inasmuch as I hove applied to this term 
a stricter definition. It is certainly true, however, that due to its key thesis this doᢰ 
trine belongs to the type of aesthetics that fully deserves to be described as socio­
logically oriented. 
I would wont additionally to make it very clear that-contrary to the garbled 
interpretations which still frequently crop up -the morxist doctrine maintains: 
1 .  that art is not dependent on any single factor but on a number of elements 
idiogenetic as well as ollogenetic, in conjuncture, among which the crucial one 
usually is the contemporary historical situation, which is characterized by con­
flicts of many kinds that con be linked to the current ideological polarizations; 
2. that investigation of these interdependencies will include not only the ele­
ments of so-called content but also those of form (by no means a phenomenon set 

304 
Art and Society 
apart from the dynamic artistic processes as a whole - however, the model of such 
an approach should not be sought in the primitivized sociological strategy of Friehe, 
but rather in Max Raphael's studies); 
3. that art not only is influenced by society, but also and conversely that art has 
an active part in molding the social consciousness; 
4. that these interrelations between art and society do not arise in some im­
personal fashion but are mediated, above all by the creator-personality (also by 
the specific, psychologically and historically determined audience). 
Please note that none of the positive statements just made should be thought 
cancelled if, in conclusion, I suggest that marxist aesthetics does, in fact, go be­
yond sociological aesthetics (even in this amended version). 
If, by a sociological orientation, we mean an investigation of the structure of 
a work of art in relation to another structure that is richer and fuller (this may be 
the semiotic model prevailing for a given culture or the dominant world view in 
the social consciousness of a given period), then it seems we must say that the 
marxist aesthetic standpoint does transcent these limits. The crux of the matter 
is that a sociological orientation is necessarily focused on the established pattern 
of sociocultural interrelations at a given time; even where it picks up on the his­
torica'I process, this will be structured synchronically. Marx's thought, however, 
has basic assumptions that lead it towards historicism rather than sociologism. 
Historicism yields a perspective that (in the Marxian sense) never loses sight of 
the total historical process-though this process is,admittedly, sure to undergo 
a certain dұcoupage from the point of view of the present. Where this interpreta­
tion is employed, art is regarded as more than a se(of mimetic and expressive 
symbols or signs coherent in the here-and-now. Art is also considered an instru­
ment of the social consciousness, that is, it is imbued, as it has been through the 
centuries, with the dream of liberating the human race from the straitjackets of 
poverty, chaos, hunger, and injustice, while it presages the end of alienation in all 
its aspects. 
Certainly the disalienation theme is one of the foremost aspects of Marxian 
philosophy. Persistently asserted as well by the marxist aesthetic doctrine, the dis­
alienation theme makes it impossible to regard marxist aesthetics as only socio­
logically oriented. In other words, the "art and society" dimension bulks large in 
marxist analysis, although this analysis is, nonetheless, primarily of a philosophical 
or, we might say, a historical-philosophical nature. Indeed, only against this back­
ground does the sociological perspective gain depth and become mea ningful. 1 5 

305 
The Integrated Marxist 
Approach 
For this reason, I would judge that, of the four approaches discussed here, the 
one that is most nearly identical with marxism, because it is most deeply founded 
in marxism in its essence, is the one I hove exemplified with the works of Lukacs. 
This is not to soy that I find acceptable every interpretation advanced by Lukacs 
(I totally disagree with his views, for example, on contemporary avant-garde art). 
What is important is that Luk6cs' treatment of the relationship between art and 
society is the most firmly and organically interwoven with the philosophical basis 
of Marxian thought: with the prospect of the disolienotion of humanity, and with 
the understanding of artistic creation and the multiplex functioning of art that this 
prospect gives. I could not, however, disallow the claim that the semiotic approach 
(which I also included in aesthetics proper) is able to effect a symbiosis with a 
philosophically interpreted morxist anthropology. Still, everything is yet to be done 
in this matter, whereas Lukacs in Die Eigenart des Aesthetischen has already mas­
terfully depicted the origin, development, and outlook for art against the back­
ground of a still reigning alienation and socialist anticipation of disalienation. 

306 
Notes 
1 .  See T. Munro, Evolution in the Arts (Cleve­
land, 1 963), Part I, ch. 7. The author does 
not attempt to show how the principle of 
"economic determinism" relates to "the 
dialectics of class struggle," his second 
principle. Nor does he fully remain with 
these principles, since he considers (rightly) 
in his account of the doctrine, such deter­
minants of art as artistic individuality and 
social psychology. Looking ahead to the 
further course of my argument, let me here 
make the point that Munro treats "the Marx­
ian dialectic" in the manner of Hegel. In 
consequence, the subject of h is analysis in 
chapter 23 -which he regards as being out­
side marxism - corresponds in fact to the 
basic assumptions of this doctrine. Another 
case of this one-sided treatment may be 
found in Rene Wellek's comments on the 
views of Marx and Engels on literature in 
A History o f  Modern Criticism, vol. 3 (New 
Haven, 1 965), pp. 232-239. Though he 
concedes a coherent "philosophy of his­
tory" behind their reflections, he devotes 
all of his energies to tracking down in­
consistencies in their remarks. He concludes 
that the following methodological strands 
are wound together: economic determinism; 
Hegelian dialectics; and realism in the typo­
logical version. 
2. See, for example, G. Morpurgo-Tag­
liabue, L 'Esthetique contemporoine (Milon, 
1 960), pp. 82-85. See also the essays by 
Melvin Roder on Marx's aesthetic ideas, 
notably "Marx's Interpretation of Art a nd 
Aesthetic Value," British Journal of Aesthe­
tics, VII iii (July 1 967), pp. 237-249. 
3. Striking examples of shortcomings in 
marxist histories of the marxist doctrine 
are provided by the studies by Pavel Tro­
fimov. In Ocherki istoryi marxistskoy es-
Art and Society 
tetiki [Essays in the history of marxist aes­
thetics] (Moscow, 1 963), which covers 
the period from Marx to Clara Zetkin, Tro­
fimov chronologically discusses the separate 
ideas of each of the writers in question, 
while losing sight of the structure of the doc­
trine; at the same time, without any grounds 
other than premises that are left unstated, 
he roundly dismisses many of their opinions 
as nonmarxist. In Estetika marxisma-lenin­
ismo (Moscow, 1 964), pp. 1 89- 1 96, 2 1 3-
27 1 , Trofimov's thoughts on the philoso­
phico I basis of the doctrine are sheer asser­
tion. He gives no notion why aesthetics, as 
the study of "the artistic cognition and 
transformation of reality," should come 
under philosophy and not u nder, say, sociol­
ogy in the strict sense. Indeed, Trofimov 
seems quite unaware that there exists a 
problem of "aesthetics vs. sociology of 
art.H 
4. These two categories hove often been 
confused in the marxist heritage. This is 
true of Lukacs no less than of Plekhonov 
despite their differences of approach. Nor 
is this confusion restricted to morxists; it 
is rampant throughout nineteenth- and 
twentieth-century European aesthetics. 
For the specific meaning ascribed to "ex­
pression" by marxist aesthetics, see the 
section on "The Expression of Psychosocial 
Equivalents," in chapter 5. 
5. In the abundant literature on the sub­
ject, it is commonly held that the sociology 
of art in the strict sense is not concerned with 
the content of the message constituted by 
a work of art. Typical representatives of this 
point of view :ire: L. Lowenthal, Literature, 
Popular Culture, and Society (Englewood 
Cliffs, N.J., 1 961 ), and H. Fiigen, Hauptrich­
tungen der Literotursoziologie (Bonn , 1 965). 
Nevertheless, we will sometimes find these 

307 
writers grouped together with such expon· 
ents of this discipline as Housenstein, Auer· 
bach, Mukerjee, or Houser-each of whom, 
according to his lights, concentrates on the 
work itself as o special kind of historical 
record. In R. N. Wilson, ed., The Arts in 
Society (Chapel Hill, 1 964), Ion Watt inter· 
prets Robinson Crusoe as the expression 
of a certain myth, and he rests his case in 
equal measure on elements within and with· 
out the work itself. Albert Memmi, in his 
essay "Problemes de lo sociologie de lo 
litteroture," in G. Gurvitch, ed .. Traite de 
sociologie, vol. 2 (Paris 1 960), pp. 299-
31 4, adopts on indecisive stance. On the one 
hand, he wonts to exam ine the work as o 
social fact. On the other hand, he wonts to 
describe it as a "foit de voleur," impene· 
treble to the sociological approach -which 
reduces the sociology of art to o sociology 
of the artist and the audience. 
6. See M. Rosenthal, Protiv vulgarnoi so· 
ciologyi w lityeraturney teorii [Against 
vulgar sociology in literary theory] (Moscow, 
1 936); or his translated article "Vulgar 
Sociology and Metaphysics," in A. Flores, 
ed., Literature and Marxism: A Controversy 
by Soviet Critics, Critics Group. no. 9 (New 
York, 1 938), pp. 86-95. 
7. See Marxistskoye iskusstvoznanye i 
V. M. Friehe [Marxist art criticism and V. M. 
Friehe] (Moscow, 1 930). 
8. Compare the interesting views on this 
subject by Frederick Antal, in his essay 
"Remarks on the Method of Art History," 
The Burlington Magazine, February-Morch 
1 949, wherein he also draws attention to 
findings by nonmorxists, who were inex· 
orably drown into considering the doss 
equivalents of artistic content. Antol's 
Florentine Painting and Its Social Back­
ground (London, 1 948) and his later study 
Notes 
of Hogarth demonstrated the fruitfulness 
of such interpretations. 
9. I cannot give a history here of the Lukacs 
doctrine. The themes I hove noted con be 
traced, despite shifts in emphasis, from his 
Geschichte und Klassenbewusstein (Berlin, 
1 923) to Die Eigenart des Aesthetischen 
(Neuwied, 1 963). I find especially valuable 
his discrimination of falsches Bewusstsein 
(explaining the ideological limitations of a 
work of art) from potential consciousness, 
on which the broadest, most fruitful artistic 
world view is grounded. I must also poss 
over Lucien Goldmonn's Pour une sociolo­
gie du roman (Paris, 1 964), which seems a 
departure from the Lukacs interpretation 
even though it proceeds from the sor,1e as· 
sumptions; the specification of o homology 
between economic and artistic structures 
(e.g., a world reified to on extreme and the 
oddly parallel "nouveou roman" which 
locks o hero) seems to me o solution parallel 
with the fourth, semiotic version as dis· 
tinguished here. 
1 0. See L. S. Vygotsky, The Psychology of 
Art (Cambridge, Moss., 1 971 ). This work 
was written in the 1 930s and published 
posthumously in Russian in 1 965. Also see 
M. M. Bakhtin, Problems of Dostoevsky's 
Poetics (Ann Arbor, 1 973), Russian edition 
published in 1 929. 
1 1 . M. M. Bokhtin, Rabelais and His y.lorld 
(Cambridge, Moss., 1 971 ), Russian edition 
published in 1 965. 
1 2. Trudy po znakovym systemam [Studies 
in semiotic systems], vol. I: J. M. Lotmon, 
Lekcyi po strukturaloy poetike [Essays in 
structural poetics) (Tortu, 1 964); and vol. II, 
o collection of essays (Tortu, 1 965). Another 
two volumes hove appeared since I wrote 
this essay. 
1 3. For a typical example of such o reading 

308 
of Marx's ideas see L. Althusser, Pour Marx 
(Paris, 1 966), and Lire de Capital, 2 vols. 
(Paris, 1 966). 
1 4 .  Though it is a truism, it may be worth 
recalling here that the marxist doctrine has 
not only assimilated external stimuli, but 
has also been assimilated. A revealing ex­
ample is given by the works of the outstand ­
ing art historian Pierre Francastel, who pur­
sues sociological-semiotic studies without 
disowning marxist inspirations. See his es­
say, "Problemes de lo sociologie de l'ort," 
in Gurvitch, Traite de sociologie, pp. 278-
296. Particular emphasis hos been placed 
on the influence of morxist thought in stimu­
lating sociologically oriented studies by 
Walter Abell in The Collective Dream in Art 
(Cambridge, Moss., 1 957). 
1 5. In view of this doctrine, the important 
problem of work as the foundation of artis· 
tic and aesthetic processes gains its full 
meaning only in the anthropological per­
spective. Homo oestheticus as one of the 
exemplars of the future humanity for which 
work will be a creative activity, a playful 
expression of one's personality, is integral 
to the morxist concept of disolienotion . 
Art and Society 

Chapter 9 
Major and Marginal 
Functions of Art 
In a Context 
of Alienation 
A thorough analysis of the functions of art is certainly one of the major desiderata 
of aesthetic analysis, for neither the structure nor the genesis of art can be ade­
quately discussed without it. However, a conscientious treatment of this subject 
will quickly lead into the quicksand of the vast realm of anthropology, so that a 
clear choice of a preli minary and predominant approach will be necessary. The 
more aware we are of the integration of art and life, the more will such a choice 
seem necessary. Nor can we hope to impose order on this state of affairs by isolat­
ing artistic from nonartistic functions, for, as we shall see, only the stalwart of 
aestheticism could steel himself to reject preemptorily a II nonaesthetic uses of art. 
Another obstacle to focusing the object of this chapter suitably consists of the 
numerous competitive standpoints for defining art's function. Each perspective 
makes important claims; the sociologist promises no less than the psychologist, 
the educator has a case every bit as legitimate as the philosopher, and so on. 
I must assure my readers that I know the Deweyan conception, and, moreover, 
that I think very highly of it. The uses of art should undoubtedly be considered i n 
relation to the aesthetic experiences of both the creator and the audience; and the 
basic element in evaluating art should be the process of i ntensifying and clarifying 
everyday experience. Nonetheless, to frame one's approach directly on this premise 
appears to stress psychology at the expense of artistic structure. Yet I am not at all 
hostile to the Deweyan position, and, indeed, when I take up the question of the 
end of alienation (i.e., disalienation), I shall come to a similar conclusion. However, 
my topographic charts lead me by another way. 
My philosophy of art has, in fact, led me to define five functions of art. Now, 
one might think it the simplest course to assume that one function embraces all of 
art: the informative one. Certainly, no art can act on its appreciators without in­
forming them, at the least, that the arrangement of the words, sounds, colors, and 
so on, .is thus and thus. All the arts, the applied and the fine, the representational 
and the nonobjective, the esoteric and the diverting, must i nitially, as a prerequisite 
to functioning, be communicative. I n  this sense the funda mental artistic function is 
semiological. Works of art are signs, and the distinctions to be made a mong the 
signs define their functional variations. 
I do not know of any argument convincing enough to dislodge the semiological 
approach, but its universal scope does not assure, to my mind, a further fruitful­
ness. I especially question how well it illuminates the problem of the artistic sign. 
This essay was written in 1 963 and was published, in Polish, in Estetyka (Warsaw), vol. 4, 1 964. It was 
slightly revised and extended in 1 968, and first appeared in English in Arts in Society. 

3 1 0  
Functions of Art 
in a Context 
of Alienation 
Let me elaborate somewhat, by commenting on a symptomatic and fascinating 
book, Nelson Goodman's The Languages of Art (Indianapolis, 1 968). 
Now, since I take a marxist approach to the fundamental aesthetic questions, I 
would certainly be the last to argue in opposition to the cognitive value of art. No 
more would I deny the possibility (and fruitful results) of analyzing the status of art 
in a setting of symbolic systems. Indeed, at least since Cassirer produced his per­
suasive and comprehensive studies of man as animal symbolicum, every humanist 
has been obliged to recognize this as a matter of fact. If man is a rational and 
featherless biped, unquestionably this rationality is achieved with a reliance on 
various symbols. A lot can be learned from Goodman about notational systems 
(scores, etc.), but not too much - and I apologize to the author for putting this 
curtly -about the characteristics peculiar to art. One is led to conclude from his 
tenacious analysis that aesthetic and nonaesthetic phenomena may be discrimi­
nated by pointing to the difference between exemplification a nd denotation, 
through an explication of the ideas of syntactic density, semantic density, and 
syntactic repleteness. These terms are really explained from the standpoint of logi­
cal analysis; nothing specific is developed as regards the qualities peculiar to aes­
thetic phenomena. Thus, Goodman's "density" repeatedly relates to ambiguity, 
imprecision, redundance-in other words, to old-fashioned qualities of art. Re­
garding representation and particularly expression, his terms stress the infinite 
potentiality for interpreting art, and here again we are on long-surveyed ground. 
What can truly be valuable in the effort to elucidate the nature of the aesthetic 
by mea ns of the specific kind of symbolization is achieved if we can come a bit 
closer to the peculiarity of artistic cognition. Just this Goodman does not do: he 
offers no observations on the patterns of sensory data that we call works of art 
and no formulation of the problem of the cognitive status of art. If artistic cogni­
tion is always a hypothesis that somehow parallels scientific inquiry, should this 
not be demonstrated? Should not the question of whether cog nition is a necessary 
feature of the aesthetic also be explored? 
The very modest results scored by Goodman are, I believe, dictated by his prem­
ises. If one sets out with the thought that aesthetic processes are primarily a way of 
apprehending the world competitive with that of the sciences, and that the matrix 
of art is a communicative system, then the conclusion one draws will be, at best, 
that art is symbolic in its own way; what that way is will remain undefined. 
Goodman's book is, nonetheless, substantial because it proves tnat much will 
be gained by clarifying the problems, by confronting the language of aesthetics 

3 1 1 
Functions of Art 
in a Context 
of Alienation 
with the technical language of analytical philosophy. Yet not much will be accom­
plished for the aesthetic domain, if all that happens is that the same old thorny 
questions, however pertinent, are merely translated from the vague a nd clumsy 
traditional vocabulary and into a crisper but (alas!) hermetic vocabulary fostered 
by the logician. This latter mode of discourse is certainly relevant to working 
through the prickly problems of axiology and, particularly, of aesthetics, which, 
in no small part owing to the confusions of their focal terminology, have brought 
about a widespread sense of the dreariness of these disciplines. The warnings ut­
tered by Occam and Francis Bacon cannot be ignored; but, even so, a purification 
of language has never in itself solved any pivotal philosophical issue. 
Therefore, if I may get back to the point at which I mentioned The Languages of 
Art, the bringing of outside viewpoints to the aesthetic perimeters can have a 
salutary effect, as the observer may thus be able to discern unhackneyed connec­
tions in artistic phenomena. Among contemporary observers the semiologists seem 
among the most welcome, for they help us understand more profoundly the signif­
icance of our continual exposure to messages. Semiology is extremely helpful in 
explaining what it is that art has in common with other categories of culture, but it 
loses impetus as it approaches the co-re matters of aesthetic concern. This appears 
even in the most subtly conducted analysis of the message peculiar to aesthetics 
{i.e., considered as ambiguous and strongly redundant in its dialectical feedback 
with the prevailing code). 1 A while back, I declared my nonacceptance of aesthet­
icism; now I must underscore my disagreement with any doctrine seeking to erase 
totally the demarcation of art from nonart. 
The aesthetic experience-and here I refer once more to Dewey, expanding on 
some of his conclusions and slightly modifying others - preserves our familiarity 
with the world but is at the same time imprinted with strangeness. Although it 
does not obliterate our psychic habits, it works against their becoming ingrained. 
It is contemplative and yet opposed to inertia, to that mode of unapprehending 
rote response which deadens us to the rhythm of life and to persons and things 
as they authentically are. The aesthetic response would be impossible if it were 
not linked to our entrenched schema of familiar perceptions. However, its effect is 
to freshen, to vivify our encounters with the world. This usually occurs in one of 
two primary fashions: either by intensifying and -paradoxically-apparently dis­
engaging everyday realities from their habitual contexts, where we know them to 
the point of inattentiveness and lethargy, to replace their literal communication 
with a shock value (this we find in the devices of dado, in pop art and happenings, 

3 1 2  
Functions of Art 
in a Context 
of Alienation 
and, to some extent, in the Verfremdungseffekt of Brecht); or by transposing the un­
known, the fantastic, the marvelous and unbelievable into the everyday context 
so as to evoke, by the clash, the shocking sense that the limits of our reality can 
be extended (a device that belongs to the baroque and romantic heritage; the sur­
realists took it up cleverly and with great sophistication, merging it with the fore­
going device). 
In sum: the aesthetic experience is one of tension; it is concordia discors. Art 
creates transgressions against our life attitudes; its means cause us to react in a 
special way, very different from the ways of science, philosophy, or engineering, 
for example. 
Margina l  Functions 
I am going to distinguish three major functions of art: one is fundamentally aes­
thetic; the others con perhaps best be termed "para-aesthetic." I propose this hier­
archy because what I have just described as art's peculiar idiom is uniquely evoca­
tive of the intensity and extent of the audience response to art. 
However, two further functions, which cannot be ignored, lie outside of this 
central hierarchy. These might be described as marginal functions in a double 
sense, for they are framing functions which, pivoted at two opposite frontiers be­
tween art and nonart, present two polar aesthetic extensions. The first is related to 
oil art that verges on science or philosophy. Surrealism's place is here, as is exem­
plified by Breton's well-known remark that art provides the window into the world. 
The second framing function pertains to those arts that organize our ordinary, 
practical space and time, the paradigm here being architecture or industrial design. 
Both of these functions focus our attention once again on communication and in­
formation, because the issues that arise in discussing them relate primarily to the 
cognitive aspects of art. 
It seems impossible to dispute the assertion that the artistic process and the aes­
thetic experience draw on the knowledge that we possess and that they complexly 
transform this knowledge, thus legitimately and irresistibly enriching our under­
sta nding of the world. Every artist, including the most mediocre, tells us something 
about himself; every looker, listener, or reader, even the dullest, gets something 
from an encounter with the arts. In this sense, at least, art is always the vehicle 
of a certain amount of knowledge (even a wax-museum figure or an effigy of some 
segment of reality con augment what we know about both artistic objects and 
means, as they lead us to consider their virtuoso technique, or the great power of 

3 1 3  
Marginal Functions 
their illusion, or the evidence they present of the impossibility of exactly duplicating 
objects) even if that knowledge is no more than a reconfirmation of attitudes that 
ore already familiar to the audience. 
We need not stick with this rather trivial idea of knowledge, however; we may 
go on to discuss artistic experimenters who put genuinely novel experiences before 
us. Given this modification, I would extend the assertion to say that attentiveness 
to the whole range of first-rate, authentic art will rightly instruct us that the al/­
sided cognitive nature of art is an irrefutable fact. This leads me to two contentions: 
l .  The cognitive nature of art is in modes peculiar to art-which I will later scru­
tinize as embodied in two myths, primarily in the Promethean, but also, if to lesser 
degree, in the Philocteteon. The peculiarity of the artistic cog nit ion is significantly 
reduced, however, in the case of those borderline modes of art to which I ascribe 
a framing, "communicative" function. 
2. Since all art is communicative, it is all somehow of a symbolic character and, 
therefore, conveys some kind of knowledge (about the work itself, its author, or 
its time). Nevertheless, I should like to restrict the term "cog nition" in this context 
to those peculiar kinds of artistic symbols which lead us to grasp a world created 
by the strategy of os-if; in other words, fictional artistic symbols. Here, cognition 
is a term used for a special mode of artistic knowledge founded on mimesis, which 
evokes in the public the experience of a "suspension of disbelief" in the encounter 
with a creatively transformed reality. 
Thus, as I comprehend the nature of art, it is inaccurate to speak of all artistic 
productions as cog nitive, or as cognition-laden. 
Now in turn, "cognitive" and "cognition-laden" ore not precisely parallel terms, 
for thenᢱ are obviously different kinds and dimensions of knowledge conveyed 
by art. In the first (cognitive) category I would include art and literature of a repre­
sentational character, which describe and depict the world (e.g., reportage, picto­
grammatic painting, sculpture, and drawing). In the second (cognition-laden) cate­
gory, I would include art and literature which use the existing artistic vehicles only 
to set forth scientific (usually psychological and sociological) and philosophical 
truth (e.g., the essay or dioristic "novel"). The predominant aim of reportage and 
pictogram matic art is to inform, to communicate about the likeness of the world 
here-and-now, while that of philosophical or scientific art is to offer a discussion 
of reality, with an imogistic vehicle. 
This much said, I must argue (see also the argument in chapter 6) that it is the 
peculiarity of artistic cognition that it both avoids abstract generalization while 

3 1 4  
Functions of Art 
in a Context 
of Alienation 
seeking typification and, above all, that it composes a vision which will, necessarily, 
entail emotional involvement and an appeal to values. On the one hand, we will 
agree, reportage and pictogroms ore intentionally and in practice stripped of a 
value-oriented approach; their task is not to iudge but to state. On the other hand, 
the philosophical essay, drama, or novel may be value-directed and visionary, but 
the discourse, being generalized, is only semiortistic, or para-artistic. 
By way of comparison, in what I shall later term Promethean and Philocteteon 
art we find a commingling, on intertwining of the cognition, the moral commit­
ment, and the emotional and imaginary aspects. The whole is pervaded with a 
voluotionol gauntlet thrown down to the world and, so for as the work amounts 
to discourse, the artistic imagery is predominant. Promethean art is more reflective, 
absorbing philosophical issues into the texture and substance of the peculiar 
medium, its pattern and means of expression. Philocteteon art turns more towards 
the active response to the represented set of values, and, if one con subscribe to 
them, one should live up to the values with deeds. Where the glossaries of film 
theory speak of on "urge for identification" (a passive, dreamy self-projection), 
Philocteteon art supposes a dynamic need for continuing artistic vision into the 
practice of social life. 
Nothing would be easier than to attack the foregoing sketch by demonstrating 
that the differences between a cognition-laden art and a peculiarly ("artistically") 
cognitive art are indefinite and vague. Moreover, it is u ndeniable that no depictive 
(or, more broadly, presentational) art is strictly communicative, since if it mani­
fested only denotation it would be empty of any traits that would make us coll it 
art. How pleasant it would be if we could discriminate in the arts among various 
types of objects, as, for example, stars or numbers may be precisely and separately 
located. However, blurred demarcations are a specialite de la maison of art. Even 
so, at the farthest extensions toward the ends of the artistic continuum, we ore 
able to discriminate the symptomatic traits of the symbolic content which is no 
longer peculiarly artistic. Near to the philosophical pole, for instance, we con locate 
some characteristic and finely achieved passages of Musil's The Man Without 
Qualities, Borges the teller of stories and Sartre the playwright; and at the picto­
grommotic pole we con discern most of the naturalistic pointing a nd sculpture of 
Soviet Russia. 
However, I hove not only suggested that a spectrum runs between the extreme 
instances of "cognitive" and of "cognition-laden" art; I hove also said that not 
all art partakes (in the "fictional world" sense) of cognition. I will odd now that 

3 1 5  
Marginal Functions 
neither what I shall later label the Orphic function of art, nor the second framing 
function, has anything to do with cognition. When the artist sings out of his inner 
sensibility exclusively, when his work, sensuously and emotionally given, conveys 
only expressive values, the knowledge to be obtained from it is of a quite specific 
kind which may be more or less "transparent" with respect to the world around it. 
Granted that, owing to the makeup of o work of art, the peculiarly artistic cogni­
tion cannot be verified like a scientific or philosophical hypothesis, it may still be 
checked if in an imprecise way; but there is simply no way to verify the expressive 
values inherent to a sensuously given coherent structure. The reference of such 
values is simply to the artist, and the key to his expression remains entirely private. 
We may, of course, hold our focus on the work of art itself, but precisely its struc­
ture does not convey any cognition. It provides only knowledge about itself, about 
its immediacy, and it may secondarily encourage us to guess about its author and 
its time. My suggestion is that we term such works "self-addressed" and that we 
recognize that, in contrast to "transparent" or "translucent" works, the self-ad­
dressed ones lack the cognitive facets in the strict sense of the term discussed 
earlier. 
The self-addressed works can and should be called messages since they do 
communicate something by their very substance and structure. Messages, in turn, 
do imply reference to the extra-aesthetic, psychosocial world, even as mere vestiges 
or perpetuations of definite artistic conventions (codes) and individual quirks 
against the paradigmatic background. For this reason I propose to ascribe to them 
an information function, as distinguished from the specifically cognitive function 
discussed above.2 
The some may be urged, even more strongly because it is so much more obvious, 
in respect to industrial art. Where could its strictly defined cognitive value be? There 
is none; instead, the work fills o place in the world that we too occupy, and its 
primary reference is to itself (also, but indirectly, to the artist and to the style of the 
epoch). The functional (utilitarian) aspects of this kind of art could hardly be treated 
as "transparent" in the mode discussed above. They can only be- like the quali­
ties of o nonobjective art- "symbols" (tokens) expressive of the individual and 
collective ideas a nd moods of a given time. 
I must here stress that the works characterized by the first framing function, 
although they share some noncognitive features with nonobjective art and indus­
trial art, can be said to convey some information "despite" their artistic qualities, 
whereas such conclusions could not be drawn in cases of the Orphic function. 

3 1 6  
Functions of Art 
in a Context 
of Alienation 
As concerns the second of the framing functions available to art, it is motivated 
by an endeavor of art to enter life, to erase the demarcations between the aes­
thetic and nonaesthetic. The two chief spheres in which this attempt is waged are 
those of technology and of play. In both cases of this trial marriage, the tendency 
to aestheticize life is carried to the extent that art ceases to be a special distinct 
phenomenon. Moreover, all the "sacrosanct" trappings of the artist's profession, 
his elite, priestly, and hermetic tendencies, are laid aside, so as to divest the aes­
thetic performance of its aura of exceptionality. Examples include, on the one hand, 
the Experiments in Art and Technology group (E.A.T) headed by Bell Telephone 
Laboratories engineer Billy Kluver; and, on the other hand, the makers of happen­
ings and the Living Theatre, by now also accepted around the world and the prime 
example of our second framing function. 
This tendency continues the notion of zizhnostroyeniie. "organizing life by means 
of practical arts," which was very popular in the early 1 920s among Soviet Russia's 
proletarian culture (proletkult) and futurist proponents. From this perspective, art 
in the traditional sense is to be rejected, for art should not be the vehicle of cogni­
tion, and no comtemplation should attach to the aesthetic experience. Art is to 
become as active as is labor in the midst of everyday life. The engineer and the 
ordinary worker will emerge as the genuine artists; they will produce harmonious 
wholes in harmonious surroundings. The proletkult and futurist vanguardists also 
turned their attenton to pageants and celebrations. They thus anticipated the hap­
penings insofar as recreational activity was concerned and the audience took a 
part, whether deliberately or willy-nilly, in creating the spectacle. The all-compre­
hending aesthetic principle was to eliminate the traditional attitude towards art, 
with its limitations and constrictions, its guild craftsmanship or techne and clear­
cut division of assigned roles (creator: work of art: audience). Thus, in the second 
framing function, the "into life" principle comes to the fore, excluding the cognitive 
function in the strict sense of the term, and forming the antipode of the informa­
tional principle. 
Despite its inclinations to aestheticize the surrounding world (a para-Orphic 
phenomenon), the art I am now discussing is best related to the Philoctetean cate­
gory described below. Like the Philoctetean it is social-practice-oriented, that is, 
it means to enter life actively. However, the Philoctetean function remains based 
on the relatively autonomous structure of the work of art, it is enabled by an aes­
thetic-cognitive experience suffused with value-commitment. In contrast, the fram­
ing function calls out for an immediate response to art directly rooted in life-praxis. 

3 1 7  
Marginal Functions 
The Comm unicative Function of All Art 
-----
includes 
-----
Art laden with Æ 
Specifically :rtistic 
Å Noncognitive and 
nonartistic 
cognition (the 
noninformational 
(informational) 
Promethean and 
art (the Orphic 
cognition 
Philocteteo n functions 
function) 
of ort) 
Figure I. 
lnformotionalõ PrometheonE--Orphic:--Ph iloctetean--Life-orgonizotionol 
Figure 2. 
The Mojor o nd Marginal Functions of Art 
Figures 1 and 2 present an approximate counterpart of art's fluid continuum 
and overlapping functions; and figure 2 presents the most elementary, linear dif­
ferentiation of the functions. The reader will note that I have carried one marginal 
function to the far extreme of an informational art. This case might form a substi­
tute for reality (a kind of surrogate function) as contrasted with what we find with 
Promethean or Philoctetean works of art. I should add that precisely the latter 
works are the most ideological (incorporating as they do a function parallel to an­
cient or medieval mythology), in other words, they are at once a fictional reflection 
of the social world and its transcendence, a game that is played out over and 
against the status quo. 
Another necessary remark of a synoptic nature pertaining to some extent to all 
of the above-mentioned functions concerns their therapeutic character. I do not 
mean this in the traditional Aristotelian sense of purging our worst feelings by 
dramatic catharsis. Nor do I mean the Spencerian sense of giving vent to our col­
lected surplus of emotion, or to the Freudian sense of freeing the libido from re­
pressions and fixation. All of these may occur; but they are secondary aesthetic 
functions. To speak of therapy in connection with 01.:r five functions, the three 
central ones especially, means basically: that our psychic powers are, through art, 
unusually concentrated towards waging the human contest in a hard world, and 
that our under.5tanding is intensified of our own position, of man 's victories but 
first of all of his defeats and discontentments, and of the order but mainly of the 
disorder in the world, so that we may choose to go by another way, bettering both 
ourselves (at least in terms of maximal self-awareness) and the state of affairs 
around us. 

3 1 8  
Functions of Art 
in o Context 
of Alienation 
Now, it might be objected that philosophy could, and does, offer the same ex­
perience. My reply would be that the experience is analogous but not the same, 
precisely due to the peculiarity of artistic cognition. Moreover, the therapy which 
is characteristic of the best examples of the Orphic function is completely incom­
parable. Indeed, these moments of inner harmony and of full accordance with the 
world -which make us prone to utter Goethe's famous phrase, Verwei/e doch, 
du bist so schon -are provided only through art. The religious mystical experience, 
which may come to mind as the counterpart of this occasion of epiphany, is, how­
ever, only an analogy, for the Orphic delight embraces all the faculties of spirit 
(perceptive, emotive, imaginative, and conceptual) in a single alloy which relates 
us to earthly things. 
It is indisputable that the framing functions which I have described as being 
marginal in a double sense have been very much in the fore of recent artistic 
trends. Striking examples can be seen in pop art, and in the efforts to abandon 
fixed artistic structure in favor of more playful, creative, or responsive processes. 
I am certainly not biased against the happening and its progeny; I believe this 
trend should be explored, not merely because it is thriving now but because it repre­
sents an important tendency in contemporary art and civilization which dates at 
least from tbe time of dado. Nevertheless, the predominant activity of art has re­
mained between the framing functions. I find it of significance that this distribution 
has remained roughly the same up to the present time, although it is also clear 
that, with the passage of time, art's basic traits and the responses they evoke have 
altered and its content has shifted. 
I should not be a mazed if John Cage or Allan Ka prow disputed my conclusions 
and insisted on putting a systematically aleatory and a ludic (play-rooted) art at 
the very center of my scale. They would be joined from another quarter by Billy 
Kluver and others who claim the primacy of technology in the civilization of today. 
They could point with assertiveness to the extraordinary role occupied by industrial 
art (I mean by this term applied art, industrial design, a nd the aesthetically pro­
gramed production of machines) in the everyday life of the entire world. Still others · 
who could be marshaled against my arguments would include those writers and 
critics who believe that a highly intellectualized prose and reportage, and also the 
so-called conceptual art, 3 properly should have the pride of place in both belles 
lettres (perhaps including theater and cinema) and the fine arts (painting and sculp­
ture). Possibly the support of Peter Weiss, Jean-Luc Godard, and the nouveau 
roman group might be gathered too. 

3 1 9 
Marginal Functions 
It is simply impossible to ignore these counterarguments; the avant-garde of 
today has definitely eroded the fundamentals of aesthetics which had seemed so 
firm for many centuries. I shall not urge that the transmitted aesthetics is certain to 
survive; it may very well be that we will pass through a period of crisis and that at 
the other side a new continuum of the arts with a considerable shift of emphases 
will emerge. However, I shall not want to take up the task of sketching that continu­
um until the 1 980s or 1 990s if I should live that long. Nor should others want to 
take it on for the present, for the aesthetic categories transmitted to us -though not 
so stable as they once were- remain validated by practice, while their most vehe­
ment opponents have no choice but to make use of them even in the moment of 
negating them. It appears that rebus instantibus these disparaged categories are 
cogent, and what we most want is their pliable modification (d. Chapter 3). 
Given the present situation, the best course to follow is to accept the chance of 
being mistaken and, nonetheless, to try to build bridges between the artistic tradi­
tion, with its relevant aesthetic categories, and the "blasphemously" radical avant­
garde which, with its "antiart," does tend toward something which ultimately will 
no longer be described as art (a field of specific phenomena), but rather as a mode 
of creation latent to all kinds of human activity. Given the incompatible proposi­
tions set forth by philosophers a nd theorizing artists, who match each other in 
stubbornness, the job of the aesthetician will be to mesh them into a consistent 
whole -at least for the transitory period of "crisis." If I were to leap to the side of 
the avant-gardists a nd to accede to their drastic revisions, the losses entailed by 
the move would outweigh the benefits gained, since it would then be virtually im­
possible to avoid confusing the still defensible traditional concept of art with the 
idea of new phenomena "beyond art." An even greater chaos than at present 
would reign; as matters stand the pivotal aesthetic terminology is amply chaotic, 
and I would opt for attempting to vindicate it as against introducing an even 
greater confusion. 
I think I have already made clear that it is my philosophy of art and my devotion 
to certain values which determines my choice among the alternatives and, conse­
quently, my scheme for presenting the aesthetic functions. No doubt others will 
want to propose some other choice of fundamental functions.4 I wish to state in 
advance my toleration of their views. I want only to emphasize my earlier reserva­
tion: No debate on this issue makes sense if it does not draw upon the total re­
sources for aesthetic thought, that is, if it does not relate to the philosophical bases 
of art criticism. 

320 
The Three Principa l  Functions 
Functions of Art 
in c Context 
of Alienation 
The three chief functions of art con, I think, be nicely illustrated with reference to 
three characters from the Greek myths: Orpheus, Prometheus and Philoctetes. 
The myth of Orpheus expresses the restorative, organically living power of mu­
sic and poetry. Orpheus makes man's feeling whole, imbuing him with an inner 
balance and a harmony with the surrounding world. 
The myth of Prometheus confronts us with the anguished, and yet quickening, 
arousal of a dormant conscience. Prometheus takes up and typifies the struggle 
for the destiny of mankind, and although the venture fares tragically, Prometheus 
persists in striving against the world and against himself -torn asunder yet still 
seeking to better his lot in the world. 
The myth of Philoctetes expresses the idea that life is only supportable in the 
presence of art, and, moreover, that art can play a significant social role. In art's 
absence man is bereft of fulfillment and stripped of skills and devices necessary 
for his victories. 
Philoctetes is a seer who has received from Heracles a bow which unerringly 
finds its target, a bow which will guarantee victory to the Greeks at Troy. On the 
voyage to Troy, however, Philoctetes is bitten by a serpent; and, as the stench of 
his wound proves unbearable to his companions, he is put ashore on the isle of 
Lemnos. Philoctetes lives on the island in total isolation for ten years. The battle 
for Troy lasts as long, without a clear-cut result, until, at last, the Greeks remember 
the invincible bow. After Odysseus, who represents practical reason (here, coarse 
political calculation), has given his consent to the journey, they resolve to hasten 
to Lem nos. Odysseus stipulates that they bring only the bow; there is no need for 
Philoctetes; however, Neoptolemus, the young son of Achilles, convinces his fellow 
seafarers that Philoctetes should be retrieved and brought aboard. The wound then 
is healed, Philoctetes vanquishes Paris, and thanks to his bow the Greeks carry 
the fray. 
Myths, of course, are subject to varying interpretations, and I do not claim that 
my interpretations are definitive. They are, however, useful for illustrating my 
present argument, and that is what is important in this context. Let me repeat for 
clarity's sake that: first, the Promethean motif is associated with the synthesis of 
moral, philosophical, cognitive, and specifically artistic values; second, the Philoc­
tetean motif corresponds to the sociopoliticol, cognitive, and specifically artistic 
values; and third, the Orphic motif is based primarily and a lmost solely on the 
specifically artistic values, often having, however, an implicit world view which 

321 
The Three Principal 
Functions 
holds that aesthetic harmony is the highest goal of humankind. The two first motifs 
relate to ideology in the broad sense, but with somewhat different emphasis, the 
Philoctetean vision having sociopolitical tenets and the Promethean moral and 
philosophical ones. The Orphic motif can be connected with ideology only in an 
indirect way; an undivided dedication to purely aesthetic values always implies 
a certain stance, whether openly asserted or unconscious, towards the conflicting 
ideologies of the given time and place. 
Not only can these three themes stand as emblematic of functions of art; each of 
them also keeps us in mind of certain constructive aspects of art. If, by contrast, 
we consider what the inversion of these themes might mean, we shall be reminded 
of the negative results which can be brought about in the sphere of art. 
Let me expand upon this last statement. To settle for an inverted version of the 
Orphic theme means to grow complacent with what is in many respects aesthet­
ically false. It is to confirm oneself in a debased or an undeveloped aesthetic taste. 
All ersatz which is advanced as genuine art, if it is accepted as genuine, has to 
prove damaging. Such ignorance of what is artistically good and base has con­
tributed to the aesthetic illiteracy up to the present, and, to illustrate this, I need only 
mention the history of the reception of so-called modern art. The contemporary 
artist is ill understood by many, because his modes of expression are quite simply 
too difficult due to the public's having been made comfortable with certain stereo­
types that have been extrapolated from art and are incessantly advanced as the 
universally valid models towards which all true art should aspire. Cheap gewgaws 
come into this category, as does the slavishly academic art that has such a great 
influence on the reception accorded to avant-garde art. Impressionism, which re­
oriented the taste of its time, was for a while faced with the real threat of a total 
boycott. Cubism, fauvism, and surrealism were fought by eternally vigilant "aca­
demicians"-and also by some newly spawned fawners on impressionism. The 
advocates of artistic modes that already are supplanted have two means of frus­
trating the Orphic i mpetus. They profusely flood the galleries with epigonal works 
that are widely proclaimed to be of high standing; and they stubbornly refuse to 
recognize, usually with every sort of barbed taunt, works that embody the new 
values. To point out this negative influence is not, however, to deny any other sort 
of influence to the older artistic trends. Their finest works will remain a healthy 
element in the best meaning of the word. Everywhere and always, the meretricious 
compromises the quality of life. 
The inversion of the Promethean theme leads, logically enough, to the dulling of 

322 
Functions of Art 
in a Context 
of Alienation 
conscience. This can occur when reality is appraised as supposedly free of con­
flicts and contradictions. The extreme inverted-Promethean example is the idyll. 
Such i nversions do not appear only in capitalist conditions, where in some literary 
works the illusion was and is nourished that this social order functions splendidly 
and brings to fruition the hu manist values; in socialist circumstances the ideal of 
a conflictless society, coupled with the proposition that what should not be there­
fore cannot be, has also led to a misappropriation of this function of art. 
Yet another possibility of the .inversion of this theme lies in the trend towards 
amoralism. Works of this trend encourage a brutalism that lunges to seize its goal 
at however high a price; examples include some crime novels and movies as well 
as the comics of capitalist countries, the United States especially. 
The inverted Promethean theme may also channel or displace its primary ener­
gies to the Orphic motif. This can occur when sociohistorical conditions are so 
hostile to the ordinary functioning of the arts that artists can resolve their prob­
lems only by resorting to hermetic aesthetic values. In the time of Gautier and of 
Baudelaire, the defense of Beauty in its purity was still feasible as a mode of ex­
pressing protest against the capitalist social order. It was somehow complementary 
to the way Balzac and Flaubert, from another side, unmasked the rhetoric about the 
free development of personality. At the time there were few gifted thinkers who 
had discerned, as had Marx and Engels, the operative laws of the new social sys­
tem and had located the perspectives (including those for artists) in effect necessi­
tated by the existent social relations. The Paris Commune made it plain, however, 
that the religion of Beauty "in and of itself," with its devotion to eternal values 
outside of society was bankrupt. The new social confrontation meant that such an 
attitude had to be bound up with a flight from artistic responsibility. 
It may well happen that the artist is not able to discern the main historical con­
tradictions of his time, but he cannot afford to turn away from those of which 
he may be conscious if he is to draw as fully as he can upon the functions of his 
art. From this perspective, Plekhanov was able to justify Pushkin but not Merezh­
kovsky; he sought to explicate the complex position of the 1 840s and 1 850s aes­
thetes but he did not find reasons to exonerate the parnassians. 
Rimbaud, Mallarme, Wilde, and their followers, yielding exclusively to the Orphic 
theme, were in disaccord. with the conscience of their age. Inasmuch as even the 
best artists at this juncture (e.g., Debussy, Leonid Andreyev, Gordon Craig) pre­
ferred the primordial aesthetic values-conveying, to be sure, a symbolic indict­
ment-to the ethical-social values, as their way of rebelling against the capitalist 

323 
The Three Principal 
Functions 
reality, I would sum up the contradiction of Orphic and Promethean themes in such 
cases as follows: Inversion leads to displacement of the Promethean theme into 
the Orphic, and, accordingly, the role of the former dwindles to a vanishing point. 
This difficulty should attract our thoughtful concern - perhaps now more than 
ever. The threat of total war, the toppling of the gods, the aggressions in the name 
of absolutes- in a word, all the phenomena that have perplexed the artistic com­
munity-encourage a further flight to ivory towers. At the same time we can also 
see, particularly in the socialist countries, a steadily greater participation i n  the 
life of society by artists and o heightened response by them to these problems of 
the present. In the capitalist lands and especially the United States, however, artists 
sense their isolation ever more starkly. 
A noteworthy instance of a resort to the para-Orphic attitude combined with a 
more-or-less philosophical maneuver (the first of the framing functions) is the the­
ory and practice of the so-called nouveau roman, whose aim is to show how the 
methodology of writing a novel can become its very theme. Artistic technique is 
here pushed to the fore, along with the conception of how persons and things both 
fill out anonymous social patterns, or of how reality is structu red through acciden­
tal points of view. Eschewing depiction of how life might go on if persons were 
to perceive their genuine chances, the nouveau roman provides instead a registra­
tron of fortuitous structures which are emblematic of chaos as the universal princi­
ple. In music, an analogous example is provided by the "aleatory" movement; and 
in the plastic arts by action painting. The resultant artistic wholes are meaningful ­
but, paradoxically, this is so because their reference is to man's failure to imbue 
his deeds and the world with meaning. Although here, too, is entailed a protest 
of art against the modern phenomenon of reification, nevertheless the Promethean 
dimension has beeri reduced almost to naught. What is projected is a tragic con­
sciousness of a devaluated. existence. At times, aleatory structure appears not as 
a metaphysical dimension but as an artistic strategy. The aim of "cutting across 
the grain" to refresh habits of perception and experience, ends, at best, in achieving 
the goal of a game or play and the g lorification of homo ludens -an Orphic rather 
than o Promethean achievement. 
The inversion of the Promethean theme may be compounded by on assertive 
aesthetic deformation. Similarly, the Orphic theme may be drained of the qualities 
that make art artistic if it is perverted into o self-congratulatory aestheticism. Now, 
one case of the deformation of the Promethean theme is sheer moral ism -the full 
subordination of art to criteria of giving to youth the correct experiences. Tolstoi 

324 
Functions of Art 
i n  a Context 
of Alienation 
proposed this aim in What is Art? (1 898), in which he questioned the value of 
Shakespeare's and Beethoven's works, as well as his own earlier writings, in the 
name of a true Christianity. Moral ism overlooks the fact that art is sustained by 
its own peculiar values- 11uch as aestheticism tries to get away from the fact that 
art does comprise manifold categories of value. Hence, the well-publicized quarrel 
in 1 878 between Ruskin the moralist and Whistler the aesthete was entirely insub­
stantial, since each was one-sided in his viewpoint. 
Another suborder of the Promethean theme's deformation is didacticism. Art 
quickens the conscience with truth; but it does not communicate this truth in the 
form of a treatise or a lecture. When we meet such interpolations in literature, as 
in The Emancipated by Boleslaw Prus or in Tolstoi's War and Peace, we accord 
them an extra-aesthetic function, considering them appendages of the novel's genu­
ine weave. We react similarly to the allegorical epigraphs on the paintings of the 
Middle Ages or the Baroque Age. Didacticism here appears in the form of a com­
mentary on the content of the picture. It can also happen that the artist projects 
a teaching viewpoint within the work of art-as for exa mple when he judges a 
situation positive or negative, or he scorns or argues on behalf of a character. In 
children's fables the chief figure is frequently decked out in noble traits so as to 
reinforce certain ethical precepts. In a letter of 1 885 to Minna Kautsky, Engels ar­
gued against handling art in this way; but one could find many instances of it. 
Just go back in literary history -to the writings of George Sand as she sought to 
pass along the influence of Fourier, or to the Polish authors influenced by Swieto­
chowski, that major ideological exponent of the early phase of positivism. 
The typical inversion of the Philoctetean theme may lead to nihilism, the con­
ception that the world is on the way to catastrophe and that there is no worthwhile 
act for a person to undertake. This point of view was widespread among the turn­
of-the-century decadents. Hence, it may readily be seen that, under some historical 
conditions, inversion of the Philoctetean theme entails its displacement into an 
Orphic theme. 
Admittedly, some persons committed to the struggle for a new society, to pro­
letarian revolution, will not be satisfied with mere criticism of the old system, no 
matter how incisive. They call for a wholly activist artistic attitude and look on the 
works of Kakfa, Camus, Faulkner, or T. S. Eliot as taking virtually an escapist posi­
tion. This is a complex problem. The above-mentioned authors, and numerous 
others (e.g., Ionesco), do carry out one of art's basic functions. They convey to the 
sensitive and attentive reader that the contemporary world is antihumanistic. To 

325 
The Three Principal 
Functions 
ask more than this of them would be to force a view of reality on them which is 
not theirs. The problem here is not one that might be solved by simply presenting 
to the artist arguments based on historical facts. Rother, it is a reflection of the 
many-sidedness of reality, of the fact that its contradictions closely impinge on one 
another. Moreover, the artist is not always optimally oriented; he will be affected 
by his origins, education, and tastes, the current ideological controversies, the 
types of radicals, socialists, or communists he meets, the circumstances of these 
encounters, etc. Finally, the work of such artists does, in fact, constitute a col l  to do 
bottle. The ways in which it does so ore many; they range from Kafka, and Camus, 
to Hemingway's For Whom the Bell Tolls, to the extreme measure of commitment 
lately reached by Sartre. 
Hence, the inversion of the Philoctetes theme will result, most pertinently, in a 
withdrawal from any criticism of reality. However, the act of refraining from on 
activist attitude should be regarded as escapism only in a time of dramatically 
heightened struggle. Just such situations hove often occurred for Polish literature 
owing to the nation's history. For those who know our poetry of the 1 840s, the 
polemics between Guztow Ehrenberg and Edmund Wasilewski probe deeply into 
this question of escapism. French literature sow comparable times between the 
revolutions of 1 830 and 1 848, during which period nearly oil poets and writers 
were socially and politically engaged -even those like Baudelaire who would go 
over later to /'art pour /'art. Those who disregarded the life of their time and on 
historical-philosophical perspective met disapproval. 
Like the other themes, the Philoctetean theme is subject not only to inversion 
but also to deformation that grossly falsifies its significance. One deformation is 
the "agitprop" -agitation-and-propaganda - idea of the function of art, which 
treats art not as a specially constituted sphere of psychic values, but as a means 
(affording a sensory-concrete form) to an end, an ideological persuader. Perhaps 
the reader is familiar with the polemical remarks by Heine - he was at that time a 
partisan of socialism -against the proleta᢬ion poets, particularly Weerth. We must 
admit he was not unfair in chiding them if we look closely at the tendentious verse 
of that time, which was laden with the sort of propaganda that can put art to death. 
Time and again from Weerth to the present the poetry siding with the cause of the 
proletariat hos skirted or fallen into this deformation. In socialist countries not 
many years ago an "agitprop" function of art was officially sanctioned as equiva­
lent to art's great civilizing function -with predictably disastrous results. (This 
tendency is still vigorous in China, for example.) Art, however, does not tidily dove-

326 
Functions of Art 
in a Context 
of Alienation 
tail with immediate priorities, which can shift from year to year, month to month, 
even week to week. Art has always sought to avoid this kind of urgency. When it 
has acquiesced to pressure, its results have been nil or quickly moribund. 
The great Baroque artist Bernini created monumental sculptures assigned to his 
workshop by the Church, but he instilled these works with enduring values, pre­
cisely because he overstepped the official Jesuit ideology and art theory. When 
Jacques-Louis David responded to the needs of the French Revolution, and when 
Dickens later satisfied the pressing requirements of liberal bourgeois journalism, 
they too did not reduce their interests and level their aesthetic taste to those of their 
institutional employer. It is sometimes asserted that Mayakovsky and Brecht prove 
that an artistically excellent propaganda art is possible, yet neither one produced 
propaganda tout court. Employing personal and inimitable idioms, each produced 
images of the individually experienced problems of a modern man -a man for 
whom the proletarian revolution and socialism provide the center of life, the ABC 
to which all else relates. They wrote a poetry at once affirmative and difficult. It 
summons to battle, to the struggle of today; nonetheless, the Promethean element 
is present. 
Another example in the same vein, and perhaps more contemporary to our time, 
is the poetry of Nicholas Guillen of Cuba. Consider Guillen's "Elegia a Jesus Me­
nendez," which incarnates the peasant leader as the liberation principle of all the 
oppressed peoples of Latin America. In this hero is symbolized the earth's plenitude 
(the sugar-cane) and the revolutionary awakening of those who tend the earth. 
Where Brecht wrote didactically dialectical porables, Guillen employs a militant 
and opulent pattern of metaphor. How easy it would be to accuse Guillen of sheer 
propaganda when he praises the violence inflicted on the oppressors; yet his poetry 
is so richly imbued with images of love and death, of hunger and poverty, of cruel 
injustice and the longing for brotherhood, that we could better term it a kind of 
Promethean scripture for all the suffering peoples of the so-called Third World. 
The vision of Guillen and that of Pablo Neruda are being continued brilliantly in 
the best films now being made in Latin America -especially those by Glauber 
Rocha - which are highly symptomatic of the combination of the Promethean and 
Philoctetean motifs. 
Questions of Alienation and Disalienation 
The interrelationships of the different strands of art have been analyzed in the 
marxist literature in many ways, and from very different points of view. Needless 

327 
Questions of Alienation 
and Disolienotion 
to say, the major problems of art are unsolvable without reference to the question 
of artistic alienation, which was raised by Marx himself. 
In his description of alienation Marx was indebted to Hegel and Feuerbach, but 
he diagnosed the phenomenon differently. In the 1 844 Manuscripts he showed 
that the economic foundation of the capitalist social order is the main cause of 
alienation. Alienation for Marx had three aspects: the alienation of the product; 
the alienation of the production process; and the alienation of the human species­
essence. Its effects are indelible not only on the human condition of the oppressed 
but also on that of the oppressor; and its results can be felt in many spheres (e.g., 
the ideological and political). The artist is also profoundly affected in his domain. 
Marx pointed out how money-the chief nexus of alienation -in capitalist times 
becomes the measure of value in artistic production, the work being severed from 
the artist to become a commodity. Moreover, the artistic activity is submitted to 
scrutiny if not final control; he who can pay art's price will wield an economic, 
political, and ideological power to elicit and encourage certain subjects and treat­
ments. 5 
Given the facts of alienation, a great many artists will perform negative func­
tions. I grant that the best works in any epoch have combatted conformity of every 
kind and have thus com batted alienation too. However, this does not mean - in 
Marx's view-that the artist can actually attain to expressing his full human in­
dividuality. 
In spite of his enthusiasm for the nineteenth-century novel and particularly for 
Balzac, Marx returned again and again to Shakespeare and the classics. Like Hegel, 
Marx saw in the art of antiquity a humankind still harmoniously linked to nature, 
not yet so alienated that the social bonds have been dissolved. In his remarks on 
the emergence of the aesthetic sense, Marx focused on the reconciliation of history 
and culture with nature - in other words, the harnessing of nature to realize a 
common social product in such a way as also to realize humankind's natural d is­
positions. Such a man, superseding and achieving himself in his labor, is homo 
aestheticus. Art !lobilizes all his psychic powers, liberates his uncharted possibili­
ties, and adapts him to the environment in the dynamic process organized on the 
creating of objects. 
The whole late history of culture entails the removal of a rt from life, the crystal 
lization of a type of artistic creativity which has turned away from production sensu 
strido, and the estrangement of the aesthetic attitude (which is said to be incom­
mensurable with all other attitudes, particularly the utilitarian). Art declines to 

328 
Functions of Art 
in a Context 
of Alienation 
the standing of a department of human interest. The way it happens is conjunc­
tural: economically, works of art take on commodity traits; politically, there is a 
censorship; and ideologically, art becomes more subjective and mystical. The sum 
of this is alienation, the loss of any chance for art to achieve a general and har­
monizing effect. It stands, then, a tongue-tied testimony to the condition of society. 
The best of this art will probably elevate just one function, accent it, and make it 
something absolute; hence, the ideal of the beautiful, or of the artist's awareness 
of his responsibility. 
Marx indicates that a liberation from this dysfunctionality is only to be had 
through the socialist revolution. Friedrich Schiller had dreamt, in Letters on the 
Aesthetic Education of Man, that the world would be rescued from need and suffer­
ing by aesthetic man. Hegel opted to overcome the alienated status of man by 
withdrawing from the objectified exteriorized phenomena (Ausserung) to the world 
of spirit. Holderlin and Keats wanted to escape to the long gone world of Greece, 
since the future held out to art a stark and ineluctable fate. Marx, with his probing 
of contemporary society, was to turn Schiller's conception inside out; it was po­
litical man who was required for the rescue and realization of aesthetic human­
kind. 
Meanwhile, the alienation processes, if deleterious to artistic creation, have se­
cured for art a relative autonomy. They could not have been avoided; and, although 
they might have been beaten back (as has been done in the past), art has, through 
the interplay, prepared itself for the superseding of alienation. Indeed, the artist 
has always been attuned to nature; he has continually drawn fresh sustenance 
from it in his fight against the decadence of civilization and culture, which is at the 
same time his fight for an authentic humanity. The unambiguous dependency of 
the artist on only one class has been rare. His product has also always had a gen­
eral social significance (this we read also in Marx) which has tended to militate 
against a narrow outlook limited by official ideology. 
A mutiny is afoot within both the Orphic and the Philoctetean phenomena. Ad­
mittedly, the battle done against alienation by the two is not equally divided. In 
their midst appears the Promethean insurgence, providing, in general, the high­
point of the resistance of art to alienation. All the same, alienation cannot be com­
pletely superseded except with communism, in the Marxian view. 
Polemicizing against Stimer in their German Ideology, Marx and Engels antici­
pated an epoch where there would be no isolated, ivory tower geniuses and no 

329 
Q.iestions of Alienation 
and Disalienation 
philistines. All men would be artists to some degree. No longer restricted to a single 
field, they stress, the artist of the future will simultaneously be painter, poet, singer, 
etc. We read (in Capitan that work when not compulsory comes to be free play of 
the psychic faculties and that the development of every talent will figure as a basic 
element of the communist system. In this way is the man of the future-among, 
and together with, his other attainments-the aesthetic man, in Marx's prediction. 
All of production can become an art; and every art can be made intimate with pro­
ductivity. The disalienated man will have the capacity to give artistic expression 
to all phenomena and to all his needs; he will in this way-while augmenting the 
store of material and psychic resources - not only reach an ethical goal of indi­
vidual development; he will as well fulfill his species-being, his nature -a stage 
for which his transposition from the natural world into civilization and culture has 
already potentially prepared him. His enduring nature, then, among other endow­
ments of zoon politicon, is aesthetic. 
Marx's prediction undoubtedly has utopian antecedents. The notion of natural 
concomitants has a basis in Rousseau. It was not, however, the uncivilized man or 
savage who lent him his most s'ignificant model, it was the attainments of Greek 
man; and in this a direct line starting from Winckelmann leads through Hegel to 
Marx. Neither is the notion of a society where all men have become artists just an 
aberration in a genius's thought; it expresses an empirically founded, acute per­
ception of the intolerable antinomy between art and society-along with a genial 
hunch as to the undoing of the antinomy. 
We should be able to understand, then, why marxist aesthetics ascribes an im­
portant role to art in transformations of society; and why the notion fostered by 
Hegel that art is useless and withering away is unacceptable to marxists. The pro­
cesses of alienation and disalienation involve not only the three major themes but 
also, undoubtedly, the second framing function. Together with Marx, later marxist 
aesthetic thought has put emphasis on zizhnostroyenije, in contrast to Hegel and 
his indirect followers who emphasize the spre᢭d of Kunstwissenschaft (and its 
counterpart: highly intellectualized art) instead of Kunst in the old sense of the term. 
Indeed, to Marx and also to William Morris whose ideas here are the closest to the 
Marxian idea, the principle of art is not abandoned but expanded. It does not dis­
appear, but pervades all social consciousness. Where Marx discusses labor in terms 
of art, he modifies Kant's analysis of Zweckmlissigkeit ohne Zweck and adapts it 
for the marriage of art and social life. In Marx's view, accordingly, the aesthetic 

330 
Functions of Art 
in a Context 
of Alienation 
realm does not lose its relative autonomy in the disalienated future; what is lost is 
only its splendid isolation. In other words, life will not engulf art but will become 
its Siamese twin. 6 
Contemporary art and art theory bear convincing testimony that Marx's aes­
thetic point of view has become central to the whole range of modern aesthetics. 
Indeed, alienation has become a fashionable term today. Owing to the influence 
of psychoanalysts and psychosociologists, the idea is applied to every kind of frus­
tration. It seems worthwhile, then, to define the conception more exactly. More­
over, when we speak of alienation today we refer to phenomena which in the time 
of Marx did not yet exist. 
I understand by "alienation" certain processes and their results which occur in 
a concrete historical situation through the conjunction of economic, sociopolitical. 
and ideological factors, and which men feel to be independent forces to which they 
may either submit or oppose themselves, but which they lack the objective and 
subjective resources to control. The processes of alienation and its results thus 
curb the freedom of man; they limit the satisfaction of his basic needs both mate­
rial and spiritual. Artistic-aesthetic alienation is a dimension of an encompassing 
alienation which can be effected if art has succumbed to myths and mystifications 
not of its own election, or if it combats these, or if the aesthetic values of the social 
model are so negligible as to become prized in an exclusive way-resulting in the 
mythos of the artist closed inside his ivory tower and superior to events, the mythos 
of the eternal "outsider." Alienation thus understood does not depart from the 
methodological guidelines of Marx, and is also applicable to our sociohistoricol 
conditions. 
Henri Lefebvre, in his Introduction a lo modernite (Paris, 1 962), draws our at­
tention to the new modes of Entfremdung affecting art that Marx had no grounds 
for discussing. These are: scientific and technical alienation (e.g., the discoveries 
of nuclear physics, cybernetics, etc., and the dangers issuing therefrom) and the 
political and ideological alienation which hos been evoked by and has widely trou­
bled the Stalinist deployment of socialist power. A literary reflection of the former 
mode is presented in the fate of Mobius, a major character in DOrrenmatt's The 
Physicists. The lotter mode is represented in the most convincing fashion in Sol­
zhenitsyn's short stories. On a larger scale and incorporating both modes, Peter 
Handke's Kaspar depicts the counteralienational struggle against speech-torture 
no less than world-torture (the latter involving deceiving sociopolitical, scientific, 
and technological myths). These recent phenomena can occur, obviously, only as a 

33 1 
Questions of Alienation 
ond Disolienotion 
consequence of an unresolved antinomy between the artist and society. As to the 
aleatory aspect of modern creative production, Lefebvre links it to these pervasive 
discords of our epoch. For the coming period he does not exclude the possibility 
that a sociopolitical and philosophical resolution might be synthesized. We need 
not assent to all of Lefebvre's judgments, which tend to be rather rash, to agree 
with him about the futility of analyzing the function of today's art without reference 
to the contemporary modes of its alienation. We must also agree when Lefebvre 
notes that the Dionysian strain prevails in the cultural model of the twentieth cen­
tury. The Apollonian vision of a Marx is a good deal harder to attain; artists may, 
indeed, find it unattainable. 
I should add that Lefebvre is stimulated not by the visionary but rather by the 
realistic force of thought in Marx. It is precisely Marx who shows the concrete an­
tagonisms of art and society, one of which is the unprecedented difficulty faced by 
the artist (whether com mitted or uncommitted) in his attempt to resolve conflicting 
aesthetic and sociopolitical claims (i.e., the seeming distinction between the so­
called universally human content of art and an ideological outlook embedded 
therein). Marx attributes to such phenomena a dialectical unity. 
Even where the concept of alienation and disalienation does not appear as such 
in their works, the anlyses of the American scholars (among aestheticians, espe­
cially Melvin Rader) lead eventually to this problem. Herbert Read addresses him­
self directly to it-as in The Third Realm of Education (Cambridge, Mass., 1 960), 
where he develops his earlier view that a true education is impossible without 
an emphasis on art; in other words, that education must be more than just dis­
cursive, as it is where only a drilling in facts and moral axioms occurs. Read sees 
a hope for overcoming the antinomy between pleasure and work in the Marxian 
alienation theory. Even so, he cannot believe that a society might be organized 
today in such a way that work is felt to be pleasurable. Read argues that speciali­
zation, as its impact grows from year to year, leads irrestibly to ever greater alien­
ation, which he calls a technological alienation. He saw firsthand and was sym­
pathetic to the experiments in aesthetic education in the Chinese People's Republic 
- but he came, nonetheless, to accept Schiller's thesis that self-integration is to be 
achieved only outside of work, in the "play and leisure time" of man. I cannot al­
together agree for several reasons: First, automation as it ceaselessly advances 
opens up ever new possibilities, and can evoke a positive attitude toward work, 
that is, toward work in some degree creative. Second, Marx never claimed that 
the humanity of the future would be an aesthetic humanity due exclusively to the 

332 
Functions of Art 
in a Context 
of Alienation 
character of the work process. Third, in a way Read's vision, although stated very 
recently, is more a conjecture of imagination than that of Marx a century ago, for 
it leans upon the Kantian and Schillerian idea of three separable aspects of the 
world. However, I am not nearly as interested here in differences as in noting that, 
in discussing the various artistic functions, Read, too, accords a most prominent 
role to the concept of alienation. 7 
This question was linked to the problem of time by Hans Meyerhoff. Man has 
grown acutely sensitized to time: the constant need to fragment one's day, the 
excess of obligations one has, leads to a loss of the sense of selfhood. The problem 
of "alienation through time" recurs in twentieth-century literature from Proust and 
Virginia Woolf to the so-called antinovel of Robbe-Grillet and Butor. 
Literature and art do indeed lend evidence to the assertion that the concept of 
alienation figures as a key to current reality. The life work of Bertolt Brecht is one 
sustained unmasking of the capitalist modes of alienation, and DOrrenmatt hos 
pursued his example. Diverse aspects of the same single phenomeno᢮ are illumined 
by Kafka and Musil -the alienation of the uninformed or of the aware but still 
floundering individual in the power of the state; Thomas Mann in Dodor Faustus ­
the alienation of modern art; Max Frisch in Homo Faber-the technical-rational 
alienation which stems from the highly organized nature of life. The alienation 
processes in socialism hove received an effective portrayal only recently in the 
novels of Solzhenitsyn. 8 
I hove not been able to discuss the alienation problem fully here, but I could not 
poss over it entirely, for the functioning of both modern and earlier art is brought 
into focus by the concept as by an optical lens. My marxist interpretation has dis­
cerned a fivefold artistic functioning; I can now specify the interconnections and 
the hierarchy of the particular themes -or strands- under the conditions of alien­
ation: In comparison with the other themes, the Orphic strand initially plays a lesser 
role during the revolutionary period of transition from an alienated post towards 
a fully humanized social order. The Philocteteon theme asserts precedence where 
the historical processes of alienation are pitted against those of antiolienotion. 
Disolienation processes tend to restore the Orphic strand -together with the ten­
dencies inherent to the "art as life" movement, the second framing function -to 
its appropriate operation; in the aftermath of the socio list revolution and the crea­
tion of the socialist state an aesthetic education sensu stricto will acquire increasing 
importance, helping to prepare the aesthetic humankind of the future. 
We are witness to artistic processes which to some degree would seem to con-

333 
Questions of Alienation 
and Disalienation 
firm the Marxian hypotheses about the future of art and its integration with life. 
Applied art has come to occupy a central place in the art of the twentieth century; 
indeed, it now appears to have prefigured the style of the epoch. By organizing 
the space of the locales in which we live, work, shop, and take walks, art enters 
directly into life. A task force of persons specifically concerned with /'art implique­
to borrow a term from Etienne Souriau -are employed in the machine-dependent 
industry of today, bringing it closer to the handcraft industries of the past. They 
lend the personal touch to items which always had been treated as technical, im­
personal products. We may glimpse in this a disalienating development. It is, how­
ever, limited and only fragmentary. First, although an enlargement of the field for 
aesthetic perception is gained, the (Marxian) question of homo faber as homo 
ludens is wholly begged -with no likelihood of its being dealt with in this mode. 
Second, the "do-it-yourself" (in French, brico/age) tendency'does not necessarily 
imply that a competence in work technology can be turned into artistic activity. 
Third, the authentic liberation of a human being only occurs when his entire psychic 
energy is activated in expression of the most completely human sense of his exis­
tence, and when his principal aspirations (the Promethean theme) are thus fully 
embodied; that is, when he is able to be the actor of history and not its slave, to 
finish with all kinds of tyranny and authoritarianism, to live in a society which is 
free of hunger, poverty, violence, and repression. 
All of these qualifications, however, do not diminish the significance of "the 
aestheticization of everyday life." TJ:iey only serve to explain why the second fram­
ing function is marginal and not central in coming to terms with the domain of art 
and with art's intrinsic and extrinsic potentialities. 
Somewhat similarly, we can see a limited disalienation in the continuous life 
spectacles organized by television -that is, a lessening of the demarcations be­
tween the life model and the art model. In improvisatory jazz, moreover, the mode 
of experience to be had by a listener is such as to induce us to reconsider the effect 
of art. There is the story of King Saul who sent his retinue to Nayoth to clap David 
into custody. But the prophets at Nayoth frustrated the aims of these emissaries, 
by artfully beguiling them: "and when they saw the company of prophets prophe­
sying, and Samuel standing as head over them, the spirit of God came upon the 
messengers of Saul. and they also prophesied" (I Samuell 9:20). 1 attended a per­
formance of the Dizzy Gillespie Band in San Francisco; and as I sat among the 
rhythmically swaying, enraptured throng of listeners, in a near-dark hall lit by a 
few dull-red electric candles in the corners, it struck me that I was participating in a 

334 
Functions of Art 
in o Context 
of Alienation 
modern ceremony. The rhythm and the never-to-be-duplicated expression of the 
jazz ensemble induce a state in the listener such as to tear down the boundaries 
separating the ego from its environment, if full attention is diverted to the body. 
This effect is reminiscent a rebours of the syncretic birth of poetry, song, and dance 
in collaborative labor- described by Karl Bucher in.the eighth chapter of his book 
Arbeit und Rhythmus (1 896). In two ways the concert affected me: as a structure 
of sounds (the Orphic dimension) and as a sensory-rhythmical climate the perva­
siveness of which was intensified by the milieu. I quite early yielded myself to the 
performance and experienced a pleasing aesthetic emotion such as I had never 
previously known in this way. The Orphic theme was illustrated here in a special 
mode: I, and the other members of the audience, submitted to the identical aes­
thetic spell. The second framing function was here, of course, equally obvious, but 
I must emphasize that this modern ritual was imbued by the aesthetic exigencies: 
Art was not rendered obsolete but extended. This distinctive, unique experience 
became merged with life-experience, and I was ready at a single word from Dizzy 
Gillespie and his group to respond with my own act; I was ready to go out into the 
streets rendering changes on his tune. I was virtually a jam session participant my­
self, prepared to take initiative or to be propelled along willy-nilly. 
Without question we likewise observe a fusion of the Orphic, the "art-as-life" 
trend with the Philoctetean strand in the particular case of communal celebra­
tions and demonstrations. There may be Orphic presentations included (music, 
dance, plastic arts), but just let the participant or spectator get caught up, and he 
will develop a practical-ceremonial attitude. If the situation or ti mes move into a 
dramatic sequence, the Promethean strand often emerges as well. Let me give just 
one offhand but most revealing example. American friends have informed me that 
in the spring of 1 965 Alan Ginsberg wrote a poem which was a kind of proposal 
for the Vietnam Day Committee's demonstration in San Francisco. This poem -a re­
buttal to the brutal actions of the Oakland police against the earliest demonstrators 
-celebrated love and peaceful activity, and was adopted as the scenario for the 
protest, which was "staged" on San Francisco's streets. 9 
Again, I should stress that this mode of disalienation - much like applied art 
or, more specifically, industrial art-affords a somewhat increased freedom to the 
aesthetic sense, indeed extending its domination over the technical world; but, 
just as certainly, it does not in itself solve the major human problems. Moreover, 
there is the danger that such freedom will prove illusory and fleeting if the prob­
lems coped with by the Promethean outlook in art remain essentially unchanged. 

335 
Questions of Alienation 
and Disalienation 
How practicable then is the Marxian vision of an aesthetic humankind? Of 
course, history alone will deliver the final verdict. The prediction is based on the 
idea of a humankind delivered from misery and necessity. Marxism , and the the­
ories closest to it, again and again refer to this vision. Accordingly Christopher 
Caudwell wrote, in ///usion and Reality (l 938): "Art is a mode of freedom . . . .  
Communist poetry will be complete, because it will be man conscious of his own 
necessity as well as that of outer reality . . . .  Art is one of the conditions of man's 
realization of himself, and in its turn is one of the realities of man." Ernst Fischer's 
The Necessity of Art (l 959) holds that, in the future, art will enlarge its function 
of developing the personality, in contribution to the process whereby the individual 
develops identity with nature and with his fellow man. Art, says Ernst Fischer, is 
to become a genial faculty of the society as a whole. 
The passages just cited do have a note of the prophetic to them, as their authors 
certainly were aware. If we adopt instead of a visionary a scientific view of social 
development, it is feasible, in line with Comte's rule -savoir pour prevoir-to set 
down a few predictions, yet no genius has ever forecast the concrete processes of 
the historical development to come. From certain indications it does appear-as 
I have said -that elements of the Marxian vision are starting to be realized. In 
countries of very different ideological stamp, similar trends can be observed ­
whether they are the conscious aim of politicians, or are present, for all that, in 
the arts and the theories of art. 
This is not to say that there are no grounds for skepticism. As I said in discussing 
Herbert Read, the question seems to be whether the individual's entire psychic 
potential can be brought all together to accomplishment. The epoch of an ever 
burgeoning specialization appears not to favor realization of the ideal of the aes­
thetic man in this respect. Those who support the idea (Read is among them) will 
reply that even if the production process _does not lead towards this goal, the ex­
pansion of leisure time yet enables, increasingly, the emergence of aesthetic sensi­
bility and an emotional life. A return to Hegel - to his thesis about the termination 
of art, and its replacement by philosophy- is now being made by some thinkers. 
These theoreticians draw a smidgeon of evidence from the intellectualizing ten­
dencies of the arts, for example the anti novel, antifilm, antipainting. But alongside 
the highly intellectualized work, so nearly related to the essay and manifesto, the 
twentieth century can lay claim to direct and spontaneous creations, which the­
orists who wish to prognosticate the end of art have overlooked. 
There remains the possibility that, rather than becoming identified with life, art 

336 
Functions of Art 
in a Context 
of Alienation 
will (unavoidably) retain its independence in a century of increasing specialization. 
Or again-even if disalienation does prove practicable, in other words, if the aes­
thetic values can be realized in a particular social model and at least ᢯me modes 
of production come to be identical with artistic creativity-even so a great deal of 
artistic creation, though fundamentally always operational (i.e., due to techne, 
arrangement, etc.), will remain apart from the strictly productive domains. Precisely 
beyond this juncture where art and production do not coincide, the situation may 
become exceptional, that is, a situation of alienation; for the evolution of art does 
not lead to the overcoming of all internal and external a ntinomies. These cannot 
but remain, although they will present themselves in a changed context and one 
unknown to us. 
If art is to be shucked off, then the Orphic theme is anachronistic and major 
changes are required in the other strands. However, if art is to be amalgamated 
to everyday life, then the Orphic strand will either wither away and be replaced 
by what l have called the second framing function (the zizhnostroyenije tendency), 
or it will absorb and supersede that tendency. My other two major functions might 
then be pushed to the margins of artistic life, or gradually wane. Should art retain 
its independence, then all the themes will persist; however, new tensions and con­
flicts will emerge to replace the tensions of today among these themes. 
If we reject the updated Hegelian theory of the end of art, we must then choose 
the more plausible of the two remaining possibilities. It is not the business of a 
scholar, whose job is to analyze the facts available to him and to generalize cau­
tiously from them, to make predictions about the far future. What he should do­
working with the questions supplied by a philosophy of art - is to try to explain 
the dominance of certain art functions. 
This has been the aim of my essay, and, for this reason, I cannot go the full way 
with Herbert Marcuse in his fascinating Essay on Liberation (1 969; especially chap­
ter 2). Certainly, I am not opposed to the utopian approach, in the sense that it is 
thinking based on the contemporary dynamic reality and it entails negation of the 
actual state of affairs and reflection on the development of tangible potentialities; 
and l wholly agree with Marcuse in locating an antialienational trend in the con­
temporary avant-garde. However, I find that his understanding of "the aesthetic" 
pushes to the extreme just one of the aspects inherent to Marxian theory. 
Marcuse focuses on the idea of what Marx termed the "rich man" in full and 
integrated possession of his psychic faculties and functions. Marcuse bolsters this 
notion with Freudian and surrealist concepts; and he concludes that the era of the 

337 
Questions of Alienation 
and Disalienation 
New Sensibility, which we should eventually achieve, will be founded on Aesthetic 
Forms as equivalent to the Reality Principle. He accordingly envisages the man of 
the future as essentially homo aestheticus. This seems to me a rather speculative 
interpretation, especially if due weight is given to the growth of specialization, 
which even the proposed nonrepressive society of tomorrow will not be able to 
discard. Given his overly hopeful premise, Marcuse is led unquestionably in the 
direction of projecting the dissolution of all art forms and the transformation of 
art into the "mode of life." I do not see this happening -any more than I see like­
lihood in the opposed prophecies, which speak of impending restoration of the 
centrality of the representational arts. 
I will readily grant that the value and function of art undergo essential changes 
(see chapter 2). If the aesthetic is destined to become a gesellschaffliche Produktiv­
kraff, however, then Marcuse must be prepared to make all the arguments that are 
called forth by the notion of the end of art; yet that assertion is undoubtedly too 
sweeping. My own approach avoids dangers of this order by sticking to short-term 
utopian reflections regarding the present and future. Art, due to its "second real­
ity" (confronting the primary realities of society and nature) and relative autonomy, 
seems able to go on delivering cathartic effects, which, of course, need not yield 
purely illusory gratifications in relation to life's hardships a nd frustrations. As Ernst 
Fischer rightly argues, the contemporary art endowed with human ethos has some 
leverage to enhance a nd remodel life values. 
Conceding all the complicated moot points in the discussion, I am inclined to con­
clude that the major functions in the priority discerned here will persist as the long 
contest of alienation and disalienation proceeds: First, in the preparation of a dis­
alienated world, the Philoctetean motif is basic, and it may remain vital in new cir­
cumstances that must be unknown to us. Second, the Promethean theme is surely 
pivotal to the challenge hurled against an alienated world, and it cannot grow ob­
solete as long as human history unflaggingly continues to pursue the "ought" in 
contrast to the "is". Third, if the disalienation processes are nourished increasingly 
and organically on the aesthetic values (as these are understood against a back­
ground of the human heritage), the Orphic function will survive - not only by its 
immersion and dispersion in "art-as-life" activity, but still more through the exam­
ple it sets to such phenomena by its integral structures. In this way, it will contribute 
maximally to the achievement of a fuller humanization of social life. 
Having cited the ideal of "fuller humanization," I wish to append a few succinct 
words on the goals and pattern by which human desire and will can be oriented 

338 
Functions of Art 
in a Context 
of Alienation 
to the fulfillment of this ambition. In my view, those means ought to be pursued 
which are pervaded by the optimum attainable degree of iustice and freedom, and 
which should, then, provide both a springboard and a field of play for creativity 
and harmony. These four goals, which are treated as end-values, will only be tan­
gible to us when patterned (embodied) as means. We shall then find that we can 
pursue these means/ends only in the rhythms of their recurrent mutual opposi­
tions, which do, nonetheless, achieve concordances. 

339 
Notes 
1 .  See U. Eco, "Messagio estetico come 
l'idioletto," in La struttura assente: lntra­
duzione al/a ricerca semiologica (Milan, 
1 968). 
2. Nelson Goodman places overriding em­
phasis on the problem of the purpose and 
function of art, and we explicitly diverge 
regarding this matter. I am, however, aston­
ished to read on p. 248 of The Languages 
of Art that the emotions function cognitively 
to discern what properties a work possesses 
and expresses. So far as I can see, Goodman 
is saying more than just that we respond 
emotionally to expressive qualities: he is 
using "cognition" not in the metaphorical, 
Pickwickian sense, but rather in a sense that 
implies epistemological inquiry. Thus, taking 
this statement in its literal locution, I find 
that it espouses the rather odd phenomenol­
ogy of Max Scheler, who argued for emo­
tions as the faculties of spirit that were 
truly capable of intuitively comprehending 
values. 
Another way to tackle this issue, and a 
more promising one in my view, is that of 
Georg Lukacs in Die Eigenart des Aesthet­
ischen. Lukacs adopts the Diltheyan her­
meneutics, according to which expression 
in art can be interpreted as a psychosocial 
phenomenon. (For a further discussion of 
expression and its meanings. see chapter 
5.) 
3. I om fully aware that the proponents of 
conceptual art turn away all attempts to es­
tablish durable definitions, since they hold 
that the artists must permanently unsettle 
the status of art. If you read the manifestos 
of, for instance, Joseph Kosuth or Alain 
Kirili, however, no doubt can remain that 
they chiefly mean to exchange artistic crea­
tion for a "methodology of art." They want 
Notes 
to alter the bias in favor of formal excel­
lence, expression, representation, and com­
munication, so os to secure the uttermost 
implications of Duchamp's strategy (the 
art-world as the permanently self-problem­
atizing challenge) and of Ad Reinhardt's 
minimal art. In my schematization of art's 
tendencies, this "art-follows-philosophy" 
view which, as the authors intend, becomes 
poralogical and para mathematical, and is 
akin to synoptic charts, scientific programs, 
ond physicists' diagrams, is art immensely 
intellectualized. Its counterparts should be 
sought in the nouveau roman and in French 
structuralist semiology (the Tel Que/ group­
ing). Although the movement was originally 
American, it is most valuable to trace it in 
its world-girdling contemporary European 
variants. (Cf. the "Art conceptuel" issue of 
the French-Swiss quarterly VH IO I, 1 970 
no. 3.) 
4. See, for example, the scheme set forth 
in F. C. Sparshott, The Structure of Aesthet­
ics (Toronto, 1 963), ch. 8, and also the two 
subsequent chapters, which concern art in 
relation to the individual as well as the so­
ciety. 
5. I must here omit discussion of precÄpitol­
ist alienation. However, a thorough study 
of Marx's thought (see, for example, the il­
luminating discussion in I. Meszaros, Marx 's 
Theory of Alienation [ 1 970 ] )  may well con­
clude that the three aspects of alienation 
have been functional from the origin of our 
civilization. It should be added that prior to 
capitalism the predominant aspects were 
political and ideological (chiefly religious). 
A keen insight into the precopitolist situation 
of the artist may be obtained from R. and M. 
Wittkower, Born Under Saturn (New York, 
1 963). 
6. Incidentally, in this context of historical 

340 
development the affinities between Marx's 
and Dewey's aesthetics could be rewardingly 
explored. I leave the question in abeyance, 
however, as there is no brief, compact way 
for me to formulate the affinities. 
7. The importance ascribed by Read to this 
crucial issue of modern artistic life emerges 
even more dearly from his lost published 
volume, Art and Alienation (London, 1 967}. 
Another interesting example of the impor­
tance of this theme is R. McMullen's Art, 
Affluence and Alienation (London, 1 968), 
especially its introduction and a concluding 
chapter on the open-ended future. 
8. An illuminating treatment of the issues 
of this subject matter is provided by Georg 
Lukacs in his two recently translated essays 
on Solzhenitsyn (Cambridge, Moss., 1 971 ). 
However, I must odd that I disagree with 
Lukacs' assessment of Solzhenitsyn as a 
"socialist realist." He is, rather, a critical 
realist in on era of bureaucratically maimed 
socialism. In this sense, we still await on 
"insider's critique," that is, one from the 
viewpoint of a communist-oriented artist. 
(For a further discussion of Solzhenitsyn and 
socialist realism, see chapter 7.) 
9. This corresponds to ideas advanced in 
Lee Boxondoll's stimulating 1 969 essay on 
the dramaturgy of radical confrontation, 
reprinted in the anthology which he hos 
edited, Radical Perspectives in the Arts 
(Baltimore, 1 972). 
Functions of Art 
in a cOntext 
of Alienation 

Chapter 1 0  
Quotation In Art 
In what context does the use of quotation arise? On the whole, it is where respect 
exists for a knowledge of precedents or sources. Quotes are a proof if not a badge 
of learning. We expect to find them in the scholar's dissertation, a legal brief or 
decision, an essay which popularizes science, a treatise on philosophy. Due to this 
same connection of quotations to post precedents and previous knowledge, we are 
often disgruntled to find them in a journalist's impression, a love letter, when chat­
ting with on acquaintance, or in a reader's letter of opinion to a newspaper, where 
the freshness of response is to be highly prized. At such times, the citing of prec­
edents may come across as pedantic or otherwise out of place. I believe that the 
possible use of quotations in art objects is likewise limited, but this is a proposition 
to be tested, not merely asserted, and I should like to analyze the elements that 
constitute the quotation and its significance in a particular context. 
Tracing the usage of the term "quotation" will lead us first to the early courts 
of low, where witnesses were summoned before a magistrate and required to 
swear to the accuracy of their statements. The law courts have always placed em­
phasis on the authoritative character of a quotation that is accepted into evidence. 
Right here, we should stop and toke note of the dual nature of the phenomenon. 
On the one hand, the new context, which may be on institution such as a low court, 
tends to assert the authoritative status of a quotation. On the other hand, the quo­
tation emerges from a particular setting or context which usually to some extent 
lets us test the fidelity, or truth, of its attribution within the newer context. 
If we trace the use of quotation through the emergence of civilization, we see 
that for very long the institutional assertion of its status has been paramount, not 
only in the low courts but also in the military, where, for example, "citation" hos 
meant an order or decision conveyed to the troops or the public. Quotation of 
necessity become a central practice of the ecclesiastical authorities, since the 
Church pointed for its transcendent a uthority to the Bible and the various com­
mentaries thereon. With the Renaissance, the content of quotation shifted, and the 
activity of quoting became a prerogative of the layman; but there was still little 
emphasis on original contexts. At this time the classical authors of antiquity were 
reintroduced to shore up one or another traditional authority that had come under 
suspicion. As the nuclei of authority had multiplied, the same quotation might now 
be employed from several standpoints for competing aims. Gradually, by the six­
teenth and seventeenth centuries, and as often as not to validate a personal claim 
This essay was written i n  1 965 and originally published i n  Polish in Nurt (Poznan). 

342 
Quotation in Art 
to a disputed quotation from a favorite author, the original context was gaining 
more attention. 
The seventeenth and eighteenth centuries marked the turning point, and in the 
next century it became common for a writer to consult original contexts rather than 
rely on textual authority as such. Out of the European framework an historicist 
mode of thought had emerged. I mean by historicism a pervasive inquiry into the 
past, accomplished by various intellectual disciplines at different levels of abstrac­
tion, with the respect for the past dictated by a concern for the present and future. 
This kind of scholarship then developed its own institutional features, more or less 
assuring that quotation would not be able to lapse into a historicity once more. I 
do not mean to imply, of course, that quotation has now become the exclusive 
prerogative of science, historicist scholarship, and humanist essays. The use of this 
device still flourishes in the law courts, where it is invoked by the defense no less 
than the prosecutor, as well as in many other kinds of public situations. 
I can give no more than this brief account of quotational praxis, for I am con­
cerned here not with the history of quotation, but with its theory. My goal is to 
provide a definition that will accommodate the conventional ideas of yesterday and 
today, and also the formulations set forth by various dictionaries or encyclopedias. 
Towards a Definition of Quotationol Praxis 
Let me start with the assertion that quotation is the integral reprodudion of a 
written or spoken text of a certain length, or of a certain set of images, sounds, 
or movements, or of a combination of such materials, in a way which allows what 
is reproduced to provide a coherent part of a new whole and yet remain readily 
detachable from the new whole. Here is a definition which deliberately is left 
"open" so as not to exclude the possibility of quotation from such nondiscursive 
"languages" as are used in music or painting (a possibility which needs further 
examination). 
The decisive traits of a quotation are its literalness and its discrete character in 
the context where it is inserted. By "literalness" I mean accuracy or fidelity. By 
"discrete character" I mean the setting off of the quote by quotation marks, either 
actually or implicitly. A semantic element, the quotation is meant to achieve a par­
ticular function in a new, "higher semantic structure" which is operatively extra­
neous to it. The quotation is a subentity which the new, larger whole cannot com­
pletely absorb. The quotation is not so much distinct as it is distinguishable, not 
so much separate as it is separable. Examining the quotation, we can surmise the 

343 
Towards o Definition 
of Q.iotational Praxis 
relation between the original from which it derives and the work that has borrowed 
it, and I want to propose a typology of quotations based on the functions the quota­
tions perform while out on loon to the higher semantic structures. 
To derive this typology, I must first review the situations which give rise to a 
literal incorporation of an original referent. These can superficially be summed up 
in the phrase "a maintenance of cultural continuity." It is clear from our historical 
overview how strictly connected quotation is with a sense of tradition. The con­
stancy of its occurrence confirms an irrepressible need and desire to keep in touch 
with the prior attainments and values of the species. Glancing at the introductions 
to The Oxford Dictionary of Quotations, 3rd ed. (1 956) or the Encyclopedie des 
citations (Paris, 1 959), we are not astonished to read the editors' assertions that 
the works are compiled to meet the requirements of persons with an appreciation 
of the history of the human spirit. I should also note that the questions posed over 
and over by history, and not simply the answers supplied, make important claims 
on our attention. However, whether we go to the tradition for its evidence with 
regard to problems or its assertion of solutions, we can see that in our age of revo­
lutions the consultation of the past has taken on renewed urgency; the availability 
of historicism has by no means made history out-of-date. 
In other words, quotation does not simply equate with antiquarianism, although 
it is often enough used to dredge up the past uncritically and keep it comfortably 
and nostalgically at hand. The vitality of quotational praxis is, however, seen more 
in the confrontation with, than in the literal preservation of the perennial issues 
and the attempts at solutions. This occurs whenever a new tradition crystallizes 
to replace those which had previously exercised hegemony. Such abrupt trans­
valuations of value, such sharp breaks with what had recently seemed the best 
available tradition, seem implacably to erupt as part of evolutionary cultural devel­
opment. Thus, quotation can give accent to the dilemma of every age, to the eternal 
tensions between innovation and a preservation of the past. 
How is this tension manifest? Texts from the displaced tradition may be cited 
in scientific or philosophical inquiries with the aim of systematically refuting or 
qualifying their claims; or, the writers in the new tradition may scan sympathet­
ically their own "classic" forebears with the goal of sanctioning a particular future 
line of interpretation. From this latter operation (which is itself interpretive) a re­
patterning of the still emergent "I iving" body of texts, questions, and propositions 
appears. I must also here mention the malicious use of quotations from either the 
"dead" traditions or from competing tendencies within one's own tradition; how-

344 
Quotation in Art 
ever, where the goal of disparagement replaces analytical intent, the quotational 
praxis is transformed into worse than antiquarian musing: it becomes a blow 
against o meaningful past. 
The creation of o positive connection with the past is certainly not the job of 
quotation alone. This point may seem obvious; yet we should take core to see how 
the study of quotation leads us by an immediate route into the heart of the dialec­
tical problems of cultural processes. We have in the quotation not only an (inter­
changeable) semantic element, but also a semiotic element. The semiotic material 
is inherently part of both synchronic and diachronic structures. When the diachronic 
structure is recalled in thought, a past which can be almost infinitely repatterned 
is available. Quotation, however, has the trait of presenting this semiotic material 
in a synchronic present-day structure which lends to it a certain context, which 
we may analyze for the relationship which is thus created between the quote­
inclusive structure and those who respond to it. In this way the actual functional 
application of quotation is connected with the functional relationship to the past. 
In what follows, I shall primarily consider the synchronic, contemporary use of 
quotes. Accordingly, I may seem to elaborate the functions without concern for the 
original context of what is quoted, and with the assumption that the semiotic ele­
ments ore a historical constants. This is, of course, not the case, and we need not 
overlook, either, that the contemporary use of the quoted semiotic element may 
dovetail with the original, diachronic integrity of meaning. In any case, the past 
will become wholly unintelligible if we do not regard it ultimately as o sociocul­
tural process productive of synchronic elements to which we can, attendant upon 
specifiable difficulties, relate. 
A Typology of Quotational Functions 
I have noted that the earliest major function of quotation, which obviously con­
tinues to this day, is the assertion of legitimate authority. In this sense of a solicita­
tion of trust and deference, quotation often serves os a means both to ovoid and 
to forestall independent thought. The quoter does not have to discover his own 
opinion; nor need he provide reasons to back up his use of quotation. This function 
ploys a chief role in periods when one philosophical system is clearly dominant, 
particularly if powerful institutions lend it official support. 
A few examples will help to make this point dear: medieval Church officers cited 
either the Bible or their predecessors in office in order to acquire the authority of 
that institutional and ideological tradition; the early Renaissance humanists who 

345 
A Typology 
of Quototional Functions 
retrieved the thought of Plato and Aristotle held the views of those philosophers 
to be self-evident; the writers who remained in favor through the Soviet "cult of 
personality" became adept at employing quotations from Stalin, together with a 
wholly conventionalized commentary, as a quasi-philosophy. Quotation can thus 
feed, and feed on, an unquestioned authority, although it will display the intel­
lectual torpor of the writer and reader alike. The ritual, the canon, are paramount; 
and any challenge to the ascendant tradition is considered at least as a social 
malfunction, and probably as a heresy or sin. The selection and manner of presen­
tation of the quᢪtes betrays this function -an interesting geneticofunctional aspect 
that will be explored later- but it is evident that one's favored notion of authority 
will curtail the field from which the quotations may be token, and the possibilities 
of applying them will be determined mostly by current social imperatives, as inter­
preted by the legates of the authority. 
From these remarks, it might seem that quotation which simply promulgates a 
legitimate authority must be an anachronistic and pernicious phenomenon. How­
ever, this device is, in fact, appropriate to some kinds of discourse, particularly 
where the context is acknowledged as doctrinal or institutional: a sermon or an 
ethical homily; a legal brief, where a similar case was decided in another court 
with on inescapable application; or a presentation of a philosophical, sociopoliti­
cal, or other system with a long-preserved structure (i.e., a doctrine whose scope, 
thematic hierarchy, and interpretation have been effectively settled). These are 
cases where it would be quite illogical to anticipate any other sort of quotation but 
quotation from authority; the cause of discourse within the perimeters is best served 
by argument from the agreed-upon postulates. 
Nonetheless, we are all well aware that the authority of such quotation has 
been undermined by the scientific and technological advances of our century. The 
trusting attitude survives chiefly in cases where the whole sociocultural situation 
fosters a respect for tradition as the guide to both conduct and thought. Fascinat­
ing, in our day and age, is the idea of studying the function of quotation in an 
Asian or African culture where nationalism has stirred both a socialist conscious­
ness and religious fanaticism. We might find a combination of, soy, a "personality 
cult" socialism and ritualistic Islam. The character of these two authority-systems 
would, on the whole, be opposed to one another; it seems unlikely that the absolute 
role of either one could be maintained, no matter how the quotes might be deftly · 
chosen and interwoven. 
A second function of quoting is to provide erudition. This function appears to 

346 
Quotation in Art 
be in the strictest accord with my definition. Here, someone makes extracts from a 
particular context so as to communicate its salient aspects. The knowledge-spread­
ing quote may appear in the body of a new structure or in a note or addendum. 
If in the body, the idea generally is to let the original statement "speak for itself"; 
the quote is regarded as firm ground on which to erect the new structure of inter­
pretation. If in a note, the implication is that more may be achieved by reformulat­
ing the views from the past while maintaining the coherence of the new statement. 
The goal of erudition is to quote aptly and concisely. Aptness (or relevance) is a 
scholarly standard, while conciseness, is as much an aesthetic as a scholarly stan­
dard. 
In part, the aptness of a quotation is dependent on the context in which it ap­
pears. Unless one is simply piecing together "a presentation" of the original au­
thor's views, one will choose quotes with an eye to the expositional requirements 
of the argument underway. 
This brings me to a third function which is, however, closely related to the func­
tion of providing erudition. Again, a certain number of faithfully presented, apt, 
and concise quotations are used; but, whereas quotations may well be sufficient 
in themselves for pulling together a topic in an erudite monograph, the writer here 
is concerned chiefly with presenting an original argument, and introduces the quo­
tations as a restrained, tactical element in a much larger, comprehensive strategy. 
This strategy might use quotations as bridges between positions, as springboards 
to speculation, or as evidence in deciding whether or not to proceed in freshly 
formulating a commonplace question or in rejecting an apparently settled answer. 
Although not everyone might agree that the praxis here is categorically different, 
I shall demarcate more or less dense quotation with an erudite function from eru­
dite quotation inside a comprehensive strategy of original argument. Accordingly, 
to the authoritative and erudite functions of quotation I add this function which 
stimulates and amplifies an exposition. 
Reasonably, we expect to find that the functions may overlap or even coincide. 
Where the erudite and stimulative-amplificatory functions are mingled, we get a 
result worthy of separate mention. Here, quotations are intended at once to present 
a tradition and to interpret it. A Polish anthology of Existential Philosophy ( 1 965), 
for example, excerpted its represented figures extensively, and in a way which 
insisted on serious differences with them; the specific published texts provided 
both a useful "defense" and a presentation of the ideology. Within the anthology, 
a similar effect was evident in the personal readings of Kierkegaard given by such 

347 
A Typology 
of Quotational Functions 
leading existentialists as Shestov, Sartre, and Camus, each of which tended to 
reinforce the author's own view (which, in fact, had sprung from idiosyncratic ante­
cedents). Another instance of this dual functionality of quotation, for another tra­
dition, is Adam Schaff's Marxism and the Individual ( 1 965) wherein the author si­
multaneously expounds Marx and directs our attention to selected themes. 
Indeed, it is evident that, at various stages of the development of marxist doc­
trine, different aspects of the basic writings have gained attention. This fluctuation 
of preferences affects every body of classic texts. Succeeding periods revoluate the 
heritage. The legacy is restructured, priorities ore reshuffled, and a somewhat al­
tered general sense of the classical tradition emerges. This treatment gives the 
quotations or readings a double significance inasmuch as the heritage is both 
preserved and breached: which is only to say, finally, that aspects of a tradition 
that hove been neglected or forgotten may be recovered. Strict exegesis is always 
claimed although, in fact, the interpretive activity is inherent. An actualization of 
the old texts thus corroborates the vigor of the theory while modifying its original 
total meaning. 
The place of quotation in this ongoing process of revaluation will always be 
equivocal. On the one hand, it brings forth the received philosophical heritage. 
On the other hand and especially, the quotation functions in a new totality which 
is bound to modify what is preserved. In aesthetics, a case of dual functionality 
is seen in the way both "formalists" and "nonformolists" often appeal to the some 
quote in their protracted quarrel; they will both toke any text employing the terms 
"form" and "content" and try to explicate the priorities and the interrelations in 
their own terms, but, as time goes on, each side will increasingly use the consulted 
text chiefly to stimulate the efficacy of its own interpretations and to amplify their 
centrality, while the old, classical text, however reinvigorated, will inevitably slip 
away from the center of the discussion. Another instance of this process is the 
growing "structuralizotion" of Marx's aesthetic thought. The customary texts from 
Marx and Engels ore cited, while interpretation turns increasingly towards the 
specific structure of the work of art as the key problem of art. This modification 
may be seen in Lukeics' Die Eigenart des Aesthetischen (1 963), in the writings of 
Ernst Fischer, and in my own work. When such modifications ore adequately con­
ducted, the pertinent quotations from Marx will be treated as decisive in the prob­
lems of the interpretation. Arbitrariness and fudging may creep into interpreta­
tion -but they need not, and should not. 
To restructure a theoretical heritage, one must not only be concerned with cur-

348 
Quotation in Art 
rent needs and trends in the theoretical domain; one must also establish a firm grip 
on the dynamic potential of the tradition, whether this is one side of it or the whole 
of it. The implicit assumptions and aims of the founder of the tradition - where 
determinable-should explicitly be considered. In brief, one should not treat mate­
rial from the founder's basement or lumber-room or attic as though it belonged in 
the parlor. There is no scientific rationale for inflating or skewing the significance 
of a theoretical heritage. 
Con strictly scientific inquiry benefit from the dual functionality of quotation? 
It con indeed, and, although there is less precedent for the stimulotive-amplificotory 
interpretation of such texts, it should clearly be seen that interpretation cannot 
be entirely dispensed with. Consider David Bohm's Causality and Chance in Mod­
ern Physics (London, 1 957), wherein the author attaches his individual interpreta­
tion to the findings of the Copenhogon school, which he juxtaposes with the La­
place theory. Bohm includes no quotations in the body of his text. Either they appear 
in footnotes, or else Bohm simply paraphrases the views of the scientists involved. 
A similar interpretive account of modern scientific theory is Hermann Weyl's Sym­
metry (Princeton, 1 952); Weyl, however, does not dispense with main-text quota­
tions. 
Another function of quotation is to act as on ornament. This application is par­
ticularly common in public speaking or in the occasional essay. Quoting decora­
tively differs markedly from quoting with on erudite aim. One does the lotter to 
render the original author's communication faithfully, prior to endorsing and devel­
oping it further or perhaps rebutting it; ol"!e does the former as a mere intellectual 
conceit, often with no pretense of concise application or coherence. In ornamental 
contexts, the handling of quotes is similar to their handling in an interpretive con­
text, but scientific criteria of selection and usage ore out of place here. The quo­
tation may be token wholly out of context, or it may be in context but entirely 
marginal to the quoted writer's basic view. 
In considering this function we ore brought up abruptly against the semiotic 
side of quotation and its dualistic semantic character: it performs literally with re­
spect to its parent structure and subserviently with respect to its host context, in 
greater or lesser degree. The literal quality and oil that that semantically implies 
is evident in all of the functions I have considered. The reception within the host 
structure, however, varies with the function. Erudition handles quotes in a de­
tached way; ornamentation seems wholly to absorb the quotation into the new 
setting. Authoritative quoting sets its material out in on unchallengoble fashion; 

349 
A Typology 
of Qiototional Functions 
but the stimulative-amplificatory approach seems to want to spur new intellectual 
constructions by its presentations. 
In ornamentation, the favored form of quotation is the epigram, and its handling 
is symptomatic. Whereas in the case of authoritative quotation the authority is the 
decisive element, here the accuracy and the attribution of the quote are almost 
unimportant; what will matter for the listener or reader are certain associations 
evoked by the passage. Thus, the epigram may be set apart typographically, but 
for all practical purposes it might be original to the host text, since it expresses 
not the thought of the quoted writer but an idea that will be expounded in the host 
text. Quotation might be termed "aesthetic" where it is ornamental in function, 
for the writer is so intent on the effect of his product that he dissolves or blurs the 
demarcation between his original work and his borrowings. Here, too, however, 
we must not neglect the dualistic functioning where it occurs; for instance, some 
masterly philosophical, scholarly, and "aesthetic" essays will not overlook the 
stimulative-amplificatory function. 
Undoubtedly, I have not exhausted the possible functions of quotation. I would 
contend, however, that the four functions I have taken up are the chief ones, and 
I shall now proceed towards some conclusions in the matter of quotation in works 
of art. 
The Possible Modes of Quotation in Art 
What would be the equivalent in a work of art of quotation with an authoritative 
function? Some might be inclined to locate it in any element or motif which con­
stantly recurs. However, this would be a mistaken conclusion; any faint resem­
blances between the two phenomena are canceled by the fundamental differences. 
Some persistent motifs are canonical traits peculiar to and ubiquitous in a given 
culture or period (L᢫vi-Strauss links the persistent motif with static civilizations); 
while the general question of recurrent motifs can best be considered in the per­
spective of Jungian archetypes or E. R. Curtius' notion of topoi. Although there 
are important differences between archetypes and topoi, they are similar to the 
extent that both afford compositional or conceptual patterns which cannot on any 
account be regarded as extraneous or interpolated into the given artistic structure; 
and, stereotypical though it may be, the motif, much like the archetype or topos, 
comprises, in whole or in part, the skeletal matter of a work of art and not a "for­
eign element." Our task in this regard is· simply to see to what extent the stereo­
type incorporates some individual modification or is a straight replica. 

350 
Q.iotation in Art 
Jung maintained that archetypes result from congenital psychological disposi­
tions evinced in the history of culture and invariable through the differing historical 
contexts. Jung's theory of the "collective unconscious" (a notion which, by the way, 
seems unverifiable) led him to regard creative energy as the basic manifestation 
of the libido (a category here defined differently and more broadly than in the work 
of Freud); the artist-seer brings to light the collective unconscious where the artist­
psychologist will only obscure its basic features. Maud Bodkin's classic study 
Archetypal Patterns in Poetry (1 934) argues that the visionary will distill the under­
lying archetypes in the greatest works of art: resurrection ("The Ancient Mariner"), 
the opposition of heaven and hell (Paradise Lost, "Kubic Khan"), the great mother 
(from Homer, Dante, and Goethe to D. H. Lawrence), saint and satan (Shakespeare 
and Shelley to T. S. Eliot), a nd the like. 
This interpretive approach is not confined to literary works. Erich Neumann's 
Kunst und schopferisches Unbewusstes ( 1 954) looks at do Vinci and Chagall in 
this way, analyzing how each painter employs the archetype of the great mother; 
Herbert Read in "The Dynamics of Art" (Eranos Jahrbuch, 1 952) finds this same 
symbolism in the sculpture of Henry Moore, and he also finds the archetype of a 
childlike freshness and spontaneity in Picasso's Minotouromachia. 
Just from these few examples it must be evident that archetype and quotation 
are dissimilar. The only point they hove in common is the persistence with which 
a given passage may recur. The archetype is, however, conceived as more a bio­
logically than a culturally rooted phenomenon, while quotation is purely cultural. 
The archetype permeates the whole of a signifying structure and cannot be de­
tached from it; the nature of a quotation is that it is separable. While the quota­
tion may turn up in many different works, it is always as a loan, defined by its ex­
traneity; the archetype is instead antinomical, an utterly private experience of the 
creator employing it, although, at the same time, it partakes of the universal. 
Topoi are conceived of as cultural phenomena, but this distinction from the 
archetype does not overcome the predominant dissimilarity of the topos and the 
quotation. Curtius regarded topoi as being beyond the merely recurrent rhetorical 
figurations that could ultimately be regarded as a kind of poraquotation. Rather, 
the topoi ore certain modalities of mind and expression that are embodied in a 
particular constructive pattern. For example, in his analysis of European Literature 
and the Latin Middle Ages..( 1 948), Curtius showed how the themes of sapientia 
and fortitudo in the construction of the hero were at first opposed, and were only 
later merged. No more than an archetype is the topos a quotation, for it is the con-

351 
The Possible Modes 
of Quotation in Art 
trolling principle of any artistic or nonartistic structure in which it appears. It cannot 
be extraneous. The topos carries echoes of other manifestations of that constructive 
bent which it shares (and here is where it recalls quotation), but always in modi­
fied form. Two examples of the transmutations of topoi- furor divinus and altera 
theo/ogia -are explored by Otto Pogeller in "Theory of Poetry and Investigation 
of the Topos," Jahrbuch fur Aesthetik und allgemeine Kunstwissenschaft, 1 960. 
The topos then is operative within the limits of certain cultural ambits, which are 
demarcated by adjacent and analogous signifying structures. Curtius speaks of 
Sinneinheit; this spiritual kinship is said to promote the same or similar artistic 
models. Undoubtedly, the topos thus understood makes one think of Erwin Panof­
sky's patterns of iconography or iconology or simply of conventions in art, con­
tinuously passed down and transmuted. Quotation can have a part in such signi­
fying cultural wholes, but its part is of a distinct order: its participation is condi­
tional and can be withdrawn, most often without major harm. 
Of particular interest to my discussion is the mutability of topoi without the loss 
of their conceptual identity. In view of this process I can, for instance, consider 
how motifs are taken over from the past and incorporated into new wholes. (This 
way of considering motifs shows them being handled in a way parallel to quota­
tion.) Yet what is meant by the mutability of the topor? In what manner is a con­
crete motif borrowed and assimilated? Briefly, in a new historical and cultural 
context the topos (the "motif") produces a changed artistic structure, that is, it 
does not slip into a new whole, but, rather, creates that whole. It is not the woven 
but the weaver. 
At once we see how this process of the topos/motif differs from that of quota­
tion. However, perhaps I wrongly use the case of the authoritative quotation, when 
I might better compare the historical continuity of the topos with the stimulative­
amplificatory function of quotation? This shift may seem reasonable, but the anal­
ogy still isn't convincing. Quotation in all its functions remains a literal reproduc­
tion, a separable microworld in the new context, whatever ramifications are at­
tached to it. The ornamental quotation might seem an exception, placed as the 
epigraph to an essay expounding at length on its theme, for instance; but even 
here its literalness and autarchic fragmentary quality preclude us from treating 
the quote as we would a topos. The latter, after all, is the backbone of a new whole; 
the former, as epigraph, scarcely offers more than the label of a topos. 
Since I dismiss the possibility of parallelism between quotation and archetype, 
and also between quotation and topos, should I conclude that quotation has no 

352 
Quotation in Art 
place in art? Surely not, and the evidence proves otherwise. I now turn to a dis­
cussion of the varieties known to appear in works of art. 
Some works contain a kind of fugitive and nonprepossessing motif which makes 
us doubt whether it rates mention as a quotation. Probably it does not- for these 
glimmers of a microcoherence are so fully absorbed by the new whole that they 
have to be pried out; whereas, in contrast, a quotation draws attention at first 
glance. I shall return to this case later. 
I should ask whether quotation ever appears in literature not merely in its orna­
mental or its stimulative functions, but also in its erudite function. This is a question 
to which I should like to give extended attention. Its importance comes from the 
fact that precisely the extreme instances cogently demonstrate the presence or 
absence of the erudite quotation in works of art. 
Consider The Waste Land: literary allusions play a crucial role, and Eliot even 
gives notes to indicate their sources. More than being quotations in a strict sense 
these are basically paraquotations, they are nonemphasized phrases which are 
struts or spurs to the poet's own ideas and imagery. Their presence-veiled 
though it is- is palpable in the style and the symbolism of the poem. The only 
conventional, literal quotations are demarcated with the standard inverted com ­
mas; these demand of the reader a considerable literary background, for Eliot 
draws in bits of Shakespeare, Marvell, Baudelaire, Dante, Milton, Verlaine, the 
Bible, and Saint Augustine. 
The Waste Land uses quotation in every function I have delineated. Addition­
ally, it should not be forgotten that the poem was written fundamentally as the 
expression of an artistic philosophy, and Eliot explicitly refers readers in his notes 
to the two learned works inspiring it, namely, Jesse L. Weston's From Ritual to 
Romance and James Frazer's Golden Bough. The intention of the poet is here ex­
ceptionally binding on us, for it is so strongly impressed on the structure as to guide 
the reception of the poem unequivocally. Quotations are used profusely because 
Eliot regarded himself as both artist-scholar and artist-prophet and he wanted 
the reader to accept this self-estimate. (We need not be concerned with the self­
irony he later displayed in his commentary to the Waste Land in The Frontiers of 
Criticism [ 1 957).) The prophetic tinge was catastrophic at the time the poem was 
written, while the erudite bent was the natural extension of his philosophical and 
linguistic investigations. 
Eliot's aesthetic aimed at making poetry more vernacular, while he also wanted 
to eliminate the difference between "verse" and the philosophical essay. This pur-

353 
The Possible Modes 
of Quotation in Art 
pose was reflected in his theory of "objective correlatives" (equivalents found in 
diction and imagery for emotional tensions). Eliot provides an instance where per­
sonal motivations- but also the cultural and historical situation (this was the time 
of dodo, which denied both the old definitions of art a nd art in general) -led as a 
meaningful poetic device, to the embrace of both the simply erudite quotation, 
and the erudite-stimulative quotation. 
Should Eliot be regarded as an exception? In my view, yes, he should be seen as 
rather exceptional; but this does not mean that quotations don't turn up elsewhere. 
A somewhat parallel Polish case is the collection of satirical poems by Todeusz 
Boy-Zelenski coiled Bon Mots ( 1 905-30). One, "Expiration," has an epigraph token 
from Ecclesiastes which is also paraphrased in the poem itself. Another, "I Think 
No One Will Contradict Me," incorporates Lasciate ogni speranza the well-known 
togline from Donte. While in both coses the quotation's function is primarily orna­
mental, in the former poem there is a stimulative plus-factor, from which the epi­
graph in no way detracts, while in the latter the tag line performs an omplificatory 
function for the main theme of the poem. The role of the quotes is, however, mar­
ginal in Boy. In other works he employed quotes or paraphrases so as to attack 
the conservative catch phrases endemic in the fields of politics, manners, c;md liter­
ature. These he parodied - not by deformation but by ironic commentary. 
In prose the varieties of quotation appear in analogous contexts. Its erudite 
function is discovered where the writer has philosophical or learned intentions. 
Thus, in the novel lnsatiety (1 929) by the Polish philosopher and dramatist Stanis­
law lgnocy Witkiewicz, we see quotations from Husserl, Beethoven, Tadeusz, Micin­
ski, Ernst, Mach, and others. Some of these, characteristically, are provided in the 
apparatus which the author supplied for his own text. Beyond these, it is easy to 
find in the "metaphysical" conversations among his heroes Genezyp and Tengier, 
Prince Bazyly and Benz, paraphrases of the author's own-views, elsewhere set 
out in his theoretical writings. The quotes in Witkiewicz are usually extremely 
truncated and sometimes not literal. Thus, at times their function is but quosi­
erudite, despite the aim of the author (or of his characters) for a literal confronta­
tion of quotes, a bottle of ideologies presented modo philosophico. 
We find in Aldous Huxley's Point Counter Point quotations from Claude Bernard 
and Shakespeare, Walt Whitman and Adam Smith, Baudelaire and zoology text­
books. This is but port of the erudition deployed through the novel, often in para­
phrase or paraquotation. Each of the fictional characters represents a specific philos­
ophy, and critics have been at pains to locate the real-life originals on whom they 

354 
Quotation in Art 
are modeled. Point Counter Point is an intellectual novel peopled by intellectuals; 
it expounds a pluralist philosophy of many equivalent, compatible truths. It is feas­
ible to regard the quotations here as imploded elements of the created whole; none­
theless, they preserve their discrete aspect. Their function is in some contexts (as 
in the statements of Philip Quarles) erudite; and in others stimulative-amplificatory. 
Quotation is here as refractive as in an essay or a scholarly but interpretive exege­
sis. The fact that it lends itself to two semantic structures - its own original, and 
the host one -affords an especially fascinating character in this case. 
These quotations have a dual character for yet another reason. They represent 
the attitude of the author but at the same time pertain to the character uttering 
them. As attributes of the characters, they weave into the structure of Point Counter 
Point, augmenting and sharpening its system of meanings. Simultaneously, they 
exude the climate of the novel (only the character Ram pion resists; all the other 
characters are so laden with culture that they are unable or unwilling to forego the 
compulsion of tradition and intellect), and they fortify our feeling that Huxley is an 
erudite author interested mainly in people's minds. This impression is even more 
strongly made by the later novel Eyeless in Gaza wherein Anthony Beavis' diary 
is replete with quotations of an encyclopedic range. 
I think I may make the fairly safe generalization from the four preceding exam­
ples that quotation most frequently appears in literary works when the writer has 
philosophical or learned ambitions and seeks-either in fiction alone, or in con­
junction with discursive undertakings - to put across an intellectual perspective. 
Another motive for quotation's appearance may be porody-that is, the wish to 
discredit an idea or cliche -or an aesthetic effect, paradoxically furthered in the 
form of an apparently erudite ornament. In such cases quotation serves a function 
as either a trigger for some association, or a startlingly incongruous interpolation 
whether of (foreign) language or of style. Either mode is quite uncommon in liter­
ature, where it must be reckoned a peripheral phenomenon. As prose and poetry 
come closer to the essay (i.e., as they grow more intellectual) the more do we find 
erudite quotations used also in the aesthetic quasi-erudite function. 
We thus see that literature -the art closest to science and philosophy-affords 
relatively small opportunity to quotation; how much latitude can it then have in the 
other arts? We may quickly decide that its place is even more negligible, for even 
the most consummate and well-rounded experts will have to rack their brains to 
find quotation in painting, theater, or film as it appears in writing. If the quotes 
must be painfully sought for, then they are rare. Yet rarity is not of itself proof of 

355 
The Possible Modes 
of Quotation in Art 
insignificance. On the contrary, where the infrequent phenomenon occurs we may 
be obliged to give it special importance. However, in the arts this is not the case; 
quotation not only is rare, it is also-the crucial point- of little significance from 
the artistic standpoint. Its cultural import may, however, in this field too loom 
large. 
A few examples may bring these general observations down to earth. As for 
theater, we need not seek the quotation in the actual text of the play, where it 
would be simply a variant of the literary quote. A genuinely theatrical quotation 
would inhere in a certain stage effect. Inasmuch as the knowledge of theatrical 
"scores" remains embryonic it is difficult to say whether a given production bor­
rows from another and interpolates the citation into the new whole on the basis 
of at least relative discreteness. There is a certain improbability in the thought 
that it would be done in this way. Yet we do know that Piscator, for one, made use 
of such effects as captions or film sequences anticipating the action onstage. I 
believe this can be treated as paraquotation with a stimulative-amplificatory func­
tion. I use the term "paraquotation" because Piscator meant these interpolations 
to be among the meaningful elements of the pottern of his staging. 
An analogous use of paraquotations can be found in Robert Aldrich's film What 
Ever Happened to Baby Jane? (1 962) where excerpts from old Bette Davis and 
Joan Crawford movies provide an organic element of the artistic structure, yet 
may be isolated from this whole as literal copies taken from an earlier work. A 
different view should be taken of the use of newsreel clips in a film like Orson 
Welles' Citizen Kane (1 941 ), where they may be regarded as straight quotation. 
In contrast, the singing of a popular song in a fil m - such as "Red Poppies of Monte 
Cassino" in Andrzej Wajda's Ashes and Diamonds ( 1 958) - does not qualify as 
quotation in any way. Film, where it hopes to achieve maximum authenticity, must 
take its material from life. "Quotation" for cinema means operatively to photo­
graph real people, real buildings, a real singer in a particular cafe where the cam­
era is introduced, etc. "Red Poppies" is an element of the immediate situation, not 
a small work embedded in a larger one. (In contrast, Piscator's interpolations of 
film into stage productions are a relatively autonomous operation.) The song in 
Wajda's film carries the expressive values of the particular scene. There are also 
examples of pseudoquotations in film. In Jacques Doniol-Valcroze's Denunciation 
(1 962) the hero, a film-studio executive, watches a movie which is reminiscent of 
the work of Robbe-Grillet. It is not, however, a genuine excerpt, although the pseu­
doquotation plays a key role in the script of the fil m. 

356 
Quotation in Art 
How about the so-called fine arts? It is easiest to locate a quotation in a cartoon, 
poster, or book illustration where a verbal text taken over from an original can 
serve as a focus. The more imaginative artists who look for loans have, however, 
dispensed with the mere borrowing of crutches. Easy to discern, too, is the quote 
in the medieval tapestry, print, or mural. with its appended text- but here the quo­
tation is often scriptural, and this element of religious authority contrasts with 
the usually stimulative caste of the quotation in modern graphic arts. 
A remarkable case of paraquotation is the reproduction of a Japanese print in 
Manet's famous portrait of Emile Zola of 1 867. Zola, depicted in his study, was 
championing the artists who had been refused by the then-official academic art. 
Zola had first assumed this role a year earlier by disputing with Courbet and Proud­
hon and defending the view that art depended primarily on the temperament or 
the originality of the artist. Japonaiserie was not only in vogue, it was a model 
invoked by these "refused" artists as exemplary for their argument; moreover, it 
provided an essential component of modern, sophisticated interior decoration. 
Zola stumped for Japonaiserie as fervently as had Baudelaire and the Goncourts 
before him. Thus, Manet was using a quotation-symbol. It had a dual function, 
stimulative-amplificatory and ornamental. Analogous examples are Van Gogh's 
Father Tanguy (1 887) and Gauguin's Still Life with Japanese Print (1 889). 
I do not feel, though, that the papiers col/es of Braque or Picasso can be treated 
as paraquotations. Nor can the "shocking" juxtapositions of bits and pieces of 
material in the dadaist works, or the photographic collages inspired by dada, be 
so treated. The point of the papiers col/es and especially the collages of Max Ernst 
was precisely that they had to pierce the established reality with an imaginative 
new synthesis. The creative moment was the whole point. Synthetic cubists fastened 
onto everyday objects in order to destroy their literalness and their legibility. The 
sa me can be said of the dadaists. Duchamp's ready-modes didn't quote; they pro­
vocatively evoked ordinary rather than aesthetic responses. Man Ray, Heartfield, 
and Hausmann brought together fragments of reality not as meaningful structures 
but as examples of an overarching chaos, demonstrating that all principles-artistic 
and otherwise-were moribund. The quotation as a discrete signifying entity here 
had no function whatsoever. 
In music, examples of quotation can doubtlessly be found. But, if I may rely on 
expert opinion, it seems that such examples are rather exceptional. Instances in 
the stimulative-omplificatory category are Karlheinz Stockhausen's Hymnen, which 

357 
The Possible Modes 
of Quotation in Art 
cites fragments of national anthems, or Charles Ives 's compositions, which incor­
porate numerous snatches from the popular music of the day in a wondrous inter­
play of public and individual sensibility. Rarity seems, however, the rule, especially 
since we must disqualify such contenders for the description as fantasies or sets 
of variations on a given theme or, indeed, parodies of a theme, since what occurs 
in these cases is a treatment or transmutation of previous musical data (elements 
or combinations of elements, in other words, substructures), so that the relationship 
between the new work and the old work is best comprehended through the notion 
of the topos. 
Architecture seems to be the art least amenable to quotation. It would be diffi­
cult to regard as quotation the mere inclusion of a fragment of old city walls or of 
an ancient edifice in a new construction -for after all, if quotation were to be de­
fined as simply placing anything older in a newer setting, the idea would be so gro­
tesquely expanded as to lose all point. Nor should we expect to see quotation in 
the particular details of architecture; if these do provide elements or patterns remi­
niscent of older buildings, we shall find that we must regard them as conventional 
devices on the order of topoi or of motifs peculiar to a given ethnic-cultural prove­
nance, or else as negligible features transformed in the context of the new whole. 
Only in special -and, no doubt, extravagant -cases do we find genuine interpo­
lations or insertions in modern architecture. For example, many modern Roman 
villas along the Appian Way contain quotations in the form of the scraps of col­
umns, capitals, or bas-reliefs cemented into the front of the house. A less effulgent 
but equally pertinent example is a Renaissance house in Aries which has Roman 
foundations and a Romanesque sculpture above the doorway. A similar example 
can be seen in Poland in the Goluchowski Castle. 
Concl usions 
I have not argued here that quotation has never been formidable in art and never 
will be. I say only that: 
1 .  strictly defined, it occurs much more frequently in literature than in the other arts; 
2. in literature it can be found performing the various functions I have listed, and 
its likelihood is the greater the more a literary work borders on scholarship, 
philosophy, or journalism; 
3. in the other arts it chiefly performs a stimulative-amplificatory or an ornamental 
function, which is why it so easily goes over into a paraquotation; 

356 
Quotation in Art 
4. architecture has provided almost no cases of quotation; and 
5. its fittest function in the realm of art is correlated to the fullest absorption of 
an interpolated substructure into the total structure of a work. 
Quotation in this sense, far from clearly contrasting with the whole, contributes 
to cohering it. Its own integral sense becomes as if metaphorized, or it comes to 
form one of the coordinates of a multivalent semantic structure. Here I must again 
stress what was said in point (3) above, that in such contexts the status of quota­
tion per se is highly uncertain. Accordingly, a final proposition may be advanced, 
that 
6. in both literature and art, the significance of quotation does not appear to be 
great. 
I readily concede that these contentions, and particularly the last, require more 
confirmation -although my view seems to be bolstered by the results and the pet 
uncompleted project of the literary and cultural critic Walter Benjamin. An un­
ceasing collector of quotes, Benjamin dreamt of making a book that would have 
nothing but quotations, and would yet, due to an interpretative patterning of the 
sections and the whole, be an original study. This montage composition (its inspira­
tion was dado-surrealist) would surely have bled the old literal integrity and have · 
overwhelmed the discreteness with transfusions of a posteriori meaning. If this 
is the transformation that citations encounter in high-calibre criticism, what must 
happen in art? 
I do not argue that the constituent traits of art exclude the functional role of 
quotation. However, I am suggesting that the function of art -apart from the defi­
nition of art in 1 900, 1 920, or today- pursues an individualizing and integrative 
creational trajectory; the artist generally wishes to transmit the cultural tradition 
germane to himself and in his own way. The traits of quotations seem at odds 
with the artistic process in this view. The artist modifies as he borrows, he is in­
tent on not duplicating what has been, he will submerge his erudition (if he has 
any) in his new material and new ideas and sensibility. Even if the modification 
does not come off, the artist is still not quoting. He is either drawing on arche­
types or is imprisoned in a canon. He is at worst an imitator- but even this is not 
tantamount to a preference for quotations. Rather, the entire imitated work might 
be termed a plagiarism, an entirely different mode of loan-object. 
In sum, art may have recourse to quotation for individual or historicocultural 
reasons which are exceptional. It is employed by the scholar-artist or the artist 

359 
Conclusions 
with a thesis, for whom art is one among other media for the expression of philo­
sophical messages. Quotations accumulate in art when the boundaries between it 
and other forms of social consciousness become vague. This may happen in an era 
of sociopolitical revolution or of domination by an institution such as the Church, 
in a time of convulsive aesthetic crisis. 
Yet we may not say that the lengthening, darkening shadow of a cherished tradi­
tion is what necessarily perpetuates quotations in art, for even in this case art 
resists the imposition of quotations - partly just because philosophy, scholarship, 
and all traditional institutions and their attendant ideologies submit to art's incur­
sions. 
Ideologies necessarily invoke their legitimacy with quotations; they incessantly 
flaunt their past. Without this an ideology would seem insubstantial. Science and 
philosophy refer to earlier achievements because their current achievements owe 
very much to previous breakthroughs, and these disciplines are understood at 
every turn through their continuity, even where some new concept revolutionizes 
thinking. In such matters, quotation is indispensable. It is a working tool in the 
cultural stock, which anchors time present to time past. Art, however, is different. 
The participation in past achievements, the place in a continuity, are not different ­
but the artist does not play up these points, and he is, in fact, reluctant to own up 
to them. Instead, he invariably tries to break with the received ideas, to overcome 
them freshly with what appears like their modification or rejection. The artist sub­
mits his own vision, one ·not previously extant. He dissociates himself from quo-. 
tation since any individual whole has to be a unique, never-before type production. 
Of course, I speak of an optimal situation, pushing my points to the extreme. 
Nonetheless, the tendency I have emphasized seems entirely tangible in any period 
of art and in any artistic trend. We may consider the most difficult test for my 
pre!lise- namely, the avant-garde movement of today, which deliberately aban­
dons the specificity of forms, of individual expression, and even the personal craft 
touch of carrying through an artistic vocation. In their place, anonymity and serially 
produced multiples are provocatively substituted. Even so - here, where impersonal 
technology and the mass media are exalted shibboleths -the artist's own idea 
(his invention) remains the most precious factor. Superficially, the artist may agree 
to a nameless and unrecognizable status, u ndifferentiated from others. Yet beneath 
the skin he strives to be remembered for his unique contribution. It is a striking 
antinomy; and it obviously bears on the assumption I have presented about the 

360 
Quotation in Art 
quotation-resistant character of artistic activity. Even in the case of pop art, where 
the logos and visuals of everyday marketplace transactions are "quoted," what we 
get is quite other than a quotation. Indeed the interest lies in a pervasive game 
with such objects, to the point that they are deprived of their colloquial meaning. 
The same may be said of the materials gathered by happeners or conceptualists. 
These are by no means "quoted"; either they simply are, as part of an arranged 
environment; or their significance and status is definitely modified in the transfigur­
ing context. 
Possibly I have stretched too far the contrast between the function of quotation 
and what I see as the function of art. Yet, even if the sharp antithesis I have drawn 
is tenable, it in no way denigrates the .quotation as a cultural phenomenon; nor 
does it diminish the place and importance of quotation in art. Quotation pertains 
to that broad area of social consciousness where originality counts for less than 
does continuity, where vision is less important than knowledge, where a spon­
taneous sense of the moment is subordinated to a sense of participation in an an­
cient and continuing culture. There can be no doubt that humanity moves forward 
with a continual glance backward over its shoulder, akin to Narcissus admiring 
himself in the spring; and no less stimulus is drawn from the past than from the 
present or from the aspired-for prospect of the future. At the interior of this sus­
tained dialogue with the past, quotation -mostly outside of art, but within it too ­
exerts an undoubted vitality and importance, and sometimes it grows to be almost 
sacred. It imparts knowledge and insists on knowledge; it encourages a play of 
the mind; it may be allusive and symbolic; and it provides the means to a wide­
ranging associativeness, like a riddle or conundrum. Lastly, it is not an inherently 
complacent or a meanly conventional resort, for it relays information not otherwise 
available and it helps us to understand, if we wish to, these texts that we retain 
from the past. 
In conclusion, let me apologize to the reader. I have been obstinate. I wanted to 
write an article about quotation which would entirely lack quotes-and I have 
succeeded. It may be that the price of my persistence has been to hamper some­
what the building of the argument; if so, in this cost lies some token of the value of • 
quotation. 
Postscript 
When I wrote this essay I was unacquainted with Hermann Meyer's The Poetics of 
Quotation in the European Novel (Princeton, 1 968; German original published in 

361 
Postscript 
Stuttgart, 1 961 ). I had had a very glad experience, what with my scholarly habits 
and bookish surroundings, fondly believing that for once I had good reason not to 
cite any pertinent literature on the subject, that this perennial nightmare of every 
quthor-the accumulating heap of volumes-was for once out of the picture. 
When I came back to the essay in 1 965, I decided to leave its basic ideas un­
changed; and what a joyous surprise it was for me when I learned that such an 
erudite scholar as Meyer quotes no theoretical ruminations on the meaning of quo­
tation ! I should also add that his Introduction and, especially, his chapters on quo­
tation in Rabelais, Cervantes, and Thomas Mann seem to confirm my ideas. 

Chapter 1 1  
Art and Obscenity 
How shall I plan a strategy which will allow me to estimate the common ground 
- if any-connecting art and obscenity? It would be all too easy to stray into a 
vast labyrinth of bordering issues which distract more than they enlighten this 
problem. Furthermore, the question may be raised from several standpoints: from 
a purely analytical perspective; a purely practical perspective (perhaps with moral, 
religious, or political ends in mind); or a mixture of the analytical and practical 
perspectives with the aim of promulgating theory so as to accomplish some strate­
gic objectives. My own aim is strictly that of analysis. Yet this decision alone still 
leaves the approach unclarified, for the analysis of art and obscenity is open to a 
range of systematic interpretations-those of sociology (or, more broadly, cultur­
ology), psychology, ethics, aesthetics, or a more comprehensive viewpoint not so 
much scientific (in a strict sense) as philosophical. 
Explicitly, then, my frame of reference is aesthetic thought, and I am particularly 
interested in the problem of art and obscenity from the aspect of artistic structure. 
This clarified, I can specify the questions to be explored: 
1 .  Can art be called "pornographic"? In other words, does common ground ex­
ist between "aesthetic" phenomena and those cultural attractions widely de­
scribed as "dirty"? 
2. Suppose we find that aesthetic phenomena and "filth" never coincide. Can ob­
scenity still find a niche in art? If so, precisely what role does it occupy in the 
artistic structure? 
These questions are framed with a concern for the structural analysis of the 
phenomenon of "pornographic art." I must, nonetheless, first direct a glance to­
wards the genesis and function of the views regarding this "filth"-views which 
often err through terming something aesthetic which is only obscene, or else 
through treating as merely obscene something which makes genuine aesthetic 
claims on our judgment. To avoid such errors, I will start by clarifying the two terms 
of the title. I should note first that "obscenity" and "pornography" are here used 
synonymously and interchangeably. It is true that "obscenity" is often understood 
in a broader sense which includes acts that do not directly arouse sexual desires 
(e.g., defecation) and also many words which do not have purely sexual connota­
tions, but I shall omit this distinction here. Let us simply agree that pornography fits 
the definition of obscenity; and everything obscene that shall concern us here will 
have a pornographic character. 
The first version of this essay was written in 1 962; an English translation was published in the Journot 
of Aesthetics ond Art Criticism, Winter 1 967. 

363 
Tentative Definitions 
of Art ond Obscenity 
Tentative Definitions of Art and Obscenity 
The problems involved in the definition of art have already been discussed in Part l ;  
let me summarize the principles derived there. In my view we should reject the two 
extreme points of view that have persistently recurred in aesthetic thought: first, 
the absolutism which holds that art is a suprahistorical phenomenon which ful-
fills certain a priori conditions; and second, the relativism which argues that the 
list of the qualities that define art is truly limitless and, in fact, must be so, given 
the variety of views on the scope and character of art expressed by different in­
dividuals and groups in the course of its ever changing history. My position avoids 
both these poles by seeking certain constants which emerge from the natural dis­
positions of the human species and from the accumulated social and cultural ex­
perience of the species. 
Artistic values have been distilled in a gradual historical process of detachment 
from a matrix of magical and religious phenomena, informational or purely recre­
ational pursuits, and technical-productive aims. Eventually these values become 
distinct and relatively independent, coherent structures supplied either with pure­
ly sensory elements or with mimetic or functional features. These more or less com­
plex structures display additional specific values, which are denoted by the term 
"expression." In brief, the fundamental value of art and thus its chief constituent 
element is what we might tentatively call, in this context, its expression-imbued 
structure. Artistic values are, nonetheless, of several kinds: the purely formal; the 
mimetic (in representational art); the functional (in applied art); the specifically and 
primarily expressive. The art object always presents a "rival" world in comparison 
with ordinary objects which are wholly of this world; and yet the work of art is 
likewise always a physical or at least cultural artifact and, often, a commodity in 
the everyday world. 
For the purposes of this chapter the mimetic vaiues are crucial. A distributive 
but integral component of the fundamental artistic structure, these values enable 
the embodiment in representation of moral, religious, political, philosophical, or 
other ideas of the experiential reality. (The mimetic embodiment is, of course, modi­
fied by form and the specific formal and expressive patterning of elements.) Fre­
quently, such embodied ideas are the salient feature of an artistic structure; there­
fore, we cannot exclude the (often agitated) reactions of the public to these idea­
aspects. Besides, every work of art is a sociocultural as well as an aesthetic phe­
nomenon. Yet, finally, it would be mistaken to rule on what is or is not art according 
to the character of the ideas that are implied by the work's mimetic values. Just as 

364 
Art and Obscenity 
questionable is ranking of works according to the merits of their moral, political, or 
religious ideas. 
The position towards which I have developed might be termed structuralist­
historical; my view is that in the course of the historical processes of culture a class 
of relatively autonomous objects has emerged and been established, which we 
term artistic and whose fundamental values are of course aesthetic. 1 
If the idea of art causes major definitional difficulties, the idea of obscenity 
causes even more formidable trouble. We often hear the statement, " I  can recog­
nize something dirty when I see it," and when international conventions gathered 
at Paris (May 4, 1 9 1 0) and Geneva (December 31 , 1 924) to discuss pornography, 
the conferees thought the same. Yet no one has yet offered any clear definition, 
which would let us, say, distinguish pornography from all art. 
I should like to look more closely at conventional notions of pornography, tenta­
tively defining "obscenity" as the representation or suggestion in words or images, 
with the aid of objects, themes, motifs, or situations, of all those elements which 
pertain to the sexual life. (This definition is deliberately cast in such general terms 
as to embrace every kind of sociocultural stereotype.) But what do I mean by "the 
sexual life"? Nudity? Intercourse? Perversion? Don't the limits of obscenity run 
differently in different cultural formations? These are good questions, but before I 
tackle them let me try to concretize my working definition of obscenity. On the basis 
of judicial rulings and notorious acts of censorship, it appears that the key test is 
whether a deliberate appeal to the prurient sexual imagination can be found (by 
authorities, it should be noted) in the work. On this ground Henry Mi Her's Sexus 
was seized in Norway in 1 958-59; while Lady Chatterley's Lover and Ulysses were 
banned for years on the charge that Lawrence and Joyce were soliciting readers 
to follow their characters' examples and to act lasciviously. 2 
Another charge that recurs in court cases is that pornography publicizes what 
is properly the private side of sex. Coitus, homosexuality, and masturbation are 
private; but kissing, teenage flirting, and caresses between husband and wife ore 
properly public when tactfully portrayed. This leads to the argument that the por­
nographer treats sexual phenomena crassly and explicitly: explicitly due to natural­
istic description, and crassly because sex is deliberately raised to a status equal 
to, if not exclusive of, all the other relationships among men and women. 
Accepting these refinements, I shall mean by "obscenity" not merely the sugges­
tion or representation of erotic themes or situations but a specific kind of treatment: 
their exploitation for the purpose of arousing the reader's or spectator's sexual 

365 
Tentative Definitions 
of Art and Obscenity 
instincts with the aid of symbols, objects, or scenes of a highly intimate character 
presented in a vulgar and unrestrained way. This definition i mproves on the earlier 
one because it is more substantial; yet it, too, raises doubts. One is immediately 
put in the position of relativizing such terms as "arousing the sexual instincts," 
"intimate," "vulgar," "unrestrained." One is thus thrust into the domain of psychol­
ogy and of social anthropology; and examples could easily be produced to show 
that the effectiveness of a given sexual stimulus is relative to one's background, 
nationality, class, etc. (e.g., what is private to the English is often public to the 
French; what is vulgar to the European is often accepted and tender to the Trobri­
and Islanders; what is grossly unrestrained in middle- or upper-class company is 
natural among the working class). 
Therefore the statement, "such-and-such a work is obscene," must always be 
subjected to specific historical and psychological analysis. Otherwise we shall not 
be able to appreciate why, for example, Judge Lockwood sentenced Oscar Wilde 
to two years in gaol for an offense which the Greeks in the time of Plato and Al­
cibiades viewed as an acceptable practice, or why at the close of the nineteenth 
century the German parliament banned the Venus de Milo, although the sixteenth 
through eighteenth centuries had revered it as a matchless monument to feminine 
beauty. 
Obscenity is -in a word -always dependent on idiosyncratic moral taboos; 
and since human sexuality is irrepressible, highly diversified, and volatile, the sys­
tem of taboos is continually shifting. Nevertheless, the act of transgression at any 
moment is labeled pornographic. 
This is, however, just one way of looking at this question; we might also look at 
obscenity as it relates to the codes of an increasingly striated society where the 
rights of the individual are held up as inviolate. From the former perspective, we 
watch a pitched conflict between nature and culture, an incongruity dating from 
early human civilization. (The constrictions of nature are most effectively discussed 
in the vocabulary of Freud.) From the latter standpoint, we watch the emergence 
of a humanity less and less involved with religion and more and more opposed to 
laws restricting the gratification of a multivalent individual need (especially to be 
noted in the lands with democratic tradition in Europe and North America). Here, 
the problem of obscen ity is not at all limited or isolated; it is inseparable from a 
vast, far-reaching process, which dialectically sees on the one side a permanent 
tendency to impose controls on the variety of sexual options, and on the other side 
an unceasing impulse to profane the taboos "obscenely." 

366 
Art and Obscenity 
The present trend is undoubtedly to more civil liberty, with the result that what 
once were obscoena have become socially acceptable erotic themes. We observe 
all over the world a convergence of the political and ethical struggles, under a 
banner which includes the demand of absolute sexual freedom. The social majority 
is still backing a condemnation of so-called smutty writing, dirty pictures, filthy 
behavior, etc. The laws have to take account of both extremities and, in their os­
cillations, the dialectical process is played out. 
In 1 967, the Danes took the innovative step of decriminalizing obscene materials 
both verbal and pictorial, an act which has spurred parallel efforts in other coun­
tries, usually under the auspices of committees of experts. Especially instructive is 
the Report of the American Commission on Obscenity and Pornography, commis­
sioned by President Nixon. This Commission had a multifaceted character, exem­
plified by a minority report confirming a still active religious view that the corrupt 
character of pornography is obvious and eternal. What stands out, despite the 
selectiveness of the Commission data, is that in a single society at a single moment, 
attitudes may vary widely. True, some visibly (and tacitly) common beliefs emerge; 
yet there is no consensus as to the effects of exposure to explicit sexual materials, 
nor is there even agreement as to the meaning of obscenity. 
The section written by the Legal Panel emphasizes this. It impugns oil of the 
federal. state, and local legal standards, accusing them of subjectiveness and arbi­
trariness. At issue is the so-called Roth Test and the notion that materials should 
be prosecuted only if they meet three criteria: 
1 .  the dominant appeal is to prurient interests; 
2. current community standards regard the material as patently offensive; 
3. the material lacks redeeming social value. 
Commenting on these criteria of obscenity, the Legal Panel said that studies made 
at the order of the Commission had discovered no general agreement as to the 
threshold of sexual prurience, nor could a clear correlative be discerned between 
arousal and offensiveness. Indeed, many respondents to the inquiry found positive 
social value in arousing materials. 
The chief attack of the Commissioners on existing law centered on the definition 
of "community standards." As I have indicated, I am prompt to note a considerable 
relativity in sexual proclivities; and yet it would be a mistake to ignore that a given 
society at a given time does possess some kind of ultimate com mon understanding 
as to h()W difficult matters of sex should be resolved. This is not to assert any as­
sumption of harm in explicit sexua l materials-and I should add that I agree with 

367 
Tentative Definitions 
of Art and Obscenity 
the Legal Panel in favoring repeal of restrictive legislation in regard to tᢩe sale, 
exhibition, and distribution of "obscene" materials. Pornography flourishes only 
where there are deeply established disintegrative trends in society; and it makes no 
sense to apply superficial checks when an incisive analysis of the etiology of the 
phenomenon is appropriate. 
Anyway. although my aim here is different, it seems possible to define obscenity 
tentatively according to the legal tests just described. The ultimate criterion of ob­
scenity would thus be a lack of redeeming values. Surely it is clear that obscenity 
can be (and often is) of social value, but the predominance or monopoly of ob­
scenity does often tend to blur or efface other values which may be judged desir­
able. It is my aim to exclude the test of "offensiveness to the community" for my 
present purposes, and to propose as the test of obscenity the dominant (or exclu­
sive) attraction of prurient interest due to a weakness (or absence) of other, re­
deeming values. 
I might still at this point be criticized for the ambiguity of the concept of prurient 
interest. Some recipients will be sexually aroused by a given content; some will 
be bored; some will be informed or entertained. I do not dispute the range of re­
sponses; but I emphasize that the object of prurience behind the responses will 
remain constant. Also, the capacity for sexual excitation should be judged at the 
recipient's first encounter with the object, since a factor of satiation may set in. If 
my definition of the obscene is in this way somewhat slack. the fault would seem to 
have no remedy. Yet I hope it is sufficiently sharp to allow the reader to anticipate 
that I found Oh, Calcutta! obscene. I agree with Lord Longford in comparing it 
with the pornographic shows of Soho, but I disagree with his wish to have it sup­
pressed. The reader should also see why I judge Sjoman's I Am Curious (Yellow) 
heavily obscene but also imbued with some redeeming values. A predominant or 
exclusive prurient interest is not proven by the sexual content in itself; rather, this 
can be determined only by the sexual content in conjunction with the mode of its 
presentation within a whole (i.e., in its context).3 
I shall put off for the moment a discussion of the alleged harm done by pornog­
raphy and the arguments for censorship. 
Obscenity Which Clashes with Art, and Erotic Art 
A work of art cannot be, in my opinion, an obscene object; and, in fact, the phe­
nomena are mutually exclusive. This judgment is founded on a consideration of 
the three basic contexts of aesthetic investigation: the genetic, the structural, and 

368 
Art and Obscenity 
the functional; in other words, the standpoints of the work's structure, of its cre­
ator, and of its audience. Let me add that a test of pornographic content cannot be 
made with reference solely to the stated intention of the artist or the stated reaction 
of the public. This is secondary evidence; the primary criterion must be found in the 
art object itself. Nonetheless, the secondary evidence is needed because identifica­
cation of a work as pornographic can never be accomplished by structural analysis 
alone. A syndrome of elements provides that evidence. The artist's intention, or the 
audience's reaction, or both, will provide the control-check that substantiates the 
accuracy of a structural interpretation. 
In the method here proposed for defining the pornographic quotient of a work, 
then, the structure is taken as an independent variable, and the intention of the 
artist and the phenomena of the reception are taken as dependent variables. Due 
to interaction among the independent variable and the dependent variables we 
obtain alternative pornographic estimates; and works classified in this category 
can be ranked as to whether the interpretations of them as pornographic are more 
or less strong. I must also add that this definitional operation has to be related to 
the particular historical period in which the work was produced. Any subsequent 
patterns of its reception must be referred back to the original circumstances, that 
is, to the work's genetic context. 
We can see in this framework of investigation the antithetical relation of art a nd 
pornography. Genetically, the aim of the artist is not primarily to arouse sexual 
excitation. Structurally, the sexual elements of a work of art can never be the ex­
clusive or predominant ones, or even as prominent as the aesthetic values. Func­
tionally, it is in the nature of aesthetic experience to eliminate a practical, opera­
tional attitude such as would obtain if the work involved us in a real situation. 
Perhaps it might be countered that in a primitive work, and not only there, the 
sexual elements overwhelm or at least eclipse all others; that sexual motifs have 
been aggressively embodied in artistic structures through the centuries, never be­
coming subordinate; that any interpretation of works of art which sees only aes­
thetic values is skewed, and that those who make such interpretations are the 
slaves of aestheticism. I shall try to answer these points, and, in so doing, build 
my own position. 
It cannot be denied that in primitive art, Indian art, and some periods of Euro­
pean art (e.g., the fourth-century Sicyonian school, French rococo painting, or the 
work of Felicien Raps) priority is given to sexual appeal. Yet it would be wrong to 
interpret this indiscriminately, in every case, as an effort to cause sexual excitation. 

369 
Obscenity Which Clashes 
with Art, and Erotic Art 
For instance, Bronislaw Malinowski emphasized the magical-religious aspect of 
the sexual games and themes in the Trobriand folklore which he presented in his 
Sex Life of the Savages in North-Western Melanesia. These elements cemented 
cultural bonds, fortified social approval for the acknowledged ideal of beauty in 
both sexes, and ritually affirmed the primacy of life over death, of procreation over 
barrenness. Similarly, in Indian, African, Mexican, or Brazilian art the sexual motifs 
ore interwoven with the religious. We can speak here of a specialized order of 
mimetic content; special be
.
cause of the ideal and emotional associations of those 
who, in experiencing a certain mode of religious perception, organically perceive 
inseparable sexual motifs.4 
The case is different with the work of a rococo painter such as Froni;ois Boucher 
or a modern like Rops, but here too a distinction must be brought out. Among 
Boucher's audience, a deliberate stimulation of sexual imagination seems to hove 
accorded with the psychosocial climate; additionally, and this seems to me the 
crucial point, Boucher simply used nudity as on accepted, fashionable subject for 
his artistic purposes. Here, we see again that it is not only the structure of a work 
but also its framework, its sociohistoricol context, which determines its character 
and its status <?s art or obscenity. (We con make a comparison with the conduct 
and acting style of the Italians, which to the non-Italian seem so flamboyant but 
which in national context ore quite natural.) The work of F_elicien Rops is another 
matter entirely. His intent of conveying sexual thrills is only too transparent. His 
case, however, goes beyond the scope of the question now being considered, being 
a borderline case needing separate study. 
The case of Rops takes me to the second (the structural) framework with which 
I shall have to deal in showing that sexuality con never be the predominant feature 
of on artistic work. If counterexamples ore produced, I shall then hove to decide 
whether they ore nonetheless marginally artistic and to what degree. (The next 
section will explore this question further.) 
I now turn to the third (the functional) framework, which involves the public's 
reception of the possibly obscene work of art. I hove already shown that the charge 
of aestheticism sometimes lodged against scholars who claim never to find sex­
uality outweighing artistic traits in any example of art is false since the artistic 
traits subsume both the mimetic values and the moral, political, religious, and phil­
osophical ideas therein imbued. Obviously our response to Rembrandt's Return of 
the Prodigal Son differs from our response to Mondrian's Boogie Woogie; and our 
response to the Sienese Madonnas differs from that to Renoir's nudes. We read 

370 
Art and Obscenity 
Rabelais' Gargantua et Pantagruel or Brantome 's Domes galantes differently from 
the novels of Richardson or Dickens; and the plays of Wycherley have a different 
effect on us than do the plays of Goethe or Hugo. None of this, however, alters 
the fact that in each instance we are reacting to artistic mimesis, that is, to a spe­
cific quasi-world represented in the art object within the limits of its structure. Just 
as soon as the ideas plucked from the mimetic tapestry loom larger in our response 
than does the structure of the work taken as a whole, we pass to the sphere of 
nonaesthetic experiences, of which sex is one. 
The distinction that concerns me here was grasped by Freud, though he had 
little reason to wish to restrict the field of effectiveness of the libido. In writing 
about the relationship between art and sex, he notably classifies aesthetic expe­
riences under the heading Vorlust. According to his theory, poetry, like children's 
games and daydreaming , satisfies our deepest sexual desires, but the poet not only 
condenses his material and hides his real longings behind symbols, but also to 
some extent neutralizes these drives of the libido by arranging the psychic contents 
associated with them into artistic form. This operation releases in us not only en­
joyment of a cathartic type but also and above all pleasures of a strictly aesthetic 
character. 5 
Accordingly, I regard as misleading the interpretation given by Eduard Fuchs 
in his remarkable and still interesting work Geschichte der erotischen Kunst ( 1 91 2). 
Leaving aside the fact that, while orienting himself expressly to the methodological 
position of historical materialism, he stated -without noticing the inherent contra­
diction -that the sexual impulse was the regular, fundamental drive of art, I should 
like to note Fuchs's contention that the basic law of art (its lebensgesetz) is its use 
of sexual motifs and his argument that the stronger the erotic effect of a work the 
more artistic it is. Yet even Fuchs speaks of a degradation of art at least since the 
rococo period due to a decadent attitude towards sex. Several times he emphasizes 
that the predominant trait of all art is a "healthy sensualism," and he does argue 
that this sexual motif (das Stoffliche, the subject matter) should be subsumed artis­
tically to the extent that its mere or forthright sensuality - dos gemein Sinnliche­
is eliminated (aufgelost und vollig oberwunden). 
The weakness of Fuchs 's case lies in his failure to explain the i mplications of this 
"healthy eroticism" and to draw the necessary conclusions from his sensible real­
ization of a formal artistic predominance in the presentation of sexual elements . 
(It is impossible, for instance, to react primarily with sexual attention -although 
this is the response postulated by Fuchs-to works in which the erotic has been in 

371 
Obscenity Which Clashes 
with Art, and Erotic Art 
a sense neutralized by the artist.) As a result we can learn a great deal from Fuchs's 
book about the recurrent obsession with sex evinced in works of art; but the best 
use is not made of this evidence. 
Fuchs fails to see that the art objects he cites can be ranged along a continuum: 
from the blatantly pornographic (the priapic statues of Pompeii and the Naples 
mu seum, the frescoes in the Casa Vetii, the sixteenth-century painting by Van Orley 
of Neptune having intercourse with a nymph) through works like Poussin's Satyr 
Discovers Venus Sleeping or Rembrandt's etching The French Bed, to works in 
which the sexual is only a means towards quite different artistic objectives. Among 
the latter works are Fouquet's noted portrait of Agnes Sorel, the mistress of Charles 
VII, shown with a breast exposed, as the Madonna; Rubens' portrait of his wife 
Helene Fourment in the nude; the anti papist Dutch etchings which decry the las­
civious conduct of monks and nuns (among these Monk with Girl among the Reeds, 
a little-known copper engraving by Rembrandt); or the English cartoons of Gillray, 
Rowlandson, and Cruikshank, where great play is made with sexual elements for 
the purpose of sociopolitical caricature. 
If this argument has been persuasive, then we should put behind us all counter­
arguments and affirm that art and obscenity are mutually exclusive. Some examples 
will highlight the conflict between the aesthetic standpoint that seeks to do justice 
to a work, and the nonaesthetic attitude that trims and reduces a work to the needs 
and the prejudices of a perceiver. I shall begin with what is perhaps the most ob­
vious problem, the portrayal of the nude in the European tradition. 
In Greek art the portrayal of Venus nude was the natural representational de­
cision. However, the point is not simply that Greek custom approved the public 
display of nudity, since it ·might then be responded that what may have suited the 
Greeks cannot, after centuries of Christian (or rather Puritan) civilization, strike 
us as other than indecent. Rather, the point here is that the Venus Anadyomene 
and the Venus de Milo were above all else ideal expressions of feminine beauty 
cast in harmonious forms. Anyone who studies purely from the sexual point of view 
the sleeping figure of the Hermaphrodite in the Rome National Museum -en­
grossed by the erect phallus, and lost to the expression and formal rhythms of the 
sculpture- is quite simply aesthetically blind, and nothing can be done for him until 
he is taught to see. 
Rubens bared the bosom of his Queen when she encountered the King in his 
Maria de Medici cycle; but the entire body had already been presented naked from 
the time of Masaccio, Botticelli, and Van Eyck. It is true that the Adam and Eve in 

372 
Art and Obscenity 
the Ghent Altarpiece modestly conceal their pudenda and that Botticelli's Venus 
is more a poetic symbol than a flesh-and-blood woman, but even before Rubens the 
great Venetians (Titian, Giorgione, Tintoretto) had painted a pagan and sensuous 
beauty in their women's bodies, while in the same century Rembrandt did not hesi­
tate to show ugliness in the nude . 
In none of these cases, however, was the artist seeking simply to arouse the 
sexual imagination. The further history of European painting only confirms this 
view. Ingres' Turkish Bath caused as great a scandal in its time as did Manet's 
Luncheon on the Grass, and yet neither used its sexual motif as more than an in­
ducement to achieve an elaborated aesthetic aim. Artists of the early modern pe­
riod (e.g., Toulouse-Lautrec, Marquet, or Friesz) accented an everydayness in their 
choice of model and situation, and we can detect in their work an attitude of un­
concealed earthiness and also a sexual tantalization. Nonetheless, these artists 
too hove achieved primarily a painterly set of values. This approach has been a 
staple since Renoir's and Cezanne's depictions of Bathers and Degas' Woman at 
Her Dressing Table. Each avant-garde grouping hos modified the programmatic 
intent of their eroticism and in this regard we may note a swing away from the 
overt portrayal and towards the nonfigurative (Delaunay's Three Graces), the 
decorative (Miro's Nude Before Her Mirror), or the surreal (Coutaud's Erotic Mag­
ic). 6 It is true that such works (or at least the more representational among them) 
have suffered frequent attack for undermining and debauching wholesome social 
values. Can this be a correct accusation from any aspect? I shall put off answering 
this charge until I hove set out the arguing points and the values of those who re­
gard the nude in art as a seducer of the young. 
Literature offers a more munificent source of cases for an understanding of the 
difference between a legitimate response to art and a distorted one. From the trou­
bles met by Flaubert's Madame Bovary, Baudelaire's Flowers of Evil, or Zola's 
Earth we may judge the frequent gap between the work, which indeed makes not 
the slightest appeal to the prurient imagination, and a type of reader who reacts 
to it according to nonaesthetic criteria stemming from a particular set of taboos. 
I shall confine myself here, however, to a few notorious and controversial examples 
from the twentieth century. 
In Lady Chatterley's Lover D. H. Lawrence asserted the right to full personal 
happiness that was denied by middle-doss prudery. The same right had been de­
fended by Freud, whose individual therapy was meant to relieve neuroses traceable 
to sexual disturbances and repression. Although Lawrence made something of a 

373 
Obscenity Which Clashes 
with Art, and Erotic Art 
religion of sex, his attack on the moral chains and cobwebs of his day was salu­
tary. 
The case of Henry Miller is more troublesome. Tropic of Cancer must be seen, 
however, as an act of protest, not one of simple temptation; in fact, a protest by 
an artist against the whole of capitalist civilization. Early in his book Miller speaks 
of the need to shock readers, to provide a blood transfusion, and states that this 
infusion could only be drawn from his own direct primitive experience of life, in 
which sex holds a central place. Through his hero Miller confesses: "I am spiritually 
dead. Physically I am alive. Morally I am free. The world which I have departed is 
a menagerie . . . .  If I om a hyena I om a lean and hungry one. I go forth to fatten 
myself."7 This hero feels utterly isolated; Paris is for him an escape from humanity, 
and he is an outsider in a city which is "a blind alley at the end of which is a scaf­
fold."8 Hating the world he has fled, this hero wants something more tenable, a 
foothold with more substance ("I belong to the earth"). He proselytizes, and his 
message is that sexual passion alone can revitalize existence; it can recapture the 
elemental desires and the natural drives.9 
It is of course possible to read Tropic of Cancer as pornography, but this is to 
read it against the grain. Miller's is a philosophical novel, distilling much of the 
rebellious mood of the artists of the 1 930s. It breathes the same air as the work of 
Joyce and Kafka. All three authors raised intransigent protests against the realities 
of their times, although each of them pursued a different artistic solution. We may 
glimpse a world kindred to Miller's in the oppressive and harshly tense paintings 
of Soutine. His world too implies the still widespread notion of instinctuality as the 
sole alternative to the false ideas and misleading phrases carried in the head. 
Notwithstanding its tone of nihilism, then, Tropic of Cancer is the counterthrust 
of a deeply lacerated person. To paraphrase Marx's 1844 Manuscripts, we might 
say that Henry Miller's aim was to return man to himself, to his intrinsic potential; 
he sought a release from capitalist alienation, but, not entirely grasping the pro­
cesses by which he was held, he found no recourse but the most ancient coursing of 
the blood and semen. This is not a titillating book. Its premise is appalling. It incites 
us to adopt a purgative attitude. The Dionysian element is its hope. 
A somewhat different case is presented by Vladimir Nabokov's Lolita. Nabokov 
shows us his hero Humbert as a man who is sick but who deserves our sympathy 
since his intentions are worthy. Humbert's passion and love for the teenage girl 
Lolita are shown as genuine. He may censure himself (chapters 31 , 32, and 36), 
but this self-accusation is offset by the portrayal of Lolita as a precocious tease 

374 
Art and Obscenity 
and voluptuary. We may speak of Nabokov as a humanist author in the nil hu­
manum dimension. People are taken by various infatuations, and see them through 
in diverse ways; Humbert is different from Othello or Werther but certainly no 
worse. Lolita does not protest against an entire civilization, nor does it present a 
compact personal philosophy as does Tropic of Cancer. Yet there surely is an out­
cry against a repressive moral code which abominates certain sexual irregularities 
and which labels their inclusion in a work of art as obscene, ignoring the fact that 
Freud held such inclinations to be as admissible as the normal patterns in a civiliza­
tion which requires neurosis-formation to survive. Persons who pick up Lolita to 
"read it for the dirty parts" are very much deceived. This is a serious and a difficult 
work; its author has distanced and controlled his theme and written with profound 
compassion for a tortured, complex hero. Nabokov says in his Postscript to Lolita 
written in 1 956: "For me a work of fiction exists only insofar as it affords me what 
I shall bluntly call aesthetic bliss." 1 0 In this same essay, he says of pornography: 
"Obscenity must be mated with banality because every kind of aesthetic e.njoyment 
has to be entirely replaced by simple sexual stimulation . . . .  Thus, in pornographic 
novels, action has to be limited to the copulation of cliches. Style, structure, imagery 
should never distract the reader from his tepid lust. The novel must consist of an 
alternation of sexual scenes." 1 1  
Film presents a n  even richer vein for our inquiry. We can rather easily distinguish 
Literature (books of high artistic intent) from merely commercial literature, but 
this line tends to blur in cinema. Film is primarily a mass medium, an entertainment 
for the multitudes. To the extent that within this context it strives also to function 
as a "high art," its loyalties generally are torn. Malraux said that the East has opi­
um and the West has women; Lo Duca used the aphorism as the epigraph for his 
three-volume L 'Erotisme au cinema (Paris, 1 960), adding that eroticism is so charac­
teristic of contemporary European culture that a highly realistic, "documentary" 
art form such as cinema could scarcely avoid the subject. Yet if we think of some 
films with a pronounced sexual emphasis-Autant-Lara's Le Dioble au corps, 
Malle's Les Amants, Vadim's Et Dieu crea la femme, Clouzot's La Verite, Fellini's 
La Dolce Vita, Antonioni's L 'Avventura-we shall conclude that in none of these 
movies was the portrayal of sex an end in itself; none of these directors was out 
merely to titillate the public. Fellini stares at orgy scenes with the cold eye of a 
moralist. Antonioni demonstrates the vacuity of the hero through his nonstop pur­
suit of kicks; the figure is an emotional cripple in a devastated world where friend­
ship is an impossibility. Autant-Lara and Malle extol the passions which lend rich-

375 
Obscenity Which Clashes 
with Art, and Erotic Art 
ness and poetry to the whole of life. Vadim sings dos ewig Weibliche. His direction 
of Bardot makes her a reborn Aphrodite with the profligate abandon and innocent 
charm of nature herself. Clouzot is interested in a tragic pursuit of love in a world 
without bearings which can offer no more than temporary unions. 
Let us take another film which, when it appeared, was the center of a storm of 
controversy throughout the European press. Ingmar Bergman's The Silence was 
denounced by some as filth, period. Scorecards of the offensive sequences were 
offered: copulation, masturbation, etc. Undoubtedly some persons were drawn to 
this film from prurient motives, as some had been to The Tropic of Cancer or Lolita, 
but this does not alter the fact that the erotic episodes in this film are all essential 
to the central motif of desolation. The two heroines live in a world so alienated 
that all communication, even with those nearest them, is severed. Sex seems a kind 
of lifeline, which may allow them to make contact with others if only for a moment's 
gratification. When others fail them even in this, they turn in on their own bodies. 
Even this ruse fails, for their world is, in fact, empty. In their alienation, symbolized 
by the labyrinthine corridors of the hotel, the socially ostracized dwarfs, and the 
parallel figures of the boy and old man both hungering for affection, the women 
want to break out. The dying aunt writes a note to the boy which is Bergman's 
porte-parole. Whether its philosophy is convincing is beside the point. What matters 
for our inquiry is that this film, far from being titillating, is shatteringly true to the 
experience of our time and handles its medium and subject with consummate ar­
tistry. 
Possibly it will be responded that Bergman deliberately sets out to shock. Per­
haps so, but this would in no way diminish the complexity or seriousness of his 
work; nor would it prove anything lubricious in his motives. The worst we might say 
of The Silen"ce is that Bergman did not scruple to show a woman in so intimate an 
act as masturbation. However, this in its context betokens an intellectual and moral 
courage rather than an intention to seduce and deprave. It seems fair to suggest 
that if nil humanum alien um est then no subject in the world can be off-limits to the 
genuine artist. Let me repeat once again: not content, but the presentation is the 
test of the obscenity of a work; although, of course, content and presentation will 
be mutually composed of erotic elements and will, undoubtedly, also generate 
sexual elements in our aesthetic response. 
· We must, in other words, distinguish between eroticism and obscenity. This is a 
conclusion strongly supported in a work I find excellent, Eberhard and Phyllis Kron­
hausen's Pornography and the Law (1 959). I agree with their distinction that ob-

376 
Art and Obscenity 
scenity can be ascribed to a work only when the reader or viewer is unremittingly 
bombarded by sexual stimuli, and the work is, in fact, used only or primarily as an 
aphrodisiac. In contrast, an erotic literature or art incorporates sexuality and its 
ramifications in a rich life-framework. 
This greater life-tissue is not all that serves to complicate and deepen the re­
sponse to the sexual element and transfigure the potential obscenity into eroticum, 
a category which is among the most fundamental of art. As already suggested, the 
cultural context is inescapable. What might to a raw observer seem pornographic, 
often reveals after some study its deep roots in the erotic ambience of a time and 
place. Much of the ancient art of Asia astonishes and unsettles the European by 
the immediacy with which it treats various sexual motifs. It may be hard not to 
believe these works were not created primarily to arouse lust, and yet this suspicion 
is wholly unfounded. Our ignorance of the symbolic framework is what disables 
us from accurately reading the temple sculptures of Konarak, say, or the sixteenth­
century Chinese novel The Golden Lotus. This tale of destructiveness emanating 
from sex has direct links with the philosophy of yin and yang which describes the 
achievement of perfect harmony through the balancing of opposites. The sexual 
yoga (maithuna) so commonly depicted in Far Eastern sculptures is founded, as all 
scholars emphasize, on tantric buddhism. Here is symbolically embodied the unity 
of spirit and nature, of so-called male and female cosmic sexuality. By no means 
is orgy the point of the display. 
A further factor (to which I shall return) transforming obscenity into ors erotica 
is just the refinement of artistry. Historians often point to certain Chinese scrolls 
of the nineteenth century or Japanese scrolls of earlier date as instances of por­
nography, due to the detailed presentations of love-making both heterosexual and 
homosexual. However, so masterful is the execution, so imbued with charm or 
vigor of line and with beauty of composition, that it is impossible not to be ravished 
by the artistic form of these works. In these cases, the knowledge of cultural sym­
bols is not important; the immediately apprehended iconic dimension neutralizes, 
as it were, the forthrightly sexual stimuli. 
I experienced a similar aesthetic response to a performance of Mutations by the 
Netherlands Dance Theatre (at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, March 1 972). The 
dancers' full nudity, developed as a main theme of the piece, eventually becomes 
almost imperceptible as such. This dance work is a paean to the human liberation 
of spirit and body; it is also a virtuoso artistic composition. For these reasons Mu­
tations scarcely offers occasion for sexual arousal. I am not even certain that in 

377 
Obscenity Which Clashes 
with Art, and Erotic Art 
this performance the nudity retains an erotic appeal. If it does then this role is im­
measurably reduced from the place it holds in the Chinese or Japanese scrolls. 
My distinction between obscenity and eroticism is pivotal in any case, since erotic 
art does not eliminate the evocation of sexual imagination, but neither does it fail 
to situate that appeal in a context of other values. 
In contrast, when one encounters a work such as The Perfumed Garden, which 
is an oft-reprinted, thinly fictionalized guide to the varieties of sexual organs and 
positions, this developed and ingenious erotic appeal is scarcely found. It is worth 
noting that sheik Abu an-Nafzawi, the author of this fifteenth-century brochure, 
undoubtedly had sexual instruction and excitation as his sole aim. Where we do 
find the extreme case of man subdued to his sexuality, depicted in what can be 
qualified nonetheless as erotic art, we must also find, at a minimum, some kind of 
manifest or latent reflections concerning this peculiar subordination. 
This is a view shared by the liberal judges who have taken their stand resisting 
the persistent efforts to ban works which deal with themes regarded as taboo in 
some sectors of society. Let us consider two cases summarized in Alec Craig's book. 
A true breakthrough for libertarian law was the decision by Justices Woolsey and 
Hand to clear Ulysses in 1 933, a decision upheld in the U.S. Court of Appeals. 
Points 3 and 4 of the original opinion clearly imply that the author's intent is to be 
deduced from the structure of the work itself. Arguing that literature is to enjoy 
the same immunity as works of science, Judge Hand states: "The question in each 
case is whether a publication taken as a whole has a libidinous effect . . . . In apply­
ing this test, relevancy of the objectionable parts to the theme, the established 
reputation of the work in the estimation of approved critics, if the book is modern, 
and the verdict of the past, if it is ancient, are persuasive pieces of evidence, for 
works of art are not likely to sustain a high position with no better warrant for 
their existence than their obscene content." 1 2  
A second case led to Judge Bryan's decision which revoked the confiscation of 
Lady Chatterley's Lover by the U.S. Postmaster General. This opinion repeats the 
argument that the author's intent must be judged by the structural content of the 
work. Conceding that an author might write an obscene book despite his best in­
tentions, Judge Bryan added that the evidence of literary and intellectual merit is 
sufficient for deciding whether a work is pornographic; and, on this showing, Law­
rence's book was artistically outstanding. 
The Kronhausens are also persuasive on the legal tests. They object to the use 
of such arbitrary labels as "lewd," "lascivious," "predominantly appealing to pru-

378 
Art and Obscenity 
rient interests," and the like, and they trace such compaigns to individuals or groups 
suffering from sexual frustrations . The Kronhausens' conclusion is that a penal 
code on obscenity derived from "community standards" is untenable, since such 
standards may easily be impugned. Therefore, the only objective criterion must 
be the structure of the controversial work, and, within this structure, the content. 
These legal decisions, the opinions of juridical authorities, and the writings of 
such experts as the Kronhousens, which all argue that the intentions actually ex­
pressed rather than those imputed by hostile parties to a work are what must be 
judged -on such grounds, I gather confidence in my own argument that the artistic 
object and the obscene object ore basically incompatible. 1 3  I Ãant now to add just 
a few expansions, so as to be able to answer the second of my opening questions: 
Having concluded that art and obscenity are basically incompatible, can obscene 
elements still find a place in the artistic structure -and if so, then how? 
How Naked Sex Achieves a Presence in Art 
The time has come to stress that, in arguing the disparity between art and obscen­
ity, I have invoked something of an ideal model. In oetual practice what we often 
find is a jumbling of the artistic and obscene; they'coexist side by side within the 
same overall structure, which may then be described as artistic or as obscene in 
varying degrees. We must, then, admit the tangibleness of the lewd in works of art. 
Its place depends on the kind of work and the particular proportion of artistic to 
"dirty" aspects and functions. 
My analysis has till now emphasized that the erotic features of a work of art are 
so interwoven in the aesthetic values that they cannot exert a separate and rela­
tively independent role. Yet there have been and there are today art objects which 
include certain obscene portions, sometimes extended into obscene sequences, 
which have a measure of autonomy. These passages are either so obtrusive that 
they burst out of the overall fabric, or they are interpolations or even imposed ele­
ments unconnected with the substance of the work. We can find a fair sprinkling 
of such episodes in Pietro Aretino, and some purple passages in Henry Miller more 
than stoke their claim in this deportment. More restricted but equally striking frag­
ments of this kind turn up in Rabelais, in Casanova's Memoirs, in Diderot's Jacques 
le fotaliste, in Faulkner's Sanctuary, and in Lolita. They are notably absent, on the 
other hand, from Laclos' Liaisons dangereuses, as we can see by considering Letters 
79 and 85, which detail the Chevalier Prevan's adventures, and in which the pre­
vailing tone is one of intellectual naughtiness and of delight in the art of cynical 

379 
How Naked Sex 
Achieves a Presence 
in Art 
seduction. The latter moods have nourished a major strain in French literature, 
and one which should not be confused with pornography, even though the tone 
evokes a sexual atmosphere. 
In all the works iust cited, the obscene portions do connect with the artistic de­
sign. The same cannot be said of Sjoman's film 49 1, for example. Here there are 
two scenes (homosexual intercourse and bestial ism) that cannot be justified by 
reference to the needs of plot or drama. Though set in a tale of juvenile delinquency 
and reeducation, the episodes are sure (again, due to their mode of presentation 
rather than their substance) to stimulate a response that is more sexual than aes­
thetic. Even more can this be said of the same director's I Am Curious (Yellow) 
for the directly obscene passages are here more extensive. The fellatio and cunni­
lingus exchanges between Lena and Borjᢧ. or the sequence in which the couple 
copulate in a tree crotch, seem wholly centered on the sexual motifs, although else­
where in the film the nudity and sexual games do appear as an organic ·part of their 
mutual infatuation. 
Two recent American movies produced by Andy Warhol and directed by Paul 
Morrissey, Flesh and Trash, are of a similar character. They project the current 
climate of sexual anarchism against its social background; they bring in homo­
sexuality, which has been one of the primary issues in the quest for liberation, 
and they focus on the naked body in numerous intimate positions and situations. 
All of this is fine from the aesthetic viewpoint. What is dubious are the many seg­
ments of both films which exhibit the penis as a patently self-contained effect. These 
close-ups do not arouse sexual excitement, but are, rather, SCi>mewhat repugnant 
and in the end boring. The crux of the matter, nonetheless, is that they concentrate 
the viewer's attention solely on the sexual exhibition. I do not question, however, 
that Morrissey's films do fall on the side of cinema art; they need only be compared 
with such hard-core products as The Stewardesses, Mona, or Hollywood Blue to 
see where episodic obscenity and the unrelieved article differ. 
I now want to return to Fᢨlicien Rops. His work seems often to lie on the very 
midpoint of the fragile line between art which contains elements of pornography 
and pornography which is lacking in art. Not all Rops' works qualify but his most 
popular output achieves this consummate balance. It seems a little fulsome to com­
pare his gifts with the Pyramid of Cheops, as Baudelaire did in a sonnet of 1 865, 
and Rops himself surely exaggerated when he claimed the discovery of "une for­
mule nouvelle." Yet the artistic merit of his drawings and etchings is indisputable. 
We cannot deny him, either, a philosophy of life, idiosyncratic though it was; his 

380 
Art and Obscenity 
mentors were Baudelaire, Poe, and Huysmans, and he shared their dandyism and 
misogyny. their contempt for the bourgeoisie and their hatred of the mob. Rops's 
sexual obsessions were chiefly Satanic-as, for example, in his Pornocracie (symbol 
of the blind lusts which drive men to destruction) or Le vol et la prostitution domi­
nent le monde or the visions of men and women ravaged by syphilis and drink. 1 4  
All this notwithstanding, the bulk of Rops's output is plainly lewd. Women are 
seen from the rear, their legs apart and bent forwards; invariably they sport Folies­
Bergere-type black stockings and gloves which emphasize the stark nudity of their 
breasts, thighs, and bellies: usually there are men shown present at these repel­
lently gross displays of "pulchritude," and the women themselves are made to 
narcissistically fondle or eye their sexual parts. The aesthetic response is not en­
couraged, while a sexual one is, in Le miroir de la coquetterie, Seule, le Maillot, 
Nubilite, lmpudeur, Suffisance-to sa mple at random a few of Rops's works. 
Granted, these water colors. prints, and drawings do partake of the savour of 
the entire period: of Toulouse-Lautrec, Strindberg, or Stanislaw Przybyszewski. 
Women were indeed treated as the envoys of the devil and -since am Anfang war 
des Geschlecht-eroticism was both demonized and dwelt upon in a crude natural­
istic mode. Thus, it might be said that obscenity fitted in with the artistic vision of 
the time, but even so no one portrayed it so broadly, aggressively, and abundantly 
as Rops. Yet the pictures I have cited seem less artistic than Rops's other works. 
The sexual motifs appear overemphasized; the means of expression are subor­
dinated to the exposition of sexuality. Again the mode of presentation is more 
relevant than the subject matter. Huysmans was right when he said Rops elevated 
a fascination with the demi-monde of whores into the apocalypse of prostitution. 
This aspect helps raise much of his work into the category of genuine art, but the 
examples cited transform the apocalypse into the dalliance of prostitution. Thus, 
the approach to the selfsame sexual subject matter is decisive even in a single ar­
tist's oeuvre. 
The whore has been a theme of the drama and literature from the start of the 
nineteenth century and remains prominent as the twenty-first century approaches. 
She looms attractively and frighteningly among the dispossessed and the rebels 
of capitalist society. From Fleur de Marie in Sue's Mysteres de Paris to Shen Te in 
Brecht's The Good Woman of Setzuan to the whores in such films as Nights of 
Cabiria, Never on Sunday, or Klute, the prostitute has been shown as among a 
select company of the pure in heart. Again, it is the artist's interpretation of the 
theme which decides, not the theme as such. 

381 
How Naked Sex 
Achieves a Presence 
in Art 
The balance between obscene and aesthetic values breaks down when the latter 
are unremarkable or meager. In such cases even themes of no compelling power 
will toke control and exert an atmosphere more sexual than artistic. A film like 
Gilda is an example. Indeed, the film industry has made a specialty of this kind of 
pap since it does have a built-in appeal for the less discriminating portion of the 
public. A slick mock-up of art offers a transparent window through which the cal­
culated snatches of sex are shown. It was in such films that Marilyn Monroe and 
Brigitte Bardot launched their careers and were duly snubbed by exacting cinema 
critics. Given more substantial filmscripts, these actresses were able to reveal their 
latent dramatic talents; others, however, have never been given the chance to be­
come more than "sex symbols." 1 5  Their counterparts in painting and sculpture 
are such works as the Venus Callipygos (Museo Nationale, Naples), the Renais­
sance woodcut Eroticum by Peter FIOtner (Friedrich-Museum, Berlin), or the anony­
mous Dutch work Monk and Nun (c. 1 600, Haarlem Museum) in which the monk 
lustfully hovers over a nun while fondling her bared breast. 
Another category of works that feigns artistry is the one that blends sex with 
sadism. These works elicit a response to sexual violence by any available means, 
no matter how crude. The grouping is obviously the product of a neurosis- and 
perversion-ridden civilization. 
Also weak on art and direct in solicitation is the ubiquitous use of women's bod­
ies and female charm to promote and advertise in every medium, and I should also 
include here the pseudoartistic striptease, such as Paris and London's Soho district 
have long purveyed. The best of these shows- interspersed with witty banter, 
graced with attractive performers and apt music and lighting - have certain at­
tributes of art, but chiefly the goal is to put the audience into a sexual trance, and 
even the more pretentious elements will be used in such a way as to aid the sexual 
effect. We find sexual dances among the primitive peoples of Brazil, Africa, and 
India which employ the same elements as the striptease of Europe. Yet here, though 
the act of sex is mimed, it is done either as a ritual in which the entire tribe par­
ticipates and in which the erotic and religious elements are merged into an insepa­
rable whole, or as a rudimentary mode of theater in which socially important phe­
nomena are enacted. The striptease reduces the mime to the aphrodisiacal function. 
With cold calculation it is either a preparation or a surrogate for ors amatoria. 
Certainly, sex with a mere nod to artistic effect goes far back. I mentioned the 
statues of Pompeii, with their erections and displays of sexÂal technique. In the first 
volume of Eduard Fuchs's book, many works are reproduced which have as their 

382 
Art and Obscenity 
main goal the parasexual stimulation of the viewer. I n  the Middle Ages this trait 
even stands out from the architecture as an obscene joke. Textbook examples of 
sex-with-airs are provided by some of Hans Behom's engravings in the Renais­
sance, and especially by the numerous rococo etchings in the salacious style go/ant. 
Some English caricatures of the late eighteenth century qualify too. Fuchs repro­
duces a lampoon of flagellations which appeals to the most coarse associations: 
a man with trousers lowered straddles a woman while another woman with 
breasts bared flogs him; the whole scene is lit by a phallus-shaped candle. 
I think I have sufficiently answered my second question. The obscene definitely 
finds a place in art objects, although variously, in dependency on the vividness and 
assertiveness of the lewd passages and the degree of pallidness of the artistic val­
ues. We can therefore scale articles of culture along a continuum: at one end are 
those where the artistic tissue virtually absorbs the obscene without a residue, 
while at the other end ore those where pornography nods little or not at all to art. 
I discern four basic creative methods by which even a potent obscene aspect may 
be, so to speak, neutralized. These are: 
1 .  The sexual elements can be handled metaphysically. Sex is here regarded as the 
Absolute in life, or it is tied in with some Absolute. We see this in D. H. Lawrence 
and, in Polish literature, in Stanislaw Przybyszewski and S. I. Witkiewicz. 
2. The sexual can be poeticized, invested with a suffused but charged emotion. 
The scenes of love-making in Les Amants by Malle or La Verite by Clouzot ore 
of this kind. 
3. The sexual can be intellectualized. This occurs chiefly where characters are made 
to describe and reflect upon their own behavior; Aldous Huxley was a master 
of this approach. 
4. The most frequent method is aestheticization. Here, the valuational qualities 
associated with the sexual, such as sound, shape, movement, or color, have their 
:iexual connotations artistically extended. 
Now, there remain other ways than these to offset the plain lewdness of sexual­
ity, but this listing will serve to demonstrate my view of the disparity between the 
artistic and the obscene. Yet I must emphasize again that in the pornographically 
weighted end of the spectrum, certain sequences may be experienced as obscene 
even though that was never the artist's intention. This effect is due to an imbalance 
in the artistic structure which permits the aesthetic values to be overwhelmed, 
either by vigorous sexual matter or by an inadequacy of the aesthetic aspect which 
lets even weak sexual material predominate. 

383 
How No keel Sex 
Achieves a Presence 
in Art 
I have not so far mentioned any nonrepresentational artists or groups. In archi­
tecture and music, the evidence for an obscenity measurement is scant; which is 
not to say, of course, that eroticism may not be strongly suggested by, for example, 
one of Scriabin's ecstatic compositions or an erect victory monument. The applied 
arts (Greek vases, for instance) carry mimetic features, which in turn may have 
sexual elements; a free-standing representational sculpture (the thirty phalluses 
and twenty vaginas of Dinapur) might be regarded as a kind of architectural com­
plex; music tied in with a libretto (Shostakovich's Lady Macbeth of the Mzensk 
District) or dance (Strauss's Salome) may well generate more literal associations. 
Nonetheless, these are all special and qualified cases. If primitive architecture and 
sculpture tend to be interpreted by some as libidinal, 16 it is often overlooked that 
architecture has depended on the given need and the available materials and tech­
nology, while sculpture had a magical-religious character. 
Music is a nonobjective art which is so multivalent that its mere texture-sepa­
rate from literalizations - is incapable of being pinned down as being sexual. How­
ever, when Luigi Nono's Red Coot was choreographed for a Warsaw performance 
in October 1 962, the passages played with the scenes of Don Perlimplino's impo­
tence and Belisa's wedding night acquired sexual impact-a classic instance of 
episodic obscenity. Conversely, the sexual thrust in Stravinsky 's Rite of Spring is 
so subsumed in the musical conception that the artistic values control the whole. 
Thus, I will stand by my contention that the representational arts, with their 
referents in reality (objects and situations), are the most open to the interpolation 
of obscene parts and passages. 1 7  However, let me also repeat that where we are 
not familiar with the historical background of a work (as in the case of a work 
with magical-religious symbolism), we often too hastily assert the presence of ob­
scenity where that intention did not, in fact, motivate the creator and where its 
traces are not finally verifiable in.the art object. I would say that this is the case 
with uninformed opinion concerning the Pompeii frescos. 1 8  In contrast, where we 
lack the connotational "key," we may overlook the blatant presence, if camouflaged 
and symbolic, of obscene elements even in more nonrepresentational forms. I can­
not, however, carry this line of thought too far here, as it would involve me in the 
general problems of the interpretation of content and meaning. 
Encourage Eroticism, For It I s  Disalienating 
The conclusions to which my theoretical approach has led me might be questioned 
on two counts. 

384 
Art and Obscenity 
The reader will be aware that many persons concerned with obscenity do not 
and will not accept the key distinction which I draw between eroticism and ob­
scenity. For them, the mere presence of a sexual element is tantamount to pornog­
raphy. These writers speak of "pornographic art," whereas my premises allow me 
to speak only of a certain art of pornography- and note that there is a paradox in 
this phrase since the person who crafts pornography knows that his market de­
mands that the presentation of the sex episodes be artless. that is, that the medium 
be transparent. The more successful the rendering of the pornographic material, 
the greater is the absence of art in any strict sense of the term. These potential 
objectors, on the contrary, assume a category of obscene art just as there is a cate­
gory of religious or of poetic art. 
Another possible objection would reject my basic conception of art. Many writers 
consider art to be a system of signs expressive of individual or group behavior and 
seeking to evoke similar behavioral responses in the audience. The specificity of 
art's means is thus treated as a secondary matter, a presumably flexible feature 
which alters in light of what A or B (individuals or groups) think art is. This ap­
proach enfeebles or eliminates the relatively autonomous status of art, although 
it does comprehend both art and pronography as aspects (sometimes partially 
interwoven) of a given system of signs in a given sociocultural context. Of course, 
these two objections may be united to impugn in one package my conceptions of 
both art and pornography. 
Obviously, it is unlikely that I will convince my opponents, unless I can first per­
suade them of my fundamental tenets and the evidence supporting them; yet even 
if I should gain consent for my notion of the relationship between art and obscenity, 
there will remain another problem. It could justifiably be asked whether I was not 
motivated to demarcate pornography from art because I find the former pernicious. 
When I wrote the first version of this essay in 1 962, I was convinced that all por­
nography should be eradicated by all the means available. In the ensuing years I 
have changed my mind, in part because of the highly persuasive Kronhausen book, 
which was issued in 1 964. The argument of Phyllis and Eberhard Kronhausen is 
that even hard-core pornography may sometimes be the agent of purgative ca­
thexy. This finding is reinforced by the extensive studies of the above-cited Report 
of the American Commission on Obscenity and Pornography. So far there is no 
irrefragable proof that pornography induces criminal behavior, initiates delin­
quency, encourages deviance, etc. Doubt has even been cast on the farflung belief 

385 
Encourage Eroticism, For 
It Is Disalienating 
that pornography undermines moral standards and produces callous attitudes 
towards the opposite sex. 
If expert research and analysis thus eroded my conviction of the obnoxiousness 
of obscenity, my change of mind was speeded by the Danish experiment which, 
as is widely known, so satiated the public with a flood of lewd articles that their 
attraction was quickly lost for most people. Accepting, then, that pornography 
need not be pernicious always, for everyone, everywhere, and accepting also the 
estimate of the American commission that some control on availability with respect 
to juveniles is inevitable, I want now to repeat what I said in 1 962: There should 
be no censorship exercised towards a genuine erotic art for it is (in one aspect) 
a principal means to win people away from a hard-core or a soft-core pornography. 
The more subtle the censorship and the more understanding the law in this matter, 
the greater will be the chance of encouraging and facilitating an artistically ad­
mirable body of work dealing with sexual themes. 
The true problem lies in the pornographic tyranny, hard or soft, within the mass 
media. I continue to believe that a pornography that goes hand in glove with a cult 
of brutality and violence, and a pornographic commercialism that exploits the most 
base needs of man, can be dangerous. That is to say, it impoverishes the human 
being, generating a repetitious compulsion similar to drugs or gambling, and dis­
tracting him from more beneficial entertainment and more humanized values. 1 9  
For this reason I believe we are justified i n  confronting pornography with all possi­
ble weapons and not just with an erotic art alternative. I do not, however, believe 
that the "possible" weapons should include legislation or legal decisions banning 
pornography outright. The urgent, underlying task is not to come up with the cor­
rect way of writing a law; that will not eliminate the problem. What is wanted is 
the means to alter existing societies so as to provide free and healthy opportunities 
for all kinds of sexual enjoyment. 
Whether pornography will prove to be as obdurate and ineradicable as man's 
own existence is a matter I would not presume to answer. What can be debated is 
the fantastic boom in pornography, which seems to be a manifestation of an ill­
functioning civilization. The anthropological-philosophical and sociological points 
of view can be of the greatest relevance to the search for an explanation of why 
contemporary culture verges on pathology-that is, why it calls forth pornography, 
which, instead of healing the frustrations of social life, exacerbates the horrible 
sexual taboos and entrenches the immaturity of so many persons. 

386 
Art and Obscenity 
The human body is our earliest and basic experience. We might well follow here 
the phenomenological analysis given by Jean-Paul Sartre in his Being and Nothing­
ness (Part Ill), without adopting all of his existential premises. Sartre holds that 
three dimensions of our attitude towards the body have to be distinguished. First 
and primordial, the body is simply the medium through and in which we enforce 
our being and by which we respond through pain, pleasure, and other affects. 
Second, we are aware of the body as an object; a reflexive intentionality is focused 
on employing it in all feasible ways and also on being recognized in this dimension 
by other human agents. Third, the body is seen by /'autrui; it is treated as an object 
by another's intention to grasp us only in the dimension of physical entity. Sartre 
explains the phenomenon of prudery in relation to this third dimension. 
To this point I am assisted by Sartre with much benefit for my topic. Pornography 
is only to be elucidated, however, by combining the existentialist with the socio­
historical interpretation. The usefulness of Being and Nothingness, which sees the 
body as a contingent, potentially reified being (facticite), must be augmented and 
superseded for, while alienation may be founded in man's ontological status, .it is 
above all culturally engendered, determined, and finally limited. I earlier noted 
that the nature/culture conflict is essential to our understanding of the continuous 
tussle between pornographic-impulses and tendencies and the moral code of a time. 
Pornography is not so much the product of a man's practice of sex as it is of his 
thinking about sex; and I do not think it is a difficult task to respond as to why por­
nography has remained fascinating and exciting since the dawn of human civiliza­
tion. What is truly hard -and would require a chapter in itself- is an elucidation 
of why pornography has grown problematic (more or less the Heidegger issue of 
Fragwordigkeit) in man's mind at this time. 
In this matter, I can here only delineate a possible line of inquiry. First of all, 
once the fixed order of values ("the great chain of being") established by a scrip­
ture or gospel of one kind or another had been undermined, there was no holding 
back the sexual question from emerging. 
Second, the progressive autonomization of the individual (a concomitant of the 
democratizing processes) had to raise the question of priorities: Shall the gratifica­
tion of private needs be deferred wholly and indefinitely in the face of legal (moral) 
fiats? Or shall the latter be subordinated to the former? In our tradition, Sade was 
the first to assert this question in an aggressive fashion and to make of sexual 
blasphemy a new cult. 
Third, this emerging individual, proud of his expanded and hallowed rights, was, 

387 
Encourage Eroticism, For 
It Is Disolienoting 
nonetheless, increasingly oppressed by the alienational situation which had grown 
since the end of the eighteenth century. One way for "the discontents of civiliza­
tion" to make their protest was through a revitalization of sexual conduct. The 
Freudian and the post-Freudian revolution will bear witness to the theoretical im­
plications of this tendency. In the writings of Wilhelm Reich and Herbert Marcuse 
with regard to the possibility of liberation through the release of libidinal energy 
directed towards the achievement of harmonious interaction with others, lies the 
most conspicuous proof of a nascent sexual eschatology. 
The spectacular outburst of pornography is a phenomenon of the post-World 
War II era. No one can ignore the fact that it has accompanied an era of harrowing 
civilizational transition (towards the second industrial revolution), of continual 
anxiety over the very survival of humanity, of persistent rebellion against all forms 
of empire owing to the bureaucratic, anonymous, and antihuman character of their 
administration. The battle for an open, multifarious pornography is, accordingly, 
one of the pointed protests against an overpowering and increasingly unbearable 
alienation. It is, however, an abortive challenge, which turns the rebellion into 
another servitude. Some radicals will object at this point, arguing that the defense 
of an unrestricted pornography parallels the fight for the rights of women and 
homosexuals, which is in turn part of the larger struggle of the political left. To this 
I must reply that to frame the struggle in these terms is a mystification. It is sheer 
self-deception to believe (as many do) that one of the routes to achieving real free­
dom is the pornographic highway. For not the first nor the last time, the aliena­
tional processes have been countered with an alternative mode of alienation. The 
pro-obscenity radicals "out-Herod Herod" when they hold that Playboy magazine 
and its like help to spread the evangel of a liberated mankind. Let me take up two 
examples to clarify the matter: striptease and nudism. 
The striptease and topless fad, like all kinds of voyeur spectacle, derive from the 
entrenched antinomy of culture and nature. Leszek Kolakowski has dealt with this 
tension in an exhaustive way. 20 However, it should be added that with striptease, 
as with all pornography, the chief oppositions occur within culture itself. Striptease 
debases intimacy, it makes sex dirty by reifying it utterly. Second, striptease is an 
excrescence of mole domination; it flaunts the power of men to treat women as 
commodities to be bought and sold upon prior inspection. Third, striptease is an 
ersatz myth, fulfilling the lowest needs by reversing them to the status of the highest 
attainable value. It has been observed by Roland Barthes that the striptease de­
sexualizes women. 21 Possibly this is true for the stratum of curious intellectuals 

388 
Art and Obscenity 
whose sophistication quickly turns the show into a boring ordeal. I surely belong in 
this category; and yet during the course of numerous stripteases I hove noticed how 
many men store fixedly at the performing women; they relish the performonces-
it is standard businesᢦ practice -so as to select a stripteaser for fornication after­
wards. Thus, the striptease manifestly proves that open pornography only deepens 
. 
and confirms the state of alienation; it reasserts the frustrations and neuroses, it 
divides mcin into a chaste soul and a dirty body, and makes of the latter a thing, 
o sheer commodity. 
Nudism on the other hand seems to offer some relief from alienation. Nudism 
is derived from a desperate effort to return to nature, to shed the taboos of civiliza­
tion, to divest oneself of the shame of being mode on object in another's eyes. The 
last of these points is especially significant, for the users of pornography believe 
mistakenly that they get rid of sexual shame when they turn themselves and their 
models into objects in a paid charade. This mystification proves how greatly we oil 
are enslaved and how easily we are entrapped into glorifying open pornography 
as a suitable liberating instrument. In any case, authentic nudists understand (not 
without a certain dramatic hubris) that they cease to be objectified bodies looked 
at as though before on auction. Nudity in time (how long depends on both the 
individual and the environment) becomes as natural as it once was at the downing 
of civilization. However, even nudÁsm. where it has at the lost superseded the dra­
matic hubris, culminates in what seems no more than a great illusion, if we reflect 
on its possibilities as an implement for restoring a sexual existence which has gone 
out of joint. Why? First, the nudist "colonies" are small and dispersed enclaves. 
Second, considerations of climate, ugly bodies, and so on, would inhibit any general 
development of nudism. Third, it is evident that nudist beaches ore visited by many 
persons who are looking for something other than a Rousseouion, animalized cul­
ture wherein one tries to recoup the primal dimension of living in and through one's 
body in Sartre's sense. 
Let me add that such an "animalized" state of mind seems to be on impossibil­
ity. Man's sexuality is distinguished by the presence of the two other dimensions 
pointed out by Sartre. In other words, the reflexive awareness of employing our 
bodies and the sense of being looked at ore ineradicable. The basic goal to be 
aimed for, then, is to disalienate the sexual culture without reducing it to the level 
of nature, which just introduces another version of alienated sexuality. I am leaving 
aside the question of whether nudism manages to ovoid the animalization of sexual 
attitude. What matters for my present purpose is the utopian projection of the nud-

389 
Encourage Eroticism, For 
It Is Disolienoting 
ist program, even should nudism be able to intensify the consciousness of being 
free in glancing at an alien body and in being glanced at. 
Due to such considerations, I have urged that pornography must be resisted. It 
must be resisted for the very reasons espoused by those radicals who argue that 
the gates must be opened to pornography. Nor am I spinning a sophistry. We can­
not cure our ill-functioning culture by seeking symptomatic relief while not going 
after the ·causes. The disalienation of the existing societies -the complete, harmoni­
ous fulfillment of all the riches of the various natural needs of the human species 
(the sexual impulses included) -is not a goal to be reached through the gates of 
pornography. 
Let me again stress that I am not in favor of a conclusive ban on obscene mate­
rials. If there is worth in what I earlier argued, then sanctions against pornography 
can only bring unintended consequences. Those punished for spreading obscoena 
will be persons who have but haplessly preserved the corruption of the predomi­
nant culture.22 The only effective way to eradicate or minimalize the range and 
influence of pornography is to alter the underlying social systems, their basic fabric, 
their value hierarchies. 
Those who would abolish obscenity should, moreover, make it part of their strat­
egy to protect all genuine erotic art. If art can have a cathartic (therapeutic) func­
tion then it lies in this direction. Moreo\'er, there should be an extension of the idea 
of the erotic domain. At one time notable for scandalous (and today innocent) 
works like Bellocq's photographs of New Orleans whores, today it should admit, 
for example, Jack Smith's film Flaming Creatures or Warhol's and Morrissey's 
Trash and Flesh. The latter works are controversial, but they certainly do not ex­
hibit sex for its own sake. They have referents in actual life problems, in the neu­
rotic complexes and the desires of young people who exist on the margin of society 
and in contempt of its laws, beliefs, and habits. Thus, even though Morrissey's 
frames emphasize male and female nudity, and especially the genital presence, 
the films basically promote a most serious attitude towards the possible disaliena­
tion of society. Likewise-although I cannot share his eschatological program -
I must agree with Marcuse when he says that Marx's idea of homo aestheticus 
(or, to put it more adequately, the communist person) includes also the anticipation 
of liberating and fully humanizing the sexual drives. 

390 
Notes 
1 .  The view presented here seems consistent 
with the methodological precepts of Karl 
Marx, and also his remarks on aesthetic ax· 
iology (few and unsystematized though these 
ore). This line of argument hos rarely been 
advanced within the morxist tradition since 
the ideas of Plekhanov dominated the field; 
although recently, similar interpretations of 
artistic values have been presented by other 
marxists; see G. LukOcs , Die Eigenart des 
Aesthetischen (Neuweid, i 963), L. Gold­
mann, Recherches dialectiques (Paris, 1 959) 
and E. Fischer, Von der Notwendigkeit der 
Kunst (Dresden, 1 959). 
2. See A. Craig 's instructive book, The 
Banned Books of England and Other Coun­
tries (London, 1 962). 
3. My position differs from the well-known 
one set forth by D. H. Lawrence in "Pornog· 
rophy and Obscenity" (in Lawrence, Sex, 
Literature and Censorship, edited by H. T. 
Moore [ New York, 1 968 ], pp. 64-81 ). He 
treated pornography as the mob's vulgar 
degradation of sex, the way the mosses in­
sult what they do not comprehend. I would 
hesitate to declare that all "obscenity" vilifies 
and caricatures sex, in port because I do not 
shore Lawrence's intense sexual mysticism, 
which he advanced with greater explicitness 
and fervor in "A propos of Lady Chatterley's 
Lover" ( 1 929). Here, Lawrence describes 
the sexual (blood) nexus as being threefold: 
involving the love partner, the species as a 
whole, and the vital universe. A kindred 
erotic religion has been advocated by Tim­
othy Leary, in particular in a Playboy inter­
view of 1 966঒ reprinted in his Politics of 
Ecstasy (New York, 1 968). Yet the approach· 
es of Lawrence and Leary are most helpful 
for discriminating the sexual (erotic) and the 
obscene, a fruitful distinction in the study 
Art and Obscenity 
of the relationship between art and ob­
scenity. 
4. See T. Hakenssen, "Sex in Primitive Art 
and Dance," and A. Ellis, "Art and Sex," in 
The Encyclopedia of Sexual Behaviour (New 
York, 1 961 ), pp. 1 54-1 79. 
5. See Freud's essays "The Poet and Day­
dreaming" (1 908) and "The Uncanny" 
(l91 9), in B. Nelson, ed., On Creativity and 
the Unconscious (New York, 1 958), pp. 53-
54, 1 55-1 61 . In texts on Leonardo do Vinci 
and on wit, his only other writings con· 
cerned with aesthetics, Freud developed 
this view and used it to show that psycho· 
analytic methods of study stop on the thresh· 
old of art. Of the followers of Freud that I 
have read, the subject is best and most pro· 
foundly analyzed by Ernst Kris. Following 
Freud closely, I feel , Kris suggests that 
dreams actually employ some formal de· 
vices not unlike art to "mask" the dream 
material. See E. Kris, Psychoanalytic Ex­
plorations in Art (London, 1 953), pp. 1 3-63. 
6. See V. George, Corps et visages feminins 
(Paris, 1 955). 
7. H. Mi Iler, Tropic of Cancer (New York, 
1 961 ), p. 90. 
8. Ibid., p. 1 64. 
9. Ibid ., pp. 229-233. Compare also his 
The World of Sex (New York, 1 965), esp. 
pp. 1 6-27. I omit here a question taken up 
by Kate Millett in her Sexual Politics (New 
York, 1 969, Port 111) -Miller 's attitude to· 
words women. I agree with Millett's persua­
sive analysis, which stresses the adolescent 
narcissism and the smoking-car fantasies 
in most of Miller's work. However, she 
also helps confirm the aspect of Miller 
most pertinent to this analysis, namely, his 
cathartic self-revelations, his truthfulness 
and artistic greatness in laying bare the sex­
ual neuroses of our time and in unmasking 

391 
their deeper sources in the pathology of the 
civilization. The same claim might be made 
for D. H. Lawrence, whose se.xual rebellion 
should be judged against o background of 
a still Victorian England. Incidentally, I 
should like to emphasize the paradox that 
all these literary rebels on whom the femi­
nist Millett posses o severe verdict were pre­
paring the ground for today's women's 
liberation movement. The sexual liberties 
they helped to gain were among the factors 
which enabled the shaping of the question 
of sexual equality. 
1 0. V. Nabokov, Lolita (New York, 1 959), 
p. 286. 
1 1 . Ibid., p. 284. 
1 2 . Craig, Banned Books, pp. 1 45-1 46; 
my italics. 
1 3 . Craig, in Banned Books, p. 2 1 4, rejects, 
as I do, the view that authentic literature 
can be pornographic. The position is also 
set forth in D. Loth, The Erotic in literature 
(London, 1 962). However, neither writer 
offers a theoretical underpinning to support 
this belief. Where they argue (quite reason­
ably) that the author's intent is insufficient 
grounds for judging whether a book is ob­
scene, they ignore ( 1 ) that the intention can 
often be surmised from the structure of the 
work; and (2) that the intention may be 
articulated outside of the work per se (as 
in the case of Thomas Mann's commentary 
on his novel Doctor Faustus) and this at 
least provides important interpretive mate­
rial. It will be seen that my position here 
deports from "The Intentional Fallacy," the 
well-known essay by M. C. Beardsley and 
W. K. Wimsatt, Jr. (Cf. Wimsatt, The Verbal 
Icon [New York, 1 958 ), pp. 3-1 8.) 
1 4. These are the primary grounds on which 
all the major writers who treat Rops have 
defended him against charges of decadence 
Notes 
and pornography. See E. Ramiro, Felicien 
Rops (Paris, 1 905); C. Lemonnier, Felicien 
Rops, l'homme et / 'artiste (Paris, 1 908); 
G. Kahn, F. Rops, in L 'Art et le beau, numero 
special (Libraire ortistique et litteraire, 1 965), 
pp. 5-59; R. Klein, F. Rops, ibid., vol. Ill, 
numero special, pp. 5-63. Each of the auth­
ors does concede that the obscene is the 
dominant tra it of his work. 
1 5. See A. Kyrou, Amour- erotisme et 
cinema (Paris, 1 957). Kyrou holds that since 
World War II cinema has become dominated 
by the ideal of a woma n  impersonally and 
mechanically providing sex, just as love has 
come to be handled in the same terms as 
other consumer products. This sharply criti­
cal observation also comes through in the 
film by Carlo Lizzani, La Vita agra (1 964). 
1 6 . See the Freudian interpretation in E. von 
Sydow, Primitive Kunst und Psychoanalyse 
(Lei pzig-Wein-Zurich, 1 927). 
1 7. Which of the representational o rts -
if it introduces obscene portions- is most 
open to the charge of being pornog raphy 
plain and simple? I suspect the parasexual 
responses ore most likely to be stirred by 
theater, mime, and dance, owing to the im­
mediate physical presence of performers. 
The matter is complicated because in films 
and literature the absence of physical con­
tact makes identification with a character 
or situation easier. 
1 8. See the analysis of the Dionysian friezes 
in the Villa dei Mysteri in A. Maiuri, Pompei 
(Rome, 1 938, 1 952) and K. Schefold, Pompe­
ianische Malerei (Bale, 1 952). 
1 9. The dialectically ambivalent character 
of the process of reception is emphasized 
in the "identification/projection" formula 
presented by Edgar Morin in L 'Esprit du 
temps (Paris, 1 962). Morin concentrates on 
the cinema as a case of mass media and on 

392 
violence as o chief attraction. The audience 
(primarily adolescents - but many adults 
too) rids itself of accumulated repressed 
materials, at the some time identifying with 
the heroes in suggested situations. The ana­
lysis applies equally to the reception of 
verbally or iconicolly com municoted por­
nography. If sexual fore were regularly 
sought out for amusement, it is likely that 
obscene material would predominate. Would 
not the attitude-reinforcement stemming 
from the identification/projection of the 
fantasy indulgence overbalance any purga­
tive benefit? 
20. See L. Kolakowski, "Epistemology of the 
Striptease," Tri-Quarterly, Foll 1 971 ; in Pol· 
ish in Tw6rczoSc!, April 1 966. 
2 1 .  See R. Barthes, Mythologies (Paris, 
1 957), pp. 1 65-1 68. 
22. See J. Fronk, "Obscenity and the Law," 
in M. Levich, ed., Aesthetics and the Philos­
ophy of Criticism (New York, 1 963), pp. 
41 8-440. 
Art and Obscenity 

I ndex 
Aalto, Alvar, 1 35 
Abakanowicz, Magda, 1 38 
Abell. Walter, 27, 246 n . 7, 308 n. 1 4  
Abu an-Nafzawi, and The Perfumed Gorden, 
357 
AChRR, 259. 262 
Action painting, 9 1 ,  1 07, 1 1 1 . 323 
Adam, Leonard, 59 
Aesthetic val ues. See Value 
Albee, Edward, 243 
Alberti, Leon Battista, 89, 1 56 
Aldrich, Robert, 355 
Aleatory composition, 95, 1 04, 1 1 0, 320, 
331 
Alhazen, 1 56 
Alienation 
artist as outsider, 238 
and commitment to social change, 239, 
320-326 
and disalienation, 73. 1 48. 233-234, 237-
240, 304-305. 308 n. 1 5, 309, 31 7, 327-
338 
and "ivory tower" attitude, 66, 73, 239, 
322-323. 330 
and the prophetic character of art, 240, 
280. 288, 304, 329 
and sexuality, in art, 373-389 
in socialism. 286-287, 329-330 
and time, 332 
Ambiguity, 76, 1 1 5  
Analogon in art. See Mimetic art 
Andreyev, Leonid, 322 
Antal; Frederick, 307 n.B 
Antiart, 2, 3 1 9, 335 
Antinomies. 225. 229, 386-387 
Antiutopias, 278-279 
Antonioni, Michelangelo, 1 35, 1 89-1 90, 
374 
Appia, Adolphe, 95, 1 93 
Applied arts, 1 1 8. 1 30, 1 37, 261 -262, 308-
317. 332 
Appraisal, aesthetic, 1 64, 1 68, 1 70-1 71 .  See 
also Explanation; Valuation 
Aquinas, Thomas. 1 09, 232 
Aragon. Louis. 239, 289 
Archetype. 27, 1 42, 1 47, 349-351 
Architecture, peculiarities of, 1 1 7. 262. 3 1 2. 
357, 383 
Aretino, Pietro, 378 
Aristotle. 1 1 8, 1 36, 1 99  n.3, 251 . 253. See 
also Mimetic art, Aristotelian tradition of 
Arnheim, Rudolf, 24-27, 1 70, l 79 n. 12. 
1 91 .  207 
Art, definition of, 67. 71 , 74-78, 88-1 21 . 
363. See also Valuation; Val ue 
"Art for art's sake." Se Alienation 
Artifact, artistic, 7 1 ,  75, 1 1 4. 1 1 7 
direct and mediated. l 09-1 l 0 
Artist, as institution. 67, 1 1 4, 252. Se also 
Individuality 
Artistic val ue. See Value 
Arts and crofts movement, 95 
Aschenbrenner, Karl, 6, l 53 n. 9, 1 88 
Assafiev, Boris, 201 n. 1 1  
Attitude, aesthetic, 1 7, 30, 62. 67, 72, 76, 
96, 1 24 n. 18 
contemplation vs. cooperation, 77-78. 96, 
1 1 0-1 1 1 .  1 20, 1 22 
Auerbach, Erich, 204, 307 n.5 
Autont-Lara, Claude, 374 
Authenticity (spontaneity, immediacy). 
artistic, 7, 1 1 2, 1 1 6, 1 23 n. 1 2. 1 4 1 ,  1 54 
n. 1 B. See also Sincerity 
Autonomy of art, relative, 45, l:IJ. 67, 72, 
1 0 1 ,  1 05-1 09, 1 1 4. 1 20. 203 
Autotelicism of art, 60, 63, 67, 69, 73, 75, 
1 06. 1 1 4, 1 1 6, 363 
Avant-garde, 70-73, 88-96, 1 07, 1 1 4, 1 33, 
1 40-1 41 , 1 47, 21 5. 248 n.20, 261 ,  31 8, 
372. See also Novelty; Realism, socialist 
Axiology. See Value 
Ayer, Alfred, 1 5, 1 68  
Babel, Isaac, 276-277, 286 
Baez, Joan, 1 38 
Bakhtin, Mikhail M., 1 42, 301 -303 

394 
Balance, artistic. l 05, 1 89, 320 
Balzac, Honore de, 322. 327 
Barbusse, Henri, 261 
Barthes. Roland, 203-204. 2 1 6. 221 -222, 
387 
Bort6k, Bela, 1 43 
Baudelaire. Charles, 322. 325, 372 
Bauha us, 92, 1 06. See also Gropius 
Baumgarten, Alexander, 20, 1 56 
Baxondoll. Lee, 340 n. 9 
Bayer. Raymond, l .  1 79 n. 12 
Bazin, Andre. 209 
Beardsley. Monroe , 2, 4, 8, 21 , 23. 33. 68-
69. 73-74. 1 29, 1 68. 1 76 
Beauty 
and the beautiful, 90, 94, 1 28, 1 56, 1 94 
feminine. 365, 37 1 
See also Va lue 
Beauvoir, Simone de, 220 
Belinsky, Valerian, 75 
Bell, Clive. 1 9 
Bellomy, Edward, 240 
Benjamin, Wolter, 92, 358 
Benn, Gottfried, 1 94 
Bense, Max. 98 
Berg, Alban. 1 42 
Bergman, Ingmar. 208, 375 
Bergson , Henri. 91 , 94 
Bernini, Gianlorenzo, 326 
Bialaszewski, Miron. 21 9 
Biological predisposition, to aesthetic value, 
41 . 43, 1 1 9, 1 75 
Birkhoff, George. 20. 22 
Blaue Reiter, 1 94 
Boas. Franz, 59. 86 n.58 
Boas. George. 28-29 . 39 
Bodkin, Maud. 27, 350 
Borges, Jorge Luis . 3 1 4 
Bosch, Hieronymus, 21 3 
Boucher. Franѩois . 369 
Bouhours, Domin ique, 1 57 
Boy-Zelenski. Todeusz, 353 
Index 
Brancusi, Constantin, 89 
Brondys, Kazimierz, 91 
Brantome, Pierre. 370 
Braque. Georges. 207-208 
Broudel. Fernond, 85 n.56 
Bread ond Puppet Theater. 1 94 
Brecht. Bertolt. 1 0 1 . 1 09. 1 33. 1 41 . 1 93, 
1 94. 239, 288. 3 1 2. 326. 332 
Breton. Andre. 97. 1 1 1 .  31 2 
Brik, Os1p. 93 
Brook. Peter. 1 93 
Brucke, 1 94 
Bucher. Karl, 59. 334 
Bukharin, Nikolai, 258. 273 
Bulgokov. Mi khail. 1 31 
Bullough, Edward. 1 2. 1 4, 1 7  
Buiiuel. Luis, 244 
Burke, Edmund . 21 -24, 1 03. 1 57 
Burri, Emil , 1 35 
Butor, Michel, 1 35 
Coge, John, 3, 96, 1 1 1 , 1 1 8, 3 1 8  
Colder, Alexander, l 07 
Comp taste, 1 49 
Camus. Albert, 1 08, 324-325 
Capitalism and art, 94, 238. See a/so 
Alienation 
Carpets. Persian, 1 38 
Cossirer, Ernst, 3 1 0  
Catharsis, 77, 370. 389 
Catholic personalism . 92 
Coudwell, Christopher, 43, 1 1 6. 335 
Cows, Peter, 52 
Censorship, 1 36, 1 47, 1 50, 252. 288, 289 
n. 14, 328, 364, 375. 385. 389 
Cervantes, Miguel de, 236, 238. 240 
Cezanne. Poul, 89 
Chagall, More, 1 95, 21 3 
Chance, and the structure of art, 9, 90-91 , 
94-95, 1 08. 1 1 1  ' 244. 323 
Chaplin , Charles, 1 32, 208 
Child. Arthur. 41 

395 
Childe, Gordon, 62 
China, People's Republic of, 325. 331 
Christiansen, Broder, 1 03 
Chwistek. Leon, 2 1 4-21 5 
Cinema. See Mimetic art, cinematic mode 
Class, social, and art 
norms of judgment, 1 47, 260, 328, 363 
proletarian art, 259, 325 
structure and conflicts, 70, 88, 238, 295, 
299, 302 
"vulgar sociologism.'' 298 
See also Proletcult 
Classical works of art, 1 51 
Classicism, 1 31 
Clouzot, Henri-Georges, 375, 382 
Cognition 
characteristic of all art, 226, 31 0, 320 
cognition-laden vs. artistic-cognitive art, 
31 4-31 7  
and constituent artistic values, 1 1 5, 1 83-
1 99, 21 1 -2 1 3, 248 n.20, 264, 299, 31 0-
31 7 
Coleridge, Samuel T., 1 99 n.3 
Collage. 1 20, 356 
Collingwood, Robin G., 1 4-1 5 
Commercial art, 1 46, 239, 381 
Commodity status of art. See Alienation 
Comprehensibility (communicativeness) of 
art, 93, 1 46, 1 55 n.25, 229, 259, 261 , 
267. 270 
Conceptual art, 92, 96, 1 20, 224, 3 1 8, 339 
n.3, 360 
Concrete poetry, 95 
Constable, John, 206-208 
Construction-function-form syndrome 
(applied arts), 6, 1 03, 1 30, 1 45, 1 54 
n. 12, 257 
Constructivism, 89, 92, 1 06 
Content of art, 1 03, 1 30, 1 37, 1 40, 203, 209, 
2 1 8. 227-228. 297, 301 
Continuum, 1 1 7, 1 29, 223, 235, 240, 371 
Conventions. See Symbols 
Index 
Cortazar, Julio, 77 
Counterfeiting of art, 1 1 2, 1 22 n. 10, 1 40 
Croft (skill, metier), 75, 91 . 95, 1 09-1 1 0, 
1 1 2, 1 20, 1 49, 253, 3 1 6. Se also 
Technique 
Craig, Gordon, 95, 1 40, 1 93, 322 
Creativity, aesthetic 
collective, 92, 94 
and definition of art, 1 1 4, 1 55 n.3 1 
and freedom, 272 
origin of, 62·72 
and realized expression, 1 85, 21 4, 21 9 
as subject matter, 77 
and unconscious, 1 86 
Criticism, specific 
related to aesthetic axiology, 55, 57, 1 36. 
1 75 
related to artistic praxis, 251 , 271 
Croce, Benedeto, 2, 1 4-1 5, 91 , 1 39, 1 42 
Cruikshank, George, 371 
Cubism, 89, 1 06, 205, 207, 356 
Cummings, e. e., 1 40 
Cunningham, Merce, 96, 1 1 1  
Curtius, Ernst Robert, 349-351 
Cybernetics, and aesthetics, 5, 1 09-1 1 1 ,  
1 40, 330 
Dada, 2-3, 89-90, 92, 1 06, l 08, 1 4 1 ,  1 70, 
356 
Dante Alighieri, 232, 235, 286 
Darwin, Charles, 43 
David, Jacques-Louis, 252, 326 
Debussy, Claude, 1 31 ,  322 
Definition of art. See Art 
De Kooning, Willem, 1 35 
Delacroix, Eugene, 1 3 1  
Delaunay, Robert, 89 
Del la Volpe, Golvano, 295, 302 
Denotation vs. connotation, 21 1 -21 2, 21 7· 
21 8, 230, 245 n.3 
Depiction (description) in art, 220. See also 
Mimetic art 

396 
Derrida, Jacques. 221 
De Sica, Vittorio, 210 
Dewey, John, 1 1 ,  309, 31 1 , 339 n.6 
Diachronic vs. synchronic, 44-46, 69-71 ,  
99, 1 01 , 1 41 .  344 
Dickens, Charles, 326 
Dickie, George, 33 
Diderot, Denis, 21 , l t/J, 236. 251 , 253, 378 
Dilthey, Wilhelm, 44, 1 96, 200 n.8, 303 n.21 
Diogenes the Babylonian, 156 
Direct apprehension. Se Value judgment 
Disney, Walt, 21 7 
Dispositional taste. Se Taste 
Dissonance and consonance, 7, 1 3, 100 
102, 1 94 
Divinism, aesthetic, 23 
Dominguez, Oscar, 1 1 1  
Doniol-Valcroze, Jacques, 355 
Dostoevsky, Fyodor, 1 42 
Dubos, Jeon-Baptiste, 1 57 
Duca, Lo, 374 
Ducasse, C. J., 1 4. 1 7 
Duchamp, Marcel, 2, 3, 89, 96, 106, 1 41 .  
1 47, 339 n.3, 356 
Dufrenne, Mikel, 1 8, 191 .  203, 204, 221 -
225, 247 n. 12, 248 n.20 
Duncan, Isadora, 1 90  
Durer, Albrecht, 21 . 1 56. 251 
Durrenmott. Friedrich, 330, 332 
Eco, Umberto, 76 
Educative role of art, 269-272 
Ehrenberg, Gustav, 325 
Ehrenfels, 01ristian von, 24 
Eidetic imagery, 59, 67, 75, 92-93, 1 02 
Eikhenboum, Boris, 70, 1 42, 21 8  
Einstein, Albert, 94 
Eisenstein, Sergei, 1 09, 208, 239 
Ekman, Rolf, 1 47 
El Greco, 1 90  
Eliot, T. S., 93, 324, 352-353 
Index 
Elton, William, 33 
Emotionalist theory of art, 9, 1 64 
Empothy theory of art, 1 2, 1 6-1 7, 187-1 88, 
1 97-1 98, 235 
Empiricist theory of art, 18-22, 1 39, 216 
Ernst, Mox, 89, 356 
Eroticism, and art, 364, 36, 367-378, 389 
Estrangement effect, 101 
Ethics, and aesthetics, 1 77, 284 
Ethnocentrism, and aesthetic norms, 30-41 , 
56, 76 
Evaluation (grading, scaling), aesthetic 
criteria of, 1 25-1 52 
and explanation, 36-38 
and ideology, 1 46-149 
marxist tradition of, l 54 
nonresidual standards of, 1 45-149 
residual standards of, 1 28-1 45, 1 49 
and subcriterio, 1 50  
and valuation, 6, 38, 1 36, 172-183 
Everyday objects, and aesthetics, 2-3, 89-
92. 105, 107, 1 1 8, 210, 261 , 31 2-31 7, 
329 
Existentialism, 1 8, 44, 92, 21 6, 222, 232, 
250 n.23, 386 
Experience, aesthetic, 2-3, 1 23 n. 18 
criteria of, 1 51 -1 52, 31 1 -31 2 
and dado, 3, 31 1 
emotions .involved in, 1 99  n.3 
and expresive traits, 1 86-1 89, 191 
as norm of value, 10-1 1 ,  1 56-1 57, 166 
origin of, 45, 62, 67-69, 327 
permanence of, 71 -72 
Se also Attitude: Homeostasis 
Explanation (and description}, 36-38, 56. 
1 70, 1 78 n. Z See also Appraisal 
Expresion, 24, 26, 32, 75, 77, 99, 1 1 0, 1 1 8, 
1 20, 1 31 , 1 33, 1 35, 1 37, 1 38, 1 40, 1 48, 
1 71 ,  1 83-202, 205, 297, 302, 31 5. 363 
genesis of, 1 99, 202 n. 1 1  
and magic, 202 n. 1 1  

397 
Expression (continued) 
morxists' confusion with mimesis, 1 83, 1 96, 
339 n.2 
of psychosocial equivalents, 1 95-1 98 
reductionist approaches to, 1 83 
"virtually psychic" traits of, 1 84 
Expressionism, 91 , 1 94-1 95, 1 98 
Family resemblance, in definition. Se 
Wittgenstein 
Faulkner, William, 220, 324, 378 
Fauvism, 89, 91 , 21 5 
Fechner, Gustav, 22 
Fellini, Federica, 1 08. 1 35, 233-234, 37 4 
Fischer, Ernst, 43, 57-58, 1 1 6, 201 n. I l. 
244, 335 
Flaubert, Gustave, 1 85, 322. 372 
Flo, Juan, 28 
Folk (popular) art, 29, 90, 1 1 1 , 263 
Form, 36, 58, 60, 62, 1 03-1 05, 1 20, 1 30, 
1 37, 1 40, 203, 303 
as composition, 1 04, 1 33 
and content, in diverse arts, 1 03-1 04, 1 38, 
1 45 
and expression, 21 2 
as type pattern, 1 04 
Formalism, 1 8-1 9, 1 01 ,  1 45, 2 1 8, 303 
Forster, E. M., 201 n. 10 
Fouquet, Jehan, 371 
Francostel, Pierre, 2 1 4, 308 n. 1 4  
Frazer, Jomes, 59 
Freud, Sigmund, 59, 91 , 94, 336, 350, 365, 
370, 372, 374, 387, 390 n.5. See a/so 
Wish fulfillment theory of .art 
Friehe, Vladimir, 298, 299, 304 
Frisch, Mox, 1 08, 332 
Frondizi, Risieri, 52 
Fry, Edward, 207 
Fry. Roger, 224 
Frye, Northrop, 27 
Fuchs, Eduard, 370 
Index 
Fuentes, Carlos, 288 
Fiigen, H., 306 n.5 
Functions of art, 55. 1 30, 1 44, 1 52, 296-
?Q7 ֕-:1:1A :1AQ 
central or Orphic, 31 5-326, 328, 337 
"framing" or marginal, 31 2-3 1 9  
poro-oesthetic, Philocteteon, 31 4-326. 
328. 332, 337 
poro-oesthetic, Promethean, 31 4-326. 
328, 332. 337 
Future of art, 77-78. See also Hegel 
Futurism . Russian 
in art, 31 6 
in poetry, 93 
Gaba, Noum, 1 07 
Galecki, Jerzy, 1 8-1 9 
Gome, art as. 31 -35, 97 
Goroudy, Roger, 1 23 n. 13. 233, 241 . 244, 
248 n.20, 290 n.20 
Goudi, 1 33, 1 95 
Goutier, Theophile , 322 
Genet, Jeon, 1 21 
Genetic approach to art, 41 -46, 56-72, 85 
n.55 
psychogenesis vs. sociogenesis, 70 
Genotype and phenotype, 76, 1 01 ,  1 1 6 
Genre, 1 37, 1 38 
Geometrism in art, 1 9, 63-64, 1 53  n.6 
Gerard, Alexander, 1 57 
Gestoltism, and aesthetic norms, 6, 17, 24-
27, 98, 1 05, 1 64-1 65, 1 91 .  207 
Gestures, aesthetic, 2-3 
Giacometti, Alberto, 1 90, 2 1 7, 244 
Gide, Andre, l 08, 233 
Gillespie, Dizzy, 333 
Gillray. Jomes, 371 
Ginsberg, Alon, 334 
Giraudoux, Jeon, 1 33 
Godard, Jeon
-Luc, 95, 1 08, 1 20, 31 8 
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von, 236, 240 

398 
Gogh, Vincent von, 1 34, 1 90, 1 94, 1 96 
Gogol, Nikolai, 1 42, 236 
('-,()/den Lotus. The. 376 
Goldmann, Lucien, 1 22 n.4, 249 n.20, 299, 
307 n.9 
Gombrich, Ernst, 206-208, 2 1 4  
Goncharova, Natalia, 89 
Goodman, Nelson, 1 99  n. I, 245-246 n.3, 
31 0-31 1 .  339 n.2 
Gorki, Maxim, 1 23 n. 1 3, 233. 239, 254, 255, 
261 -265, 269, 274, 277 
Gotshalk, D. W., 86 n.58. 1 99 n.3 
Gramsd, Antonio, 1 37, 1 55 n.24 
Greene, Theodore, 1 8-1 9, 1 43, 1 99 n.4, 
245 n. 7  
Griffith, D .  W. ,  1 40 
Grochowiak, Stanislaw, 93 
Groos, Karl, 59 
Gropius. Walter, 91 . 1 35, 1 41 
Grossman, Leonid, 1 42 
Grotowski, Jerzy, 1 94 
Guillen, Nicholas, 239, 326 
GunsenhOuser, R., 21 
Hojdun, Janusz, 1 1 5 
Ham/et, 36-39 
Hampshire, Stuart, 1 77 
Handke, Peter, 1 90, 330 
Happenings, 3, 76, 96, 1 1 4. 1 20, 1 34. 1 47, 
1 71 ,  31 1 .  31 6, 360 
Hormony, 62, 67, 77, 1 00, 1 05, 1 28, 1 89, 
1 94, 31 8, 320, 328, 371 
Hortman, Robert, 1 8, 20 
Hasior, Wladislow, 90 
Housenstein, Wolter, 307 n.5 
Houser, Arnold, 299, 307 n.5 
Heortfield, John, 356 
Hedonist theory of art, 9, 1 64 
Hegel, Georg W. F., 71 . 78, 1 60. 1 96, 306 
n. 1, 327, 328, 329, 335 . 
Heifetz, Joscha, 1 93 
Heine, Heinrich, 325 
Index 
Hemingway, Ernest, 233, 325 
Hempel. Corl G., 51 . 56 
Herder, Johann G., 48, 1 60, 253 
Herskovits, Melvin, 39, 1 79 n.8 
Heyl. Bernard C.. 8. 23. 27 
Hierarchy, and aesthetics, 94, 1 29, 1 49, 
31 2. 332 
Hindemith. Paul. 1 89 
Historicism, 27-28, 35-48, 56, 68, 88, 97-
99, 1 1 9, 1 29, 1 45, 1 60. 1 68. 1 71 .  1 74-
1 75. 1 77. 21 5. 233. 304. 342. 363-364 
Hofmann, Hons, 1 35 
Hogarth, William, 21 -22 
Holderlin, Friedrich, 328 
Hollywod films, 1 38 
Home, Henry, 1 57 
Homeostasis, psychic, 68, 72, l 24 n. 18 
Homer, 235 
Homo oestheticus, 327, 329, 335.- 337. See 
a/so Alienation 
Hospers, John, 21 2-21 3 
Housman. A. E., 1 33 
Huizinga, Johan, 59 
Hulme, T. E., 93 
Hume, David, 4, 1 26, 1 28, 1 53 n.2, 1 57 
Husserl, Edmund, 222. 231 . Se also 
Phenomenology 
Hutchison, Fronds, 1 57 
Huxley, Aldous, 353-354, 382 
Idealist theory of art, 242-243, 250 n.23, 252 
Ideology. 41 , 70, 1 95, 232, 235, 241 , 256, 
264-265, 303, 31 7. 321 , 325, 328: 363 
and genesis of art, 299 
ldiogenetic vs. ollogenetic interpretation, 
60-74, 303 
lkebona, l 09-1 1 0  
Illusionist theory of art, 7, 1 3, 90, 206, 209-
21 1 , 31 3 
lmogism, in English poetry, 93 
Impressionism, 89, 21 5 
Indeterminacy, 76, 91 . Se a/so Chance 

399 
Individuality, artistic, 31 , 67, 70, 7 1 ,  75-76, 
95, 1 1 0-1 1 4. 1 1 7, 1 35. 1 39-1 40, 1 86. 
222. 304 
as anthropomorphism, 229. 
and critical realism, 238-240 
modern rejection of, 91 -92, 96. 359-360 
as "parole," 229 , 
social role of. 320 
as style or "signature," 1 9().1 91 .  1 98 
See also Originality 
Industrial (functional) art, 1 1 1 , 1 54  n. I 2. 
31 2-31 7, 334 
Information theory of art, 91 , 98, 309-31 7 
lngorden, Roman, 1 7- 1 9, 81 n.23. 98, 1 02, 
1 22 n. I, 1 23 n. 12, 1 24 n. 1 9, 1 53 n.9, 1 55  
n.25, 1 70, 1 76, 209, 218, 255 
Ingres, .Jean, 1 31 , 372 
Inspiration, 91 
Instinct, aesthetic, 1 56-1 57, 1 62, 1 64, 1 67 
lnstrumentalism, 23-24, 19, 83 n.39, 1 67-
1 68, See also Ethnocentrism; Relationist 
theory of art 
Intellectualism, in art, 93, 108, 1 21 .  1 31 .  
243, 318, 322, 335 
Intensity 
of experience, 1 52 
as quantifying standard for art, 1 30, 1 32, 
1 38, 1 43 
Intention, and the work of art, 1 84-1 85, 
1 93, 1 96-1 97. 205 
Interpretation, 36-39 
Intuition, 48, 93, 99, 1 29. 1 65, 1 68. Se also 
Direct apprehension 
Invariants (recurrent phenomena). Se 
Permanence 
Ionesco, Eugene, 324 
Isenberg, Arnold, 1 6  
Ives, Charles, 357 
Jaffe, Hons L. C., 21 4 
Jakobson, Roman, 44, 69, 86 n.62, 103, 241 , 
301 
Index 
Jazz, 1 1 1 , 333-334 
Jesuit doctrine of art, 252 
Joad. C. E. M., 1 9 
Josephson, Ernst, 1 34 
Joyce, Jomes, 1 31 , 244, 364, 377 
Judgment, artistic. Se Value judgment 
Jung, C. G., 27, 201 n. I I, 349-350 
Kafka, Franz. 233-234, 244, 324-325, 332 
Kagan , Moisei, 75, 86 n.60 
Kahler, Erich, 33, 1 00, 1 06  
Kandinsky, Vasily, 89, 1 34, 1 42, 205 
Kant, Immanuel 
on aesthetic judgment, 1 57-1 64, 1 78 n. I 
contemplation theory of, l 0-1 2, 1 4  
disinterestedness i n  the philosophy of, 
1 0-1 1 .  329 
on evaluation, 1 53  n.3 
on originality, 1 38-1 39 
semblance (virtuality) in the philosophy of, 
1 0- 1 1 
not a subjectivist, 1 27-1 28, 1 64, 1 76 
Kaprow, Allan, 96, 1 1 1 ,  31 8 
Kautsky, Karl, 43, 58 
Keats, John, 328 
Kennick, William E., 21 -22 
Khlebnikov, Velimir, 102, 1 70 
Kinetic art, 91 
Klee, Paul, 1 42, 213-21 4 
Klein, Yves, 90 
Kluckhohn, dyde, 39 
Kluver, Billy, 31 6, 31 8 
Knight, Helen, 21 
Kobayashi, Mosoki, 1 90  
Koestler, Arthur, 281 -284, 289-290 n. 16 
Kafka, Kurt, 24-25, 98 
KOhler, Ytblfgong, 24-25, 98 
Kolakowski, Leszek, 387 
Konarak. temple of, 376 
Kotorbinska, Janina, 97 
Kracauer, Siegfried, 40-41 
Krechowicz, Jerzy. 1 1 5  

400 
Krieger, Murray, l 
Kris, Ernst, 390 n.5 
Kranhausen. Eberhard and Phyllis. 375-378, 
384 
Kruchonykh, Aleksei, 1 02. 1 70, 21 9 
Kuhn, Thomas. 73-74 
Kurosawa, Akira, 1 89-1 90, 208. 2 1 6  
Kyrou, Ado, 391 n. 1 5  
Labor, and art, 57-72. 257, 261 -262, 264. 
See also Bucher; Proletcult 
Laclos. Pierre Choderlos de, 378 
Lafargue, Paul. 48 
Larionov, Mikhail F., 89 
Lavelle, Louis, 1 8  
Lawrence, D. H . •  364. 377, 382. 390 n.2, 
391 n.9 
Leakey, Louis, 61 
Leary. Timothy. 390 n.3 
Lebel, J. J., l l l , 1 93 
Le Corbusier, 1 06, 1 35, 1 89 
Lee, Vernon, 1 87 
Lefebvre, Henri, 330 
Leger, Fernand, 89, 239 
Leibniz, G. W., 20, 1 56 
Lenin, Vladimir I.. 1 55 n.24, 260-261 . 266, 
270, 277. 299 
Lessing; Alfred, 1 41 
Lessing, Gotthold, 236, 251 , 253 
Levi-Strauss. Claude, 44, 59, 69, 99, 204, 
301 
Lewis, C. I., 6, 23, 1 75 
Libido, and art. See Eroticism 
Lifshitz. Mikhail, 295, 300 
Lipps. Theodor, 1 87 
Lissitsky. Eliezer, 89 
Living Theatre. 31 6 
Lizzani, Carlo, 391 n. I 5 
Loewenthal, Leo, 306 n.5 
London, Arthur, 284 
Loos, Adolf, 1 06, 1 33 
Loth, David, 391 n. 13 
Index 
Lotman, Julij. 225, 307 n. 12. See also Tortu 
study center 
Lukacs. Georg 
on anthropomorphism in art, 229 
on the autonomy of works of art, 1 06 
on the content of art, 1 37, 303 
on mimesis, 1 96, 204, 246-247 n. 12. 275, 
299, 306 n.4, 339 n.2 
on the origin of art. 57-59 
philosophy of, 295, 305, 307 n.8 
on Solzhenitsyn, 285, 340 n.8 
on the structure of art, 1 22 n.4. 204, 244, 
248 n.20. 300 
Lumiere, Louis, 208 
Luministic art, 91 
Lunacharsky. Anatoli, 1 37, 1 55 n.24, 258, 
261 -262, 266-267, 270, 278 
Lutoslawski, Witold, 1 35 
Macdonald, Margaret, 1 6  
Magic, and art. 57-72 
Magnitude, as quantifying standard for art, 
1 30, 1 32. 1 38, 1 43, 1 76 
Mahler, Gustav, 1 31 , 1 38, 1 94 
Malevich, Kasimir, 89, 205 
Malinowski, Branislaw. 369 
Mallarme, Stephene, 322 
Malle, Louis, 37 4, 382 
Malraux, Andre. 42. 227, 241 
Mandelbaum, Maurice, 33 
Manet, Edouard, 356, 372 
Mann, Thomas, 244, 332 
Mannheim, Karl, 207 
Mao Tse-tung, 271 
Marceau. Marcel, 247 n. 1 3  
Marchlewski, Julian, 262 
Marcuse, Herbert, 336, 337, 387, 389 
Margolis, Joseph, 1 23 n. 12. 1 7 1  
Marinetti, Filippa, 1 01 
Marx, Karl 
on the constituent traits of art, 1 23 n. 13, 
299-308 

401 
Marx, Karl (continued) 
methodology of, 40, 42-46, 65, 67, 72, 84 
n.47, 85 n.55, 94, 1 00, 1 37, 1 47- 1 48, 
1 60, 1 63, 233, 238, 265, 287. 322, 327, 
331 ,  347, 390 n. I 
on realism, 1 1 6 
Mass media, 29. 1 1 1  
Material. artistic, 1 04, 1 40 
expressiveness of, 1 88-1 89, 1 92, 1 98, 
227 
Matisse, Henri, 89 
Motso, Ivan, 259 
Mayakovsky, Vladimir, 93, 239, 257, 258, 
276-278, 326 
Meager, Ruby, 21 ,  33, 1 23 n. 12 
Mechanical reproduction. al art, 91 -92, 94, 
204, 2 1 0, 3 1 8  
as patterning, 208-21 0 
See also Mimetic art, cinematic made 
Medium, artistic, 53, 1 88-1 89 
Mehring, Franz, 40 
Mekas, Jonas, 95 
Melies, Georges, 208, 2 1 3  
Memmi, Albert, 307 n.5 
Mercier, Desire, 50 
Mere, Chevalier de, 1 57 
Methodological approach, 44-57, 69-71 ,  
1 1 9, 1 26-1 27, 1 35, 1 47-1 48, 1 75, 1 83, 
240, 242, 295-296, 298-305, 362. See 
also Antinomies; Continuum; Marx; 
Paradigms: Typology 
Metz, Christian, 203, 209-21 1 ,  225 
Meyer, Hermann, 360-361 
Meyerhoff. Hans, 332 
Meyerhold, Vsevelad. 1 09, 239, 256 
Mickiewicz, Adam, 201 n. 10 
Microcosm, work of art as, 1 06 
Mikhailovsky, N. K., 1 42 
Miller, Henry, 364, 373, 378 
Millett, Kate, 390-391 n. 9 
Mimetic art, 6, 58, 60, 62-64, 7 1 ,  77, 1 1 0, 
1 1 4-1 1 6, 1 30- 1 31 ,  1 35, 1 37- 1 38, 1 40, 
Index 
1 45-1 46, 1 71 ,  203-250. 297, 302, 31 3, 
337, 363, 370 
and abstraction, 205, 248 n.20 
amimetism, 21 7 
analogues (models), 2 1 1 .  21 4-21 7, 223, 
228-230, 232, 235, 245 n.3 
and antimimetism, 89-95 
Aristotelian tradition of, 204, 221 -247, 
248 n. 1 5, 265 
cinematic made, 204, 206, 208, 224 
and colors, 247 n. 1 3  
Democritean tradition of, 204 
epistemology of, 2 1 4-21 7, 244 
and expression, 1 83-1 84, 1 90, 1 96, 1 98, 
222, 227-228, 247 n. 12 
and fantasy, 21 1 ,  21 3, 220, 232, 31 2 
homology as criterion of. See Goldmann 
mimetic-in-part, 21 3 
and movement (dance), 247 n. 1 3  
and narrative, 220 
natura naturans, 228 
and perception, 249-250 n.22 
Platonic tradition of, 204-221 , 242, 269 
semimimetic works, 21 3, 2 1 9, 224, 247 
n. 1 2  
and socialism . See Realism, socialist 
and sounds, 247 n. 12 
as universal category, 246-247 n. 1 2, 248 
n.20 
ut pictura poesis, 220 
See also Cognition ; Realism 
Minimal art, 92, 96, 1 34, 1 47, 20 n. 7, 339 
n.3 
Miro, Joan, 1 42, 1 89, 2 1 3-21 4  
Mladoienec, Stanislaw, 1 01 
Modigliani, Amedeo, 1 85 
Maholy-Nagy, Laszlo, 91 
Moliere, Jean-Baptiste, 236 
Mondrian, Piet, 89, 1 3 1 ,  1 34, 205, 207, 
2 1 4, 21 7, 369 
Montesquieu, Boron de, 1 57 
Moore, George E., 1 8  

402 
Woore, Henry, 1 34, 1 90 
Morality 
and a rt, 95, 1 06, 1 28, 1 38. 1 45-1 47,11 49, 
297, 320. 323 
socialist, 265, 272 
Morpurgo-Togliobue, Guido, l .  1 72, 1 76 
Morris, Charles, 75 
Morris, Desmond, 1 22 n. 9 
Morris, William, 91 , 329 
Morrissey, Poul, 379, 389 
Mothersill, Mory, 33 
Motivations vs. causes, 31 -33, 36, 56, 69-
70, 1 63 
Mrozek, Slovomir. 243 
Mukorovsky, J., 69, 21 8, 222, 225 
Mukozhovski, Jon, 70 
Mukerjee, Rodhokamol, 'YJ7 n.5 
Mumford, Lewis, 92 
Munro, Thomas, 4, 298, 306 n. / 
Murdoch, Iris, 33 
Music 
"concrete," 1 1 1 , 1 7 1 ,  247 n. 1 3, 323 
peculiar values of, 1 37, 1 38, 1 92, 266, 383 
Musil, Robert, 1 31 ,  3 1 4, 332 
Myrdal, Gunnar. 3-4 
Myth 
and aesthetic theory, 27, 59, 1 23 n. 1 3, ·1 95, 
31 6 
and realism, 235, 248 n.20. 263 
Nobis, 89 
Nabokov, Vladimir, 373, 374, 378 
Nagel, Ernst, 4 
Na postu, 258, 260 
Naturalism, 64, 90, 1 42, 204, 234, 242-243, 
380 
Nature, and aesthetic val ue, 2, 41 , 58, 1 61 ,  
1 63, 21 4-21 7, 227, 232-233, 245 n. I, 
327, 350. 365. See also Sexuality 
Necessity, as compositional element. See 
Chance; Tendentiousness 
Neruda, Pablo, 239, 288, 326 
Index 
Nervi, Pier Luigi, 1 38 
Netherlands Dance Theater, 376-377 
Neumann. Erich, 350 
New Criticism, American, 21 8  
Nexo, Mortin Anderson, 261 , 27 4 
Nietzsche, Friedrich, 94 
Nono, Luigi, 383 
Nouveau roman. 96, 234, 249 n.20, 307 
n.9, 31 8, 322 
Novel, 1 38, 2 1 8. 275 
decline of, 95 
omniscient narrator in, 90 
Novelty (freshness), 7, 1 1 2, 1 38-1 44, 236 
place in realism of, 236, 241 , 260 
and tradition, 360 
Nudism, 387, 388 
Objectivism 
mathematical (Pythagorean), 20. 48 
moderate, 21 , 46 
as o theory of art, 1 0-23. 46-47, 1 45. 1 65, 
363 
Ob;ets trouves, 96, 1 06, 1 09, 1 1 0 
Obscenity 
defined, 364-365, 367 
hardcore, 378-383 
partial, 378-383 
O'Casey, Sean, 288 
Olivier, Lourence, 1 93 
Ontologism. See Objectivism 
Op art, 91 , 1 01 . 1 1 8. 204 
"Open" artistic structures, 77, 96, 1 1 1 , 1 20 
Originality, as artistic attribute, 76, 1 1 2-
1 1 3. 1 28-1 35, 1 40, 1 45, 1 47, 1 54 n. 18 
Origins of art. See Genetic approach to art 
Orwell, George, 279, 285-286 
Ossowsko, Moria, 1 69, 1 74, 1 77 
Ossowski, Stanislaw, 9, 1 3-1 4, 255 
Ponoestheticism, 42, 46. See a/so Relativist 
theory of o rt 
Ponofsky. Erwin, 351 

403 
Paradigms, 54, 56, 74, 1 76, 21 6·21 7, 226 
Parker, De Witt, 74, 1 04-1 06 
Pasolini. Pier Paolo, 239 
Pasternak, Boris, 290 n. 18 
Patronage, artistic, 237-238, 252 
Paxton, Joseph. 1 40 
Peiper, Tadeusz. 1 40 
Peking Opera, 1 94 
Penderecki, Krzysztof, 1 35 
Pepper, Stephen, 6, 1 29, 1 70 
Pereverzev, V.F .. 298·299 
Performing arts, peculiarities of, 1 04, 1 23 
n. 12. 1 92-1 94. 1 98, 391 n. 1 7  
Permanence, and evanescence, i n  art, 41 ·42, 
56, 71 ·74, 1 1 9·1 20. 241 
Perse, St. John, 1 90  
Perspective, in art, 47 
Petroiycki, Leon, 1 68 
Pevsner, Nikolaus, 1 07 
Phenomenology, 1 8·20, 44·45, 1 72, 222, 
245 n. 1, 386 
Philosophy 
and aesthetic thought, 1 ,  6, 38, 51 -52, 1 48, 
1 69, 240. 241 . 31 2·3 1 7, 319 
vs. sociology. 295·296 
and value facts, 5, 38, 52, 1 69 
yielding artistic value, 1 38 
Photography. 1 1 7 
Physiognomy of art. See Expression 
Physiological equivalents, 5. 23. See a/so 
Gestaltism 
Picobio, Francis. 89, 1 06 
Picasso, Pablo, 27, 89, 207, 21 3 
Pilnyok, Boris, 258, 275 
Piscator, Erwin, 355 
Plato, 20, 1 56. 365. See also Mimetic art, 
Picton ic tradition of 
Play and art (homo ludens). 59·60, 68, 72. 
77. 1 1 1 . 1 20, 1 22 n. ?· 31 6, 31 8. 323. 328. 
See also Autotelicism of art 
Playboy, 387 
Pleasure. aesthetic, 9. See a/so Experience 
Index 
Plekhanov, George 
on aesthetic "drives," 43, 58 
on the content of art, 1 37, 260 
on evaluational standards, 1 54 n. 1 1, 300, 
322, 390 n. I  
on mimesis, 1 96, 306 n.4 
on relativism, 40. 295·296, 303 
Poetic pathos, 75 
P0geller, Otto, 351 
Pointillism, 89 
Politics, and art, l 45· 1 46, 1 49, 233, 235, 
252·288, 266-273. 297, 328, 366 
Pollock, Jackson, 1 25, 1 89 
Pop art, 1 06-1 07, 1 25, 206. 31 1 , 360 
Popper, Karl, 207 
Pornography. Se Obscenity 
Poussin, Nicholas, 371 
Prehistoric art, 61 ·66. 2 1 5, 368 
Proletcult (proletarian culture), 92, 256, 
261 . 279. 31 6 
Prophetic role of art, 95-96 
Proust, Marcel, 43, 200 
Przybyszewski, Stanislaw. 1 96, 380, 382 
Psychologism. See Subjectivism 
Psychosocial equivalents. See Expression 
Pudovkin, V. I., 256, 257 
Pushkin, Alexander, 236, 322 
Quantification, 98. 1 30-1 38, 1 40, 1 76 
Quotation 
authoritative, 344·345 
erudite, 345-346 
ornamental. 348·349 
stimulative, 346-348 
Rabelais, Fram;ois, 370, 378 
Rodek, Kori, 273 
Roder. Melvin L., 1 .  4, 8. 306 n.2, 331 
Raphael. Max, 62, 1 1 6, 304 
RAPP. 256, 260 
Rauschenberg, Robert, 90, 1 06 
Ravel, Maurice, 1 31 .  1 42 

404 
Ray, fvl.an, 1 1 8, 1 42, 356 
Read, Herbert, 27, 59, 322. 331 . 335, 350 
Realism, 63-67, 74, 1 1 4, 1 1 8, 1 37, 204-243 
and artists' involvement in the world, 23 1 ,  
241 . 255, 272. 275 
critical capitalist, 237-239 
critical social ist, 239-240, 276-278, 287 
as incorporating social processes, 236. 255, 
264 
and innovative subject matter, 241 , 248-
249 n.20 
as mimetism, 248 n. 1 5  
and "modernism," 244 
and ontology. 231 ,  255 
as part of social process. 235, 240, 241 
and transmutation, 221 . 224, 227 
as typology of "essences," 204, 221 -222. 
236-237, 246 n.3, 300 
Realism, socialist, 235-237, 251 -291 
as attitude rather than style, 255, 264 
as avant-garde, 265 
conditions of production, 239, 256-257, 
264-265 
and "decadence" of other art, 265, 328 
future of, 286-288 
origins of, 254-265, 274 
positive hero in, 236, 257, 275 
project for adequate history of, 274-288 
transformation to dogma of, 258-267 
See also Politics 
Reasons, 31 -33, 35-37, 39, 56, 1 25, 1 35-
1 36, 1 44-1 45, 1 63, 1 66, 1 71 
Reception, aesthetic, 55, 1 36, 1 46, 2 1 4, 249· 
250 n. 22, 391 n. 1 9. See also Experience 
Referents, artistic, 203, 21 4-21 7, 229. See 
also Cognition; Expression; Mimetic 
art; Realism 
Reich, Wilhelm, 387 
Reid, L. Arnaud, 1 47 
Reinhardt, Ad, 339 
Relationist theory of art, 23-27, 30-40, 46-
48, 56, 1 28 
Index 
Relativist theory of art, 9, 27·40. 56, 95. 
1 25-1 27, 1 44, 1 56, 1 65, 1 74, 21 4, 21 6, 
363 
Rel igion, and art. 62, 90, 95, 1 28, 1 45-
1 49, 235, 297, 365 
Rembrandt. 1 3 1 .  1 33-1 38, 1 85, 1 90. 369, 
37 1 
Renoir, Auguste, 369 
Reportage, as a rt, 93, 1 08. 233 
Report of the American Commission on 
Obscenity and Pornography, 366, 385 
Representational art. See Mimesis 
Rescher, Nicholas, 40, 79 n.7, 80 n. 10, 1 1. 
1 55 n.29 
Restany, P., 1 22 n. 9 
Revai, Jozsef, 265 
Rhythm 
and art, 57, 60, 62, 77. 1 02, 333 
and expressiveness, 1 89 
in cinema, 209. 224 
Richards, I. A., 1 5  
Richter, Sviatoslav, 1 93 
Rietveld, Gerrit Thomas, 1 37 
Rimbaud, Arthur, 322 
Ritual, 61 -65. 71 , 1 20, 333-334 
in modern theater, 95 
" Rival world" of art. See Analogon; 
Autotelicism; Mimetic art 
Robbe-Grillet, Alain, 96, 1 21 .  1 35, 234. 
249 n.20 
Robbins, Jerome, 1 90. 1 94 
Rocha, Glauber, 326 
Roche, fvl.aurice, 220 
Rock music, 1 32 
Rococo, 368. 370 
Rodchenko, Aleksander, 89 
Romanticism, 1 31 .  1 47, 1 94, 31 2 
revolutionary. 263-264 
Romm. Mikhail, 233 
Rops, Felicien, 368-369, 379-380 
Rosenberg, Harold, 200 n.7 
Rouault, Georges, 1 95, 2 1 7, 244 

405 
Rowlondson, Thomas, 37 1 
Rubens, Peter Paul, 371 
Ruskin, John, 1 87, 324 
Saarinen, Eero, 1 35, 1 89 
Salinas, Giovanni, 41 
Sarroute, Natalie, 234, 249 n.20 
Sartre, Jean-Paul, 31 4, 325, 386, 388 
Saussure, Ferdinand de, 44, 227, 297, 301 
Scheler, Max, 1 9, 339 n.2 
Schelling, F. W. J., 20 
Schiller, 250 n.23, 328, 331 
Schonberg, Arnold, 95, 1 40 
Schummer, F., 1 79 
Schwitters, Kurt, 1 02, 1 41 
Science 
and artistic progress, 245 n. 1, 330 
and value, 3-4, 31 2 
Science fiction, 220 
Scriabin, Alexander, 1 31 ,  383 
Sebog, Lucien, 1 22 n.4 
Second International, 40, 296, 306 n.3 
Sedlmoyer, Hans, 98 
Segal, Jakub, 9-1 0, 1 7  
Semantic-linguistic school, l 5; l 68, 31 0-
31 1 .  See a/so Weitz; Wittgenstein 
Semantic structure, 1 03, 21 1 
Semiotics, 64, 69, 75, 98-99, 203, 21 1 ,  2 1 6, 
275, 297, 308, 31 1 ,  344 
and aesthetic theory, 204, 231 , 301 -308 
"transparent" and "opaque" signs, 75, 
1 08, 225 
Semisentience, of art objects. Se 
Expression 
Sensibility, aesthetic, 6, 62 
origins of, 67 
See a/so Experience 
Sexuality, and art, 57, 61 , 62, 66, 364-370, 
388. See o/sa Freud; Obscenity 
Shaftesbury, Lord, 1 57 
Shakespeare, William, 236-240, 327 
Shaumian, S. K., 76 
Index 
Shklovsky, Viktor, 93, 1 42, 21 8 
Sholokhov, Mikhail, 1 32, 233. 256, 257, 275, 
280 
Shostakovich, Dmitri, 266, 271 ,  384 
Sibley, Frank, 35-36, 53-54, 171 
Sicyonion school, 368 
Sienkiewicz, Henryk, 220 
Sign, aesthetic. See Semiotics 
Signifiont and signifie, 203, 209, 2 1 1 , 21 8, 
225, 230, 301 . See a/so Semiotics 
Sincerity, artistic, 1 1 2, 1 42-1 43, 1 84-1 86. 
See a/so Authenticitv 
Siqueiros, David Alfaro, 239 
Sjoman, Vilgot, 366, 379 
Skill. See Craft 
Smith, Jock, 389 
Sobeski, Michal, 9 
Socialist realism. Se Realism, socialist 
Sociologism 
as differing from marxism, 295-297 
as a theory of art, 23-24, 27-41 . 46, 1 1 9, 
1 65 
Sociology of art, 296-297 
and sociologically based aesthetics, 297-
298 
Sollers, Phillipe, 220 
Solzhenitsyn, Alexander, 285·286, 290 n. 1 9, 
330, 332 
Sophists, 1 56  
Sorokin, Pitirim, 39 
Soutine, Hoim, 1 95, 373 
Space, and the art object, 1 08 
Stalin, Josef, 260, 289 n. 1 2  
Stalinism and art. See Zhdanov 
Stanislovski, Konstantin, 1 93 
Stevenson, Charles L., 1 6, 36, 1 69 
Stochastic art. See Chance 
Stockhausen, Karlheinz, 1 2 1 ,  356 
Stoics, 1 56 
Stolnitz, Jerome, 8, 23 
Stolovich, Leonid, 75, 86 n.6 1 
Strauss, Richard, 383 

406 
Stravinsky, Igor. 1 41 ,  1 89, 383 
Strindberg , August, 1 94, 1 96, 380 
Striptease, 381 .  387 
Structuralism 
in Democriteon mimetic tradition, 204 
and historicism, 44, 59, 69-71 ,  85 n.55, 
1 46. 303 
influence of, on marxism, 347-348, 364 
Structure 
and "higher meaning ", 21 9, 221 . 230, 246 
n.7, 342 
in historical process, 44, 57-67, 70, 1 22 
n.4 
and sensuously given qualities. 75, 98-1 05, 
1 1 2, 1 1 4, 1 21 ,  1 31 -1 39, 1 70, 1 89-1 93, 
363 
Strzemiriski, Wlodislow. 89, 2 1 4  
Stuart, Dugald, 74 
Style. See I ndividuality 
Subjectivism as a theory of art, 9-1 8, 42, 
46-47, 56, 76, 1 26-1 28, 1 56. Se also 
Sociologism ; Toste 
Sublime, 90, 1 49 
Surrealism. 90-91 .  1 06-1 1 1 . 1 95, 240. 3 1 2. 
336 
Symbols 
as conventions, 21 9, 230, 245 n.3, 302 
iconic. 60-61 . 67. 1 03. 1 1 8 
and meaning, 75, 1 45, 1 91 ,  2 1 3, 31 0 
Symmetry, 60, 62, 67, 77, 1 02 
Syntogmatics. of artistic "language." 2 1 1 ,  
2 1 6, 2 1 9, 221 , 225 
langue and langage. 21 1 . 228-229 
Taine, Hippolyte. 4. 24, 74. 1 28. 1 60, 1 96 
Tanizaki, Yunichiro, 1 90  
Tapestries, 1 38 
Tortu study center, Estonia, U.S.S.R., 203, 
302 
Toste 
de gustibus non disputandum, 9, 28, 52, 
l 25. 1 58-1 59 
Index 
as disposition to experience. 1 61 - 1 68 
genesis, 1 6 1  
voluntarism of, 1 65-1 66 
whirligig of, 41 
See also Relativist theory of art 
Tatarkiewicz, Wladislaw, 84 n.50 
Tatlin, Vladimir, 89 
Technique (techne. bricolage), 53, 59, 61 , 
62. 67. 71 . 72. 75. 96, 1 09. 1 1 4. 333 
as a theme of art, 92, 31 2-3 1 7, 322 
See also Craft 
Television, 209, 2 1 1 ,  224, 234, 333 
Tendentiousness. 1 46. 235-236. 240-241 , 
264. 325 
and utopianism, 336-337 
Theatricalization, of the arts, 77, 1 20  
Theme, ond artistic greatness. 1 43 
Thomson, George, 64-65 
Tinyonov, Juriy, 70, 1 42 
Tolstoi, Alexey, 275 
Tolstoi, Leo, 1 47, 236, 260, 323 
Topoi, 27, 349-352 
Tormey, Alan, 200 n. 10 
Torossion, Aram. 1 7 
Torroja, Eduardo, 1 38 
Tragedy, 90, 208. 283 
T ran¢y, K. E., l 00, 1 1 8 
Trofimov, Pavel, 306 n.3 
Trotsky, Leon, 258 
Truth, artistic. See Cognition; Mimetic art 
Tsia Che-pioo, 21 7 
Tuwim, Julian, 1 02 
Tynyanov, Juriy, 301 
Typology 
specific application of, in art, 235-237, 239, 
244, 248 n.23, 300 
and value, l ,  8, 46, 1 48, 1 72, 221 . 227-
228, 232-235. 343 
T zara, Tristan, 1 1 1  
Ugliness, 7, 90. 93-94, 1 49 
Uniqueness, of art objects. See Originality 

407 
Unity in diwrsity, 1 02, 1 30. Se also 
Gestaltism 
Urbanski, Kazimierz, 1 1 5  
Urmson, J. 0., 1 7  
U.S.S.R, aesthetics in, 43, 74-75, 84 n.47, 
1 1 6, 1 23 n. 1 3, 1 96, 200 n. 1 1, 233, 273, 
298-308 
influence of Plekhanov on, 296 
See also Realism, socialist 
Ut picture paesis, 1 03  
Utilitarian functions of art, 1 06. Se also 
Functions of art 
Utitz, Emil, 42 
Vadim, Roger, 375 
Valuation (appraisal), aesthetic 
criteria of, 1 ·87, 1 25, 1 29, 1 74 
development of standards for, 2. 48-57, 
1 29. 1 36, 1 67, 1 71 
distinguished from evaluation, 6, 38, 1 25-
1 55 
and sulx:riteria, 55, 1 71 
See also Reasons 
Valuational qualities 
and autotelicism, 1 06, 1 08  
balancing of ,  1 00- 1 03  
constituent and heightened, 6 ,  55, 1 1 4 
and expression, 1 89-1 92 
indirectly l!lO<Xltiw, 1 02-1 03 
norms of, 5-7, 37, 75, 1 00-1 03, 1 1 1  
patterns in, 1 91 
quantifying of, 1 32-1 33 
and values, 6-7, 55, 1 05, 1 91 
Value, aesthetic (artistic) 
axiological·philosophical assumptions, 1 ,  
41 , 52-57, 1 29-1 30 
constituent, 1 1 6, 1 1 8, 1 26-130. Se also 
Expresion; Form; Structure 
distributive, residual. See Construction­
function-form; Mimetic art; Novelty; 
Originality 
distributive, nonresidual, 1 45-1 49, 363. 
Index 
Se also Ideology; Morality; Politics; 
Religion 
and "esence" of art, 1 .  6, 33-34, 232. 
Se also Typology 
evaluation of. Se Evaluation 
experience as source of, 1 38, 1 43  
founded on artistic work, 1 -2, 57, 59, 21 0 
historical origins of, 45, 296-'Hl 
para-artistic, 31 4, 370 
preartistic, 53, 65, 71 , 205 
ranking of, 1 37-1 38  
standards of definition of, 1 -78, 1 68-169. 
1 78-1 79, 363. Se a/so Valuation 
subjectivity-objectivity of, 2-3, 1 7, 1 7  4. 
Se also Value facts 
Value facts 
definition, 79 n. I 
and facts in a strict sense, 3-5, 1 69, 1 74, 
1 78 n.7 
and sociohistorical norms, 5, 38, 41 -42, SO 
Value judgment 
and academicism, 252-253 
by direct apprehension of work, 1 32, 1 39  
and dogmatism. 251 ·254 
objectivity of, 5-57, 1 26- 1 30. 1 56-1 79 
sociohistorical context of, 6, 41 , SO 
relation to taste, 1 63  
Van der Rohe, Ludwig Mies, 1 35 
Variation of themes, 7 
Verlaine, Paul, 1 02 
Vermer, Jean, 1 41 .  1 43  
Vertov, Dziga, 208, 256 
Vico, Giambattista, 48, 1 60  
Vinci, Leona rdo  do, 89, 1 56, 251 
Vishnevsky, Vsevolod, 276 
Vivas, Eliseo. 1 
Voronsky, Aleksander, 258, 260 
Vygotsky, Lev. 1 03, 301 
'M:Jjda, Andrei, 355 
'M:Jllis, Mieczyslaw, 9, 1 3, 1 00  
'M:Jllon, Henri, 62 

408 
Walsh. Dorothy, 86 n.62 
Warhol, Andy, 379, 389 
Wasilewski, Edmund, 325 
Watt, Ion, 307 n.5 
Watteau, Antoine, 240 
Wedekind, Fronk, 1 92 
Weerth, Georg, 325 
Weiss, Peter, 3 1 8  
Weissberg-Cybulski, Alexander, 281 
Weitz, Morris, 1 .  1 6, 33-34, 36-39, 7 4, 1 71 ,  
230, 245 n.7 
Wellek, Rene, 306 n. 1 
Welles, Orson, 209, 355 
Wertheimer, Mox, 24, 98, 1 05 
Whistler, Jomes M., 324 
Whitman, Walt, 1 33 
Whyte, L. L., 25 
Wienerkreis, 1 5  
Wilde, Oscar, 322. 365 
Wimsatt, W. K . . 1 03 
Wish fulfillment theory of ort, 1 3, 91 . See 
a/so Freud, Jung 
Witkiewicz, Stanislaw lgnacy, 1 9, 1 40. 1 95, 
2 1 9, 243, 279, 353, 382 
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 8, 1 5-·1 6, 30-33, 50, 
56, 97, 1 1 8-1 1 9, 1 68 
Wittkower, Rudolf ond Margot, 339 n.5 
Witwicki, W., 9, 1 4 
Wolff, Christion, 20 
Wollheim, Richard, 200 n.7 
Worringer, Wilhelm, 1 9  
Wycherley, William, 370 
Zamyatin, Yevgeniy, 258, 278-279 
Zhdanov, A. A., 260, 263-267 
Zhdanovism, 268-273 
Zhirmunsky, Viktor, 301 
Ziff, Paul, 33, 35 
Zola, Emile, 242-243, 250 n.23, 264, 372 
Z61kiewski, Stefan, 302 
Index 

