
 Moral Development and Reality 
 
■

This page intentionally left blank 

3
 Moral Development 
and Reality 
 Beyond the Theories of Kohlberg, 
Hoffman, and Haidt 
t h i r d  e d i t i o n  
 John C.  Gibbs 

 3 
 Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.  
It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship,  
and education by publishing worldwide.
Oxford New York 
Auckland Cape Town Dar es Salaam Hong Kong Karachi  
Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Nairobi  
New Delhi  Shanghai  Taipei Toronto 
With ofﬁ ces in 
Argentina Austria Brazil  Chile Czech Republic France Greece  
Guatemala Hungary Italy Japan Poland Portugal Singapore  
South Korea Switzerland Thailand Turkey Ukraine Vietnam
Oxford is a registered trademark of Oxford University Press in the UK 
and certain other countries.
Published in the United States of America by 
Oxford University Press 
198 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016
© Oxford University Press 2014
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a 
retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the prior 
permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly permitted by law, 
by license, or under terms agreed with the appropriate reproduction rights organization. 
Inquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the above should be sent to the Rights 
Department, Oxford University Press, at the address above.
You must not circulate this work in any other form 
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer.
 Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data 
 Gibbs, John C.
Moral development and reality : beyond the theories of Kohlberg, Hoffman, and Haidt / 
John C. Gibbs. – Third edition.
 pages cm
Revised edition of the author’s Moral development & reality : beyond the theories of Kohlberg and 
Hoffman, published in 2010.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978–0–19–997617–1
1. Moral development. I. Title. 
BF723.M54G5 2014
155.2′5—dc23
2013017566
 1 3 5 7 9 8 6 4 2
Printed in the United States of America 
on acid-free paper 

  Dedicated to  the memory of J. Lowell Gibbs 
 
■

This page intentionally left blank 

vii
■c o n t e n t s  
 Foreword by David Moshman 
 ix 
  Personal Preface and Acknowledgments   
  xi  
 About the Author 
 xvii 
 1.  Introduction 
 1 
 Social Perspective-Taking, Reversibility, and Morality 
 2 
 Th e Right and the Good: Th e Moral Domain 
  6 
 Introducing Chapters 3 through 10 
 10 
 2.  Beyond Haidt’s New Synthesis 
 17 
 Th ree Th emes 
 17 
 Conclusion and Critique 
 31 
 3.  “Th e Right” and Moral Development: Fundamental 
 Th emes of Kohlberg’s Cognitive Developmental Approach 
 39 
 Early Childhood Superfi ciality 
 41 
 Beyond Early Childhood Superfi ciality 
 50 
 Stages of Moral Judgment Development 
 60 
 Evaluating Haidt’s Challenge 
 79 
 Summarizing Comment 
 80 
 4.  Kohlberg’s Th eory: A Critique and New View 
 81 
 Background 
 81 
 Kohlberg’s Overhaul of Piaget’s Phases 
 84 
 Adult Moral Development in Kohlberg’s Th eory 
 91 
 A Critique and New View 
 93 
 Conclusion 
 97 
 5.   “Th e Good” and Moral Development: Hoff man’s Th eory 
 98 
 Th e Empathic Predisposition 
 99 
 Modes and Stages of Empathy 
 101 
 Empathy and Prosocial Behavior: Cognitive Complications 
and Empathy’s Limitations 
 113 
  Empathy, Its Cognitive Regulation, and Aff ective Primacy   
  121  
 Th e Empathic Predisposition, Socialization, and Moral 
Internalization 
 123 
 Conclusion and Critique 
 130 

viii 
■ Contents
 6.  Moral Development, Moral Identity, and Prosocial 
 Behavior 
 133 
 Prosocial Behavior: Th e Rescue   
  133  
 Individual Diff erences in Prosocial Behavior 
 137 
 Conclusion: A Spurious “Moral Exemplar” 
 148 
 7.  Understanding Antisocial Behavior 
 152 
 Limitations of Antisocial Youths 
 152 
 A Case Study 
 169 
 8.  Treating Antisocial Behavior 
 175 
 Th e Mutual Help Approach 
 176 
 Remedying the Limitations and Generating Synergy: 
Th e Cognitive Behavioral Approach 
 184 
 Social Perspective-Taking for Severe Off enders 
 203 
 9.  Beyond the Th eories: A Deeper Reality? 
 206 
 Two Case Studies 
 208 
 A Deeper Reality? 
 215 
 Moral Insight, Inspiration, and Transformation 
 230 
 Conclusion  
 236 
 10.  Conclusion 
 238 
  Revisiting the Issue of Moral Motivation and Knowledge 
 241 
 Moral Perception and Reality 
 249 
 Appendix 
 257 
 Notes 
 265 
 References 
 283 
 Author Index 
 329 
 Subject Index 
 341 

ix
■f o r e w o r d 
 Moral Development and Reality is serious about morality, development, and even 
reality. John Gibbs is not just out to explain moral development: he is out to 
explain morality itself. Morality, he argues, is not just whatever we happen to like 
or whatever our cultures happen to favor. Morality is rooted in the reality of social 
interconnections and develops as we come to understand that reality. 
 Th is advanced text, now in its third edition, is not just a systematic overview of 
the literature on moral development; it is also an original theoretical contribution 
to that literature. In fact, I would go so far as to call it the most important contri-
bution to the study of moral development since the turn of the century. Gibbs has 
recognized what is most fundamental in the contributions of Lawrence Kohlberg, 
Martin Hoff man, and Jonathan Haidt. Th ese are not just three theorists he hap-
pens to like. (In fact, he fi nds plenty to criticize in all of their theories, especially 
Haidt’s.) Rather, they represent three distinct theoretical traditions that usually 
either ignore or actively disparage each other. Integrating their complementary 
insights and contributions makes this a unique and indispensable book. 
 Gibbs takes from Kohlberg a Piagetian conception of moral rationality and 
objectivity that allows for genuine developmental change. Th is moral epistemol-
ogy draws strongly on the ethics of philosopher Immanuel Kant. Gibbs is far from 
alone among current developmentalists in his rationalist moral epistemology. 
Cognitive social domain theory—as seen in the work of Elliot Turiel, Larry Nucci, 
Judith Smetana, Melanie Killen, Charles Helwig, Cecilia Wainryb, and many oth-
ers—shares with Gibbs his Piagetian moral epistemology. Social domain theorists, 
however, reject Kohlberg’s stages of moral development, whereas Gibbs believes 
a modifi ed version of them provides the cognitive core of any viable theory of 
moral development. Gibbs is not only neo-Piagetian, as was Kohlberg and as are 
the social domain theorists; Gibbs is specifi cally neo-Kohlbergian, in contrast 
to the social domain theorists. Th is is refl ected in the fact that he has far more 
to say about moral development beyond the preschool years than most current 
developmentalists. 
 But morality, Gibbs insists, is not just about what is right and not just a matter 
of knowledge and reasoning. Morality also concerns the good, and owes as much 
to emotion as to cognition. Here Gibbs draws on Hoff man, who highlighted the 
emotional side of moral development, including our deepening empathy for 
others. Intimately interrelating Hoff man’s theory with that of Kohlberg produces a 
theory that transcends either. Moral perspective–taking is recognized as simulta-
neously cognitive and emotional. Moral development represents progress in both 
justice and care. 
 But there’s more. Moral behavior is a function of many factors and cannot be 
predicted simply from developmental status. In the complex realm of social behav-
ior, moreover, theorists do not always agree on what counts as moral behavior. 

x 
■ Foreword
Since the turn of the century, moral psychology has broadened to concerns far 
beyond the central issues of moral development. In recent years, Jonathan Haidt 
has emerged as perhaps the major proponent of what are generally seen as alterna-
tives to traditional developmental perspectives, and especially to the rationalist 
views of Piaget and Kohlberg. Th e fi rst two editions of this text already addressed 
such matters. 
 Th e major innovation of the third edition is to consider Haidt’s new theory 
systematically. Th ere is much in Haidt’s theory for a developmentalist to disagree 
with, and Gibbs is clear about his disagreements. In typical fashion, however, he 
fi nds much to agree with and manages, instead of simply refuting Haidt, to appre-
ciate many of his theoretical insights. Th e result is a new edition that is not only 
updated throughout but makes a further theoretical contribution. 
 And what about reality? Gibbs clearly sees morality as rational and even objec-
tive, raising the question of moral “objects.” If morality is knowledge, what is it we 
know about? At the very least, Gibbs’ Piagetian and Kantian answer is that moral-
ity involves truths about “oughts” inherent in the reciprocity of human relations. 
Toward the end of the book he goes further, suggesting that the moral salience 
of human relations lies in a deeper reality of human interconnection that can be 
glimpsed occasionally in near-death experiences. 
 One need not go as far as Gibbs on questions of moral ontology, however, to 
recognize the vital importance of moral epistemology. Philosophers, psycholo-
gists, and educators will profi t from this broad-ranging examination of the episte-
mology, development, and promotion of morality. But the book is aimed no less 
at students, and succeeds in this respect, too. Th rough careful organization, clear 
presentation, and vivid examples, Gibbs advances the state of the art in the study 
of moral development in a manner accessible to readers with little or no back-
ground in psychology or philosophy. 
 A background in morality, however, may be required. Fortunately, we all have a 
background in morality, rooted in social realities we have increasingly understood 
since our preschool years, with enduring potential for further progress. Reading 
this book will help you understand better what morality is, really, and how we can 
promote its development. 
 David Moshman, Ph.D. 
 University of Nebraska at Lincoln 
 November, 2012 

xi
■p e r s o n a l p r e f a c e  a n d 
a c k n o w l e d g m e n t s  
 First among my acknowledgments in this personal preface are the three names in 
the title: the late Lawrence Kohlberg, Martin L. Hoff man, and Jonathan Haidt. Th e 
works of all three have been at the forefront of major (if disparate) movements in 
the fi eld of moral psychology; accordingly, I am fortunate indeed to have known 
and dialogued with all three thinkers for decades. Kohlberg’s and Hoff man’s works 
were already prominent in 1971. In that year I asked Kohlberg and Hoff man 
(whose works I knew from my undergraduate psychology courses) to contribute 
to my doctoral study of social infl uences upon children’s resistance to temptation 
(Gibbs, 1972). Hoff man mailed, from the University of Michigan, his measure of 
parental nurturance, and Kohlberg, on my graduate campus (Harvard University), 
participated as a member of my reading committee. 
 Aft er completing my dissertation in 1972, I continued collegial interaction with 
both Kohlberg and Hoff man, especially with Kohlberg. In 1975, Larry, as everyone 
called him, invited me to join him at the Harvard Graduate School of Education. 
Th is I did gladly, collaborating as a research faculty member in the completion of his 
longitudinal moral judgment project (Colby, Kohlberg, Gibbs, & Lieberman, 1983; 
Gibbs, Kohlberg, Colby, & Speicher-Dubin, 1976) and assessment manual (Colby, 
Kohlberg, Speicher, Hewer, Candee, Gibbs, & Power, 1987). In the free atmosphere 
of Harvard, I also was encouraged to develop certain theoretical and empirical con-
tributions. Aft er reading the page proofs of my 1977  Harvard Educational Review 
revisionist critique of his stage typology, Larry told me that I “could be right.” 
 I remain deeply appreciative that Larry continued to support and encourage 
my work in moral development even aft er I left  Harvard (in 1979) for a faculty 
appointment at Th e Ohio State University. He wrote the foreword to an early 
group-administrable moral judgment assessment instrument that colleagues and 
I developed (Gibbs, Widaman, & Colby, 1982). He also continued to consider 
sympathetically my revisionist argument, even proposing (in part along the lines 
of that argument) a reconceptualization of adult moral development (Kohlberg, 
1984). He appreciated our (Gibbs & Schnell, 1984) juxtaposition of his moral 
developmental approach with socialization approaches such as Hoff man’s. He was 
interested in our work on exemplary prosocial behavior (see Chapter 6). He even 
shared my interest in the near-death experience and the question of a deeper real-
ity of human existence (see Chapters 9 and 10). Hence, although he died in 1987, 
years before the emergence of this book, Larry Kohlberg, in eff ect, nurtured its 
advance shoots. I know that Larry would have nurtured the book’s progress as 
well, along with our (Gibbs, Basinger, Grime, & Snarey, 2007) “revisiting” with 
new data his universality claims for moral development (see Chapters 3 and 4 of 
this third edition of  Moral Development and Reality ). 

xii 
■ Personal Preface and Acknowledgments
 I have also kept in touch with Martin Hoff man, for whose continued encour-
agement and help I am also grateful. Like Larry, Marty appreciated our (Gibbs & 
Schnell, 1984) overview of his and Kohlberg’s approaches to moral development 
(indeed, he had provided helpful comments on a preliminary version). He also 
constructively commented on a subsequent chapter and article of mine (Gibbs, 
1991a, 1991b) that proposed an integration of his and Kohlberg’s theories. He even 
wrote a commentary (Hoff man, 1991) on that article. (Remarkably, Marty’s com-
mentary began, “Th e last time I saw Larry Kohlberg, about a year before he died, 
we decided to get together some day soon and try to integrate our theories. We 
never did” [p. 105].) 
 Especially appreciated have been Marty’s encouragement and help with this 
book. He has provided valuable feedback for two of this book’s chapters, and even 
developed with me a summary table of his typology of empathy-related modes, 
stages, and attributions for Chapter 5. His consultation was invaluable as I refi ned—
based on the most recent research—my presentation of his theory of empathy-
based moral development and socialization. In his own book (Hoff man, 2000), 
Marty commented that he was “impressed with the variety of [social perspective–
taking] methods” (p. 293) used in our intervention program for antisocial youth 
(see Chapter 8). Marty provided crucial consultation as my graduate students 
Julie Krevans and, subsequently, Renee Patrick fashioned their respective disserta-
tions chiefl y concerning the impact of inductive discipline (one of Hoff man’s most 
important contributions to moral socialization; see Chapter 5). 
 Marty’s fi rst “encouragement” was actually a one-word challenge. At the 1987 
American Educational Research Association meeting in Washington, D.C., Martin 
Hoff man and Nancy Eisenberg presented an “Invited Dialogue.” As the discussant 
for their presentations, I commented that Hoff man’s theory presumed “aff ective 
primacy” (empathic aff ect as the exclusive source) in moral motivation and behav-
ior. Marty replied, “So?” Unpacked, that meant, I think: So what’s wrong with that? 
 A fair question , I thought. (Marty has since come to agree with much of my argu-
ment that moral motivation entails not only aff ective but also cognitive primacy; 
see Chapters 5 and 6). 
 Ten years later, that “fair question” and challenge of aff ective primacy surfaced 
again, this time in more extreme form. At a 1997 Association for Moral Education 
meeting in Atlanta, I again served as a discussant, this time for a symposium in 
which a young scholar named Jonathan Haidt launched a bold and broad challenge. 
Beyond Hoff man’s mere “what’s wrong with that?” Haidt argued that “intuition” 
is so strongly primary in morality and everyday social behavior that “cognition,” 
“rationality,” or “development” is, in the main, epiphenomenal. My discussant com-
ments suggested that cognition, too, warrants a primary role in moral psychology. 
I pointed, for example, to evidence that developmental delay in basic moral judg-
ment is an important factor in antisocial behavior (see Chapter 7). My suggestion 
had little or no impact—at least none that I could discern in a subsequent paper 
Jon sent me with a friendly and low-key note (“Dear John—I thought you might 
be interested in this. Best wishes, Jon”). Th at paper, then already in press, was to 
become Haidt’s (2001) landmark  Psychological Review statement. In a subsequent 
chapter with Selin Kesebir (2010), and then in his impressive book  Righteous Mind 

Personal Preface and Acknowledgments 
■ xiii
(2012), Jon declared a “new synthesis” concerning the primary roles of biology, 
fast aff ect or emotion, and diverse cultures in the formation of morality. He cited 
my  Moral Development and Reality as depicting the status quo, vulnerable to the 
major challenge of the new synthesis. 
 Jon’s challenge, then, was more than one word; it was in 1997 a major declara-
tion, to be followed by many elaborations from this brilliant thinker, innovative 
researcher, and prolifi c writer. Most recently, I have appreciated Jon’s feedback con-
cerning my coverage of his work in the early chapters of this edition as well as our 
direct intellectual exchanges during his speaking engagements at Ohio State and 
at conferences (most recently, at the American Psychological Society conference in 
Chicago, in June of 2012; and at the Association for Moral Education Conference 
in San Antonio, in November of that year). Despite our disagreements, we do 
appreciate aspects of one another’s work and remain cordial colleagues. 
 Beyond containing my answers to Marty and Jon, this book addresses the full 
sweep of moral development and reality. Writing the book has meant for me the 
thrilling opportunity to seek closure concerning questions that have consumed 
my interest over the decades since 1971: What is morality? Can we speak validly of 
moral  development , as Kohlberg and Hoff man claim, or is morality—as in Haidt’s 
broad descriptivist view—relative to the particular values and virtues emphasized 
in particular cultures? Is the moral motivation of behavior primarily aff ective 
(early Hoff man, Haidt), or cognitive, a matter of justice (Kohlberg, Piaget)? Are 
Kohlberg’s and Hoff man’s theories integrable? Can they adequately account for 
exemplary prosocial—and, for that matter, antisocial—behavior? What are their 
implications for treating antisocial behavior? Finally, going beyond the theories: 
Does moral development, including moments of moral insight, inspiration, and 
transformation, refl ect a deeper reality? 
 Th is book seeks to answer these questions. I have been deeply gratifi ed by the 
praise elicited by the book’s earlier editions (Gibbs, 2003, 2010) from reviewers, col-
leagues, and students. In the years since the second edition, I have conducted exten-
sive research, corresponded with national and international colleagues, and kept up 
with the remarkably diverse literature of moral psychology; hence, this third edi-
tion features over 200 new or updated references. In addition to the new chapter on 
Haidt’s theory, every extant chapter has been updated and refi ned. I have especially 
benefi ted from Dave Moshman’s recent work, along with that of (among others) 
Kwame Appiah, Karl Aquino, Bill Arsenio, Dan Batson, Roy Baumeister, Gus Blasi, 
Paul Bloom, Larry Brendtro, Jean Decety, Frans de Waal, David Eagleman, Ken 
Fujita, Alison Gopnik, Joshua Greene, Sam Harris, Susan Harter, Tobias Krettenauer, 
Derek Parfi t, Sam Parnia, Steven Pinker, Michael Sandel, Bob Selman, Bob Siegler, 
Peter Singer, Pim van Lommel, Robert Wright, and Carolyn Zahn-Waxler. 
 My hope is that this new edition will fi nd its place, not only as a supplementary 
text in graduate and advanced undergraduate courses pertinent to one or more of 
these questions (facilitating this role are chapter summaries and study questions, 
provided in the Appendix), but also as a contribution to the broader dialogues in 
the academic and intellectual community. 
 I will use “we”—as in, “we will explore moral development through the theo-
ries of Kohlberg, Hoff man, and Haidt”—frequently throughout this book. At some 

xiv 
■ Personal Preface and Acknowledgments
points, the pronoun may seem odd, but its use is quite intentional. In part, “we” is 
used for ordinary reasons: “to secure an impersonal style and tone” and cultivate a 
“considered together” quality ( Th e Oxford English Dictionary , 2012); specifi cally, a 
presumed partnership with the reader. A special reason, however, is that at many 
points I do mean  we , not in some impersonal sense but, instead, quite literally 
and personally. I did write this book and do accept any credit or blame that may 
ensue. Fundamentally, however, not “I” but  we accomplished this book. It exists 
only because of the collaboration, critiques, and encouragement of so many: not 
only mentors such as Larry Kohlberg and Marty Hoff man (and, as late as 2002, my 
former Harvard Graduate School advisor Herb Kelman), and challengers such as 
Jon Haidt, but also so many other good and thoughtful people: coauthors, other 
colleagues, graduate students, advanced undergraduates, friends, and family. 
 Let me express fi rst my appreciation to my coauthors over the years. In addi-
tion to my abiding appreciation of Larry Kohlberg ( qua coauthor as well as 
mentor), I thank, most notably, Helen Ahlborn, Kevin Arnold, Alvaro Barriga, 
Karen Basinger, George Bear, Daan Brugman, Kate Brusten, Marvin Berkowitz, 
Matt Blount, Larry Brendtro, Henri Chabrol, Phil Clark, Anne Colby, Marc Daigle, 
Renee Devlin, Ann-Marie DiBiase, Jim DuBois, Dick Fuller (now deceased), Lance 
Garmon, Barry Glick, Arnie Goldstein (now deceased), Ginny Gregg (Jelinek), 
Patrick Grim, Becca Grime, Petra Helmond, Mary Horn, Keith Kaufman, Julie 
Krevans, Jennifer Landau (Harrold), Leonard Leeman, Albert Liau, Marion 
Mason, Fara McCrady, Dave Moshman, Renee Patrick, Bud Potter, SaraJane 
Rowland, Steve Schnell, Randy Shively, Susan Simonian, John Snarey, Geert Jan 
Stams, Bobby Lee Stinson, Ann Swillinger, Kevin van der Meulen, Eveline van 
Vugt, and Keith Widaman. 
 Among my current and recent colleagues (in addition to my coauthors) here at 
Ohio State and in the local intellectual community, I am so grateful for the helpful 
feedback or encouragement of Randy Anderson, Bob Batterman, Sally Boysen, 
Harold Cheyney, Jane Cottrell, Russ Crabtree, Don Dell, Kristen Dunfi eld (now on 
the faculty at Concordia University), Norm Knapp, Herb Mirels, Ray Montemayor, 
Steven Robbins, Bob Rodgers, Linda Schoen, Ping Serafi ca, Vladimir Sloutsky, 
George Th ompson (now deceased), Jerry Winer, and Charles Wenar (now 
deceased). Among colleagues—again, in addition to my coauthors—at other insti-
tutions, I thank MaryLou Arnold, Bill Arsenio, Dave Banerjee, Diana Baumrind, 
Roger Bergman, Roy Baumeister, Laura Berk, Gus Blasi, Paul Bloom, Daan 
Brugman, Gus Carlo, Bill Damon, Frans de Waal, Jim DuBois, Carolyn Edwards, 
Nancy Eisenberg, Ed Giventer (now deceased), Bruce Greyson, Sam Hardy, 
Susan Harter, Marty Hoff man, Jan Holden, Ray Hummel, Tobias Krettenauer, 
Peter Langdon, Dan Lapsley, David Lorimer, Ron Mallett, Frank Murray, Elena 
Mustakovia-Possardt, Ulric Neisser, Larry Nucci, Fumi Ohnishi, Steven Pinker, 
Clark Power, Don Reed, Don Richardson, Mike Sabom, Stanton Samenow, Bob 
Siegler, Ping Serafi ca, Dawn Schrader, Peter Singer, Henry Stapp, Elly Vozzola, 
Cecilia Wainryb, Larry Walker, Minet Wied, Katsuyuki Yamasaki, Pim van 
Lommel, and Carolyn Zahn-Waxler. 
 Special thanks go to Sarah Harrington and Andrea Zekus at Oxford, who have 
wonderfully supported the accomplishment of this third edition; Dave Moshman 

Personal Preface and Acknowledgments 
■ xv
for his insightful and gracious foreword; Jennifer Kuehn, Marty Jamison, and 
Bruce Leach for their superb literature searches; Doug Findlay, Scott Higgins, and 
Meghan Mathews for their invaluable tech support; Pim van Lommel and Tom 
Sawyer (now deceased), for taking the time to critique the book’s fi nal chapters; and 
the graduate students of Psychology 6832 (Lifespan Sociomoral Development). 
Among the (current and former) postdoctoral, graduate, and advanced under-
graduate students, Hanah Chapman, Winnie Chung, Jessica Haushalter, Sophie 
Lazarus, Leean Lower, Renee Patrick, Kristin Rohrbeck, Carisa Taylor, and Tiandai 
You merit special praise for their remarkably thoughtful and discerning feedback 
on the chapter draft s; they saved this book from numerous ambiguities and defi cits. 
I also especially thank Charlie Campbell (now advisor for Ohio State’s undergrad-
uate neuroscience program) and Becca Grime (now on the faculty of Washington 
and Jeff erson College) for their invaluable assistance as I prepared portions of this 
book and related work for PowerPoint presentations at conferences. 
 Other contributors and supporters include the members of my family. Th is book 
is dedicated to the memory of my father, John Lowell Gibbs, the fi rst great love of 
my life, with whom I fi rst discovered the joy and deep connection of true dialogue 
(as well as the fun of trading puns and other half-witticisms). I also thank Jonathan 
Lowell Gibbs, Louise B. Gibbs (now deceased), Stephanie Gibbs Kamath, Sophia 
Gibbs Kim, Sung Clay Kim, Lea Queener, Llewelyn Queener (now deceased), 
Carol Gibbs Stover, JohnAlexis Viereck, and Peter Viereck (now deceased). Lastly, 
I thank Valerie V. Gibbs, my life’s greatest love, my co-adventurer, my wife and 
partner in the most personal sense of “we” of all. 

This page intentionally left blank 

xvii
■a b o u t  t h e  a u t h o r 
  John C. Gibbs, Ph.D. (Harvard University, 1972), is Professor of Developmental 
Psychology at Ohio State University. His work on moral judgment and cognitive 
distortion assessment and on interventions with antisocial youth has not only seen 
widespread use in the United States and Great Britain but has also been translated 
and adapted for use in France, Germany, Italy, Taiwan, Spain, the Netherlands, 
and other countries. Dr. Gibbs and coauthors’ EQUIP intervention program won 
the 1998 Reclaiming Children and Youth Spotlight on Excellence Award. He has 
served as a member of the Ohio Governor’s Council on Juvenile Justice, as well 
as the Social Cognitive Training Study Group of the Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention (Division of Violence Prevention). He also serves on the edito-
rial board of the  Journal of Near-Death Studies . His previous books include  Moral 
Maturity: Measuring the Development of Sociomoral Refl ection (with coauthors 
Karen Basinger and Dick Fuller) and  Th e EQUIP Program: Teaching Youth to Th ink 
and Act Responsibly Th rough a Peer-Helping Approach  (with coauthors Granville 
Bud Potter and Arnold P. Goldstein). In addition to his books, Dr. Gibbs has pub-
lished (alone or with coauthors) more than 80 book chapters and articles pertain-
ing to the topics involved in  Moral Development and Reality . 

This page intentionally left blank 

 Moral Development and Reality 
 
■

This page intentionally left blank 

1
  1 
 Introduction 
 Certain campers one summer repeatedly pulled a prank on Edward. Ed was a 
small, uneven-legged, mildly mentally challenged adult who was the basic mainte-
nance staff er for the camp. He was kind, conscientious in his duties, and proud that 
he was earning his way in life. Th ere was just one thing: At a point of frustration 
or moment of embarrassment, Ed would invariably unleash a torrent of profani-
ties that was surprising and, to some campers, entertaining. Several campers had 
devised a way to set off  this “entertainment.” Ed worked hard mowing and doing 
other chores on the campgrounds and would sometimes take a nap during the day. 
His bed was located in the boys’ wing of the campers’ open barracks–style sleep-
ing quarters. Seeing Ed asleep, the plotters would move in. Th ey would gently sink 
one of Ed’s hands into a pail of water. Ed would wet his pants in bed and awaken, 
swearing madly and running frantically aft er the hysterically laughing campers. 
 Imaginatively putting oneself in the place of another, or social perspective-taking, 
is central to moral development and behavior. Social perspective-taking relates to 
the right and the good of morality; that is, to justice or mutual respect and to 
empathy or caring. What if the plotters that summer had adequately taken Ed’s 
perspective, including Ed’s limited ability to take such a prank in stride? Might 
they have anticipated a certain unfairness to their planned act, a certain violation 
of justice or respect? Might they have anticipated feeling a certain empathy-based 
guilt? Had the campers been less self-centered—that is, had put themselves in Ed’s 
place—the y might have successfully resisted their temptation to tease and humili-
ate him. 
 Th is book mainly addresses the development of justice and caring, especially 
as seen through the works of their preeminent theorists, Lawrence Kohlberg and 
Martin Hoff man. Th eir works identify certain progressive trends: Human moral 
understanding as well as feeling grows beyond the superfi cial. A morality of 
mutual respect and caring becomes increasingly evident—if not always in social 
behavior, at least in competence. A Kohlberg colleague, Elliot Turiel, posits an 
objective right and wrong defi nitive of the moral domain. Kohlberg even posited 
a deeper reality, a cosmic perspective that can affi  rm the moral life of love and 
respect for persons. 
 Fundamentally, Kohlberg’s and Hoff man’s theories imply that acts such as the 
campers’ against Edward are morally wrong and harmful. Morality and its devel-
opment have an objective basis; a more mature morality is a more adequate moral-
ity. But let us step back a bit. Aren’t evaluations of moral right and wrong basically 
subjective? Aren’t they relative to the values and virtues approved of and incul-
cated in this or that particular culture? And if there is no objectively “right” or 
more adequate morality, then isn’t it of overriding importance not to impose our 
own subjective morality upon others? 
 William Damon (2006) noted that precisely such questions have led to chal-
lenges to the legitimacy of studying “broad concerns of development”; indeed, to 

2 
■ Moral Development and Reality
the very “notion of development itself” (p. xv). “To develop is to make progress” 
(Moshman, 2011a, p. xviii). Yet challenges to broad concerns of human moral 
progress, greater adequacy, or development—and even to objectivity or rational-
ity—continue to abound in the social and behavioral sciences. 1 Th ese relativistic 
challenges—most formidably, from the “new synthesis” proclaimed by Jonathan 
Haidt, the third name in the title of this book—prompt us to ponder the basis for 
moral developmental theories such as Kohlberg’s and Hoff man’s, as well as the 
nature of the moral domain. In so stepping back, we will present an objective basis 
for morality as well as for moral development in a non-relative sense. Th is presen-
tation will serve as a prelude to the chapters to follow. In these chapters, we will 
ponder fi rst Haidt’s and then Kohlberg’s and Hoff man’s theories. We will extend 
mainly from Kohlberg’s and Hoff man’s theories to explore moral development, 
social behavior, and reality.  
social perspective–taking, 
 
■
reversibility, and morality 
 “Social perspective–taking” can mean mentally adopting, understanding, or con-
sidering another’s thoughts, beliefs, attitudes, emotions, desires, preferences, per-
ceptual point of view, motives, goals, opportunities, intentions (see Davis, 2005; 
Kane, 1994), and even what Hoff man calls the other’s “life condition.” In Edward’s 
case, adequate social perspective-taking would include taking into account 
Edward’s limited mental and emotional ability to take a prank in stride. Th is the 
campers did not do; instead, they indulged their self-centered desire for “enter-
tainment.” Th ey treated Edward merely as an object, using their knowledge of his 
vulnerability to serve their exploitative purpose. Th eir act was morally wrong. 
 Th e campers’ act can be evaluated as objectively wrong because it was not 
reversible. In victimizing Edward, the campers’ behavior failed to satisfy what 
Kurt Baier (1965) called “the condition of reversibility, that is, that the behavior 
in question must be acceptable to a [mentally and emotionally healthy as well as 
adequately informed] person whether he is at the ‘giving’ or ‘receiving’ end of it” 2 
(p. 108). Th e appeal is to consistency: Th e campers’ behavior would not have been 
acceptable to them had they been in Edward’s place, at the receiving end of it. 
 Steven Pinker (2011) related the condition of reversibility (his phrase was 
“interchangeability of perspectives”) to “the moral principle that no person has 
grounds for privileging his or her interests over others’.… I can’t act as if my inter-
ests are special just because I’m me and you’re not.” Self-centered or “privileged” 
acts, interests, and appeals are one-sided or inconsistent and unfair:
 If I appeal to you to do something that aff ects me—to get off  my foot, or not to stab me 
for the fun of it, or to save my child from drowning—then I can’t do it in a way that privi-
leges my interests over yours . . . say, by retaining my right to stand on  your foot, or to 
stab  you, or to let  your children drown. (Pinker, 2011, pp. 182–183; emphases added) 
 A self-centered social act or appeal is objectively and  intrinsically wrong or “wrong 
in itself” (Baier, 1965, p. 108), refl ecting an unjust and selfi sh point of view not 
worthy of continued “tolerance” or moral respect (Kane, 1994, p. 14). 

Introduction 
■ 3
 In positive terms, reversible, intrinsically right, and morally respectable acts, 
interests, and appeals relate to the moral point of view—a perspective that is more 
adequate insofar as it is “independent, unbiased, impartial, 3 objective, disinter-
ested, . . . [and] in the interest of everyone alike” (Baier, 1965, p. 107). Th e moral 
point of view is, in Adam Smith’s (1759/1976) famous phrase, that of a hypotheti-
cal “impartial spectator”—a stance toward “right or wrong regardless of what’s in 
it for ourselves” (de Waal, 2013, p. 176). Robert Selman (1980, 2008) described 
the moral point of view as a “third-person,” or overall, perspective, typically con-
structed through the mental coordination of social perspectives in late childhood 
or early adolescence. Th is point of view is implicit in the morality of mutual respect 
and justice, of reciprocity and equality—not of one person’s using (or exploiting) 
others as means to attain his or her selfi sh (even if “entertaining”) ends. Th e moral 
point of view also pertains to the morality of “reciprocity as an ideal” (Piaget, 
1932/1965; see our Chapter 3), as well as the situation of “ideal speech” and con-
fl ict resolution (Habermas, 1991). 
 Pinker (2011) suggested that reversibility, the moral point of view, or ideal reci-
procity constitutes a “foundation of morality” that can be 
 seen in the many versions of the Golden Rule that have been discovered by the 
world’s major religions, and also in Spinoza’s Viewpoint of Eternity, Kant’s Categorical 
Imperative, . . . and Jeff erson’s self-evident truth that all people are created equal. (p. 182)  
 Derek Parfi t (2011) concluded: “[B]y requiring us to imagine ourselves in other 
people’s positions, the Golden Rule may provide what is psychologically the 
most eff ective way of making us more impartial, and morally motivating us” 
(p. 330). Parfi t’s connection of social perspective-taking and impartiality to 
moral motivation is especially noteworthy. Golden Rule reversibility can gener-
ate  cognitive  primacy in moral motivation—a key point emphasized throughout 
this book. 
 Th is objective basis for morality can be compared with the stances taken in 
other views in moral psychology and cognate fi elds. An objective stance is also 
championed by social domain theorists such as Turiel (e.g., Helwig, Turiel, & 
Nucci, 1996; Smetana, 2006; Turiel, 2006a), although their referent for “objective” 
does not emphasize the condition of reversibility. 4 Utilitarian philosophers have 
sought to establish objective morality by formulating and additively computing 
putatively equal units of consequence, utility, or collective good along a uniform 
scale (the eff ort is laudatory, but problematic; see Sandel, 2009). Generally taking 
issue with the tenability of objective morality and leaving “little room for ratio-
nal agency or developmental change” (Moshman, 2008, p. 280) are views such 
as post-modernism (e.g., Gergen, 2001); personological, virtue, identity, or com-
munitarian ethics (e.g., Campbell & Christopher, 1996; MacIntyre, 1981, 1988; 
Narvaez & Lapsley, 2009; Sandel, 2009; Walker, in press); “narrative” or Vygotskian 
psychology (e.g., Day & Tappan, 1996; Tappan, 2006); pragmatic accounts 
(Krebs, 2008; Krebs & Denton, 2005, 2006; critiqued by Gibbs, 2006b); aspects 
of neo-nativist or social intuitionist theory (e.g., Haidt, 2012; Haidt & Bjorklund, 
2008a, 2008b; Haidt & Kesebir, 2010; Wilson, 1993); and cultural psychology 
(e.g., Shweder, 1990, 2000; Shweder et al., 2006). Arguably the best presented of these 

4 
■ Moral Development and Reality
non-objectivist views—Haidt’s social intuitionist theory or “new synthesis”—is 
considered more fully in the next chapter. 
 Such views commonly argue that morality—even the right and wrong of jus-
tice—is basically pre-rational, its formation largely relative to diverse personal, 
cultural, and historical contexts. In such contextually relativistic views, a judgment 
about moral right and wrong cannot be valid “without qualifying ‘for whom,’ or 
‘when,’ or ‘from what point of view’” (Kane, 1994, p. 9; cf. Nietzschean perspectiv-
ism). On a group level, morality is “viewed in relation to . . . the specifi c customs 
and conventions, as well as the unique needs, of the society that produced the 
values” (Damon, 1977, p. 13). 
 Cross-cultural universals or broad themes in moral and cognitive development 
have generally been neglected in this focus on particular contexts and directions of 
moral socialization. For example, Jonathan Haidt and Frederick Bjorklund (Haidt 
& Bjorklund, 2008a, 2008b) claimed that a fully moral or virtuous individual is 
typically one who has been fully enculturated into the norms and values of his or 
her particular culture. 5  What are we to make of such a claim? Is morality simply 
a matter of fully internalizing and enacting this or that character virtue or value, 
such as loyalty? Consider the case of a physician who acts loyally by not reporting 
the incompetence of a fellow physician (cf. Beauchamp & Childress, 2009). Th e 
physician is enacting the virtue of loyalty, and in that context, might he not think 
himself (or herself) to be moral, his character good? How can others impose their 
views by judging him (or her) to be otherwise? Yet if the non-reporting physician 
were to put himself in the place of his incompetent colleague’s patients—innocent, 
suff ering, perhaps permanently harmed—he might have second thoughts about 
his “loyalty.” Insofar as it is not reversible, the non-reporting physician’s complicit 
inaction is morally wrong—his loyalty notwithstanding. 
 But what about the contexts of other cultures’ established beliefs, values, tra-
ditions, and practices? Well taken are Haidtian social intuitionists’ and cultural 
psychologists’ assertions that one’s own culture is not always right, that diversity 
should be appreciated and even celebrated, and that one must make every eff ort to 
understand and respect the morality of a particular cultural context. Respecting 
and appreciating the other person or group, aft er all, is certainly in the spirit of 
taking into account others’ (or other groups’) perspectives. Such expanded social 
understanding “may not come until you travel, or become a parent, or perhaps just 
read a good novel about the traditional society” (Haidt, 2012, p. 109). Th e appli-
cation of moral principles (such as, presumably, the condition of reversibility) to 
the global evaluation of other cultures can undermine one’s proper humility and 
appreciation of human diversity: “When you have a . . . principle, you can begin 
making judgments across cultures. Some cultures get a higher score than others, 
which means that they are morally superior” (p. 271). 
 We must indeed expand our social understanding and beware self-righteous or 
ethnocentric conceits. Nonetheless, although the issues may be more complex, we 
 can justifi ably engage in valid moral evaluation 6 even of a diff erent cultural prac-
tice. Might not a given tradition, custom, or practice be morally wrong? Consider, 
for example, the cultural custom of female genital mutilation. It has continued to 
be part of a girl’s traditional upbringing in the village of Kisii, Kenya, although it is 

Introduction 
■ 5
conducted secretly because of its having been declared illegal by Kenya’s parliament 
(Lacey, 2002). It should be clear that the accurate term for this practice is  mutilat-
ing , not merely “altering” (Haidt & Bjorklund, 2008a, p. 191; see Chapter 2; cf. 
Jacobson, 2008); nor is the practice comparable to male circumcision: Th e custom 
involves removal of all or part of the girl’s clitoris and labia minora (thereby dimin-
ishing or eliminating her capacity for sexual sensation) and, in some cases, severe 
constriction through suturing of the vaginal opening. Th e custom is intended to 
promote (by discouraging promiscuity) values of sexual purity and family honor. 
Th e practice can lead to infection, infertility, and even life-threatening complica-
tions. It can also be excruciatingly painful as it is oft en conducted without anes-
thesia; some girls cannot stand the pain and resist so much that they must be held 
down by men (Ali, 2007; Edgerton, 1992; Kopelman, 2001; Sinclair, January 20, 
2008; cf. Moshman, 2011a, pp. 65–66). 
 Given that the custom is still widely approved in the cultural context of the 
village of Kisii (although the practice is controversial in many villages), are these 
villagers right to persist in its practice? On what basis are the Kenyan lawmakers, 
representing the national culture, right to impose their views on this village sub-
culture? Haidt (2012) warned against decrying “oppression and inequality even 
where the apparent victims see nothing wrong” (p. 109) with the practice. One 
might presumably fi nd, in the village of Kisii, women (themselves “altered” in 
this fashion) who “see nothing wrong” with the practice and prescribe it for their 
daughters. 
 Nonetheless, this practice  can  be validly judged to be morally wrong. Like 
the acts of the campers and the physician, the acts of these practitioners fail the 
condition of reversibility. As Pinker (2011) argued, objective morality is not “the 
custom of a particular culture” but rather “a consequence of the interchange-
ability of perspectives” or violation of the reversibility condition. Female genital 
mutilation—even if endorsed by practitioners, affl  icted members of that culture, 
or others—is clearly identifi able as objectively wrong upon “scrutiny by disin-
terested, rational, and informed thinkers”; i.e., mature and informed individuals 
who have adopted the moral point of view (pp. 180, 182). If the practitioners 
of this mutilation were adequately informed 7 and in the place of their vulner-
able, innocent, suff ering victims, the mutilators would not wish the act done 
to them. 
 But might female genital mutilation be functionally necessary to protect the 
village’s communal solidarity, cultural identity, and traditional values? 8 It is true 
that Durkheimian values of group solidarity or community merit moral con-
sideration (Haidt, 2012; what we will call “the good”: see below). Nonetheless, 
such values and considerations are “not enough to override . . . basic fairness” 
(Moshman, 2011a, p. 68; see also Rest, Narvaez, Bebeau, & Th oma, 1999). 
Respecting cultural traditions and practices, in other words, should not require 
one to “condone the subjugation and brutalization of women” (Fowers & 
Richardson, 1996, p. 615; cf. Appiah, 2010). As anthropologist Robert Edgerton 
(1992) noted dryly, “most societies in the world . . . have managed to cherish 
female purity and family honor without practicing [clitorectomy and] infi bula-
tion” (pp. 9–10).  

6 
■ Moral Development and Reality
the right and the good: the moral 
 
■
domain 
 Once we have objectively justifi ed an evaluation that the acts of the campers, the 
physician, or the mutilators are morally wrong, is our moral evaluation complete? 
Generally, does morality consist exclusively of fairness-based right or wrong? What 
are the foundations of ethics? Th ere is clearly more to the moral domain than right 
or wrong based on reversibility. What fundamentally completes the core of the 
moral domain? We have already alluded to some candidates. Note, for example, 
that sentiments pertaining to loyalty, group identity, purity, and honor fi gured into 
our evaluation of the acts of the complicit physician and the genital mutilator. And 
consider our disgust at the self-soiling infl icted on Edward; our revulsion at impu-
rity surely intensifi ed our condemnation of the campers’ act. 
 Values pertaining to in-group solidarity, loyalty, tradition, and conformity; 
respect for, honoring of, or obedience to authority; and purity (or disgust at impu-
rity) are widely evident around the world. It is certainly true that such broadly evi-
dent values and sentiments infl uence our moral evaluations. As we will see, Haidt 
(2003, Haidt & Kesebir; Chapter 2) has even claimed a primary or foundational 
status for each of these values or aff ectively based “intuitions” (along with justice 
or fairness and the value of liberty or freedom from oppression; see Haidt, 2012). 
 Th is claim is dubious. Consider again our reaction to Edward’s soiling. Our 
emotional reaction of disgust might intensify our empathic distress at the harm 
to Edward and our empathic anger at the tormentors. Does that reaction make 
disgust (or its positive side, purity) in its own right a basic foundation of morality? 
Although it is true that values, virtues, or sentiments of loyalty, tradition, honor, 
and purity may be moral ized (cf. Pinker, 2011) in a particular culture, they are not 
by that token made moral (even though they may relate to the moral domain in 
terms of caring, welfare, or “the good”; see below). Although our feeling of impu-
rity or disgust at the victim’s soiling surely intensifi ed our negative moral evalua-
tion, it was the victimization itself—its self-centered, exploitative, non-reversible 
nature—that permits identifi cation of the act as immoral. 
 Similarly dubious are moral foundational claims for loyalty or authority. “Th e 
greatest problem today,” asserted Frans de Waal (2009), “with so many groups rub-
bing shoulders on a crowded planet, is  excessive loyalty to one’s own nation, group, 
or religion” (p. 203; emphasis added). Of course, in-group solidarity and loyalty 
do promote the sense of belonging or personal security of in-group members (and 
do contribute to the community’s “moral fabric”; de Waal, 2013, p. 184; cf. Brewer, 
2007). And surely there are limits to how far we can extend ideals of impartiality 
and equality (see Chapter note 3). But what about  excessive, illegitimate loyalty? 
Doesn’t it matter how a nation. religion, or peer group treats  out -group members, 
such as Edward (see Jacobson, 2008; and our Chapter 2)? 
 Again (recall the complicit physician), loyalty per se is off  the mark. Consider, 
in the late twentieth century in Africa, the mass murders by Hutus of certain out-
siders (out of a feeling of loyalty to the in-group Hutu culture). Like the complicit 
physician’s inaction, the Hutus’ “loyal” acts were morally wrong—and morally 
 right were the just and caring eff orts of some individuals to defend or protect 

Introduction 
■ 7
those victimized outsiders (see Moshman, 2011a). Similarly, respect for authority 
is better framed as respect for and obedience to  legitimate authority (see Damon, 
1977, for the role of reciprocity in the mature understanding of authority), which 
again returns us to considerations of the right or  fairness. Th is crucial qualifi er was 
noted by Haidt (2012) himself: “[T]riggers [for the authority intuition] . . . include 
anything that is construed as an act of obedience, disobedience, respect, disre-
spect, submission, or rebellion, with regard to authorities  perceived to be legitimate ” 
(p. 144, emphasis added). Pinker (January 13, 2008) suggested that criteria of ratio-
nality, justice, or fairness (e.g., interchangeability of perspectives) may “provide a 
benchmark for determining” whether a moral evaluation or intuition is “aligned 
with morality itself” (p. 56). In-group loyalty, obedience to authority, and “purity” 
too oft en fail Pinker’s benchmark to merit individual foundational status in ethics. 
In short, “a morality defi ned by loyalty, obedience, duty, law, or convention” is not 
necessarily “morally defensible” (Pinker, 2011, p. 641). 
 Feelings of impurity or disgust warrant further discussion as we seek to com-
plete the basic core of the moral domain. Granted, disgust “can be a cruel and 
stupid emotion” (Bloom, 2004, p. 175). Although the disgust involved in our reac-
tion to Edward’s victimization aligned with morality (and, as noted, intensifi ed 
our evaluation of moral wrong), consider the disgust that ostensibly justifi es the 
persecution of so-called “untouchables” in India. Indeed, given how oft en manip-
ulations of disgust have led to “extreme in-group–out-group divisions followed by 
inhumane treatment” (see Chapter 2), this feeling “wins the award as the single 
most irresponsible emotion” (Hauser, 2006, p. 199). 
 Nonetheless, the evolutionary function of this emotion points to an aspect of 
morality that may indeed assume a primary or foundational status alongside “the 
right” of impartiality, justice, or fairness. Disgust does prompt us to avoid contact 
with rotten meat, decaying fl esh, vermin, vomit, feces, urine, or other “potential 
disease vectors” (Pinker, 2008, p. 37; cf. Bloom, 2004). “Individuals who had a 
properly calibrated sense of disgust” survived, reproduced, and even prospered 
(Haidt, 2012, p. 148). So the original environmental stimulus for disgust or revul-
sion did (and still does in part) serve the function of protecting our bodies from 
harm. 
 What about considerations not specifi cally of infection to oneself or others, but 
of harm—or benefi t—in general? Oft en complementary to the intrinsic right or 
wrong of an act are its good or bad  eff ects or  consequences for oneself and others. 
Edward, for example, was not only wronged; he was harmed. He  suff ered , as did 
the village girls and the incompetent doctor’s patients. And we  care about their 
suff ering. “Of the emotions that one could use as a moral guide,” wrote Paul Bloom 
(2004), “I would prefer [over disgust] sympathy, compassion, and pity” (p. 175). 
 Although it can be misguided, sympathy or caring in general is a worthy com-
panion to fairness. Indeed, it is comparably fundamental in the moral domain. Just 
as it is generally immoral to infl ict harm, it is generally moral to promote welfare 
or human fl ourishing (Lourenco, 2000; although ingredients of the good life or 
 eudaimonia extend beyond ethics; see Appiah, 2008); that is, the greater good of 
participants in the moral sphere. Although our disgust at Edward’s soiling was not 
itself morally foundational, it did contribute to our evaluation of harm. Feelings of 

8 
■ Moral Development and Reality
purity, loyalty, obedience, etc., pertain to the moral domain proper insofar as they 
promote judgments and actions serving individual or collective good (welfare, 
solidarity, security, etc.). Diff erentiating these feelings may “needlessly parcel what 
is, at bottom, a more general concern about harm” or the greater good (Harris, 
2010, p. 254; cf. Suhler & Churchland, 2011; vs. Haidt & Joseph, 2011). Nor should 
social conventions be divorced from group-welfare concerns (see Gibbs, 2010a). 
Th ese feelings can be considered morally foundational insofar as they pertain to a 
basic concern for human welfare. 
 An adequate morality requires both the right and the good. Taken together, these 
basic considerations capture the moral domain and defi ne the primary strands of 
moral development. Th ese “two foundations are deemed part of the moral domain 
by virtually all individuals, cultures, and theorists because they represent the core 
of any justifi able morality” (Moshman, 2011a, p. 85). Haidt’s broader or more dif-
ferentiated and relativistic (his preferred term is  pluralistic ) conceptualization of 
the moral domain is further considered in Chapter 2. Hoff man’s developmental 
theory of the good (in terms of the empathic predisposition) is considered in 
Chapter 5. 
 Largely consistent with our twofold representation is Beauchamp and 
Childress’s (2009) conceptualization of morality in terms of two primary prin-
ciples: fi rst, justice (cf. constructed knowledge with its corresponding virtue, the 
character ideal of fair-mindedness) and respect for the person 9  (autonomy), and, 
second, non-malefi cence or benefi cence (cf. the empathic predisposition with its 
corresponding virtue, the character ideal of benevolence). 10 William Frankena 
(1973) argued that  justice and  benefi cence together suffi  ciently defi ne the moral 
domain. Beauchamp and Childress (2009) defi ned  benefi cence as “all forms of 
action intended to benefi t other persons” (p. 197). Moral appeals to promotion 
of the good—not only for individuals but also for groups—are typically driven by 
empathy (see Chapter 5; see also note 9 for this chapter). 
 Th e right and the good strands of morality and moral development, although 
distinct, intimately interrelate and complement one another. Th e paradox is worth 
contemplating: Th e strands of morality are distinguishable yet inextricable. Th e 
“right” is the right of  something. What is “the right” if not the right expression of 
love, the right balance of goods, the right (or equitable) sharing or reciprocating 
among  people? Does not the right “presuppose” the good (Frankena, 1973, p. 44)? 
And the converse is also true: One can scarcely refer to the good in the absence of 
the right. Utilitarian and other consequentialist theories of the good prescribe not 
just the “greatest good” but the greatest good for  the greatest number —an implicit 
appeal to equality. Indeed, “much of the appeal” of these theories lies in their “non-
judgmental spirit” that “everyone’s preferences” should “ count equally ” (Sandel, 
2009, p. 41, emphasis added). Although doing so mixes the two foundations, it 
does seem appropriate to include considerations of equity or fairness in promo-
tions of the general good. No wonder Jean Piaget (1932/1965) concluded that 
“between the more refi ned forms of justice . . . and love properly so called, there is 
no longer any real confl ict” (p. 324; cf. Barry, 1995). 
 Yet for all their intimacy (and perhaps ultimate compatibility), the right and 
the good do remain distinct and mutually irreducible: Th ere simply is no way to 

Introduction 
■ 9
assimilate justice into benefi cence, nor benefi cence into justice. We cannot say 
that the right  reduces to the good any more than we can say that the good  reduces 
to the right. 11 
 Th e mutual irreducibility of the right and the good is not problematic for moral 
evaluations or decisions so long as these strands interweave compatibly. Th e 
campers’ act was clearly immoral in that Edward was both wronged and harmed; 
much the same can be said for the medical patient and the child victims in Kisii, 
Kenya. In general, the case for objective morality is strongest where the strands are 
complementary. Moral judgments or obligations to intervene that “follow . . . from 
 both principles” thereby gain “a kind of priority” (Frankena, 1973, p. 52, emphasis 
added). An intended act of both harm and wrong (“intentionally harming some-
one who is innocent and undeserving of such treatment”) can even be called “evil” 
(Baumeister, 2012, p. 368). 
 But what about cases where the good and the right would seem to be unavoid-
ably in confl ict and have equal weight? Aft er all, “caring and justice are powerful, 
legitimate principles and both are valid” (Hoff man, 2000, p. 270). As Jean Decety 
and Daniel Batson (2009) concluded from research fi ndings: “Empathy-induced 
altruism and the desire to uphold a moral principle of fairness are independent 
motives that can at times confl ict” (p. 122). Piaget’s optimistic declaration of ulti-
mate compatibility notwithstanding, then, the good and the right can be at log-
gerheads. In such cases, how does one decide whether caring or fairness takes 
precedence? 
 Hoff man (2000) provided a real-life case of confl ict for us to consider. In 
Hoff man’s psychology department, “an esteemed faculty member died and his 
wife, a part-time adjunct instructor with much-below-average teacher ratings, 
wanted to keep her job.” Th e department faculty members were for a while at log-
gerheads: “Th e faculty who supported retaining the widowed part-time instructor 
were passionate about the matter and found it hard to believe that their colleagues 
could be so callous as to want to add to this woman’s grief. [But] the other faculty 
were equally passionate [that] allowing a poor teacher to stay on” was unfair (and 
uncaring) to the students, who pay tuition and have a right to expect to learn from 
the best available teachers; to more competent and available prospective instruc-
tors who would be more deserving of the job; and to the meritocratic standards 
and legitimate expectations of the university (Hoff man, 2000, pp. 269–270). What 
to do? 
 Frankena (1980) suggested that, in cases of confl ict between the right and the 
good, one might weigh the two sides (for more complex cases, see Beauchamp & 
Childress, 2009, pp. 19–25). Perhaps the right and the good are not aft er all com-
parably substantial in the given case. Th en one could justifi ably give precedence 
to whichever side is more substantial. “A considerable amount of good may out-
weigh a small inequality of treatment or a considerable gain in equality [or in fair-
ness] may outweigh a small amount of good” (Frankena, 1980, p. 69). In terms of 
Hoff man’s example: Is the good of not adding to the widow’s grief and letting her 
keep her job “considerable” or substantial and the attendant inequities of doing so 
“small”? Or does the right (fairness to the students, prospective teachers, univer-
sity standards) outweigh the good? 

10 
■ Moral Development and Reality
 In the end, the faculty decided to replace the widow with a more competent 
instructor (Hoff man, personal communication, November 15, 2007), but perhaps 
not without some reluctance. Empathy for her plight was outweighed but not elim-
inated in the moral decision-making. Precisely because the lesser consideration 
remains, its subordination oft en leaves in the judge a trace of sorrow, a residual 
regret that the less substantial (in this case)—yet also valid—consideration had 
to be overridden (cf. Hill, 1996). Both cognitive and aff ective primacy in moral 
motivation remain relevant. 
 Th e right and the good not only capture much of the moral domain but also rep-
resent the main strands of moral development. Aft er appreciating the neo-nativist 
and enculturative themes of Haidt’s theory (Chapter 2), we will largely focus on 
moral development (as well as compatible socialization) and its relation to reality 
in the other remaining chapters (3 through 10) of this book. To explore the devel-
opment of the right and the good, we will use as vehicles the theories of Lawrence 
Kohlberg and Martin Hoff man. Like the right and the good, these theories of 
moral development are distinct yet interrelated, and generally complementary. 
introducing chapters 3 through 10 
 
■
 Both Kohlberg’s and Hoff man’s theories posit that we develop morally in part as 
we take and coordinate with the perspectives of others and thereby go (or, perhaps 
better, grow) beyond the superfi cial. Young children might laugh at Ed because 
they would attend mainly to the salient or “surface” features of his colorful reac-
tion: Ed’s reddened face; the blaring and astonishing fl uency of his blue streak; his 
odd, off -kilter way of running; and his ineff ectual attempts to catch the culprits. 
More mature and accurate observers would have grown beyond this superfi cial 
laughter. Th ey would deeply and truly take Ed’s perspective. Th ey would under-
stand and object to the unfairness against him (cognitive primacy), discern and 
feel his suff ering (aff ective primacy), and—one would hope—act on their moral 
motivation to help him. Th eir moral perception would be profound. 
 We emphasize that moral perception can be profound in understanding (an 
unfairness, the right) as well as empathic feeling (another’s suff ering, the good). 
Th e development from superfi cial perception to a deeper understanding of right 
and wrong is addressed in Kohlberg’s theoretical approach, discussed in Chapters 
3 and 4. In Chapter 3, we discuss the fundamental themes of Kohlberg’s theory or, 
more broadly, the cognitive developmental approach to morality. We revisit the 
works of Kohlberg’s predecessor, Jean Piaget, as we consider the phenomenologi-
cal world of the young child. Because preschoolers generally fi nd it diffi  cult to keep 
in mind and work with multiple sources of information, their moral understand-
ing or moral judgment tends to be superfi cial. Broadly speaking, their attention 
is readily captured by or  centered  on that which is momentarily immediate and 
salient in their social and nonsocial worlds. Spontaneous altruistic thoughts do 
occur even in the young child’s mind, and the child may act on those thoughts and 
feelings for others. Nonetheless, highly salient is the chatter of one’s own desires or 
impulses, and the immediate needs of one’s own body; that is to say, one’s egoistic 
perspective. Although Piaget’s original concept of egocentrism as an  incapacity did 

Introduction 
■ 11
not prove to be valid, “egocentric bias,” a  tendency  to center on one’s own immedi-
ate perspective, lives on in the literature today. 
 Fortunately, egocentric bias can diminish to some extent with cognitive devel-
opment: “ reason allows us to extricate ourselves from our parochial vantage 
points” (Pinker, 2011, p. xxv). Just as centration and superfi ciality characterize 
early childhood moral judgment, “decentration” and depth can be said to charac-
terize moral understanding and perception in the school years and beyond. Social 
interaction, taking into account others’ perspectives (i.e., decentering from one’s 
egoistic perspective through mental coordination and refl ection), and thereby 
growing beyond the superfi cial in a cognitive sense have much to do with the 
emergence of reason in human development and social perception. We describe in 
this chapter the construction of moral understanding and judgment, of reciproc-
ity as an ideal or the moral point of view. Again, mature persons would under-
stand that the prank played upon Ed was unfair, that they—especially if they 
were Ed with his intellectual disability—would not wish to be treated that way. 
And out of that understanding, they might act, to refrain or intervene. In other 
words, the cognitive-developmental claim is that there is a primarily cognitive 
motive in morality. Th e motive is not insurmountable, to be sure; but it is there 
nonetheless. 
 In the course of our Chapter 3 discussion of this primarily cognitive strand 
of moral development, we do a number of things. We relate morality to logic; 
explain that the ideals of fairness or moral reciprocity are constructed, not merely 
socialized, internalized, or intuited; explicate the role of peer interaction and 
perspective-taking opportunities in this moral constructive process; argue that 
reciprocity can be a moral motive in its own right; trace across diverse cultures the 
construction of moral judgment through social perspective coordination during 
and beyond the years of childhood; and ponder issues in the concept and assess-
ment of “stages” in the development of moral judgment. We interpret the stages as 
frameworks or “schemas,” a construct that will evolve in the subsequent chapters 
of our exploration. We conclude by evaluating the cognitive developmental theme 
of cross-culturally evident growth beyond the superfi cial as pervasive and stable 
enough in morality to support our argument for moral  development as not reduc-
ible to (although supportable by) socialization or enculturation. 
 Given this Piagetian cognitive-developmental concern with superfi ciality- 
to-depth in moral judgment or understanding, Kohlberg was particularly con-
cerned to identify an age trend and possible sequence of developmental advances or 
stages that may be universal. Although we argue in Chapter 4 that Kohlberg’s spe-
cifi c stage typology was misguided and accordingly propose a new view, we stress 
Kohlberg’s awesome achievements: Th is man almost single-handedly put cognitive 
moral development on the map of American psychology. He encouraged attention 
to the continued development of moral judgment beyond the childhood years. And 
he speculated from case studies of mature moral thinkers in existential crisis that 
there may be a deeper reality, a “cosmic perspective” that underlies profound moral 
perception and that can support the moral life (see Chapters 9 and 10). 
 Profound moral perception also entails caring or feeling. Accordingly, in 
Chapter 5, our focus shift s from the right to the good, from justice to empathy, from 

12 
■ Moral Development and Reality
the primarily cognitive to the primarily aff ective strand of moral motivation and 
development. We examine the systematic, research-based theory of empathy and 
moral development articulated over the past three decades by Martin Hoff man and 
others. As is Kohlberg’s, Hoff man’s work is represented in virtually every current 
developmental psychology textbook. Although we will articulate our caveats, we 
do—at the very least—second Haidt’s acknowledgment of Hoff man’s “important 
work on the development of empathy” (Haidt, 2012, p. 325). We draw heavily in 
Chapter 5 from Hoff man’s integration of his impressive contributions to the fi eld, 
even as we also consider expansions or elaborations by Frans de Waal, Jean Decety, 
and others—as well as a criticism by Carolyn Zahn-Waxler and colleagues. 
 Hoff man has focused our attention on the key role of empathy in moral devel-
opment. Th anks to cognitive development, social perspective-taking, language 
development, and moral socialization, empathy evolves from simple, biologically 
based responses to surface cues to a more complex, subtle, and veridical emotional 
responsiveness to the joys, suff erings, and life situations of others—even the plight 
of oppressed groups. Because Ed’s “funny” displays of agitation were so salient for 
them, young children might attend only to those cues and ignore cues of distress. 
Surface responding tends to be displaced in moral development by subtler and 
more profound discernments: of the hurt behind Ed’s anger, of his utter shame and 
humiliation at having wet himself, and of his distress at perhaps not quite knowing 
what to do or whom to tell about what was happening. 
 Beyond the contribution of general cognitive and language development, moral 
socialization (featuring social perspective-taking in the service of the child’s inter-
nalization of prosocial norms) is crucial if empathy is to grow and motivate appro-
priate prosocial behavior. Within moral socialization, Hoff man focuses on parental 
practices of discipline. Th rough “inductions,” or disciplinary teaching that makes 
salient the perspectives of others hurt by the child’s transgression, the parent can 
elicit and cultivate a key psychological resource brought by the child to the dis-
ciplinary encounter: the empathic predisposition and its derivatives (chiefl y, the 
potential for empathy-based guilt). 
 In the course of our Chapter 5 discussion of Hoff man’s theory of empathy 
development and socialization, we address a number of topics: the complex nature 
of the empathic predisposition; an adequate distinction between self and other as a 
prerequisite for mature empathy (challenged in some studies and criticism); the use 
of both self-focused and other-focused perspective-taking in mature empathy; the 
roles of causal attribution, inference, principles, and other cognitive processes in 
the formation of empathic anger, empathy-based guilt, and other empathic aff ects; 
the limitations of empathic bias and empathic over-arousal; the roles of parental 
warmth and optimal arousal of attention in moral socialization; and the favor-
able impact, found for example in our research (Krevans & Gibbs, 1996; Patrick & 
Gibbs, 2007, 2012), of parental expression of disappointed expectations in the dis-
cipline encounter. Th e chapter concludes with our argument that the motivation 
to correct an injustice is, at least in part, cognitive. In other words, empathic aff ect 
stands not alone in moral motivation; the special structures constructed within the 
 cognitive strand of moral development can also impel action. Th e most plausible 
position in moral motivation is neither “aff ective primacy” (early Hoff man, Haidt) 

Introduction 
■ 13
nor “cognitive primacy” (Kohlberg, cf. Piaget) but  co- primacy ( both empathy and 
justice as primary motives; in eff ect a dual process model). 
 In Chapters 6 through 8, we apply Kohlberg’s and Hoff man’s theories to social 
behavior and, in the process, expand certain variables—most notably, moral iden-
tity, self-serving cognitive distortion, and social skills—that neither Kohlberg 
nor Hoff man adequately developed. Chapter 6 focuses on some of the variables 
accounting for individual diff erences in the likelihood of prosocial behavior, 
where “prosocial behavior” can range from a particular intervention to a lifetime 
dedicated to just and good causes. Ed needed someone to intervene on his behalf 
against his tormentors. I know. As one of the campers, I witnessed Ed’s torment on 
at least one occasion. Although I did not intervene (I feared sinking from anonym-
ity into downright unpopularity, an excuse that even today fails to neutralize my 
guilt), I have learned since then (Gibbs et al., 1986) that there are those who would 
intervene. Our account of prosocial behavior in Chapter 6 includes the case of a 
White youth who surprised even himself as he intervened against his peers to save 
an African American youth from imminent attack. 
 Individuals who seem primed to discern and act against unfairness and harm 
amid the complexities of social conformity, ideology, and distorted thinking in 
the “fi eld” of human social situations (discussed in Chapter 6) tend to be those 
for whom morality is central to their sense of self (that is, they tend to be high in 
“moral identity”). Moral identity can join the main primary (aff ective and cogni-
tive) sources of moral motivation. Individuals diff er markedly in moral identity: 
Some individuals, called “moral exemplars” by Anne Colby and William Damon 
(1992), achieve a life characterized by almost total integration of self and morality. 
Finally, to take eff ective sustained action, even those high in moral identity need 
“ego strength,” which we defi ne in terms of aff ect-regulating goal-attainment skills 
or attributes. Distinguishing features of genuine versus spurious “moral exem-
plars” are considered at the end of Chapter 6. 
 Chapters 7 and 8 apply Kohlberg’s and Hoff man’s moral developmental the-
ories to the understanding and treatment of antisocial behavior. Kohlberg’s 
and Hoff man’s theories primarily use the concept of developmental delay in 
perspective-taking to account for antisocial behavior. One conjures the stereotype 
of children growing up in the conditions typical of inner cities, victims of abuse 
and neglect. Th e picture is one of children managing to survive and cope as best 
they can, taking no one’s perspective except their own, still superfi cial even as ado-
lescents in their moral judgment and empathy, and accordingly acting in a manner 
that is unfair and unfeeling toward others. Abuse and neglect are in fact associated 
with developmental delays and other risk factors for antisocial behavior. Yet the 
adolescents who tormented Edward were not from a high-risk inner-city environ-
ment but instead were largely from the relatively affl  uent suburbs of northern New 
Jersey in the 1960s. 
 Here we have an apparent anomaly: How do we account for antisocial behavior 
among those who, at least at the fi rst blush of Kohlberg’s and Hoff man’s theories, 
should have gone beyond pronounced egocentric bias and other superfi cialities of 
centration to reach deeper, more mature levels of moral functioning? Why didn’t 
they adequately take Edward’s perspective? Weren’t they capable of adopting the 

14 
■ Moral Development and Reality
moral point of view or ideal reciprocity, of according to another the same treat-
ment they would expect for themselves? Weren’t they capable of empathy, caring 
about others, benefi cence? Why didn’t their performance at the camp live up to 
their overall sociomoral competence? Let us suggest three possible answers. 
 Th e fi rst answer is that Ed was not among the campers’ small circle of friends. 
Th e middle-class suburbs of northern New Jersey were rather exclusively White, 
mainstream neighborhoods. To the parochial members of that rather homoge-
neous culture, the relatively few individuals of other ethnic groups, and certainly 
disabled individuals, were, so to speak, invisible. Although Ed was similar in one 
salient respect (racially), he was diff erent in other respects. Th e perpetrators were 
friendly enough with their peers but cared little about the feelings of those who 
were “diff erent.” To use Hoff man’s term, their perspective-taking was quite empath-
ically biased (Chapter 5) in favor of their narrowly defi ned, familiar in-group at 
the expense of dissimilar others such as Edward. He was small, yet an adult; they 
were neither. He had an intellectual disability; they did not. His legs were dispa-
rate; theirs were not. His occupational orientation was that of manual labor; theirs 
(or their parents’) for the most part was not. It was as if Ed were too diff erent 
to qualify as a referent for perspective-taking, for decent (fair and caring) treat-
ment, for inclusion within their “moral circle” (Singer, 1981). Haidt’s functional 
description of group loyalty and solidarity (Chapter 2) notwithstanding, robust 
in-group identity can prompt far more  im moral than moral behavior; indeed, “is a 
major cause of strife and suff ering in the world today” (Tomasello, May 25, 2008; 
cf. Moshman, 2011a). 
 Our second answer to the question of why the campers did not take Ed’s per-
spective refers, not to their in-group empathic bias, but instead to their egois-
tic motives or desires. Ed was not simply diff erent, but diff erent and  vulnerable. 
Although vulnerability can elicit empathy, it can also invite exploitation, and the 
latter motive can overpower empathy and preempt adequate perspective-taking. 
Hoff man (Chapter 5) is correct that Kohlberg’s cognitive-developmental approach 
under-appreciates the egoistic desires or motives that must be constrained, 
 modulated, or overcome through moral development and socialization:
 Humans . . . have a desire for . . .  dominance [power or control over others, superiority to 
them in a status hierarchy] that has deep biological roots. Sociobiologists trace it to 
the drive to maximize reproduction of one’s genes. But whatever the source, it plays 
important social roles and is deeply embedded in primate behavior generally. (Kane, 
1994, p. 55) 
 Might the campers have been motivated in part to assert their power, their superi-
ority over Ed, an ostensibly higher status but vulnerable adult? Ed may have been 
a tempting target among the adults in the campers’ world. Ed was an adult, and 
hence occupied higher status and authority in the social hierarchy. Th e campers 
knew they should respect adults or others in authority (at least legitimate author-
ity). But because Edward was mentally challenged, he could readily be outma-
neuvered and dominated—in Kant’s words, used as a means instead of respected 
as an end. To overcome such egoistic motives, moral socialization must cultivate 

Introduction 
■ 15
children’s fairness (Chapter 3) and empathy (Chapter 5). Broadly, culture must 
support morality and moral development. 
 Th ere is a third possible answer. Perhaps the campers were on the verge of ade-
quate perspective-taking, with its attendant intimations of wrong and harm, of 
unfairness and empathy-based guilt. But perhaps they used cognitive distortions 
to sabotage that incipient perspective-taking so that they could continue to tease 
and humiliate. Aft er all, although their sphere of morality was small, they did not 
generally act like bullies or “proactive” aggressors (Chapter 7). Consider Hoff man’s 
(and others’) suggestion that empathy-based motives are just as much a part of 
human nature as egoistic ones; that the empathic predisposition is broadly evident 
(Chapter 5). Perhaps the campers were not so in-groupish and egoistically moti-
vated as to preclude all empathy for Edward. Perhaps, indeed, precisely because 
of some degree of perspective-taking and empathy, they needed to neutralize 
their incipient moral understanding and feelings by rationalizing their actions. 
I do remember how the campers who were engaged in tormenting Ed seemed 
motivated to talk about how much they needed “entertainment”: “Th is camp is 
so boring, you see, that it forces you to think up things to do for kicks. You just 
have to get some relief.” “Everybody pulls pranks, that’s just what happens at any 
summer camp. And, you know, Ed’s so funny when he’s mad—you just can’t help 
setting him off ; it’s sort of his own fault.” 
 Blaming the victim and other rationalizing distortions neutralized the good 
and right of adequately taking Ed’s perspective. Accordingly, the campers failed 
to live up to their cognitive and empathic sociomoral competence. Th ey failed 
to take into account that Ed was mentally challenged; that Ed had done nothing 
to them; that, in fact, he had shown them little kindnesses from time to time and 
tried to be their friend; and that their “entertainment” infl icted humiliation and 
distress on him. 
 We spend considerable space in Chapter 7 analyzing such self-serving cognitive 
distortions. And we do mean  distortions : wrong judgments, errors, inaccuracies, 
mistakes, or departures from veridical perception. It is not suffi  cient in moral psy-
chology simply to “describe what people happen to think is moral” (Haidt, 2012, p. 
270); rather, we must recognize that morality in its higher reaches can specify what 
is right, true, or valid—and what isn’t. As Sam Harris (2010) put it, “Many people are 
simply wrong about morality—just as many people are wrong about physics, biology, 
history, and everything else worth understanding” (p. 87). Pinker (2011) suggested 
that “unless one is a radical moral relativist [believing that there is no basis for judg-
ing any morality to be better than any other], one believes that people can in some 
sense be  mistaken  about their moral convictions, that their justifi cations of genocide, 
rape, honor killings, and the torture of heretics are  erroneous , not just distasteful to 
our sensibilities” (p. 623; second emphasis added; cf. Moshman, 2011a). 
 In this connection, we will in Chapter 7 examine the erroneous “moral” con-
victions and pseudo-justifi cations of a notoriously antisocial individual; namely, 
Timothy McVeigh. Th is case makes particularly clear how cognitive distortions 
can insulate a self-centered worldview (itself a primary distortion, linked to feeling 
superior or insuffi  ciently respected); that is, how they can preempt or neutralize 
social perspective-taking, moral understanding, and veridical empathy. 

16 
■ Moral Development and Reality
 Again, we ask: What if the campers had adequately taken Ed’s perspective? 
What if they had seen his common humanity with them and had thereby sensed 
the unfairness and felt the harm of their prospective act? Th en they might have 
gained the ego strength to refrain from “setting him off ” for the purpose of their 
self-centered and egoistically motivated entertainment. Most off enders, from petty 
pranksters to ideological terrorists, fail (except for self-serving purposes) to take the 
perspectives of their victims. Hence, the attainment of adequate social perspective-  
taking—perspective-taking that is profound or mature; rationalization-busting, 
adequately informed, subtle or discerning; reciprocally ideal and balanced; and 
socially expansive or inclusive—should be a basic theme pervasive across the 
components of any eff ective treatment program. As we move from understanding 
to treating antisocial behavior (Chapter 8), we will focus on a multi-component 
treatment program that incorporates a wide variety of social perspective-taking 
opportunities: namely, our EQUIP program (e.g., Gibbs, Potter, & DiBiase, 2013). 
Chapter 8 concludes with illustrations of social perspective-taking treatments 
available for severe off enders. 
 Although this book addresses Kohlberg’s, Hoff man’s, and Haidt’s theories, we 
do go beyond those theories in Chapter 9 to consider the question of a deeper 
reality. As noted, Kohlberg argued that existential thinkers in their soul-searching 
sometimes discern such a reality; that is, come to see their earthly moral life 
from an inspiring “cosmic perspective.” If there is such a deeper reality, perhaps 
it is sometimes glimpsed through physically life-threatening as well as existen-
tial crises. Accordingly, we study in this chapter cases of persons who have had a 
so-called near-death experience, or a set of “profound psychological events with 
transcendental and mystical elements, typically occurring to individuals close to 
death or in situations of intense physical or emotional danger” (Greyson, 2000b, p. 
316). Concerning the ontological signifi cance of this phenomenon, a review of the 
literature—especially, recent medical research literature—leads us to the tentative 
conclusion that it is not entirely a matter of subjective projection, that the experi-
ence involves something real. To some extent, then, we corroborate Kohlberg’s 
suggestion that a cosmic reality underlies moral development and inspiration. In 
this light, “growing beyond the superfi cial” and “taking the perspectives of others” 
take on radical new meaning. 
 In our fi nal chapter (Chapter 10), we conclude our use of Kohlberg’s and 
Hoff man’s theories to explore growth beyond the superfi cial in morality. We refer 
to our critique of Haidt’s theory. We culminate our argument for a co-primacy in 
moral motivation by relating Kohlberg’s and Hoff man’s (as well as Haidt’s) theories 
to motivationally and qualitatively distinct categories of knowledge. We conclude 
the chapter with some fi nal thoughts on moral development, perception, and 
behavior vis- à -vis a deeper reality of human interconnectedness. If we are deeply 
connected, then acts that wrong and harm one individual—Edward, a medical 
patient, a young girl in Kisii, Kenya—ultimately wrong and harm us all. 

17
  2 
 Beyond Haidt’s New Synthesis 
 According to Jonathan Haidt, the social psychologist whose relativistic view was 
briefl y considered in the last chapter, the fi eld of moral development and educa-
tion has benefi ted of late from a good dose of reality. In the early decades of the 
twenty-fi rst century, the fi eld has ostensibly gained a broader, truer depiction of 
morality thanks to what Haidt called a “new synthesis” in the social, behavioral, 
and biological sciences. Championing congruent trends in areas ranging from evo-
lutionary and comparative psychology, to human infant studies, to cognitive neu-
roscience, Haidt has sought thereby to describe and “explain what morality  really 
is” (Haidt & Kesebir, 2010, p. 797, italics added; cf. Haidt, 2007, 2012) . . . and  isn’t . 
Haidt’s explanation—featuring three key themes of in-group solidarity (“morality 
binds and builds”), intuitive primacy, and social persuasion 1 —in eff ect says “ not 
really”  to our claims, introduced in Chapter 1, concerning the right (justice) and the 
good (care). Justice is  not really some objective ideal of reversibility, constructed as 
morality grows beyond superfi cial notions and actions. Rather, justice, fairness, or 
“the right” in Haidt’s view is but one of a number of primary intuitions—biologically 
prepared, culturally shaped, and automatic or “fast.” Caring or “the good”  doesn’t 
really represent the only other foundational pillar of morality. As we saw in Chapter 
1, besides justice and care are posited intuitions of (at the least) loyalty, authority, 
and sanctity (or purity)—representing ingredients for diverse moralities of in-group 
solidarity and success. Whereas Western cultures shape (along with individualistic 
rights and freedom) mainly justice and care, many non-Western, traditional, or 
rural cultures emphasize other intuitions such as loyalty and purity. Whatever the 
cultural emphasis, these intuitions are primary. Th ey are characterized as “mod-
ules”; that is, as “domain-specifi c processing system[s]” that are “innately specifi ed” 
(Gottschling, 2009, p. 297). Th e intuitive modules are cultivated and verbally articu-
lated as the “rational” moral judgments of everyday life—judgments devoted, in this 
view, not to truth so much as to self-serving rationalization and social persuasion. 
 Although we will largely move beyond Haidt’s theory in subsequent chapters, 
Haidt’s (and his colleagues’) view of morality warrants more consideration than 
it received in Chapter 1. Accordingly, we devote this chapter to the work of this 
third name in the title of this edition. Haidt’s ostensibly new synthesis—or more 
specifi cally, his social intuitionist and moral foundations theory—encompasses 
his and colleagues’ many innovative research studies and draws upon compatible 
fi ndings and theories from an impressively broad array of disciplines. By the early 
twenty-fi rst century, the impact of Haidt’s and related work on the fi eld arguably 
was already superseding that of prior works by Kohlberg and Hoff man.  
three themes 
 
■
 To consider the themes of Haidt’s new synthesis, this chapter uses as its heuris-
tic vehicle an account found in Robert Coles’s (1986)  Moral Life of Children. Th e 

18 
■ Moral Development and Reality
account is of an incident in which one youth suddenly rescued another from an 
imminent group assault. Our narrative journey in this vehicle will enable us to 
survey the three thematic “principles” or “unifying ideas” (Haidt & Kesebir, 2010, 
p. 798) of Haidt’s new synthesis. Th e context of the narration is the desegregation 
movement in the United States in the 1970s. Th e rescuer (White) and rescued 
(African-American) were both students at a previously segregated high school in 
Atlanta, Georgia. 
 Hostility in Prior Weeks:  In-Group Solidarity 
 We start at the weeks prior to the rescue—and, correspondingly, the fi rst and 
second unifying ideas of the new synthesis. Th e White youth, an “ordinary” 
14-year-old in a so-called redneck family, had joined his segregationist buddies in 
shouting taunts and epithets at the African-American students who had joined the 
school in accordance with a federal court order:
 I didn’t want any part of them here. Th ey belong with their own, and we belong with our 
own—that’s what we all said. . . . Th e school had to get police protection for them. We 
didn’t want them, and they knew it. But we told them so, in case they were slow to get 
the message. I didn’t hold back, no more than anyone else. I said, “go, nigger, go,” with all 
the others. And I meant it. (Coles, 1986, p. 27) 
 Note the intermingling of “I” and “we” in the hostile rejection of “they” and 
“them.” Out-group hostility pertains to Haidt’s fi rst unifying idea: although moral-
ity may “blind” us against “them” (Haidt, 2012, p. 187), it also “binds and builds” 
(Haidt & Kesebir, 2010, p. 798) the “we” into group solidarity. Egoistic or self-
ish tendencies are biologically and evolutionarily based, but so are counteracting 
intuitions such as loyalty to one’s in-group. As the culture cultivates the rudimen-
tary intuitions, the child internalizes the group’s “custom complex” (p. 817) or 
“dense webs of shared meaning” (Graham & Haidt, 2012, p. 13). Th e self “begins 
to be craft ed in accordance with a . . . framework [of] cultural roles, institutions, 
and values” (Harter, 2012, p. 50). Indeed, the growing child comes to identify 
with and derive self-esteem as well as a sense of personal security from his or 
her group (Brewer, 2007; Tajfel & Turner, 1979). Haidt (2001) even posited a pos-
sible late-childhood “sensitive period” for optimal internalization 2 of the custom 
complex and identifi cation with the in-group. Morality, then, serves to bind the 
individual to his or her social group, culture, or “moral system.” Such systems are 
“interlocking sets of values, virtues, norms, practices, identities, institutions, tech-
nologies, and evolved psychological mechanisms that work together to suppress or 
regulate selfi shness and make coordinated social life possible” (Graham & Haidt, 
2012, p. 14). 
 Basic to Haidt’s “morality binds and builds” theme (and introducing his 
second theme, below) are biologically prepared intuitions such as loyalty. Th ese 
intuitions are seen as providing the foundations of morality and group iden-
tity as well as solidarity. Haidt’s “moral foundations” theory posits at least fi ve 3 
such intuitions, briefl y: justice, care, loyalty, (respect for) authority, and sanctity 
(or purity). Especially important for the theme of group solidarity (morality as 

Beyond Haidt’s New Synthesis 
■ 19
binding, building, blinding) is loyalty to one’s group. A foundation for loyalty may 
be evident in infancy: Infants and young children prefer to look at and learn from 
others who speak with familiar accents (e.g., Kinzler, Corriveau, & Harris, 2011; 
Kinzler, Dupoux, & Spelke, 2012; Kinzler, Shutts, & Spelke, 2012; cf. Hoff man’s 
similarity-familiarity bias, Chapter 5). “Put crudely,” wrote Paul Bloom (2012), 
“babies prefer their own kind” (p. 82; cf. Hamlin, Mahajan, Liberman, & Wynn, 
2013). Even in yawn contagion, “both chimpanzees and people join the yawns of 
familiar individuals more readily than those of strangers” (de Waal, 2013, p. 141). 
Such inborn preferences and tendencies can be cultivated into a sense of loyalty to 
the norms, traditions, and values of one’s group. Socialization is “moral” insofar 
as it suppresses selfi shness and promotes in-group solidarity or identifi cation with 
the culture (enculturation). 
 Haidt’s argument not only relates morality to in-group solidarity and encul-
turation but also emphasizes the diverse meanings of “culture” or “group” around 
the world. In many parts of the world, the individual’s in-group is a relatively small 
and enduring community, perhaps a tribe or ethnic group of “shared blood, shared 
place, and shared mind or belief” as well as a shared heritage of traditions and 
historical narratives. “Just a few miles” from urban cultures, for example, may be 
“enclaves with honor codes, arranged marriages, and patriarchal families” (Haidt 
& Kesebir, 2010, p. 799). Th e 14-year-old and his peers in our narrative identi-
fi ed with a subculture of homogeneous race or ethnicity (Caucasian), place (“the 
South” or southern United States), history (former slave-based economy), and 
mindset or belief (e.g., segregationist ideology; as expressed by the White youth in 
the above passage, “Th ey belong with their own, and we belong with our own”). 
 Whatever the nature of one’s group,  in-group solidarity, preference, and loyalty 
mean that (in Haidt’s view) love for others scarcely extends beyond its confi nes. 
As Frans de Waal suggested (2009; cf. Hoff man, 2000), love or “empathy builds 
on proximity, similarity, and familiarity, which is entirely logical given that it 
evolved to promote in-group cooperation” (p. 211). Activities promoting in-group 
“bonding and merging” may include communal “meals, synchronized movement, 
chanting or praying in unison, shared emotional experiences, common bodily 
ornamentation or mutilation, and the mingling of bodily fl uids in nursing, sex, 
and blood rituals” (Pinker, 2011, p. 627). 
 Whereas Hoff man (Chapter 5) is optimistic, Haidt doubts that humans can 
appreciably reduce what Hoff man called the familiarity-similarity empathic bias: 
“Parochial love—love within groups—amplifi ed by similarity, a sense of shared 
fate [cf. in-group solidarity], and the suppression of free riders [selfi sh group 
members], may be the most we can accomplish” (Haidt, 2012, p. 245). We are 
reassured that, in general, parochial love or “groupishness is focused on improving 
the welfare of the in-group, not on harming an out-group” (p. 218). Nonetheless, 
especially in the absence of joint goal-oriented activity, each in-group does tend 
to see itself as “at the center of the cosmos” (Graham & Haidt, 2012, p. 13; cf. 
 empathic bias , Chapter 5); hence, in-group solidarity and favor (“groupishness”) 
constitutes a risk factor for “in-group favorit ism ” (Haidt & Kesebir, 2010, p. 818, 
emphasis added). “When several people burst out laughing at the same moment, 
they broadcast solidarity and togetherness. But since such bonding is sometimes 

20 
■ Moral Development and Reality
directed against outsiders, there is also a hostile element to laughter” (de Waal, 
2009, p. 47). African-Americans were not exactly seen in a positive light from 
the White youth’s in-group vantage point. “I didn’t hold back,” the White youth 
recalled in the above passage, “no more than anyone else. I said, ‘go, nigger, go,’ 
with all the others. And I meant it.” 
 Out-group hostility oft en also links to the “purity” intuition: the downside 
of purity is “disgust” at perceived impurity or violation of sanctity. We noted in 
Chapter 1 the involvement of disgust in the hostile rejection of “untouchables” in 
India’s caste system. One (experimentally created) in-group of children used “dis-
gust to express shared revulsion for the other side (e.g., holding their noses in the 
vicinity of out-group members)” (Haidt & Kesebir, 2010, p. 24; M. Sherif, Harvey, 
White, Hood, & C. Sherif, 1961). 
 It should be noted that, like the other thematic features in Haidt’s new synthe-
sis, in-group solidarity, favoritism, and success are meant to be descriptive or val-
ue-neutral. Frans de Waal (2009) cautioned with a similar note: “If biologists never 
stop talking of competition, this doesn’t mean they advocate it” (p. 39). Haidt (per-
sonal communication, July 30, 2012) certainly does not prescribe, for example, 
in-group favoritism and social Darwinism. Instead, Haidt’s main aim is to describe 
the history, function, and various expressions of morality across cultures, or “what 
people happen to think is moral” (2012, p. 270). Th e particular values held by the 
researcher should not restrict or bias what counts as “moral.” Again, the focus is on 
describing what morality “really is.” Scientists in the new synthesis are merely “tell-
ing it like it is,” not how one might like things to be, normatively or prescriptively. 
Perhaps for this reason, Haidt and Bjorklund (2008a, p. 191) chose the more mini-
mal word “altering” to describe the social practice in some cultures of mutilating 
female genitalia (see Chapter 1). Th e focus on description may also fi gure into 
Haidt’s tendency not to address “prescriptive questions about how moral judg-
ment or behavior could be improved” (Haidt & Kesebir, 2010, p. 798). 
 To move from description to explanation, Haidt’s new synthesis adopts a func-
tionalist perspective. Derived from evolutionary psychology and applied to moral-
ity, its functionalist approach is social and pragmatic (cf. Krebs & Denton, 2005; 
Sternberg & Sternberg, 2011). As Haidt (2012) asserted, his functionalist perspec-
tive defi nes “morality by what it  does ” (p. 270). Th e pragmatic version of the func-
tionalist approach asks: Is the described practice, norm, or institution useful with 
respect to its function? Does it work? Is it eff ective in achieving a given goal? 
 In-group solidarity defi nes the functional success goal of morality for the group, 
as individuals “work together to suppress or regulate self-interest and make coop-
erative societies possible” (Haidt & Kesebir, 2010, p. 800). Th e result is “shared 
norms, institutions, and gods that, even in the twenty-fi rst century,” societal mem-
bers “fi ght, kill, and die to defend” (Haidt, 2012, p. 207). By Darwinian criteria, 
a successful group is one that “supplants” or incorporates other groups (Haidt & 
Kesebir, 2010, p. 815) and thereby gains in reproductive dominance. Globally, the 
human species gained dominance as emergent early humans developed the ability 
to share intentions and cooperate toward common goals in groups. Inter-group 
competition intensifi ed as each group’s abilities “to hunt, gather, raise children and 
raid their neighbors increased exponentially” (p. 206; cf. Tomasello, Carpenter, 

Beyond Haidt’s New Synthesis 
■ 21
Call, Behne, & Moll, 2005). Especially when challenged by another group, group 
members “feel that they are part of something larger”; they may “come together to 
sing, dance around a fi re and dissolve the [egoistic] boundaries that separate them 
from each other” (Haidt, May 11, 2011). 
 In-group loyalty and conformity, then, facilitate progress toward group suc-
cess by helping to build in-group solidarity; i.e., social cohesion and trust (cf. 
Durkheim, 1973/1925). Morality, in this descriptive functionalist view, “directs 
people’s strongest moral passions toward the heroes and martyrs who die for the 
group [hence the establishment of commemorative monuments and holidays] and 
toward the traitors and apostates who must be put to death in the name of the 
group” (pp. 817, 820). “Norm-violators, cheaters, and free-riders” (p. 820; cf. Fehr 
& Gachter, 2002) may not count as traitor and apostates, but they, too, must be 
punished for the sake of the group, perhaps by being shamed or ostracized. 
 What about the White youth in the Coles account? Th e last time we saw him, 
his loyalty and conformity to his peer group were strong; he “meant” his expres-
sion of segregationist ideology and out-group hostility as much as they did. Th at 
was about to change. 
 Intuitive Primacy and the Rescue:  Just an Affective Shift? 
 In our narrative journey, we now arrive at the rescue—as well as further consid-
eration of the second theme (and introduction of the third) in Haidt’s new syn-
thesis. Th e White youth who had fully “meant” his hostility in the prior weeks 
suddenly did an about-face. He himself was surprised by what he was later to call 
“the strangest moment of my life”:
 Th en it happened. I saw a few people cuss at him [one of the two African-American stu-
dents]. “Th e dirty nigger,” they kept on calling him, and soon they were pushing him in 
a corner, and it looked like trouble, bad trouble. I went over and broke it up. I said, “Hey, 
cut it out.” Th ey all looked at me as if I was crazy. . . . But my buddies stopped. . . . Before 
he [the African-American youth] left , I spoke to him. I didn’t mean to, actually! It just 
came out of my mouth. I was surprised to hear the words myself: “I’m sorry.” As soon as 
he was gone, my friends gave it to me: “What do you mean, ‘I’m sorry’!” I didn’t know 
what to say. (Coles, 1986, p. 28) 
 Th e suddenness of the White youth’s act relates to the second theme of Haidt’s 
new synthesis; namely, intuitive primacy. As noted in Chapter 1 and the last sec-
tion, Haidt has argued that the concerns of justice, care, loyalty, authority, and 
purity are all best characterized as moral intuitions or emotions. Th e goal in the 
new synthesis “is to describe and understand how people think and behave in light 
of morally salient emotions like anger, disgust, empathy, love, guilt, humiliation, 
etc.” (Harris, 2010, p. 49). Th ese primary moral emotions in turn derive from still 
more primary  aff ects  (cf. Zajonc, 1984):
 Aff ect refers to small fl ashes of positive or negative feeling that prepare us to approach 
or avoid something. Every emotion (such as happiness or disgust) includes an aff ective 
reaction, but most of our aff ective reactions are too fl eeting to be called emotions (for 

22 
■ Moral Development and Reality
example, the subtle feelings you get just from reading the words  happiness  and  disgust ). 
(Haidt, 2012, p. 55) 
 Th ese aff ects, emotions, or felt intuitions—not moral reasoning—are posited to 
be the main generative source of our moral evaluations, perceptions, and actions. 
Haidt and Bjorklund (2008a) defi ned  moral intuition as 
 the sudden appearance in consciousness, or at the fringe of consciousness, of an evalu-
ative feeling (like-dislike, good-bad) about the character or actions of a person, without 
any conscious awareness of having gone through steps of search, weighing evidence, or 
inferring a relationship. (p. 188)   
 Th e reference in this defi nition to mentally going through “steps of search, weigh-
ing evidence, or inferring a relationship” pertains to moral reasoning. Haidt (2001) 
earlier defi ned  moral reasoning  as “conscious mental activity that consists of trans-
forming given information about people (and situations) in order to reach a moral 
judgment” or evaluation (p. 802). Th e intuitions are primary insofar as they are 
“triggered more quickly” than is conscious, rational moral reasoning “in real-time 
judgments” (p. 819). 
 Such primary aff ect would seem to characterize the dynamics of the rescue. It 
would certainly seem that a powerful preconscious aff ective intuition of one sort 
or another—rather than any conscious reasoning—impelled the White youth to 
suddenly rescue and apologize to the African-American youth. Yet this powerful 
intuition, whatever it was, evidently did  not impel the White youth’s buddies.  Th eir 
moral perception and behavior continued to refl ect loyalty and in-group solidar-
ity. Whatever prompted the White youth’s sudden action had to override those 
feelings, perhaps along with an anticipatory fear of becoming a target of shaming 
or ostracism, or worse. So what was that powerful intuition? 
 Before we address that question, let us elaborate on the theme of intuitive pri-
macy in Haidt’s new synthesis. Moral intuitions are among the automatic, implicit 
reactions or feelings that largely drive and structure mental life as well as situational 
social behavior (Bargh & Chartrand, 1999). Intuitive primacy in morality means, 
in this view, that aff ective fl ashes or moral intuitions come fi rst. Th ey are primary 
not only in the real time of everyday social perception and action, but as well on the 
larger temporal scales of human ontogeny and animal phylogeny. In terms of human 
development, we noted earlier that a preference for voices with familiar accents—
arguably part of a module leading to the in-group loyalty intuition—is evident in 
infancy. We will suggest in Chapter 5 that basic arousal modes of the “intuition” 
or predisposition of caring are certainly evident in human infancy and, to some 
extent, in the behavior of other species. Such a biologically based “fellow-creature 
feeling” is at the heart of Hoff man’s theory of empathy and moral development. 
 What about fairness? Do moral judgments of fairness or justice derive from 
a modular aff ective intuition as well? Broadly, is justice a biologically prepared 
predisposition, sentiment, or module (essentially a preformationist or nativist 
view)? Or is it a product of cognitive and social development (essentially an emer-
gentist or constructivist view, distinguishable from environmental learning; see 
Moshman, 2011a)? 

Beyond Haidt’s New Synthesis 
■ 23
 Th e issue is not new. Decades ago, William Damon (1977) pondered the devel-
opmental signifi cance of certain rudimentary or “precursory” (p. 291) appeals to 
equality or reciprocity by some of the younger (three- to fi ve-year-old) children 
in his study of “positive” or distributive justice. Damon noted that in some of the 
preschoolers’ responses, a 
 rudimentary usage of equality appears in the form of one-to-one correspondences: 
“Give them all some” (though not necessarily all the same). Also, rudimentary notions 
of reciprocity appear in the form of action-reaction sequences: “If I don’t share with her, 
she’ll get mad at me.” (p. 79) 
 Damon off ered a nuanced assessment, one that entailed both developmental 
and nativist sides of the issue: “In none of these rudimentary forms is true reci-
procity or equality employed accurately or consistently, but we do see the germinal 
roots of these later organizing principles” (p. 79). As did Haidt and colleagues, 
then, Damon partly saw in such “rudimentary” responses “the germinal roots” 
of later moral judgment. Yet Damon also characterized these early responses as 
simple appeals to “one-to-one correspondences” and “action-reaction sequences” 
distinguishable from “true” reciprocity or equality. In the main, Damon interpreted 
these rudimentary responses less as foundations and more as superfi cial precur-
sors. Th e young child’s responses were characterized as generally “egocentric and 
subjective,” in which “judgments like ‘I should [in fairness] get more candy than 
Jimmy’ are not distinguished from statements like ‘I want more than Jimmy.’” If the 
four-year-old does justify his responses, he may do so by appeal to  
 certain external, observable characteristics of persons: “Th e biggest should get the 
most” or “she should have it because she’s pretty.” Th ese “objective” considerations . . . are 
invoked in a fl uctuating,  a posteriori manner and are consistent more with the principle 
of self-gratifi cation than with any constant, objective standard of fairness. (p. 79) 
 Th e verbal interview responses of a four-year-old child named Mary are illus-
trative. Asked “Who should Miss Townshend [a teacher with a class of boys and 
girls] give the ice cream to?” Mary replied:
 Clara. Why Clara?  Because she [Clara]  likes ice cream . . . . Suppose there is not enough, 
and all the kids like ice cream. Who should she [the teacher] give it to?  Rebecca. Why 
Rebecca?  She [the teacher]  likes Rebecca. Is it fair to the boys just to give the girls ice 
cream?  Yes. Why is that fair?  Because they [the girls]  don’t like the boys. So is it OK not to 
be fair to the boys?  If they [the boys]  don’t like the ice cream, then they won’t want to eat 
the ice cream. (Damon, 1977, p. 78) 
 We consider further this issue in the next chapter. It is important even at this 
point, however, to describe a relevant study by Vanessa LoBue, Haidt, and col-
leagues (LoBue, Nishida, Chiong, DeLoache, & Haidt, 2011). LoBue and col-
leagues replicated Damon’s (and others’, e.g., Dunn & Munn, 1987; Fehr, Bernhard, 
& Rockenbach, 2008) main verbal results: Confronted with a “blatantly unequal 
distribution of a desired reward” (fewer stickers than those given a peer; p. 159), 
the younger children in their sample of three- to fi ve-year-olds generally appealed 
to their wishes or desires (e.g., “I want more,” or “I don’t have enough”). But LoBue 

24 
■ Moral Development and Reality
and colleagues also studied nonverbal expressions. By nonverbal criteria, even the 
youngest children (the three-year-olds) seemed to evidence an intuitive concern 
with their unfair treatment; e.g., by looking over at the other child’s greater goods 
and/or by appearing to be unhappy at their situation. A few of the children spon-
taneously attempted to make the amounts equal. Other studies fi nd a preference 
even in infants for animated fi gures who equally distribute goods and who help 
rather than hinder others (e.g., Hamlin, Wynn, & Bloom, 2007, 2012; Geraci & 
Surian, 2010; Kenwood & Dahl, 2011; Sloane, Baillargeon, & Premack, 2012; but 
cf. Scarf, Imuta, Colombo, & Hayne, 2012). 
 On the basis of such studies, Haidt and colleagues asserted the nativist side 
of the issue: equality, fairness, or reciprocity is a module or a built-in emotional 
reaction, organized prior to environmental experience, unlearned, and evident 
even in infancy. David Moshman (2011a) pointed out that Haidt’s view might be 
called  neo -nativist given Haidt’s interpretation of modules as  culturally revisable 
prototypes (see Haidt & Joseph, 2004, 2007; but see Bell & Buchner, 2012, regard-
ing modular specifi city). As had Damon decades earlier, LoBue and colleagues 
(including Haidt) noted that such early responses refl ect at the least a “simple per-
ceptual preference for one-to-one matching” in young children (LoBue et al., 2011, 
p. 157). Th eir main position, however, diff ered from Damon’s in that they attrib-
uted much greater signifi cance to the early fairness-oriented responses (identifi ed 
through nonverbal behavior in their study). Th e young children’s egocentric bias 
and desires were viewed almost as an artifact obscuring recognition of their grasp 
of justice. Fairness judgments were characterized as linguistic expressions stem-
ming from built-in subjective  feelings such as aversion: “Children show an  aversion 
to disadvantageous inequality . . . well before they can  talk about fairness” (LoBue 
et al., 2010, p. 157). Broadly, the wellsprings of morality in Haidt’s neo-nativist 
synthesis are claimed to lie in the fast, nonverbal emotions or aff ects—not in con-
scious talk or “rational” reasoning. Developmental evidence (Chapter 3) notwith-
standing, in Haidt’s view there is no “true” equality and reciprocity that emerges 
through constructive processes of cognitive and social development. 
 Besides in speed and human ontogeny, intuitions are posited to be primary in 
the order of evolutionary emergence. Regarding inequality aversion, LoBue and 
colleagues even cited “ambiguous” (p. 157) evidence for it among chimpanzees 
and other primates (e.g., Brosnan & de Waal, 2003; Wynne, 2004), perhaps even 
among wolves or dogs (see review by Brosnan, 2006). Perhaps inequality aversion 
and other intuitive reactions of other species represent the foundational “building 
blocks” of human morality (de Waal, 1996, 2009, 2012, 2013; the issue is con-
sidered further in Chapter 3). Th e comparative-species or phylogenetic reference 
pertains to this sense of “primacy”: As in ontogeny, the intuitions are posited to 
have emerged relatively early in phylogenetic history. Haidt and Kesebir (2010) 
noted the distinction made in dual-process models (e.g., Chaiken & Trope, 1999) 
between “the ancient, fast emotions and intuitions” and “the evolutionarily newer 
and motivationally weaker language-based reasoning” (p. 801). Th e phylogenetic 
distinction is also made in applications of the “triune brain” (pertaining to brain 
regions with diff erential histories and functional roles; MacLean, 1990) to moral 
psychology (Narvaez, 2008). Th e particular importance of the regions associated 

Beyond Haidt’s New Synthesis 
■ 25
with the “ancient, fast emotions” (especially the limbic region) is suggested by the 
dramatic shift s toward irresponsible and antisocial behavior among individuals 
with brain damage or atrophy in those regions rather than the “newer” regions of 
the frontal cortex (e.g., Damasio, 1999). 
 In sum, Haidt’s second theme—intuitive primacy—posits that aff ective intu-
itions are temporally primary and causally preeminent in moral life. Th ey are 
fi rst in phylogeny, ontogeny, and everyday functioning. Th ey are fast, automatic, 
involuntary, and eff ortless. Th ey drive and fi nd verbal articulation in conscious 
reasoning, which in turn might modulate—but not in its own right cause—social 
behavior. Compared to the intuitions, reasoning is slow, deliberate, voluntary, and 
eff ortful (cf. Zajonc, 1984). Although reasoning may regulate or suppress the intu-
itions, it does not (or so the new synthesis implies) readily penetrate them (see, 
e.g., Metcalfe & Mischel, 1999, and Chapter 6). Relatively impermeable, in this 
view, is the border between intuitions and reasoning—two systems divided, as it 
were, by a common brain. 
 Now that we have elaborated on the intuitive primacy theme, we can return 
to the event in Atlanta in a better position to frame our question. If these early, 
fast intuitions drove the sudden rescue, which did the driving? Certainly not 
those intuitions serving the morality of in-group solidarity. A more likely candi-
date is empathy, or “harm/care: concerns for the suff erings of others” (p. 822) in 
Haidt and Kesebir’s (2010) typology. Note the White youth’s recollection that the 
scene “looked like trouble, bad trouble.” He saw that his buddies had cornered 
an African-American student and knew that he was about to witness a physical 
assault. Might not an anticipatory empathic distress (Chapter 5) have been trig-
gered by the sight of the cornered victim? Hoff man’s (2000, Chapter 5) analysis 
of this incident notes the sudden expression as well of empathy-based guilt: the 
White youth blurted out, “I’m sorry.” 
 It all happened so fast. In a switch too quick for consciousness, the moment 
was at least initially “strange” for the rescuer—and shocking for his buddies, who 
(true to intuitions serving in-group solidarity) promptly “gave it to” him. Just as 
surprised as his peers, the rescuer himself “didn’t know what to say” aft er his inter-
vention and apology. Th e dynamics of that moment would seem to suggest that 
we are, aft er all, “strangers to ourselves” (the title of a fascinating book by Timothy 
Wilson, 2002; cf. Eagleman, 2011). Empathic primacy had evidently replaced his 
(but not his peers’) in-group primacies so quickly that the White youth’s conscious 
mindset—even his identity as a segregationist—found itself fl ustered, fl oundering, 
and dumbfounded at the starting gate. 
 Broadly, this incident would seem to support Haidt and Kesebir’s (2010) claim 
that “prosocial behavior”—when it does happen—“points to intuitions, not rea-
soning” (p. 806). Also conducive to prosocial behavior are positive emotions or 
mood states, however induced. Studies have demonstrated that various external 
or internal circumstances—good weather, soothing music, a pleasant aroma, the 
scrumptious taste of a cookie, etc.—can induce certain subjective feelings or mood 
states and thereby promote prosocial behavior (Baron, 1997; Cunningham, 1979; 
Fried & Berkowitz, 1979; Isen & Levin, 1972; North, Tarrant, & Hargreaves, 2004; 
Rosenhan, Underwood, & Moore, 1974). 

26 
■ Moral Development and Reality
 As noted, “intuitive primacy” means that quick feelings are posited to be “where 
the action is” in morality. In everyday life, people continually and rapidly appraise 
others as good or bad, likable or unlikable, given even the briefest, thinnest slice 
of others’ demeanor and behavior (Fazio, Sanbonmatsu, Powell, & Kardes, 1986; 
Greenwald, Nosek, & Banaji, 2003; Lazarus, 1984, Zajonc, 1984). Moral reasoning, 
or for that matter rationality in general, is relegated to a secondary role in social 
perception and behavior. 
 Th e thesis that intuitions are preeminent over “secondary” moral reasoning 
or rationality is argued forcefully in Haidt’s new synthesis. Perhaps the common 
impression that moral perception and action derive from rational moral reasoning 
owes more to our desire to see ourselves as rational beings than it does to reality. 
When taboo-violation vignettes (e.g., sex with a chicken or between siblings, or 
eating one’s family’s dead pet dog) are craft ed as harmless so as to preclude ratio-
nal appeals to harmful consequences, people are dumbfounded; i.e., left  with their 
emotional disgust but rendered unable to rationally explain their moral objections 
to the violations of the taboo (e.g., Haidt & Hersh, 2001; Haidt, Koller, & Dias, 
1993). Given post-hypnotic suggestions to experience disgust (the downside of the 
purity intuition) in response to arbitrarily designated stimuli, participants read-
ily confabulate; i.e., concoct “explanations” for their moral evaluations (Wheatley 
& Haidt, 2005)—totally unaware that their plausible-sounding reasons are in 
fact irrelevant to the real determinants of their moral evaluations. Confi rmation 
biases and self-servingly “motivated” reasoning are well-documented (Kunda, 
1990; Nickerson, 1998; cf. egocentric bias and self-serving cognitive distortions, 
Chapters 3 and 7, respectively). 
 Such studies would suggest that moral reasoning is not only “secondary” but 
 servile to moral intuitions. Steven Pinker (2011; cf. Lynch, 2012) noted the irony 
that Haidt and colleagues “have been mustering their powers of reason to argue 
that reason is overrated” (p. 642). Indeed, Haidt and Kesebir (2010) declared 
that David Hume was “mostly right” p. 802) in his famous dictum that “reason 
is the slave of the passions.” Shweder and Haidt (1993) even praised Hume for 
his “intellectual courage not to shrink [from] emotivist conclusions” regarding 
the role of reason (p. 361). Although Haidt (2012) saw reason more as “ser-
vant” than “slave,” he derided as “the rationalist delusion” views of reason as the 
noble master of the passions (p. 88). Approvingly cited was Freud’s thesis that 
morality is “driven by unconscious motives and feelings, which are then ratio-
nalized with publicly acceptable reasons” (p. 817). Indeed, morality a la  Freud 
is “a thin veneer over a cauldron of nasty tendencies” (de Waal, 2013, p. 34). 
In this aff ective-primacy view of moral motivation, people are seen to “employ 
their puny powers of reason only to rationalize their gut feelings aft er the fact” 
(Pinker, 2011, p. 642). Perhaps the emotivist A. J. Ayer (1952) was right that 
morality really boils down to aff ects, feelings, or primitive preferences, that one 
might as well save time by dispensing with one’s so-called rational talk and just 
say “ugh” or “hurrah!” 
 Analogies help capture the qualities of this aff ective primacy view of moral-
ity. We might accordingly refi ne Haidt’s (2001) now-famous analogy relating the 
dynamics of morality to the “emotional dog and its rational tail” (p. 814). Haidt 

Beyond Haidt’s New Synthesis 
■ 27
wrote that “moral emotions and intuitions drive moral reasoning, just as surely 
as a dog wags its tail” (p. 830). Given the literature reviewed, we might say more 
emphatically that an  arbitrarily (depending on mood, passion, desires, feelings, or 
circumstantial infl uences at the time) emotional dog wags its  pseudo -rational or 
rational izing tail. Th e power resides primarily with the emotional intuitions, not 
with reason or rationality. Th e force of intuition is an elephant, and its rider is 
reason (“the rider is an attentive servant . . . [without] the power to make things 
happen, . . . [and] always trying to anticipate the elephant’s next move”) (Haidt, 
2012, p. 56). Haidt (2007) further suggested that “moral reasoning is not like [the 
reasoning] of an idealized scientist or judge seeking the truth. Moral reasoning 
is like [the argumentation] of a lawyer or politician seeking whatever is useful, 
whether or not it is true” (p. 999). One thinks of the besieged ego in Freudian 
theory, distorting reality this way and that to satisfy the contradictory motives and 
desires of unconscious agencies. 
 Of course, Haidt does acknowledge that reason  can function like a truth-seeking 
judge rather than a case-building lawyer, and indeed does occasionally. One trusts, 
for example, that Haidt’s own work on his “new synthesis” results from an authen-
tic, rational search for the truth and is an honest conclusion off ered to the fi eld 
in good faith (Turiel, 2006b, 2010). An honest discussion, aft er all, presupposes a 
common commitment “to whatever conclusions follow from the careful applica-
tion of reason” (Pinker, 2011, p. 181). Even among lawyers, only the most servile 
will fail to “resist when the client goes too far” with “absurd” demands (Haidt & 
Kesebir, 2010, p. 807). “Elephants rule, but they are neither dumb nor despotic” 
(Haidt, 2012, p. 71) and will sometimes “listen to reason” (p. 68). Th ree of the six 
“links” in his social intuitionist model pertain to a causal role for moral reason-
ing (Haidt, 2004). Haidt even suggested (2012) that intuition and reason are both 
“kinds of cognition” (p. 45); specifi cally, automatic versus deliberate information 
processing—with “intuitive primacy,” accordingly, not reducible to aff ective pri-
macy 4 (Haidt, July 30, 2012, personal communication). 
 Yet cognitive or  moral reasoning  primacy, rationality, or truth-seeking is not 
the thrust of Haidt’s new synthesis. Th e reasoning links are considered to be infre-
quent and hence relatively unimportant. “It is useful to study judgments of extreme 
[rational reasoning, truth-seeking] cases,” wrote Haidt and Kesebir (2010), “but 
much more work is needed on  everyday moral judgment” (p. 807; emphasis added; 
cf. Krebs & Denton, 2005). Th e name of the game in everyday life is doing what 
is useful, eff ective, or successful—not necessarily what is rational or true. We 
ordinarily fi rst experience our gut feelings; in the wake follow rational-sounding 
fabrications. 
 Social Persuasion 
 Th e image of a politician or lawyer (cf. moral reasoning) seeking “success” leads 
us to the third theme of the new synthesis:  social persuasion (as Haidt and Kesebir 
[2010, p. 808] put it, “moral thinking is for social doing”; i.e., “moral thinking is 
done in order to help the social agent succeed in the social order”). In these func-
tionalist terms, moral reasoning is in the main a  social and pragmatic enterprise: 

28 
■ Moral Development and Reality
“People rarely override their initial intuitive judgments [second theme] just by 
reasoning privately to themselves” (p. 819). If group “success” (fl ourishing, gain-
ing dominance over other groups) is the point of in-group solidarity (fi rst theme), 
individual “success” (in terms of strategic defense, social status, heroic reputation, 
or alliances  within the group) is the point of moral reasoning  qua social persuasion 
(third theme)—accomplished through use of whatever works, whether rational or 
rhetorical. In this basically pragmatic and instrumental view, one’s moral “argu-
ments don’t succeed because they’re right. Th ey seem right because they succeed” 
(Appiah, 2008, p. 150). 
 Haidt (2012) drove home “whatever succeeds” with a personal epiphany: his 
“discovery” that he is no exception to the pragmatics of social persuasion; indeed, 
that he is “a chronic liar:”   
 I was at home [working] . . . when my wife, Jayne, walked by my desk. In passing, she 
asked me not to leave dirty dishes on the counter where she prepared our baby’s food. 
Her request was polite but its tone added a postscript: “As I have asked you a hundred 
times before.” 
 My mouth started moving before hers had stopped. Words came out. Th ose words 
linked themselves up to say something about the baby having woken up at the same time 
that our elderly dog barked to ask for a walk and I’m sorry but I just put my breakfast 
dishes down wherever I could. In my family, caring for a hungry baby and an inconti-
nent dog is a surefi re excuse, so I was acquitted. . . .  
 So there I was at my desk, writing about how people automatically fabricate justi-
fi cations of their gut feelings, when suddenly I realized that I had just done the same 
thing with my wife. . . . I had felt a fl ash of negativity by the time Jayne had gotten to her 
third word (“ Can you not . . . ”). . . . My inner lawyer went to work. . . . It’s true that I had 
eaten breakfast, given Max his fi rst bottle, and let Andy out for his fi rst walk, but these 
events had all happened at separate times. Only when my wife criticized me did I merge 
them into a composite image of a harried father with too few hands, and I created the 
fabrication by the time she had completed her one-sentence criticism (“ . . .  counter where 
I make baby food? ”). I then lied so quickly and convincingly that my wife and I both 
believed me. (pp. 52, 54) 
 Th is claim that reason is dedicated to persuasion rather than truth 
(cf. Nietzschean perspectivism) follows from a pragmatic understanding of evo-
lution (we will question Haidt’s exclusively pragmatic rendering of evolutionary 
processes in Chapter 10). “From an evolutionary perspective, it would be strange 
if our moral judgment machinery was designed principally for accuracy, with no 
concern for the disastrous eff ects” of “periodically siding with our [perhaps mor-
ally or rationally right] enemies and against our [perhaps morally or rationally 
wrong] friends” (Haidt, 2001, p. 821, bracketed material added). Useful skills at 
manipulating appearance rather than ideals of authenticity, integrity, or truth even 
pervade the new-synthesis view of “reputation” and “conscience”:
 Reputations matter for survival, and natural selection favors those who are good at 
tracking the reputations of others while simultaneously restraining or concealing their 
own selfi sh behavior. . . . As the humorist H. L. Mencken once quipped: “Conscience is 

Beyond Haidt’s New Synthesis 
■ 29
the inner voice that warns us somebody may be looking.” (p. 810; cf. Krebs & Denton, 
2005) 
 We now return to our dumbfounded, fl oundering rescuer. In this mainly 
intuitionist view of morality, a quick switch in his (but not his buddies’) aff ective 
fl ashes—say, from loyalty to empathy—accounts for his sudden prosocial behav-
ior. Moral reasoning had essentially nothing to do with the rescue. Or so it has 
seemed so far.  
 Moral Reasoning, Moral Development, and the 
Meaning of the Rescue 
 Th ere is more to the rescue: more to its meaning for the rescuer, more to prior 
events, more to changes in the rescuer from that moment onward. Granted, the 
White youth’s fi rst few school weeks had been marked by an intensely felt hostility 
against an out-group member. “But” then, 
 aft er a few weeks, I began to see a kid, not a nigger—a guy who knew how to smile when 
it was rough going, and who walked straight and tall, and was polite. I told my parents, 
“It’s a real shame that someone like him has to pay for the trouble caused by all those 
federal judges.” . . .  
 I’d be as I was, I guess, but for being there in school that year and seeing that kid—
seeing him behave himself, no matter what we called him, and seeing him being insulted 
so bad, so real bad. Something in me just drew the line, and something in me began to 
change, I think. (Coles, 1986, p. 28) 
 To anticipate our critique, we note that Haidt’s new synthesis does not encour-
age us to pay much attention to the moral reasoning (the violation of ideal reci-
procity or fairness, the bad treatment infl icted upon a good person) depicted in 
the meaning the White youth made of the episode. A dedicated Haidtian might 
take the youth’s account with more than a grain of salt (except perhaps for its intui-
tive empathic aspects, such as “seeing him [the victim] being insulted so bad, so 
real bad”). Perhaps, without even realizing it, the White youth was lying or “con-
fabulating” a spurious explanation of his action, concocting a story that he knew 
would succeed by sounding good or acceptable, strategically delivering what he 
anticipated the interviewer, Coles, would want to hear. Perhaps the actual dynam-
ics of the moment pertained merely to a quick switch of intuitions and the prag-
matics of persuasion. 
 Yet only the most cynical of us would not hear a ring of authenticity, of pro-
found truth rather than a concern with pragmatic “success” or socially acceptable 
talk, in the White youth’s account. It is true that the rescuer had been at the time 
dumbfounded by his act and apology. Aft er all, as far as he consciously knew at 
the time, he still believed in the ideology of segregation. (Interestingly, in an essay 
titled “Th e Cognitive Unconscious,” Piaget [1972/1973] suggested that one may be 
unaware of “structures” directing what “one ‘must’ do” if those structures  at that 
time  are “incompatible” with one’s beliefs; i.e., “cannot . . . be integrated into [one’s] 
system of  conscious  concepts,” 5 pp. 33, 39; emphases added). Although it is true 

30 
■ Moral Development and Reality
that the youth was  at that time  dumbfounded, it is not necessarily true that con-
scious moral reasoning had therefore been irrelevant. To the contrary, the White 
youth’s moral reasoning was crucially relevant to the dynamics of the rescue. His 
prior mental coordination of features of the situation (“Seeing him behave himself, 
no matter what we called him”; “It’s a real shame that someone like him has to 
pay . . . ”) yielded a “lack of reciprocity between character and outcome” (Hoff man, 
2000, p. 108). 
 We might say that the rescuer’s moral reasoning–based perception of unfairness, 
shared with his parents (certainly not just to look good or gain some pragmatic 
advantage)  went underground . In eff ect, his (formerly conscious) moral reason-
ing penetrated his intuitions for the better—and accordingly primed them with a 
more mature understanding, a more profound perception. If a border does divide 
reasoning and intuitions, it is evidently aft er all a permeable one that allows our 
reasoning sometimes to transform and  deepen our intuitions or gut feelings. David 
Pizarro and Paul Bloom (2003) cited evidence (e.g., Moskowitz, Gollwitzer, Wasel, 
& Schaal, 1999) that once an individual has suffi  ciently reasoned and reached a 
conclusion pertaining to, say, social inequality or a situation of harm and injus-
tice, “all [subsequent] responses” to that situation “might be fast and automatic” 
(p. 193); hence, “many moral intuitions are shaped and informed by moral rea-
soning” (p. 193; cf. Hoff man, 2000; Lynch, 2012). “Th at a concept is used rapidly 
does not necessarily mean that it” did not involve, in its formation, “complex pro-
cesses of reasoning” (Turiel, 2006b, p. 19). Indeed, “it oft en happens” that complex 
cognitions “eventually migrate” into automaticity (Kahneman & Frederick, 2002, 
p. 51) and indeed operate in our ongoing unconscious mental life (Hassin, 2013). 
Steven Pinker (2011) aptly noted that “even if a decision is guided by intuition, the 
intuition itself may be a legacy of moral reasoning that had taken place before-
hand” (p. 644). 6 Such prior moral reasoning can enable one to “infer that people 
who are diff erent from us in many superfi cial ways—their gender, their race, their 
culture—are like us in fundamental ways” (p. 181). 
 Did not the White youth, pondering the unfair treatment of the African-American 
youth, develop precisely such a deeper inference and perception? Even before the 
scene of “trouble, bad trouble,” the White youth had begun to change, aff ectively 
 and cognitively (we will argue for co-primacy in moral motivation in subsequent 
chapters). He cared or empathized,  and he appreciated a fi ne person, an authentic 
and dignifi ed character morally above the petty level of trading insults. He did not 
just switch intuitions; he  grew beyond  a superfi cial and distorted perception. 
 As we will elaborate in our conclusion and critique, development must be taken 
seriously. Although his peers remained benighted by their out-group hostility, the 
rescuer began “to see a kid, not a nigger”—not a despised outsider, not an  object , but 
a  person , a  subject like himself. Th e rescuer grew in “self and social refl ection over 
time” (Selman & Feigenberg, 2010, p. 242). His refl ection, growth, and perception 
pertain to what philosopher Kwame Appiah (2010) called “the great modern discov-
ery: the fundamental equality, in the eyes of morality, of all human beings” (p. 127). 
 Th en came the scene and the sudden, pivotal moment.  Both empathic intu-
itions and violated ideals of moral reciprocity had primed the youth to react as 
he did, even though he did not know it at the time. At the scene, the line drawn 

Beyond Haidt’s New Synthesis 
■ 31
in the White youth’s mind was activated as he witnessed, now not just insults, but 
their escalation to aggressive pushing and cornering the African-American youth, 
obviously heading toward physical assault. Th e moral line was crossed; it was just 
too much. Despite the implicit pressures of loyalty, conformity and group solidar-
ity, he could take it no longer. In that sudden but perhaps not-so-strange-aft er-all 
moment, he intervened and apologized. 
 Th at the dynamics of the incident entailed not just a simple intuitive switch to 
empathic primacy but also a more complex and rational,  moral reasoning -based 
“intuitive” primacy is suggested by the lasting, powerful impact of the incident 
in the life of the rescuer. Coles (1986) observed that “we never quite know . . . how 
an event will connect with ourselves” (p. 29; see Chapter 6). Aft er the event, the 
14-year-old “had to endure lots of scorn . . . from the many others who were not as 
swift  as he to show a change in racial attitudes” (p. 28). Nonetheless, 
 his life had . . . changed. In no time, it seemed, he was beginning to talk more consciously 
(more self-consciously, actually) to the black youth. Soon, he was championing him 
 personally, while still decrying “integration.” Finally, he would become a friend of the 
black youth’s and advocate “an end to the whole lousy business of segregation.” (p. 28)  
conclusion and critique 
 
■
 We have related the rescue incident to Haidt’s proposed new synthesis for moral 
psychology. Analysis of the rescue has yielded for us a sense of both the valuable 
aspects and the limitations of Haidt’s approach. Using the rescue as our heuristic 
vehicle, we surveyed key themes of Haidt’s new synthesis. In the weeks prior to 
the rescue, the White youth’s hostility against the outsiders led to our consider-
ation of Haidt’s fi rst theme; namely,  in-group solidarity or  morality binds, builds, 
and blinds : a loyalty intuition can be cultivated as the group’s custom complex is 
internalized; the resulting in-group solidarity may shade into in-group favoritism. 
Loyalty was a biologically prepared intuition that was cultivated by his culture 
and internalized by the youth; yet at the subsequent scene of “bad trouble” for the 
African-American youth, the White youth’s intuitive empathy (in part, we would 
add) abruptly took over, prompting the rescue and apology. Th at this switch hap-
pened so fast that the youth was left  dumbfounded spoke to Haidt’s second theme; 
namely, that pre-rational and basic  aff ective intuitions are primary in everyday 
moral functioning. Haidt’s third theme assigns to moral reasoning the function 
not of private refl ection and truth but rather of  persuasion and social success. In 
addition to elucidating valuable aspects of Haidt’s approach, the etiology of the 
rescue also served to hint at some limitations. 
 We conclude, then, by refl ecting upon and critiquing Haidt’s new synthesis. At 
fi rst blush, Haidt’s vision for moral psychology is bracing and even appealing. Its 
argument is that the fi eld has been in need of a good dose of reality, a down-to-
earth reminder of our oft en less-than-exemplary or -rational functioning in every-
day moral life. Trends in the social, behavioral, and biological sciences do seem to 
converge to off er a dose of humility: We are aft er all not so unique, noble, or special. 
Although we humans do cooperate and achieve successful groups on a far vaster 

32 
■ Moral Development and Reality
scale than has any other animal species, we nonetheless evidence considerable 
phylogenetic continuity. Our evolutionary biological heritage has yielded mod-
ules, instinctual emotions, or “intuitions” discernible even in infancy and shared 
in good measure with other primates or mammals. Intuitions emanating from 
phylogenetically older regions in the neural circuitry of the brain are much more 
infl uential than we might wish to admit. Moral psychology in this view should 
focus upon evolutionarily prepared, neurologically based, and culturally shaped 
“quick” emotions rather than upon developmentally constructed reason; i.e., upon 
“the way in which feeling drives judgment” (Harris, 2010, p. 89). In so much of 
everyday life, as in Haidt’s personal example, we use our conscious “reason” or fi ne 
words to dress up or excuse our egoistic and self-serving behavior. 
 Haidt’s emphasis is on cultural diversity. His (and his colleagues’, especially 
Shweder’s) work has expanded our appreciation of the wide variety of feelings that 
can infl uence and even generate morality. In this connection, Haidt has analogized 
morality—beyond tail-wagging dogs, lumbering elephants, strategic lawyers, or 
harried dads—to the taste buds and spontaneous babbling of infants. Cultures 
refi ne their infants’ “moral taste buds” into one or another “moral cuisine” (Haidt, 
2012). Th at is, each culture socializes and shapes its own morality from the child’s 
starting array of foundational intuitions (modules of loyalty, purity, authority, jus-
tice, care). Haidt has also analogized morality to each culture’s shaping of its own 
genre of language from infants’ broad array of babbling sounds (Haidt & Kesebir, 
2010). Th e implication is that we should accept the diverse moralities of cultures of 
the world, much as we should accept their diverse acquired tastes and languages. 
 Haidt’s theory of morality is of course not unprecedented. How new are the 
themes of Haidt’s new synthesis? As Elliott Turiel (2008) noted, “we are seeing [in 
the current moral development literature] some reversions to old ways in the guise 
of the new” (p. 285; cf. Blasi, 2009; Turiel, 2010). Haidt and Kesebir (2010; cf. Haidt, 
2012) did not hide their links to “old ways.” Th ey readily acknowledged and indeed 
appealed to earlier work, such as E. O. Wilson’s call (1975; cf. 2012) decades ago for 
a sociobiological “new synthesis” in moral psychology. McDougall’s (1906/1926) 
“instinct” view of morality as the socialization of (initially largely selfi sh albeit 
potentially moral) individuals into cooperative groups was approvingly cited. 
As noted, Haidt has also acknowledged precedents in Durkheim’s and Darwin’s 
view of morality  qua cooperative group solidarity and success; and in Freud’s and 
Hume’s views of moral reasoning as subservient to egoistic desires. 
 Th e descriptive stance in Haidt’s moral psychology, noted earlier, harks back to 
that of mid–twentieth-century eras in American psychology. At least Haidt does 
refer to morality. American psychologists in the 1950s and early 1960s did not even 
claim to have a view of “morality” per se—they used instead terms such as “atti-
tude,” “custom,” “norm,” and “value.” Such terms “seemed more objective . . . and 
behavioral scientists were very anxious not to let their own values infl uence their 
research” (Brown & Herrnstein, 1975, p. 308). Much like Haidt’s descriptive stance, 
the “prevalent position” of American psychology was “that norms, customs, values, 
and attitudes varied from culture to culture and were what they were, providing 
no real basis for preferring one way of life over another.” Hence, as does Haidt’s 
new synthesis, American psychology of the 1950s and early 1960s encouraged a 

Beyond Haidt’s New Synthesis 
■ 33
“tolerant relativism” or appreciation of cultural diversity (Brown & Herrnstein, 
1975, p. 308). 
 Does it matter that Haidt’s new synthesis is essentially not new? Whether new 
or old, what is wrong with a neutral or descriptive moral psychology, rich in tol-
erance and even appreciation of cultural diversity? Again, at fi rst blush, there is 
a certain appeal. Who can plausibly deny our phylogenetic heritage? Who can 
demur from Haidt’s (2012) encouragement to diverse groups (liberals and conser-
vatives, members of Western and Eastern cultures, etc.) to recognize one another’s 
diff erential intuitive emphases, share communal meals and narratives, and “get 
along”? Yet as we further refl ect, our appreciation of these valuable aspects (phylo-
genetic humility, neutral descriptivism, cultural diversity) in Haidt’s new synthesis 
leads to recognition of at least three serious limitations: descriptive inadequacy or 
negative skew; unwarranted exclusion or studied avoidance of prescriptive impli-
cations; and moral relativism. 
 Descriptive Inadequacy or Negative Skew 
 Th e fi rst limitation might be characterized as an  inadequacy or  negative skew to 
Haidt’s descriptions. Haidt’s new synthesis does not objectively “tell it like it is”; 
its representations and characterizations are oft en seriously defi cient (Blasi, 2009; 
Pizarro & Bloom, 2003). To describe the practice of female genital mutilation as 
an “alteration,” for example, is not genuinely objective or value-neutral; rather, it is 
so minimal as to be an instance of minim izing or mislabeling (see Chapter 7). As 
noted in Chapter 1, most variations of the practice entail not just a tissue modifi -
cation but serious, permanent damage. Th is morally wrong and harmful practice 
should not be tolerated anywhere, but any “tolerance may”—and  should —“run out 
[when some] immigrants to Western countries” seek to perpetrate this practice 
upon their daughters (Pinker, 2011, p. 632). Moral psychology at least owes the 
victims of this moral wrong an adequate description of the practice. 
 Also inadequate—even negatively skewed—are Haidt’s characterizations of 
human development, reason, and care. Claims that “morality comes from what 
we feel rather than what we know. . . . don’t have much room for changes in moral 
thinking or for the moral discovery and growth that is so characteristically human” 
(Gopnik, 2009, p. 203). Perhaps because of this overemphasis on our inborn feel-
ings and early intuitions from evolution, Haidt (2012) neglects, for example, the 
emergent striving for authenticity of self (a “major contributor to our well-being”; 
Harter, 2012, p. 7) oft en seen by mid-adolescence. Regarding reason or rationality, 
is its function merely to serve the passions; e.g., to succeed (gain advantage, public 
status, social dominance)? Does our vaunted “rationality” reduce to arationality or 
 ir rationality, to the happenstance of circumstantial emotional infl uences? Granted, 
some measure of humility and recognition of circumstantial infl uence is well 
advised. Th e overall thrust of such reductionism, however, demeans, in the case at 
hand, the Atlanta rescuer’s pondering of the African-American youth’s admirable 
conduct and its moral implications (the higher reaches of human reason and exis-
tential self-awareness are discussed in subsequent chapters). Nor is it accurate to 
relegate moral reasoning exclusively to conscious, linear cognitive processes. We 

34 
■ Moral Development and Reality
will see in the next chapter that moral reasoning entails not only conscious “delib-
eration” but also constructive processes of implicit mental coordination that yield 
qualitatively new, deeper moral understandings (cf. Blasi, 2009; Hassin, 2013). As 
Michael Lynch (2012) noted, “sometimes the process of explanation and justifi ca-
tion happens beneath the level of immediate attention” (p. 29). 
 Th e negative skew in Haidt’s descriptive work discourages study in moral psy-
chology of higher reaches of morality such as rational moral refl ection (Chapters 3, 
4), empathy for the plight of entire out-groups (Chapter 5), moral courage (Chapter 
6), and the cultivation of responsible, mature moral agency (Chapter 8)—broadly, 
study of “the scope of human possibilities, of what people can do morally, if they 
are prepared, through development and education, to approach life’s important 
issues in a thoughtful way” (Blasi, 2009, p. 419). Haidt (e.g., Haidt & Kesebir, 2010) 
asserted that these phenomena: (a) have already been studied extensively; and (b) 
are less common and hence less ecologically valid than the ordinary functioning 
of everyday morality. Even if these assertions are totally accurate (their accuracy is 
questionable), the higher reaches still merit adequate coverage. 
 Again, demonstrations of self-serving and even spurious moral reasoning or 
rationality abound in Haidt’s writings, but genuine rationality and moral refl ec-
tion (such as the White youth’s)—more broadly, responsible moral agency and 
development—receive short shrift  (Blasi, 2009; Bloom, 2010; Moshman, 2011a; 
Narvaez, 2008; vs. Haidt, 2008a; Haidt & Kesebir, 2010). Moral justifi cations for 
our moral or immoral behavior cannot be entirely reduced to causal mechanisms 
or psychological accounts. Kwame Appiah (2008) pointed out that “we invoke psy-
chological explanations only when we’re seeking exemptions from moral agency 
(‘I’m sorry I said that—I haven’t been sleeping well lately’)”, (Appiah, 2008, p. 117; 
cf. Carpendale, Sokol, & Muller, 2010) or character (cf. Pizarro & Tannenbaum, 
2012). 
 Is there not something defeatist and deleterious about this negative skew? “Th e 
implication” in Haidt’s work “is that since irrationality is inevitable, we may as well 
lie back and enjoy it” (Pinker, 2011, p. 642). Similarly, an implication (in tradi-
tional economic models; see Henrich et al., 2005) that selfi shly narrow “rational” 
behavior is inevitable renders us at risk for self-fulfi lling prophecy: “the danger 
of thinking that we are nothing but calculating opportunists is that it pushes us 
precisely toward such behavior. It undermines trust in others, thus making us cau-
tious rather than generous” (de Waal, 2009, p. 162). Accordingly, the traditional 
economic model of human motivation “is a seriously defi cient caricature and can 
mislead.” Failure to appreciate empathic concern as a “pervasive and powerful 
force in human aff airs” can handicap “eff orts to build . . . a more caring, humane 
society” (Batson, 2011, p. 161). 
 A more balanced description of human moral development encourages us to 
be and do better. We agree with David Moshman, Paul Bloom, Gus Blasi, and 
Sam Harris (among others) on this point. Granted, “adolescents and adults may be 
far from perfect, but they are far from infants” (Moshman, 2011b, p. 45). “Unlike 
babies, children and adults have the capacity for rational deliberation [and] moral 
progress” (Bloom, 2012, p. 84; cf. Blasi, 2009). People can “learn to reason more 
eff ectively, pay greater attention to evidence, and grow more mindful of the 

Beyond Haidt’s New Synthesis 
■ 35
ever-present possibility of error” (Harris, 2010, p. 89). Despite indications of ger-
minal roots in infancy, justice or fairness does not entirely reduce to a refi ned 
verbal expression of an intuition. Broadly, moral development must be distin-
guished from moral socialization or learning; and morality  does grow beyond the 
superfi cial. Th e White youth did not just experience a switch in his intuitions; 
he  grew , evidencing a  deeper  and  more accurate perception of the “out-group 
member” as a  person,  a fellow human being. 
 As noted, we must take development seriously. Haidt (2004) was “mys-
tifi ed” by charges (e.g., Saltzstein & Kasachkoff , 2004) that his approach is 
non-developmental, given his attention to processes such as “how culture shapes 
morality” (p. 286). Haidt’s mystifi cation notwithstanding, the charges are accurate. 
Again, “enculturation,” “socialization,” or “internalization” is not moral  develop-
ment (see next chapter). A comprehensive and valid moral psychology is one that 
represents the developmentally mature and admirable at least as well as the com-
monplace and immature or even venal aspects of human reason, development, 
and social behavior. 
 Excessive Descriptivism or Exclusion of Prescriptivity 
 Th is negative skew or inadequate developmental description, then, should be cor-
rected—and the implications of a more adequate and balanced account accepted. 
Yes, the higher reaches of morality tend to have prescriptive implications. Why not 
embrace them? Granted, the descriptive-prescriptive, fact-value, or “is-ought” issue 
is a thorny one in moral philosophy (e.g., Kohlberg, 1971). Although it is generally 
true that “nature” can only off er “information and inspiration, not prescription” 
(de Waal, 2009, p. 30), development is  progressive  (Moshman, 2011a), its eventual 
products more adequate than those that paved their way. Beyond feeling inspired, 
we should strive for and prescribe more adequate human moral competence. 
 We arrive, then, at a second limitation of Haidt’s theory: its excessive descrip-
tivism: i.e., its misguided eff ort to exclude prescriptive (or proscriptive) implica-
tions from any and all descriptive accounts. Earlier, we cited Haidt’s (2012) candid 
description of his use of a self-serving fabrication to falsely acquit himself of 
his wife’s legitimate complaint (regarding his leaving dirty dishes in their baby’s 
food-preparation area), hence his ostensible discovery that he is a “chronic liar.” 
My personal impression of my colleague Jonathan Haidt is that he is no such thing 
(his self-eff acing exaggeration did succeed as an opening literary device)—but 
what if he  were a chronic liar? Are not self-serving fabrications morally wrong 
(self-centered, non-reversible, etc.; see Chapter 1)? What would Haidt think if he 
were to put himself in his wife’s place, taking and coordinating with her perspec-
tive (see next chapter)? 7  Should he not have appreciated her perspective? Did she 
not have a legitimate concern (that his misplaced dirty dishes could contaminate 
their baby’s food with harmful bacteria)? Should not our instances of irresponsible 
behavior “call for moral refl ection, analysis, and self-examination” (Blasi, 2009, p. 
428)—leading, one hopes, to moral improvement? In the cognitive developmental 
approach to morality, consolidated self-serving worldviews and habits linked to 
antisocial behavior require treatment (see Chapters 7 and 8). 

36 
■ Moral Development and Reality
 Haidt’s writings are in fact not consistently descriptivist, not totally devoid of pre-
scriptive appeals and higher expectations. He does, for example, advise (Haidt, 2006) 
that you “fi nd a fault in yourself”—partly because it may “save a relationship,” but 
mainly because of its emotional rewards: “you are likely to be rewarded with a fl ash 
of [the] pleasure of taking responsibility for your own behavior” as well as “a hint 
of pride”; namely, “the feeling of honor” (p. 79). One reviewer (Brownrigg, 2012) of 
Haidt’s (2012)  Righteous Mind discerned a disconnect between Haidt’s emotion-based, 
descriptive account of human nature and his greater expectations (in  Righteous Mind , 
that his insights might help us, despite our divided groups, to “all get along”):
  He [Haidt] takes a passive, empirical view of human nature. He describes us as we have 
been, expecting no more. . . . But . . . Haidt [also] speaks to us rationally and universally, as 
though we’re capable of something greater. . . . If intuitions are unrefl ective, and if reason 
is self-serving, then what part of us does he expect to regulate and orchestrate these 
faculties? (p. 13) 
 Again, in moral psychology we should include and even champion the “part 
of us” that is “something greater”: the higher reaches of human development and 
morality, the ideals of maturity and rationality. Why not endorse those better 
angels as preferable to the alternatives? Haidt’s functionalist explanation of moral-
ity in terms of the suppression of self-interest and creation of community can have 
a legitimate place in moral psychology. Yet, as Moshman (2011a) concluded, iden-
tifi cation with one’s community can be a “mixed blessing” (p. 142). Hoff man (2000; 
cf. de Waal, 2013) noted that in-group solidarity can promote prosocial behavior 
within the group, and that “bias in favor of one’s in-group when one is deciding 
whom to help is not [necessarily] such a bad thing.” Surely, however—as Haidt 
(personal communication, July 30, 2012), in normative terms, concurs—we can 
identify Durkheimian in-group solidarity as “a bad thing when people [accord-
ingly] feel compelled to attack others [outside their] group” (Hoff man, 2000, p. 
270; cf. Jacobson, 2008). As Piaget (1965/1932) established, mature morality has 
a meaning beyond adherence to Durkheimian in-group solidarity, beyond the 
Darwinian success of one’s group (in terms of faster group population growth 
and the empire-building “supplanting” or slaughter of other humans). Relatedly, 
Freud’s and Hume’s view of moral reasoning as serving the passions or sentiments 
has a place in a comprehensive view of morality and society—but not so great a 
place as to crowd out the genuine ideals of rationality, objectivity, and impartial-
ity in human development. Th e higher reaches of morality (Chapters 3 and 4) 
provide an anchor point for specifying mature compassion (Chapter 5), account-
ing for prosocial behavior (Chapter 6), and understanding and treating antisocial 
behavior (Chapters 7 and 8, respectively). A moral psychology that emphasizes 
human foibles or worse, and punts on remedial treatment or moral education, falls 
 seriously short of adequate paradigm status. 
 Moral Relativism 
 A third (and related) serious limitation is that of moral relativism. Haidt’s and 
other relativistic views in moral psychology were noted in Chapter 1. In fairness, 

Beyond Haidt’s New Synthesis 
■ 37
we should acknowledge that Haidt (2012) has explicitly objected to such a charac-
terization of his position: “I am not saying that all moral visions are equally good, 
or equally eff ective at creating humane and morally ordered societies. I am not 
a moral relativist” (p. 338). Indeed, Haidt endorsed “a Durkheimian version of 
utilitarianism” (p. 272). Yet in the same work, Haidt (2012) repeatedly asserted the 
culturally relative contexts for the shaping of a group member’s intuitively based 
moral visions or principles (presumably, even that of Durkheimian utilitarianism). 
Haidt’s (2012) sentiment that liberals and conservatives should share meals and 
narratives and “get along” is helpful, but missing is any call for rational dialogue 
or moral progress. Nor did Haidt appeal to “the right” (consistency, reversibility, 
etc.), objective accuracy, or cognitive development except to note that, historically, 
Kant championed “non-contradiction” (p. 119). As noted, Haidt even likened 
moral judgments to diversely shaped babblings or tastes. Haidt quoted Hume: 
“Morals and criticism are not so properly objects of the understanding as of taste 
and sentiment. Beauty, whether moral or natural, is felt, more properly than per-
ceived” (cited in Haidt, 2012, p. 339). Yet if ethical judgments “are nothing but the 
outfl ow” of subjective aff ects, of esthetic feelings or sensory tastes, then “it would 
be as inappropriate to criticize ethical judgment as it would be to criticize gastro-
nomic preferences” (Singer, 1981, p. 85). 
 Given such analogies, what happens to moral objectivity? In his appreciation of 
the beauty of diverse cultural contexts, Haidt (as noted) minimized female genital 
 mutilation as a mere  alteration . He (Haidt, 2012) did feel that practices subordinat-
ing (and even attacking) women are “ugly” (p. 102); that is, unpalatable, distasteful, 
or disgusting. It is possible that, as Plato posited, esthetic appraisals can sometimes 
refl ect some ultimately objective basis. In the main, however, “beautiful” or “ugly” 
would seem to be in the eye of the beholder. Th e esthetic analogy misses the objective 
basis of morality (see Chapter 1). Female genital mutilation is not to be minimized, 
subjectivized, emotionalized, or relativized. It is not just ugly. It is  morally wrong.  
 Roger Brown and Richard Herrnstein (1975) referred to the cultural relativ-
ism of 1950s American psychology as the “tide” against which Lawrence Kohlberg 
(and in 1930s Europe, facing Durkheimian cultural relativism, Jean Piaget) “swam” 
(p. 307). Again, a valuable aspect of Haidt’s work has been its encouragement of 
us to remain open-minded and tolerant, and even to appreciate diverse cultural 
norms or practices, political ideologies, and individual lifestyles. Indeed, we grow 
(as did the rescuer) through taking into account the perspectives of other indi-
viduals, groups, and cultures. Still fresh in the 1950s, however, were the horrors 
of Nazi aggression. “Since the holocaust,” wrote Martin Hoff man (2000), “cultural 
relativism is dead. We no longer have the luxury of assuming every culture’s values 
or guiding principles will pass the moral test and that each is as [morally] good 
as any other” (p. 273). In the twenty-fi rst century, the relativist tide has returned; 
we must swim against it as did Kohlberg and Piaget in their eras. Now, as then, 
we cannot aff ord the moral paralysis of a moral psychology that reduces develop-
ment to enculturation or socialization. Fundamentally, we cannot aff ord a relativ-
istic moral psychology whose functionalist evolutionary perspective encompasses 
pragmatic success, advantage, or utility, but not progress, consistency, or truth 
(this limitation will be discussed in Chapter 10). 

38 
■ Moral Development and Reality
 Concluding Comment 
 We will have occasion to refer further to Haidt’s new synthesis in remaining chap-
ters of this book. Again, there is much of stimulating value in the bold, down-to-
earth sweep of his work and that of others in allied disciplines. Haidt does 
successfully administer a dose, if not of reality (his descriptive work is too skewed 
for that), at least of phylogenetic humility: We are reminded of our pretensions 
and the impact of fast, preconscious emotions in morality, as well as the phyloge-
netic history and neurology of those emotions. We are also reminded of the values 
of scientifi c description and of respecting the important contribution of diverse 
cultures and communities to human fl ourishing. We can value in-group solidar-
ity (mixed blessing though it is) and aff ective primacy (balanced though it need 
be with cognitive primacy). With respect to the emotion of empathy or caring, a 
developmental or multilevel version is evident in the work of Martin Hoff man as 
well as Frans de Waal and Jean Decety (Chapter 5). In the fi nal analysis, however, 
the serious limitations (negative skew, exclusion of prescriptivity, moral relativ-
ism) of Haidt’s theory overshadow its contributions. We must now move beyond 
Haidt’s new synthesis as we continue our exploration of moral development, social 
behavior, and reality. 
 

39
  3 
 “The Right” and Moral 
Development 
 Fundamental Themes of Kohlberg’s Cognitive 
Developmental Approach 
 In the fi rst chapter, we noted that young children might be so taken with an 
intellectually disabled man’s (Edward’s) colorful reaction to a prank that they 
might not perceive his suff ering and the pranksters’ self-centered unfairness. 
Generally, young children oft en over-attend to, or “center upon,” one or another 
salient feature of a situation and accordingly fail to infer underlying realities. 
What does it mean in a cognitive sense to say that children grow beyond the 
superfi cial in morality? Does the construction (through taking and coordinating 
social perspectives) of a deeper understanding of fairness or moral reciproc-
ity contribute to one’s moral motivation? Would an older person’s grasp of an 
injustice, a violation of how people should treat one another, generate a desire 
to right the wrong? 
 Lawrence Kohlberg called his theoretical approach to morality and moral moti-
vation “cognitive developmental” to describe his contextualization of moral devel-
opment within social and non-social (or physical) cognitive development. One of 
Kohlberg’s chief sources of inspiration, Jean Piaget, considered mature morality 
to be a logic or rationality inherent in social relations. Morality in the cognitive-
developmental approach refers mainly to the moral  judgment (or reasoned evalu-
ation) of the prescriptive values of right and wrong. 1 To a much greater extent 
than in Haidt’s new synthesis (last chapter), this approach emphasizes moral 
 development (Gibbs, Moshman, Berkowitz, Basinger, & Grime, 2009). 
 In this chapter, we articulate the fundamental themes of the cognitive-devel-
opmental approach to morality. We have already hinted at them in the use of 
certain words in our opening paragraph, among them  superfi cial, center upon or 
 self- centered, social perspective-taking, construction, and  moral reciprocity. To be 
explicit, we will discuss the following themes. 
 Superf iciality, Self-Centration • Th e young child’s over-attention in moral judg-
ment to this or that eye- or ear-catching feature of a situation refl ects an overall 
superfi ciality; that is, a general cognitive tendency to center upon salient stimuli. 
Although one’s own immediate perspective is salient throughout life, the young 
child tends to be especially egocentrically biased or centered on the self. 
 Growing Beyond Superficiality/Self-Centration Through Social Perspective–
Taking • To “decenter” or grow beyond these centrations upon the self or upon 
some salient, here-and-now feature of a situation, the child needs not only to 
gain in working memory but also to take, coordinate with, and refl ect upon the 
 perspectives of others through social interaction (see also the next theme). 

40 
■ Moral Development and Reality
 Decentration, Mental Coordination, Social Construction • To decenter from 
biasing centrations is to keep in mind and mentally coordinate multiple features 
(some salient, some not so salient) of a situation. Th is process can foster change 
that is both qualitative and progressive. Such change accomplishes a deeper under-
standing (cf.  stage ; see below). As we will see, the “construction” of knowledge 
in Piagetian usage is irreducibly distinct from the learning or internalization of 
a norm.  Social construction (construction through social interaction, social per-
spective–taking and coordination, and refl ection) is especially important in moral 
judgment development. 
 Moral Reciprocity • Th e constructed structures most relevant to growth beyond 
the superfi cial in a cognitive and social sense are those of reciprocity. Advanced 
stages of moral reciprocity and equality (or equity) in human development surpass 
those attained by any other species. 
 Moral Necessity, Cognitive Primacy • A constructed structure of moral reci-
procity is “right” or necessary (e.g., moral equality must not be violated), much 
as logical reciprocity is right or necessary (e.g., mathematical equality cannot be 
violated). Real or apparent violations of reciprocity generate a  cognitively based 
desire to right the wrong (cognitive primacy). 
 Stages • A network of structures such as those that pertain to moral reciprocity 
can be conceptualized as a basic framework, complex schema network, or  stage by 
which a child or older person perceives (meaningfully experiences), interacts with, 
and refl ects upon events or situations. Because they are so mixed in one’s overall 
functioning at any given time, stages in moral judgment development defi ne only 
the qualitative levels of a rough age trend. As we will see, this age trend has been 
evidenced in over forty countries or regions around the world. 
 Th e pervasiveness of these fundamental themes across social and non-social cog-
nitive development refl ects the broad sense of  cognitive  in Kohlberg’s and Piaget’s 
theoretical approach. 2 Indeed, Kohlberg (1964) began his work in part by identify-
ing stable moral judgment trends that may “refl ect cognitive development” (p. 398). 
Aft er all, it is the same child who meaningfully interacts with social and non-social 
(or physical) objects. We stress, however, the uniqueness of  social interaction and 
perspective-taking. Consider that social cognitive “objects” such as people are also 
conscious, intentional  subjects. Th ere is something quite unique about taking the 
perspective of an “object” that can also take  your perspective! Pervasive cognitive-
developmental themes notwithstanding, the story of  sociomoral development (to 
use Hugh Rosen’s [1980] term) does not reduce entirely to the story of non-social 
cognitive development (Damon, 1977, 1981; Hoff man, 1981b). 
 Although Kohlberg’s and Piaget’s cognitive-developmental approach is clearly 
crucial to our exploration of the cognitive strand of moral development (a number 
of Piagetian constructs are quite helpful), we do not feel bound to the orthodoxy of 
either theorist’s work. Indeed, although we do not systematically critique Piaget’s 
version of the cognitive-developmental approach (see Beilin, 1992; Flavell, 1996; 
Lourenco & Machado, 1996; Newcombe, 2011; Siegler & Alibali, 2005), we will 
spend the entire next chapter critiquing (and off ering a new view that builds partly 

“The Right” and Moral Development 
■ 41
from) Kohlberg’s stage theory. Th is chapter goes “beneath” Kohlberg’s theory. In 
other words, we explicate  basic cognitive-developmental themes as a context for 
exploring the right and wrong of morality; in particular, the justice or reciprocity 
strand of moral development. 
early childhood superficiality 
 
■
 Because preschoolers generally have diffi  culty keeping in mind multiple sources 
of information, their moral judgment—more generally, their social and non-
social cognition, understanding of self, even social play—tends to be superfi cial. 
Impressive appearances oft en capture their attention or imagination. In other 
words, young children evidence a “vulnerability to salient features of the here-and-
now” (Flavell, Miller, & Miller, 2002, p. 181). Th is pronounced tendency to center 
upon the salient includes their own immediate viewpoint, especially their egoistic 
motives or desires at the moment. We will consider the superfi cial judgments of 
early childhood in terms of both social and non-social cognition. 
 Superficiality in Social Cognition 
 Young children over-attend in their social (including moral) cognition to one or 
another salient appearance or consequence; accordingly, their moral understand-
ing tends to be superfi cial. Despite their evaluations of acts such as hitting as wrong 
even if adults were to approve (Turiel, 2006a), young children may legitimize the 
commands of authority fi gures such as parents or teachers by appeal to an impos-
ing feature of size or power (e.g., “Dad’s the boss because he’s bigger”; Kohlberg, 
1984, p. 624). Keeping a promise may be evaluated as important because “otherwise 
the other person will be mad or beat you up”—that is, may be justifi ed by appeal 
to concrete or salient consequences. (A personal note: When my grandson Micah 
was fi ve years old, he explained that telling the truth is “very” important because 
“if you don’t tell the truth, it’s a lie [and] if you lie, you get in trouble.” We will 
return to fi ve-year-old Micah later in this chapter.) Among children asked “What 
happens when lies are told?” 80% of fi ve-year-olds, but only 28% of 11-year-olds, 
mentioned punishment by an adult authority fi gure (Peterson, Peterson, & Seeto, 
1983). Preschoolers, in contrast to older children, evaluate lies that lead to pun-
ishment more negatively than lies that do not (Bussey, 1992). Charles Helwig and 
Angela Prencipe (1999) found that six-year-olds were more likely than eight- or 
ten-year-olds to suggest severe consequences (“a lot of trouble”) for fl ag-burning. 
Th e preschoolers also appealed to the material damage of the act and preferred 
the decisions of authorities among various approaches to changing a fl ag’s design. 
Young children’s orientation to salient authority and to visible or punitive conse-
quences partly inspired Piaget’s term  heteronomy (meaning “rules from others”) 
for their morality. It also inspired Kohlberg to characterize his moral judgment 
Stage 1 as “punishment and obedience” (see Chapter 4). Th e essential theme, how-
ever, is superfi ciality. 
 Perhaps the most famous example of superfi ciality in young children’s moral 
judgments is found in one of Piaget’s (1932/1965) early studies. Presenting pairs of 

42 
■ Moral Development and Reality
stories of transgression, Piaget asked children which story entailed a “naughtier” 
act, and why. One of the story pairs contrasted one child who accidentally breaks 
15 cups as he comes to dinner with another child who breaks one cup as he tries to 
sneak a treat out of the cupboard. Th e younger (in his study, six-year-old) children, 
impressed by the “tangible” (p. 166) consequence of so many broken cups, oft en 
judged the coming-to-dinner child to be naughtier, even though that child was 
not the one with the mischievous intention. 3 Piaget’s research design was criticized 
in subsequent literature (e.g., S. A. Miller, 2007) for confounding intention with 
consequence. Th e “confounding,” however, was strategic: Piaget’s aim was not to 
investigate whether young children can understand intentions (his own research 
established that they do) but rather to study whether young children tend to focus 
on the salient and neglect the subtle (e.g., an underlying intention) when the two 
are juxtaposed in a morally relevant task or situation. 
 Young children’s tendency not to keep in mind intangible or subtle consid-
erations means that their moral evaluations tend to be absolute and infl exible 
(although their “infl exibility” may also refl ect a recognition of the distinctly invari-
ant character of the moral domain; Turiel, 2006a). For example, in the Peterson et 
al. (1983) study, 92% of the fi ve-year-olds (but only 28% of the 11-year-olds) stated 
that lying is “always wrong” (because, for example, the lie will always be found out 
and punished). Similarly, in the Helwig and Prencipe (1999) study, 96% of the six-
year-olds but only 46% of the ten-year-olds thought that fl ag burning could never 
be acceptable as a ritual showing respect for the country. Despite such “all or none” 
or infl exible declarations (Harter, 2012, p. 32; Sigelman & Waitzman, 1991), young 
children’s sociomoral judgments can also be quite capricious, as we will see. 
 Besides moral judgment, other areas of social cognition (understanding of self, 
others, social relations and situations, friendship, emotions, gender, death, and 
so on) also provide evidence of young children’s vulnerability to the impressive 
or salient. Preschoolers’ spontaneous descriptions of themselves or others tend to 
emphasize physical or directly observable attributes, abilities, and possessions (“I 
live in a big house,” “I can run faster than anyone,” “I have brown hair,” etc.; Flavell 
& Miller, 1998; cf. Damon & Hart, 1988; Harter, 2006, 2012). Similarly, their social 
explanations, person-description, and narrative comprehension tend to empha-
size overt actions or expressive features (e.g., Livesley & Bromley, 1973; J. G. Miller, 
1986; Paris & Upton, 1976). Preschoolers’ accounts of having been hurt or having 
hurt another person “lack depth” and tend to be “utterly behavioral,” featuring 
simple one-way acts of physical harm (e.g., “Um, Jack hit me. And he also, he 
also kicked me”; Wainryb, Brehl, & Matwin, 2005, p. 54). Similarly, preschoolers’ 
conceptions of friendship tend to focus on surface aspects such as playing together 
and sharing toys or other material goods (Selman, 1980). Gender is stereotyped by 
outer or situational features such as clothing, hairstyle, and occupational activity 
(Signorella, Bigler, & Liben, 1993). In the development of children’s understand-
ing of death, cessation of overt biological functions generally precedes cessation of 
related psychological conditions (Bering & Bjorklund, 2004). 
 Young children’s vulnerability to the pull of this or that particular overt feature 
does not preclude recognition of their own or others’ wishes, preferences, or inten-
tions. Indeed, broad characterizations of cognition in early childhood as “external” 

“The Right” and Moral Development 
■ 43
rather than psychological are untenable (Miller & Aloise, 1989). Various avenues 
of social cognitive research have found that early childhood judgment can be 
“internal”; that is, it can take into account psychological factors. As noted, despite 
young children’s tendency to focus on external damage in naughtiness judgments, 
they are able—especially in the absence of highly salient surface features—to make 
judgments based on intentions or preferences (Flavell & Miller, 1998; cf. Piaget, 
1932/1965). Self-descriptions, although generally concrete, oft en include psycho-
logical assertions (“I like pizza,” “I love my dog Skipper,” etc.). Indeed, young chil-
dren even prefer to describe an emotional reaction in terms of psychological states 
(e.g., “he’s scared of the dog”) over behaviors (e.g., “he’s holding his mommy’s 
hand”) when psychological and behavioral descriptions are both made salient as 
options (Lillard & Flavell, 1990). 
 Paucity of Ongoing Mental Coordination 
 Yet something is curiously amiss in the “internal” or psychological judgments 
of young children. Recall, in the last chapter, Damon’s (1977) description of the 
“fl uctuating” or inconsistent and egocentric way in which young children oft en 
reason on distributive justice (how to share) tasks. Similarly, consider a six-year-
old’s replies to Robert Selman’s (1976) famous social cognitive task called “Holly’s 
Dilemma,” pertaining to whether a girl named Holly would rescue a kitten stuck 
in a tree despite having promised her father that she wouldn’t climb trees. Asked 
“What do you think Holly will do: save the kitten, or keep her promise?” the six-
year-old replied, 
  She will save the kitten because she doesn’t want the kitten to die. ( How will her father 
feel when he fi nds out? ) Happy, he likes kittens. ( What would you do if you were Holly? ) 
Save the kitten so it won’t get hurt. ( What if her father punishes her if she gets the kitten 
down? ) Th en she will leave it up there. ( Why? ) She doesn’t want to get in trouble. ( How 
will she feel? ) Good, she listened to her father. (p. 303)   
 Although this six-year-old’s judgment is “internal” insofar as it appeals to psy-
chological states such as wishes or preferences (“she doesn’t want the kitten to die,” 
“she doesn’t want to get in trouble,” etc.), the responses evidence an egocentric and 
capricious quality. Attending to the kitten, she predicts Holly will climb the tree 
and suggests the father will be “happy” because “he likes kittens” (a convenient 
attribution that neglects the father’s likely distress over the broken promise). But 
then, prompted to consider the prospective salient consequence of punishment, 
the child abruptly switches focus from the kitten to the father: Holly would “leave 
it [the kitten] up there” and thereby avoid trouble with her father; she would even 
feel “good” about having listened to and obeyed him (an attribution that neglects 
her feelings for the endangered kitten). Th is six-year-old seems blithely oblivious 
to the contradictions of her successive judgments. Is this not the whimsical charm 
of a young child? 
 Young children typically attend to one or another feature, then, captured by 
what is salient for them at that moment. Th ey tend to “react to events only as they 
occur” and neglect relevant events that have just occurred (Chatham, Frank, & 

44 
■ Moral Development and Reality
Munakata, 2009, p. 5529). Although they do refer to psychological states, their 
self-descriptions list “piecemeal and seemingly random and unrelated features of 
the self” (Harter, 2012, p. 31). Robbie Case (1998), Robert Siegler (1996b), and 
other developmental psychologists called this momentary consideration of one or 
another feature at a time “unidimensional thinking.” What preschoolers tend  not 
to do in their judgments, then, is to keep in mind multiple sources of information 
(e.g., both the “kitten” and “father” facets of Holly’s dilemma)—what Paul Bloom 
(2004) called “double bookkeeping” (p. 21)—and coordinate them to make a more 
adequate judgment (cf. Feff er, 1970). Ongoing mental coordination of the here-
and-now with other facets of a continuing situation— multi dimensional think-
ing—is precisely what is missing in young children’s “internal” yet still superfi cial 
judgments. 
 It is worth emphasizing that this paucity of ongoing mental coordination in 
social perspective–taking is evident whether the social cognitive task is descriptive 
or prescriptive. In other words, one can discern the same unidimensional ten-
dency whether the task questions ask what  will  or  would happen and why (as in 
Selman’s [1976] social cognitive dilemma) or what  should  happen and why (as in 
a moral dilemma). Consider young children’s moral judgment responses to moral 
dilemmas such as William Damon’s (1977) obedience-to-authority task. Th e pro-
tagonist of the dilemma story, Peter (“Michelle” for girl respondents), has been 
told that he can’t go anywhere until he cleans up his messy room, but now he has 
an opportunity to go with his friends to a picnic. What should Peter do? A four-
year-old replied, 
 Go to the picnic. ( Why should he do that? ) Because he wants to and all his friends are 
going. ( But what if his mother says, “No, Peter, you can’t go until you clean up your room 
fi rst”? ) He would do what his mama says. ( Why should he do that? ) Because he likes to. 
( What if Peter really wants to go on the picnic and he doesn’t want to clean up his room at 
all because if he does he’ll miss the picnic? ) His mama will let him go out with his friends. 
( But what if she won’t let him? ) He will stay home and play with his sister and clean up all 
his toys in his toy box. ( Why will he do that? ) Because he wants to. (p. 182) 
 Once again, we fi nd a capricious sequence of momentary preferences and wish-
ful attributions, with no discernible regard for consistency. Young children just do 
not seem to engage in much mental coordination in forming their judgments. 
 Paucity of mental coordination also seems to characterize young children’s 
responses in studies that address development in the understanding of emotions. 
Young children tend not to take into account the infl uence of prior emotions upon 
current mood (e.g., that a person’s being upset by an earlier negative experience, or 
prior harm to another, could dampen or complicate his or her elation in a current 
pleasant situation) (Berk, 2012; cf. Arsenio, Gold, & Adams, 2006). Furthermore, 
young children have diffi  culty understanding mixed emotions; that is, that two 
emotions from a single stimulus can occur at once (Harter, 2012). In studies 
regarding post-transgression emotions (e.g., one child is shown pushing another 
off  a playground swing and then swinging on it), young children characterize the 
swinging victimizer simply as “happy.” Th ey apparently “view victimization as 
involving two relatively separated sets of emotional reactions—victimizers who 

“The Right” and Moral Development 
■ 45
are happy because of their gains and victims who feel quite negatively because of 
their losses” (Arsenio, Gold, & Adams, 2006, p. 584). 
 Th is unidimensional or uncoordinated cognitive tendency is surprisingly stable 
in early childhood. Th e young children retained their “separated,” simple, or one-
sided view of post-transgression emotion even in the face of eff orts to make more 
salient to them the negative feelings of the victim. Only when “young children are 
repeatedly reminded of the immoral nature of victimizing others” do the “happy” 
attributions become less prevalent (Arsenio et al., 2006, p. 604). 
 Uncoordinated or one-sided social judgment is also broadly evident in early 
childhood. In several studies (Fabes, Eisenberg, Nyman, & Michealieu, 1991; 
Gnepp, 1983; Hoff ner & Badzinski, 1989; Hoff ner, Cantor, & Th orson, 1989), ques-
tions regarding pictures depicting incongruous scenes such as a happy-faced boy 
with a broken bicycle elicited among the preschoolers’ descriptions of emotion 
that centered on salient features such as facial expression (e.g., “He’s happy because 
he likes to ride his bike”). Complex inferential judgments—for example, responses 
that coordinate or integrate the “happy face” and “broken bicycle” features of the 
scene (e.g., “He’s happy because his father promised to help fi x his broken bike”)—
did not become prevalent until somewhat older ages (seven years of age or so). 
 Egocentric Bias 
 Th is here-and-now immediacy or vulnerability to one or another salient feature of a 
present situation inclines the young child toward egocentric or self-centered cogni-
tions, perceptions, and behavior. Aft er all, what is more immediate and salient than 
one’s own mental chatter or “self-talk”? And the mental stream of young children’s 
thought (despite genuinely empathic concerns, Chapter 5) is especially self-oriented. 
Preschoolers are likely to describe the (less salient) perspectives of others in egocentric 
terms (e.g., “She gives me things”; Livesley & Bromley, 1973). Th ree-year-olds are also 
prone to attribute their own privileged-information perspective to others, not realiz-
ing that others, being uninformed, cannot share their perspective (see Carpendale & 
Lewis, 2006; Chandler & Carpendale, 1998; Doherty, 2009; Flavell et al., 2002). 
 Other social cognitive research also points to a pronounced salience of self—
that is, a paucity of taking and keeping in mind the perspectives of others—es-
pecially in early childhood. Although young children may infer that others are 
engaged in thought if others are depicted with a thoughtful expression or chal-
lenging task, they tend not to attribute  spontaneous thoughts to others (Flavell & 
Miller, 1998). In other words, they have not yet developed “an active conception 
of mental life” (Carpendale & Lewis, 2006, p. 202). Nor do they attribute sponta-
neous thought to  themselves : the “minds” encompassed within their superfi cial 
“theory of mind” include their own. 
 Yet in many respects, young children are especially prone to attend to their 
own immediate thoughts, feelings, or knowledge, more than to the perspectives 
of others. “When they play hide and seek, very small children will notoriously 
put their heads under a table with their behinds sticking very visibly into view” 
(Gopnik, 2009, p. 58; cf. Doherty, 2009). Young children’s typically infl ated self-
esteem and overestimation of their skills and abilities have been seen as following 

46 
■ Moral Development and Reality
in part from the fact that children generally do not compare their competency 
with that of others until the elementary school years (Harter, 2012). Th e youngest 
children on distributive justice tasks tend to reduce questions regarding “fairness” 
to personal desire (see Chapter 2). As noted, young children typically judge that a 
child who gets to swing by pushing off  the swing’s current user would feel “happy” 
or “good” because he got what he wanted (Arsenio et al., 2006). In a study of chil-
dren’s understanding of the eff ects of lying (Peterson et al., 1983), none of the fi ve-
year-olds (versus nearly a fourth of the 11-year-olds) made reference to a guilty 
conscience. Egocentric impulses of physical aggression are three- to six-year-olds’ 
prevalent approach to resolving social confl ict (Selman & Shultz, 1990). 
 Th e sense in which young children tend to be egocentric must be specifi ed. 
Ample research has demonstrated the untenability of Piaget’s classic defi nition 
of egocentrism as an  inability or  lack of capacity to diff erentiate others’ perspec-
tives from one’s own (e.g., Flavell & Miller, 1998). Rather, egocentrism should be 
construed as a pronounced  bias favoring one’s own perspective over others’ or a 
 distortive tendency to assimilate others’ perspectives to one’s own (or, occasionally, 
his own to another’s; see Damon, 1977). Decety (2007) even suggested that the 
“self-perspective” may be “the default mode of the human mind” (p. 258). Th is 
bias, cognitive distortion, or centration upon self may decline with gains in work-
ing memory, executive (prefrontal cortical) functioning, and social perspective-
taking experiences (discussed later); nonetheless, this default mode or processing 
bias does not disappear:
 Our own points of view are usually more cognitively “available” to us than another per-
son’s views (Tversky & Kahneman, 1973). Furthermore, we are usually unable to turn 
our own [immediate] viewpoints off  completely when trying to infer another’s. Our own 
perspectives produce clear signals that are much louder to us than the other’s, and they 
usually continue to ring in our ears while we try to decode the other’s. For example, the 
fact that you thoroughly understand calculus constitutes an obstacle to your continu-
ously keeping in mind a friend’s ignorance of it while trying to explain it to him; you 
may momentarily realize how hard it is for him, but that realization may quietly slip 
away once you get immersed in your explanation. (Flavell et al., 2002, p. 182; cf. Birch 
& Bloom, 2004) 
 Interestingly, and in fairness, Piaget (1962) in later writings was amenable to this 
view of egocentrism as a tendency or bias rather than an inability or incapacity. He 
interpreted non-diff erentiation of viewpoints as merely “an unconscious  preferen-
tial focus” (p. 5, emphasis added), and illustrated how persistently that focus can 
interfere with eff orts to take another’s perspective. Antedating not only Flavell and 
colleagues’ construal (above) but also Susan Birch and Paul Bloom’s (2004) fi nding 
of a “tendency to be biased by one’s own knowledge when attempting to appreciate 
a more na ï ve or uninformed perspective” (p. 1364), Piaget (1962) wrote:
 Every beginning instructor discovers sooner or later that his fi rst lectures were incom-
prehensible because he was talking to himself, so to say, mindful only of his own point of 
view. He realizes only gradually and with diffi  culty that it is not easy to place oneself in 
the shoes of students who do not yet know what he knows about the subject matter of his 

“The Right” and Moral Development 
■ 47
course. As a second example we can take the art of discussion, which consists principally 
in knowing how to place oneself at the point of view of one’s partner in order to try to 
convince him on his own ground. (p. 5)   
 Th is interference from one’s personal knowledge can undermine not only eff ec-
tive communication but also impartiality or objectivity. For example, egocentric 
bias can lead to hypocrisy and its maintenance by self-serving cognitive distortions 
(Valdesolo & DeSteno, 2008; see Chapter 7; cf. Haidt, 2012). Although present 
throughout life, egocentric bias is especially evident during childhood (Damon, 
1977). It is integral to the superfi ciality of early childhood moral judgment. 
 Superficiality in Non-social Cognition: 
The Conservation Task 
 Superfi ciality characterizes young children’s judgments not only in social but also in 
general or non-social cognition. Unidimensional thinking may contribute to four-
year-olds’ perceptual (rather than conceptually relational) interpretation of analogies 
and metaphors (Gentner & Christie, 2010) as well as their diffi  culty in understand-
ing multiple meanings in language (Carpendale & Lewis, 2006). Consider young 
children’s perceptual responses to Piaget’s famous “conservation tasks” (so called 
because an amount is conserved despite changes in its appearance). Immediate 
appearance-oriented (preconservation) judgments on a classic Piagetian task con-
cerning conservation of quantity are described by Flavell et al. (2002) as follows:
 (1) Th e child fi rst agrees that two identical glasses contain identical amounts of water; 
(2) the experimenter pours the water from one glass into a third, taller and thinner 
glass, with the child watching; (3) she then asks the child whether the two amounts of 
water are still identical, or whether one glass now contains more water than the other. 
Th e typical preschool nonconserver is apt to conclude, aft er the liquid has been poured, 
that the taller and thinner glass now has more water in it than the other glass. Why? One 
reason is that it  looks like it has more to her, and she is more given than the older child 
to make judgments about reality on the basis of the immediate, perceived  appearances 
of things. (p. 140) 
 As on social cognition tasks, young children’s judgments on non-social cog-
nition tasks such as conservation center on whatever is immediately salient and 
accordingly may meander from moment to moment. In the conservation task (the 
example pertains to fl uid or continuous quantity, one of many referents for con-
servation), most young children are more impressed with the height of a tall, thin 
glass and hence say there is now more water. Some children, however, are more 
impressed with the narrowness of the glass and say there is now  less water. Either 
way, of course, the young child is thinking unidimensionally (whether the dimen-
sion is height or width). A given child’s preconservation judgments can be made to 
shift  from one (inaccurate) appearance-based judgment to another, from “more” 
to “less,” as a function of which dimension is made salient in the task procedure. 
If water is poured from a tall glass to a washtub, such that the water scarcely even 
covers the bottom of the tub, the young child who had judged that there is now  more 

48 
■ Moral Development and Reality
water may blithely and abruptly switch to a judgment of  less water (Brown, 1965)! 
Th e contradiction does not seem even to be noticed. And why would we expect 
young children to notice contradiction, given their paucity of ongoing mental coor-
dination? We again encounter the curious caprice of the young child, this time in a 
 non-social cognitive context. But again, as we will see, children do grow.  
 Superficiality and Centrations 
 Whether in terms of social or non-social cognition, then, the young child’s judg-
ments tend to be superfi cial. Common to their performance on social and non-
social cognition tasks is their unidimensional focus on one or another (usually, 
highly salient) momentary feature to the exclusion of important other features; 
that is, their tendency not to keep in mind and coordinate aspects of a situation. 
We have repeatedly seen this paucity of mental coordination on social cognition 
tasks, but it is particularly clear on the conservation tasks. 
 A Piagetian construct helps us analyze the young child’s unidimensional think-
ing. With respect to conservation tasks, Flavell et al. (2002) invoked the Piagetian 
term  centration in their analysis of young children’s here-and-now immediacy in 
conservation task performance:
 Th e preschooler is more prone to concentrate or  center (hence,  centration ) their atten-
tion exclusively on some single feature or limited portion of the stimulus array that is 
particularly salient and interesting to him, thereby neglecting other task-relevant fea-
tures. 4 Th e diff erence in the heights of the two liquid columns is what captures most of 
the child’s attention (and “capture” oft en does seem the apposite word), with little note 
given to the compensatory diff erence in column widths. (p. 141) 
 Th e capricious social and non-social judgments of the young child center not 
only on the “here” (a particular interesting feature or limited portion) but also the 
“now” (the present state of the problem): “When solving problems of all sorts they 
[young children] are less likely to call to mind or keep in mind relevant previous 
states of the problem, or to anticipate pertinent future or potential ones” (p. 142; 
cf. Chatham et al., 2009). Pertinent to what has been called  temporal centration 
may be their (earlier noted) tendency to neglect the impact of an earlier emotion 
upon a subsequent one. 
 Incidentally, Flavell et al. (2002; cf. Birch & Bloom, 2004) speculated that—as 
with egocentric bias (self-centration)—temporal centration may never disappear 
altogether. Indeed, temporal centration may be thought of as an egocentric bias 
favoring one’s  present perspective:
 Interestingly, the “other” can be oneself in another time and condition, rather than a dif-
ferent person. . . . For example, it can be hard to imagine yourself feeling well and happy 
next week if you feel terribly ill or unhappy today. Taking the perspective of yourself 
when that perspective is diff erent from your current one can sometimes be as hard as 
taking the perspective of another person. (p. 182) 
 Again, egocentric bias or inadequate perspective-taking (whether the perspec-
tive is that of another person or one’s own in another time or condition) is a variant 

“The Right” and Moral Development 
■ 49
of the fl uctuating centrations or unidimensional thinking of the young child. As 
with thought, so with emotional and other social behavior: the young child tends 
“to display fl uctuating emotional states, to focus on one attribute at a time, with 
either-or, love-hate feelings” (Cowan, 1982, p. 67). 
 Social play, for example, is “subject to the whims of the moment” (Piaget, 
1965/1932, p. 30). A personal example: Aft er my then-fi ve-year-old grandson 
Micah explained the importance of telling the truth (otherwise “it’s a lie [and] 
you get in trouble,” see above), he entreated me to join him in a dueling game with 
“lightsabers.” (“Lightsabers” are plastic sword-like toy weapons that emit spectac-
ular color and sound as their tips shoot forward.) We had great fun dueling with 
the impressive sabers in the darkened fi nished basement. Micah’s imagination was 
rich and enchanting. His notions came and went so quickly, though, that I found it 
hard to retain much sense of the game. Which of us was Luke Skywalker, and which 
Darth Vader? Identities kept switching. Which of us was ahead by “lots of points”? 
Th at kept switching, too. How did one of us abruptly become “invisible,” and then 
reappear? How did the sabers suddenly gain, then lose, then regain  poison tips? 
Micah’s imagination enchanted, but the “rules” seemed erratic or egocentrically 
convenient—as when Micah would suddenly declare himself to be invisible or in a 
“safety zone,” immune to saber attack as I closed in. Of course, many of these shift s 
and switches could be attributable to Micah’s insuffi  cient knowledge of Star Wars 
as well as the way games with rules are played (cf. Gentner & Christie, 2010). But 
were such empirical information defi cits all there was to it? Given the fl uctuations 
pervasive in the life of the young child, a question remained: Were we playing a 
game, or playing  at  a game? I was at once a delighted granddad and a refl ective 
developmental psychologist. 
 Aft er our lightsabers were put away, I thought of another “game” for us to 
play. Bringing appropriate materials from the kitchen, I took Micah through the 
conservation task and then, aft er the pouring, asked him again about the relative 
amounts. “Th at one [the tall glass] has more [water],” he declared. I refl ected: His 
moral appeal to trouble or punishment, the pseudo-game we had played, his pre-
conservational answer just now . . . do they not suggest a characteristic tendency 
evident across thought, language, and behavior—namely, that of the superfi cial 
social and non-social understanding, the blithe inconsistencies, the charming 
whimsy of the young child? 
 A Tendency, Not an Incapacity 
 We again emphasize that this early childhood superfi ciality, although robust and 
pervasive across social and non-social contexts, is a  tendency characteristic of the 
young child— not a fi xed incapacity of all preschoolers in all circumstances. As 
Siegler (1996b) put the point: “Although fi ve-year-olds’ processing capacity does 
not preclude them from representing multiple dimensions, it may make them  less 
likely  than older children to do so” (p. 79, emphasis added). With age, young chil-
dren’s superfi cial and blithe caprice attenuates as increasing mental coordination 
produces more inferential judgments—and, indeed, qualitatively new structures 
of logical thought with an accompanying appreciation of logical necessity. 

50 
■ Moral Development and Reality
 As we will see in the next section, child cognitive development involves over-
lapping shift s from less to more mature modes of functioning and responding. 
Cognitive development does  not imply that mature individuals “are always ratio-
nal or are unswayed by passion and illusion” (Pinker, 2011, p. 181). Nor does 
cognitive development mean “that young children never make [integrative] infer-
ences about unperceived states of aff airs or that older children never base con-
clusions on superfi cial appearances” (Flavell et al., 2002, p. 141). Indeed, young 
children “feel the need to comment on everything, and ask about everything” (de 
Waal, 2009, p. 157). Th ey are famous for asking “why” or “how” questions; e.g., 
“How come angels never fall down to earth when there is no fl oor to heaven?”—in 
other words, how can such-and-such an unusual notion deviate from “the way 
that things normally work”? (Harris & Koenig, 2006, p. 518; cf. Gopnik, 2009); 
their fascination with “deviations from the norm” is evident even in infancy 
(Th ompson & Newton, 2010, p. 18). Optimal circumstances (interesting devia-
tions, familiar stimuli, simplifi ed task or questions, absence of misleading salient 
features, warm or friendly questioner, etc.) reduce stress upon young children’s 
working memory or executive attention and hence facilitate their nascent ten-
dency to coordinate features and make complex inferences (Siegler, 1996b). Th eir 
observations or comments can sometimes be astonishingly insightful. By the 
same token,  less than optimal circumstances, as we all know too well, tend to 
induce even among adults less than mature cognitive performance (even though 
basic knowledge competence generally is not lost). Indeed, Judy DeLoache, Kevin 
Miller, and Sophia Pierroutsakos (1998) concluded from a literature review that 
children are more—and adults less—“logical and rational than was previously 
believed” (p. 802). Nonetheless, one can discern a rough age trend characteriz-
able as growth beyond the superfi cial, a development that involves certain crucial 
qualitative changes.  
beyond early childhood superficiality 
 
■
 Growth beyond the superfi cial in moral and other judgments means that those 
judgments are no longer so tied to this or that perceptual appearance or impres-
sive feature. More subtle, complex, balanced judgments gain in prevalence as the 
child’s ongoing mental life becomes more multidimensional (Case, 1998; Siegler, 
1996b). Displacing the merely “reactive” responses mentioned earlier, older 
children’s responses in a cognitive task increasingly evidence more integrative 
responses, ones made possible by increased “proactive control” or “advance prepa-
ration” (Chatham et al., 2009, p. 5529). Accordingly, children’s moral judgments 
and emotional attributions become more mature. With perspectival coordination, 
the simple happiness attributed to playground victimizers increasingly gives way 
to attributions of mixed emotions and empathy-based guilt. Although (in Piaget’s 
earlier noted study of transgression judgments) the imagined consequence of 15 
broken cups still looms large in the judgment of the older child, the older child 
 keeps in mind more, considers more, coordinates more: Yes, to do so much damage 
is bad, but  keep in mind the story protagonist’s underlying good intentions, and  keep 
in mind the naughty intentions of the other protagonist, the one who happened 

“The Right” and Moral Development 
■ 51
to break fewer cups. Underlying intentions—a  deeper consideration—ascend 
against the superfi cial in the older child’s moral judgment. Deeper still will be the 
appreciation of “good intentions”  guided by ideals of do-as-you-would-be-done-by 
morality,  an understanding that, as we will see, typically ascends in late childhood 
or early adolescence. Th ese qualitative shift s toward deeper understanding result 
from increasing mental coordination, social interaction, social perspective-taking, 
and refl ection. As David Moshman (2011a) summarized, “refl ection and coordi-
nation in the context of peer interaction can generate progress” (p. 54). 
 Th is growth beyond the superfi cial is evident not only in moral judgment but 
broadly in the growing child’s social and non-social cognitive development. In 
the conservation task, for example, the child grows from judgments captured by 
misleading superfi cial appearances to a judgment of conservation, “an inference 
about  underlying reality” (Flavell et al., 2002, p. 141, emphasis added). Growing 
 beyond  the superfi cial naturally follows early childhood superfi ciality in the broad 
cognitive-developmental approach. 
 If superfi ciality relates to centrations, then, by the same token, growth beyond 
the superfi cial has much to do with  decentration. As we will see, growth beyond the 
superfi cial and decentration in morality involve a constructive process fundamen-
tally distinct from the internalization processes of moral socialization. Construction 
is as much a  social  as it is a non-social process, and  social construction through per-
spective-taking (in interaction with individual refl ection) is particularly important 
for the emergence of “necessary” moral ideals that can motivate moral behavior (we 
will call the cognitive motivation of behavior “cognitive primacy”). 
 Generally, the construction of more profound moral judgment constitutes an 
age trend involving a sequence of qualitative developmental advances or stages. 
Th ose stages may be universal in human development, entailing a level of potential 
maturity that would seem to surpass that of any other species. Just as our coverage 
of early childhood superfi ciality spanned the social and non-social, our depic-
tion of growth beyond the superfi cial will be similarly broad. We will depict key 
growth-beyond-the-superfi cial themes—“decentration,” “social construction,” 
“reciprocity,” “logical necessity,” “cognitive primacy”—in the context fi rst of non-
social cognition, especially conservation judgments. We then revisit the themes in 
the context of social cognition, especially, moral judgment. 
 Beyond Superficiality in Non-social Cognition 
 Decentration and Construction 
 Decentration can be discerned most clearly in judgments of conservation. In con-
trast to the centrations of young children, older children are “apt to be distrib-
uting [their] attention in a more . . .  balanced way”; that is, “to achieve a broader 
or “‘decentered’ (hence,  decentration )” judgment (Flavell et al., 2002, p. 141). 
Decentration, then, means a more balanced perspective-taking over time: a 
broader and more comprehensive attention to multiple features of the situation, 
an ongoing and responsive mental coordination of those changing features, and 
hence a more consistent, adequate, and profound judgment. 

52 
■ Moral Development and Reality
 In the cognitive developmental approach,  decentration and  construction both 
refer to the developmentally relevant qualities of ongoing mental coordination. 
 Decentration highlights the liberation eff ected by mental coordination from 
narrow, imbalanced, and biased attentions (centrations), whereas  construction in 
the Piagetian sense highlights mental coordination as a process that builds qualita-
tively new knowledge of a special sort (such as logical or moral reciprocity). 
 Social Construction of Conservation Knowledge 
 Th e construction even of non-social cognition such as conservation knowledge 
involves social interaction. Even with reference to objects, “social interaction is a 
context where one is particularly likely to face challenges to one’s perspective and 
to encounter alternative perspectives” (Moshman, 2011a, p. 60). We shorten “con-
struction through social interaction” to “social construction,” although it has also 
been called co-construction, 5 collaborative learning, dialogue, or collaborative 
argumentation. Basically, in social construction, participants who respect each 
other engage in “a balanced exploration of diff erences of perspective” (Rogoff , 
1998, p. 711). Each participant in the dialogue is aware that his or her partner (a) 
may have a diff erent perspective and (b) can actively take one’s  own perspective 
(Tomasello, Kruger, & Ratner, 1996). Social construction may be especially impor-
tant if the learner is to achieve not just a quantitative increase in a skill or other 
profi ciency, but instead a qualitatively new, basic understanding (Damon, 1984). 
 Social construction in the Piagetian sense can build knowledge that is episte-
mologically distinct, even unique (a theme we will return to in our concluding 
chapter). Actively constructed knowledge (again, in the Piagetian sense) is not 
“internalized” (used loosely here to mean transmitted, acquired, picked up, copied, 
imitated, or learned) from some model in the environment; nor is it simply innate. 
In what Moshman (2011a) called  rational constructivism , “the child is seen as an 
active agent with a role that cannot be reduced to genes, environmental history, or 
even an interaction of both” (p. xxi). 
 Th e fundamentally distinct character of constructed knowledge  à  la Piaget 
was demonstrated in a series of brilliant studies of collaborative argumentation in 
connection with conservation tasks or social issues (reviewed by M. Miller, 1987; 
Rogoff , 1998; for a related example, see Moshman, 2011a). Th e most fascinating 
(and epistemologically critical) condition 6  in these experiments involved pairing 
preconservational children whose pretest judgments involved opposing centra-
tions. For example, a preconservational child who judged that the taller, narrower 
glass holds more water would be paired with a preconservational child who (cen-
tering instead upon the narrowness) judged the glass to hold  less water. Th e dyads 
would be instructed to resolve their diff erences. Th e experimenter gave neither 
child the right answer. Nonetheless, even though there was no external source or 
“model” of conservation knowledge, many of the initially preconservational chil-
dren made conservation judgments on the post-test. How could that be? 
 A typical study using such dyads, that of Gail Ames and Frank Murray (1982; 
cf. Doise & Mugny, 1984; Glachan & Light, 1982), was aptly titled “When Two 
Wrongs Make a Right.” In each dyad, both children’s judgments were wrong—but 

“The Right” and Moral Development 
■ 53
wrong in a mutually heuristic way. Each child, in attempting to resolve the dif-
ference, enhanced the salience of the feature of the task that the other child was 
neglecting. Th e children were typically six to seven years old, old enough to have 
the working memory or “executive attention” (e.g., Barrett, Tugade, & Engle, 
2004; Case, 1998; Chapman & Lindenburger, 1989; McCabe, Roediger, McDaniel, 
Balota, & Hambrick, 2010) needed to react with at least some perplexity to the 
other’s challenges: “Look here, this glass is skinnier . . . there’s  less water”; “No, look 
there, the glass is taller . . . there’s  more  water.” Again, the “right” or more profound 
judgment (in this example, conservation of quantity; Ames and Murray actually 
used conservation of length)  could not have resulted from any direct imitation or 
internalization from the environment; aft er all, neither experimenter nor partner 
provided conservation information. It seems most plausible that the conserva-
tion judgments refl ected each child’s decentration and mental coordination, or 
construction stimulated by the opposing child’s challenge. Such studies have been 
cited to suggest that the child at least in part achieves knowledge such as that 
of conservation through a constructive process not reducible to internalization. 
Although children do not usually argue with each other over questions such as 
that of conservation, social construction may in general play a role even in  non-
social cognitive advances. Th ese advances beyond the superfi cial entail important 
cognitive developmental properties—“reciprocity,” “necessity,” and “cognitive 
primacy”—noted at the beginning of this chapter. 
 Depth, Decentration, and Reciprocity 
 Constructed knowledge, such as that of conservation, represents a deeper under-
standing. Such judgments involve “an inference about underlying reality”; for 
example, that two amounts of water, despite misleading appearances from a trans-
formation, “ are really still the same” (Flavell et al., 2002, p. 141). Th is inference 
about underlying reality represents a qualitatively new, more adequate understand-
ing and a kind of knowledge that, as we will see, has much to do with the right and 
wrong of morality. Although conservation “research has not so far yielded really 
clear answers” as to the signifi cance of the phenomenon (Halford & Andrews, 
2006, p. 577), decades ago Roger Brown (1965) made an insightful observation. 
Brown described a “crucial diff erence” between an older and a younger boy’s (or 
girl’s) responses to a conservation task: 
 Aft er pouring, the experimenter asks [the older boy] the familiar question: “Is there 
the same amount or more or less?” Th e boy promptly says, “Th e same,” and there is an 
implicit “naturally” in his intonation. If we continue with other containers of varying 
size he will become impatient and say, “It’s the same, it’s always the same.” 
 It is important to watch the older boy’s performance carefully. Th ere is a crucial dif-
ference between his reaction to each problem and the reaction of the younger boy. Th e 
younger boy when he is asked the critical question intently examines the materials before 
him. Th e older boy scarcely looks at them. For him it does not seem to be a problem in 
perceptual judgment. Th e correct answer appears to have a necessity in it that removes it 
from the sphere of matters requiring empirical verifi cation. 7 (p. 201) 

54 
■ Moral Development and Reality
 As noted, the older child’s inference of this underlying “necessity” is eff ected 
through mental coordination or decentration. Remedying the temporal and spa-
tial centrations described earlier are temporal and spatial  de centrations:
 Conservers are likely to [temporally decenter, that is, to] say that the two quantities had, 
aft er all, been identical at the outset . . . , or that the experimenter had merely poured the 
water from one container to the other, and without spilling any or adding any. . . . Th ey 
might even say that the continuing equality of amounts could be proved by pouring the 
liquid back into its original container. (Flavell et al., 2002, p. 142) 
 Th e older child’s analysis may also coordinate and balance the lesser width with 
the greater height of the liquid in the thinner but taller container. 
 Th at the temporally and spatially decentered response called conservation 
knowledge is balanced means that such knowledge derives from  reciprocity. 
Reciprocal refers to a “simultaneous exchange,” “return in kind,” or action “given 
by each party to the other” ( Oxford English Dictionary Online, 2012 ) , implying a 
counterbalancing.  Temporal decentration and reciprocity (“you can pour it back 
and see it’s the same”) involve a counterbalancing through an “equal reaction to 
an initial action” (Damon, 1977, p. 284); that is, a second action that completely 
undoes or inverts the fi rst.  Spatial decentration and reciprocity (“it’s taller but also 
thinner”; “nothing is added or spilled”) also involve a compensatory counterbal-
ancing or equating of actual or potential changes (taller with thinner; additions 
of water could compensate for spills). Damon (1977) pointed out that “precise” 
(p. 284) reciprocities or compensations imply stable equalities. 
 Logical Necessity and Cognitive Primacy in the Motivation 
to Right a Wrong 
 As in mathematics, the precise reciprocity and equality entailed in conservation 
judgments have a logical quality; they refer to what Piaget called  logico-mathe-
matical knowledge . For example, the precise reciprocity, “nothing added or taken 
away,” means that  x + 0  − 0 =  x.  It is logic that makes the “crucial diff erence” Brown 
(1965) referred to, the qualitative change that removes conservation knowledge 
“from the sphere of matters requiring empirical verifi cation.” Th e older child’s 
conservation answer “appears to have a [logical] necessity to it,” as Brown put 
the point. Granted, conservation judgments are not purely a matter of logic. As 
Th omas Shultz and colleagues noted, “Conservation judgments are neither wholly 
logical nor wholly empirical” but rather “derive from a combination of logical and 
empirical knowledge” (Shultz, Dover, & Amsel, 1979, p. 117). Conservation judg-
ments do involve logic. For this reason—and  not as a result of a sensitive-period 
acquisition—the judgments “feel self-evidently valid” (Haidt, 2001, p. 828). In 
Brown’s and Piaget’s terms, judgments such as those of conservation, transitive 
relations, and class inclusion are experienced as necessary rather than contingent, 
as that which “ must  be true” and not simply as “facts about the world that  are true 
but might have been diff erent” (Miller, Custer, & Nassau, 2000, p. 384; cf. Piaget, 
1967/1971). Generally, conservation and other Piagetian tasks that require “the 

“The Right” and Moral Development 
■ 55
comprehension of logical necessities . . . are rarely passed before age seven but [are] 
relatively easy for nine-year-olds” (Moshman, 2011a, p. 208). 
 Th e sense of logical necessity means that this constructed, qualitatively new 
understanding of underlying reality (in the present case, of conservation) generates 
a compelling feeling that can motivate behavior. Consider the typical responses of 
children in so-called counter-suggestion or contrary feedback research initiated 
in the 1960s by Jan Smedslund (1961) using a conservation-of-weight task. Th ose 
who make judgments of conservation (or other logic-related judgments) and give 
reciprocity explanations are surprised and upset upon being confronted (through 
the trick of surreptitiously removing some of the material) with an apparent viola-
tion of inferred or “necessary” reality. Th ey seek some explanation, some logical 
way to account for or correct the imbalance. Mature conservers confronted with 
violations of weight conservation may make comments such as, “We must have 
lost some clay on the fl oor,” or “Th ere must be something wrong with the scale.” 
Interestingly, initially nonconserving children who had been empirically taught or 
trained in Smedslund’s experiments to give conserving responses reacted to the 
violations with no such surprise or distress—another indicator that early-child-
hood cognitive superfi ciality is robust (and hence that genuine growth beyond the 
superfi cial typically requires more than simple instruction). Th e crucial broader 
point is that  learning , training, acquisition, internalization, socialization, or encul-
turation is not necessarily tantamount to  development  (see Moshman, 2011a). 
 In general, although the mastery of necessity is “gradual and multifaceted” 
(Miller et al., 2000, p. 400), mature judges do tend to act as if illogical imbalances 
or violations of precise reciprocity and equality are wrong or “should not be.” Th e 
nonconservation that confronts them doesn’t make sense logically, and that illogic 
prompts a feeling of distress as well as an action tendency. Th e conservers are 
motivated to try to restore (through some logical explanation or action to fi nd 
missing material) the “necessary” reciprocity or equality. Th e parallel with moral 
judgment and motivation is striking, as we will see. 
 Beyond Superficiality in Social Cognition 
 Th e fundamental themes of the cognitive-developmental approach to moral-
ity emerge as we revisit the concepts of growth beyond the superfi cial (chiefl y, 
reciprocity or equality, social decentration, mental coordination, construction, 
necessity, and cognitive primacy), this time in the context of  social cognition. As 
Steven Pinker (2011) observed, “It’s no coincidence that the word  proportionality 
has a moral as well as a mathematical sense” (p. 648). Th e same is true for equality 
and  reciprocity. We start by examining a traditional treatment of reciprocity in the 
social sense; namely, as a norm that is internalized through moral socialization. 
 Reciprocity: Internalized Norm or Constructed Ideal? 
 Decades ago, Alvin Gouldner (1960) interpreted reciprocity as a societal norm. 
Essentially, the reciprocity norm prescribes that one should reciprocate if one receives 
help, or that one should receive help in return if one has given help. Gouldner posited 

56 
■ Moral Development and Reality
that the reciprocity norm somehow gains motivational power as it is internalized by 
members of society (particularly through parental socialization). He noted that the 
norm is cross-culturally pervasive and attributed such universality to reciprocity’s 
functional value for promoting and stabilizing social relationships. He saw the norm 
as particularly helpful in preventing “system-disrupting exploitation” (p. 174) from 
interpersonal power inequalities in which the more powerful individual would—
were it not for internalized inhibition from the reciprocity norm—simply take from 
the less powerful and (according to Gouldner) feel no compunction to return any 
benefi t. Also helpful in preventing exploitation and reducing the tension of unequal 
exchanges or “reciprocity imbalances” are certain other norms, such as those pre-
scribing one-sided generosity (e.g., Christian charity or  noblesse oblige ) and magna-
nimity (“It’s not the gift  but the thought behind it that counts”). 
 Given its functional importance for any society, the reciprocity norm (at least 
in its positive form) is widely taught and should be part of moral socialization. 
Although less prescriptive and more biologically based, Haidt’s theory (see Chapter 
2) also recognizes the functional importance and status of reciprocity or fairness 
as a common cultural norm. In general, this socialization view of reciprocity as a 
norm is valid. 
 Also valid, however, is the cognitive-developmental view of moral reciprocity as 
a product of construction and decentration. Th e emergence in human development 
of non-social and sociomoral forms of reciprocity may relate to the development 
of a “natural” human preference for balance or harmony (Heider, 1958), as well as 
consistency or logical non-contradiction, cognitive dissonance reduction, congru-
ity, and symmetry (Abelson et al., 1968). Could the motive power of the reciprocity 
norm represent the power of not only an internalized norm but also a constructed 
ideal? Reciprocity may not be  either a “norm” or “ideal,” but  both ! And is only 
one level of reciprocity constructed? As we will see, the cognitive-developmental 
approach explicates the “moral reciprocity” coexistent with the reciprocity norm.  
 Social Construction (vs. Internalization) Revisited 
 It is time to revisit social construction in the context of  social cognitive develop-
ment. In this context, we fi nd not only logical reciprocity and necessity, but  moral 
reciprocity and necessity; correspondingly, we now fi nd “cognitive primacy” gen-
erating  moral feelings that in turn can motivate  moral  behavior. Piaget (1932/1965) 
regarded social construction (again, construction through social interaction) 
as “the main mover of [moral] judgmental change during the childhood years” 
(Youniss & Damon, 1992, p. 280). For Piaget, constructive social interaction 
chiefl y meant peer exchanges that involve “comparison, . . . opposition . . . [and] dis-
cussion” (Piaget, 1932/1965, p. 393). Th e experimental condition described earlier, 
in which peer dyads exchanged viewpoints and thereby helped each other decen-
ter and construct conservation knowledge, parallels the social construction of the 
“necessary equilibrium” of moral reciprocity:
 For  true equality and a  genuine desire for reciprocity there must be [an ideal] that is 
the  sui generis product of life lived in common. Th ere must be born of the actions and 

“The Right” and Moral Development 
■ 57
reactions of individuals upon each other the consciousness of a  necessary equilibrium 
binding upon and limiting both “alter” and “ego.” And this  ideal equilibrium, dimly felt 
on the occasion of every quarrel and every peacemaking, naturally presupposes a long 
reciprocal education of the children by each other. (Piaget, 1932/1965, p. 318, emphases 
added; cf. L. J. Walker, 1983) 
 For example, 
 In the course of discussion [about how to distribute candy] the children may realize 
that . . . an equal division of the candy, although not giving any child as much as she or 
he might like, avoids giving any child a valid basis for complaint. In the course of mul-
tiple such interactions, all the children may come to recognize the inherent fairness of 
no one getting more or less than anyone else—at least not without reason. (Moshman, 
2011a, p. 69) 
 Such a socially constructed moral understanding cannot, according to Piaget, be 
simply learned or internalized from parents or other socialization agents:
  But would it not be more effi  cient for an adult simply to tell the children to divide the 
candy equally? In the short run, an externally imposed rule to this eff ect might indeed 
avoid hostility and/or violence. Piaget believed, however, that such a rule would be per-
ceived by a child as simply one of many rules that must be followed because they come 
from those with power or authority. . . . Genuine . . . morality, then, is not a matter of cul-
turally specifi c rules learned [or externally imposed] from parents or other agents of 
society. (Moshman, 2011a, pp. 69–70) 
 Moshman’s question and point are well taken: Why  not simply teach the chil-
dren the rule? Moral socialization and internalization can play a valuable role; 
again, it is important for society to support moral development by, in this case, 
teaching the positive reciprocity norm. But beware. Recall from the Smedslund 
experiments the indiff erence to violations of logical necessity among the young 
children simply taught or trained to give the conservation answer. Similarly disap-
pointing have been eff orts to teach formal operational problem-solving to chil-
dren (see Moshman, 2011a). More successful have been certain eff orts to foster 
genuine conservation-related understanding among fi ve-year-olds—mainly, by 
providing them with  logical  rather than empirical explanations of correct answers 
(Siegler & Svetina, 2006). If reciprocity, equality, or fairness is related to the logic of 
social relations, then facilitating genuine sociomoral understanding of reciprocity 
or fairness may require processes of social construction. Once again, society or 
culture must support moral development and behavior. And training in prosocial 
skills contributes to eff ective programs to reduce antisocial behavior (Chapter 8). 
Socialization, learning, or training, however, is not the primary story. A moral-
ity simply learned from powerful authorities may be no more genuine, stable, or 
mature than was the “conservation” learned in the Smedslund experiments. 
 A crucial vehicle for the construction of genuinely mature basic morality, then, 
is egalitarian peer interaction. Consistent with Piaget’s claims, Ann Kruger and 
Michael Tomasello (1986) found that, relative to children paired with a parent, 
children in peer discussions generally evidenced more active reasoning followed by 

58 
■ Moral Development and Reality
gains in moral judgment; parents, too, can contribute to children’s moral judgment 
development if their interactive style is nonthreatening or Socratic and “inductive” 
(cf. Kruger, 1992; Taylor & Walker, 1997; see Chapter 5). Marvin Berkowitz and I 
(Berkowitz & Gibbs, 1983, 1985) found that college peers who reasoned from the 
hypothetical premises of one another’s moral arguments (e.g., identifying a logi-
cal inconsistency or implication of the other’s reasoning, questioning the other’s 
premises, or suggesting a premise underlying both positions) were those who evi-
denced greater pre-post gains in mature moral judgment. 
 Piaget (1972) considered such “just for the sake of argument” considerations of 
another’s perspective in a discussion to exemplify the social expression of “formal 
operations.” Socially applied formal operations (or hypothetically based deductive 
reasoning) change the nature of discussion: “A fruitful and constructive discus-
sion means that by using hypotheses we can adopt the point of view of the adver-
sary (although not necessarily believing it) and draw the logical consequences it 
implies” (pp. 3–4). Similarly (but with the goal of successful persuasion more than 
fruitful or constructive discussion; see Chapter 2), Haidt (2012) suggested: “If you 
really want to change someone’s mind on a moral or political matter, you’ll need to 
see things from that person’s angle as well as your own” (p. 49). 
 As in non-social cognition, social construction and decentration in  social cogni-
tion mean the decline of egocentric bias, or an increasing tendency to consider and 
keep in mind multiple perspectives, not just one’s own immediate preferences. Later 
levels of sociomoral judgment are less egocentric: “Th e self’s welfare is still impor-
tant, but . . . self-interest is increasingly seen in the context of the welfare of everyone 
in the relation” (Damon, 1977, p. 221). Older children no longer need salient cues 
to infer that the minds of others are spontaneously active, and are more cognizant 
of what other persons would or would not know in a situation. Th e self-esteem level 
becomes less infl ated or more realistic as children during the elementary school 
years begin to base their self-evaluations on social comparisons (Harter, 2012). 
 Generally, as perspectives interpenetrate, emotions gain nuance. Children more 
readily grasp mixed emotions or the impact of one emotion upon another (Harter, 
2012). In their accounts of post-transgression emotion, children’s attributions 
become more complex—indeed, more mature, more adequate, more genuinely 
interpersonal—with age. No longer is the victimizer seen as being simply “happy;” 
instead, “older children [understand] that the pain and loss experienced by the 
victim would aff ect the victimizer emotionally” (Orobio de Castro, 2010, p. 78). 
Attributions of conscience appear as children increasingly coordinate and “inte-
grate” victim with victimizer perspectives “so that the pain and negative emotions 
of their victims” complicate “any happiness that victimizers might feel” (Arsenio 
et al., 2006, p. 584; cf. Arsenio, 2010); but emotion attributions also refl ect dispo-
sitional diff erences and relate to “aggression, peer acceptance, and overall social 
competence” (Orobio de Castro, 2010, p. 78; see Krettenauer, Malti, & Sokol, 2008, 
and Malti & Krettenauer, in press; cf. Dunn & Hughes, 2001). In their accounts of 
having been hurt or having hurt someone else, they are increasingly likely to coor-
dinate social perspectives, refer to subtle mental states or emotions such as inten-
tions, and describe violations of trust (Wainryb et al., 2005). Friendships become 
more stable. Indeed, in all of the areas of social cognition and behavior surveyed 

“The Right” and Moral Development 
■ 59
earlier, one can discern in later childhood and beyond an increasing prevalence of 
decentered and deeper understanding. 
 Conditions for Social Construction 
 Th at social construction diff ers irreducibly from internalization is a key theme of 
the cognitive-developmental approach, whether that which is constructed is social 
or non-social. Constructive benefi ts from peer interaction cannot be taken for 
granted, however. With reference to the earlier example of candy-sharing among 
children, Moshman (2011a) noted that “one child may grab all the candy and run 
off ” (p. 69). Generally, Piaget’s presumption that peer interaction will always be 
egalitarian and constructive seems a bit optimistic. Hoff man (2000) argued that 
Piaget and Kohlberg underplayed the role of egoistic motives. As Kenneth Rubin 
and colleagues (Rubin, Bukowski, & Parker, 2006) commented, “If the exchange of 
confl icting ideas is marked by hostility, dysregulated or disabling emotions are not 
likely to promote cognitive growth and development” (p. 583). Indeed, Damon and 
Killen (1982) found that children who simply contradicted or ridiculed their part-
ners’ ideas were  less  likely to show post-test moral judgment gain. Th e downward 
spiral of gratuitously violent peer interaction depicted in William Golding’s clas-
sic novel  Lord of the Flies (1954/1962) seems to be validated by numerous media 
reports of bullying and other violence perpetrated by children upon children. 
 Hoff man and others have collectively suggested four conditions that are prob-
ably important if peer interaction is to work as a constructive process. Hoff man 
(1988, 2000) suggested three conditions. First, to preempt egoistic tendencies to 
dominate or bully, the children involved should be comparable not only in age 
but also in social status or “pecking order” within the peer group context (but cf. 
Taylor & Walker, 1997). Indeed, Rogoff  (1998) argued that perceived status equality 
was more important than equality in chronological age among factors conducive 
to cognitive-developmental change. Second, to further counteract tendencies to 
dominate, the interacting children’s disciplinary background should be character-
ized primarily by inductions (inducing consideration for others) rather than power 
assertions (see Chapter 5). (In this connection, we might note as well the value of 
socioemotional backgrounds characterized primarily by secure attachment; see 
Th ompson & Newton, 2010.) Th ird, confl icting children should be “coached” or 
encouraged by a supervising adult to consider one another’s perspectives. Finally, 
Rubin and colleagues (Rubin et al., 2006) suggested that peer interaction is most 
likely to lead to moral judgment development if the peers are friends and hence 
can interact in a positive and nondefensive fashion. Th ese four conditions enhance 
the likelihood that peer interaction will stimulate sociomoral development. 
 Morality and Logic:  Necessity and Cognitive Primacy 
Revisited 
 As noted, in the cognitive-developmental approach, morality is a close kin to logic 
and rationality. Th e intertwining of morality with logic is expressed in Piaget’s 
famous assertion of a “kinship” between morality and logic: “Morality is the logic 
of action,” just as “logic is the morality of thought” (Piaget, 1932/1965, p. 398). In 

60 
■ Moral Development and Reality
other words, the two intimately interrelate: Moral or socially prescriptive reciproc-
ity is logical, just as logic (or logical necessity) is prescriptive. Corresponding to the 
motive power of the logical necessity discussed earlier is the motive power of  moral 
necessity. Violations of reciprocity or justice, like violations of logic, “shouldn’t 
be.” Th e inference of unfairness generates a motivation to restore the “necessary” 
reciprocity or equality (cf. Hammock, Rosen, Richardson, & Bernstein, 1989). 
As Kohlberg (1984) put the point, “Violation of logic and violation of justice may 
arouse strong aff ects” (p. 63). 
 In this connection, Laura Berk (personal communication, April 1, 2002) 
recounted an incident in which both logic and justice were violated (although 
logic was not actually violated—fairness or respect was). Several years ago, during 
her course on methodology, a student 
 replicated Smedslund’s [1961] research by surreptitiously removing a piece of the Play-Doh 
while making the transformation in a conservation-of-weight task. In one instance, an eight-
year-old girl was so secure in her grasp of the logic of conservation that she knew she had 
been tricked. Her emotional reaction was strong: Why, she asked the college student, would 
an adult be so dishonest as to [try to] deceive [and upset] a child in that way? In this case, 
simultaneous violation of conservation and [justice] did, indeed, “arouse strong aff ect.”  
 Th e motivation to account for or correct a “reciprocity imbalance” in the social 
context, then, may be no less cognitively based than is the corresponding motiva-
tion in the non-social or physical context. And note that, in either context, the 
aff ect follows the cognition. Indeed, the aff ect of logical or moral necessity owes 
its very existence to the cognitive construction of logic or justice. Violations of 
logic or justice not only arouse but in the fi rst place  generate a desire to rectify the 
imbalance, to right the wrong. 8 Again we encounter cognitive primacy, this time 
in the context of  moral motivation. 
stages of moral judgment development 
 
■
 Growth beyond the superfi cial in moral judgment entails an overlapping 
sequence of basic frameworks, or  stages. Beyond the centrations on salient fea-
tures (size, power, damage, punishment, etc.) of Stage 1 are two stages of moral 
judgment that have at their core structures of moral reciprocity (see Table 4.1 
in Chapter 4). Th e second moral judgment stage—and the more primitive stage 
of moral reciprocity or justice—is that of a concrete and simple “you scratch 
my back so I should scratch yours,” or “eye for an eye” morality. It is a moral-
ity of exact payback, of strict equality, of “getting even” in favors or blows. As 
C. S. Lewis (1962) recollected,  
 Once when my brother and I, as very small boys, were drawing pictures at the same 
table, I [unintentionally] jerked his elbow and caused him to make an irrelevant line 
across the middle of his work; the matter was amicably settled by my allowing him to 
draw a line of equal length across mine. (p. 93) 
 Piaget (1932/1965) labeled such tit-for-tat morality or short-term exchanges 
of action “reciprocity as a fact,” involving “crude equality” (p. 323) and sometimes 

“The Right” and Moral Development 
■ 61
even “vengeance . . . in all its brutality” (p. 217). Kohlberg’s label for this form of 
reciprocity was “Stage 2” or “pragmatic” and defi ned by “instrumental exchange”: 
“For example, it is seen as important to keep promises to insure that others will 
keep their promises to you and do nice things for you, or it is important in order 
to keep them from getting mad at you” (Kohlberg, 1984, pp. 626–628). 
 A morality defi ned by concrete exchanges or literal equalities prompts some 
questions. What is its developmental status, its theoretical signifi cance? In the 
passage quoted above, Lewis recollected that he and his brother were “very small 
boys” when they righted an ostensible wrong— not  by the acceptance of an apology 
for an accidental bump (as they might have had then been older and more mature) 
but instead by the acceptance of a literally equal payback. How “small” or young 
were they? Did their “settlement,” although crude and concrete, nonetheless rep-
resent progress beyond earlier one-sided impulses and action-reaction sequences 
(see Chapter 2)? Did their reciprocity emerge thanks to construction (i.e., mental 
coordination of perspectives through social interaction)? More broadly, as we put 
the issue in Chapter 2: Is justice a biologically prepared predisposition, a module 
ready to activate? Or is it a constructed and emergent developmental product? 
 We argue mainly for the latter position. Although, like William Damon, we 
recognize germinal roots (see Chapter 2), we share Damon’s emphasis on the 
 development  or construction (mental coordination and refl ection) of morality. In 
growth beyond the superfi cial, justice is not merely a verbal expression of an emo-
tional sentiment or “intuition.” Rather, Stage 2 reciprocity represents an advance 
beyond the centrations and action-reaction sequences of Stage 1. Whereas the 
child with unidimensional cognitive tendencies may understand social infl uence 
in one direction at a time (self to others or others to self; Selman, 1980; cf. Arsenio, 
Gold, & Adams, 2006; Wainryb et al., 2005), the child whose thinking is desig-
nated “Stage 2” is beginning to realize that each of two friends evaluates the other’s 
actions, needs, and attitudes. In this sense, the social perspective-taking coordi-
nations of Stage 2 pragmatic reciprocity produce a concrete, logic-related moral-
ity that, although still superfi cial, is less so than that produced by the centrations 
of Stage 1. 
 Pragmatic (Stage 2) Moral Reciprocity in Primate Societies 
 Th e germinal roots of justice or moral reciprocity pertain to a primate heritage, 
raising the question of what is and is not uniquely human in the development of 
moral maturity. Frans de Waal (1996) argued that judgments and norms of moral 
reciprocity evolved from practices of social exchange and cooperation evident 
throughout the primate world. Even Old World (e.g., macaque) monkey societies 
“may be veritable marketplaces in which sex, support, grooming, food tolerance 
[passive food sharing], warnings of danger, and all sorts of other services are being 
traded” (de Waal, 1996, p. 156). Primates may be biologically prepared to engage 
in reciprocal social activity (Levitt, Weber, Clark, & McDonnell, 1985; Tooby & 
Cosmides, 1996). One is reminded of the attitudinal action–reaction sequences of 
capuchin monkeys: “If others are hostile, they’ll be hostile back. If others are nice, 
they’ll be nice back. Consequently, if another monkey helps them pull a heavy 

62 
■ Moral Development and Reality
tray, they’ll share in return” (de Waal, 2009, p. 177). Furthermore, the emotional 
and behavioral precursors of reciprocity in ontogeny can be discerned in infants’ 
interactions with caretakers, and young children can learn to take turns with toys 
during play activities (e.g., Damon, 1977; Mueller & Brenner, 1977). One can dis-
cern in human society rituals of exchange ranging from a tacit nod aft er a “pardon 
me” to formal treaties. Consistent with both Gouldner’s functionalist and Piaget’s 
constructivist analyses is de Waal’s (1996) suggestion that exchanges can serve to 
restore social balance. 
 Sociomoral advances in exchange and reciprocity may have been linked to  cog-
nitive advances in the evolution of primates. Th e social and non-social cognitive 
abilities of macaque monkeys are less advanced than those of their relatives, the 
chimpanzees. In contrast to monkeys, mature chimps can recognize themselves 
in a mirror and (relatedly) engage in social perspective-taking activities such as 
social pointing or intentional deception (Bjorklund & Pellegrini, 2002; Boysen, 
1993; Boysen, Berntson, Shreyer, & Quigley, 1993; de Waal, 1996, 2009; Premack 
& Premack, 1983; but cf. Tomasello et al., 1996; see Chapter 5). Correspondingly, 
social reciprocity in chimp societies takes on more systemic or normative and 
prescriptive properties conducive to the restoration of balance or equilibrium. 
Chimpanzees, according to de Waal (2009), “regularly break up fi ghts over food 
without taking any of it” (p. 190). 
 Furthermore, not until one studies chimpanzee societies in the primate world 
does one fi nd instances of punishment for non-reciprocation of favors. In the fol-
lowing incident, the chimpanzee Puist became furious at her erstwhile ally Luit 
and even attacked him, apparently because he declined to support her aft er she 
had supported him against a rival:
 A high-ranking female, Puist, took the trouble and risk to help her male friend, Luit, 
chase off  a rival, Nikkie. Nikkie, however, had a habit aft er major confrontations of 
singling out and cornering allies of his rivals, to punish them. Th is time Nikkie dis-
played at [threatened] Puist shortly aft er he had been [chased off ]. Puist turned to Luit, 
stretching out her hand in search of support. But Luit did not lift  a fi nger to protect her. 
Immediately aft er Nikkie . . . left  the scene, Puist turned to Luit, barking furiously. She 
chased him across the enclosure and even pummeled him. (p. 97)   
 In another incident, the group shared food with the group members who had 
shared—but not with a selfi sh chimp named Gwinnie:
 If [the female chimp] Gwinnie obtained one of the large bundles of browse [in the 
enclosure], she would take it to the top of a climbing frame, where it could easily be 
monopolized. Except for her off spring, few others managed to get anything. [Another 
female chimp] Mai, in contrast, shared readily and was typically surrounded by a cluster 
of beggars. Guess who met with more resistance if she herself was in need and tried to 
get food? . . . It is as if the other apes are telling Gwinnie, “You never share with us, why 
should we share with you!” (p. 160) 
 Despite these impressive anecdotes, the extent to which chimps grasp the logic 
of exchanges and equalities remains at issue. Although he emphasized phylogenetic 
continuity, Haidt (2012) considered the evidence for reciprocity among chimps to 

“The Right” and Moral Development 
■ 63
be “ambiguous” (p. 178): Although they may “recruit a collaborator to help them 
get food,” chimps “don’t seem to be sharing intentions or truly coordinating with 
that collaborator” (p. 357; cf. Melis, Hare, & Tomasello, 2006). And although their 
reciprocity seems normative, chimps do not “build up  increasingly elaborate net-
works of norms over time” (Haidt, 2012, p. 357). It should be noted that de Waal’s 
(1996) claim was merely that chimps evidence the “building blocks” of morality, 
not morality per se. Using another metaphor, de Waal (1996) was cautious: “Are 
animals moral? Let us simply conclude that they occupy a number of fl oors of the 
tower of morality” (p. 212). 
 From Stage 2 to Stage 3:  Construction of Reciprocity as an Ideal 
 Although normative reciprocity may characterize much of chimps’ fi ghting, 
feeding, sex, grooming, and so on, its form is (literally!) no more than that of 
you-scratch-my-back-I’ll-scratch-yours. Pragmatic moral reciprocity—Stage 2 in 
the Kohlberg stage typology (Chapter 4)—is also prominent in human societies. 
Indeed, as Th omas Lickona (1983) declared, “Stage 2 is alive and well in most of 
us adults” (p. 134). Haidt (2012) “felt a mixture of amusement and revulsion” at 
an overheard conversation, which he could not legitimately criticize “from within 
the ethic of autonomy” (an ethic attributed to individualistic Western culture 
[Shweder, Much, Mahapatra, & Park, 1997], which Haidt implicitly and mistak-
enly equated with the cognitive developmental perspective on morality):
 I was recently eating lunch at a UVA [University of Virginia] dining hall. At the table 
next to me two young women were talking. One of them was very grateful for something 
the other had agreed to do for her. To express her gratitude she exclaimed, “Oh my God! 
If you were a guy, I’d be so on your dick right now!” (p. 106) 
 Such Stage 2 exchanges are not considered to be the optimal end state of moral 
development. As Piaget (1932/1965) suggested, “the best adult consciences ask for 
something more than” pragmatic morality (p. 323). Children’s—if not chimps’—
quid pro quo social cognition typically develops into “a third perspective, that 
of . . . mutuality of expectations” (Kohlberg, 1984, p. 34; cf. Selman, 1980, 2003). 
In Stage 3, the relationship itself takes on a longer-term and deeper value beyond 
that of the concrete exchange of favors, sexual or otherwise. One need not shift , 
as Haidt (2012) suggests, from an “ethic of autonomy” to an “ethic of divinity” 
(Shweder et al., 1997)—or, for that matter, shift  in “relational models” (Rai & Fiske, 
2011) or “moral orders” (Krebs & Denton, 2006)—in order to judge an instance 
of “trivialized sexuality” (p. 106) as, well, an instance of trivialized sexuality. One 
can legitimately do so within the cognitive developmental context of greater and 
less adequacy in morality. Asked to choose the “best” advice to give to hypothetical 
individuals in a dilemma situation, adolescents evidencing third-stage or higher 
moral judgment generally reject developmentally less adequate options (typi-
cal was one adolescent’s rejection of Stage 2 advice: “I don’t like the idea that ‘if 
you do this, then I’ll do that.’ You should not make a decision because you’ll be 
paid off ”) (Rest, Turiel, & Kohlberg, 1969, p. 238; cf. Boom, Brugman, & van der 
Heijden, 2001). 

64 
■ Moral Development and Reality
 Typically from childhood to adolescence (Gibbs et al., 2007), then, a qualita-
tive advance takes place in the understanding of human interpersonal relation-
ships. “My friend is thinking about what I am thinking” evolves into “true friends 
should understand each other” (Damon, 1977). Th is third-person, mutual per-
spective aff ords a more contextual and ideal justice in which “the circumstances 
of the individual are taken into account” (Piaget, 1932/1965, p. 272; cf. Damon, 
1977). In one of Piaget’s distributive justice stories, concerning whether a fam-
ily’s youngest child who had accidentally dropped his allotment of bread should 
be given another piece, 95% of 13- to 14-year-olds but only 17% of six- to nine-
year-olds made allowance for the young child’s ineptness. Older children and 
adolescents, then, are much more likely to “attempt to understand the psycho-
logical context” in their moral judgments (Piaget, 1932/1965, p. 267; cf. Sigelman 
& Waitzman, 1991). 
 Th is third-person perspective aff ords a truly  ideal  normative reciprocity, recog-
nizable as Golden Rule, do-as-you-would-be-done-by morality. Such ideal moral-
ity represents the quintessential expression of what philosophers have called the 
moral point of view (see Chapter 1). In Brian Barry’s (1995) terms, it is the transi-
tion from “justice as mutual advantage” to “justice as impartiality” (p. 51). Th e 
hypothetical ideal of “ would be  done by” transcends the temporal sequences of 
exchanges entailed in concrete moral reciprocity. 
 Th e concrete origins of such hypothetical refl ection in moral perspective-taking 
are evident in its nascent expressions. Kohlberg (1971), following Selman, cited 
the “intellectual eff ort” made by a ten-year-old boy to justify the Golden Rule:
 Well, the Golden Rule is the best rule, because like if you were rich, you might dream like 
that you were poor and how it felt, and then the dream would go back in your own head 
and you would remember and you would help make the laws that way. (p. 197) 
 Th e intellectual ability to refl ect on the basis of a contrary-to-fact hypothesis 
(such as a rich person imagining and reasoning on the basis of how it would feel to 
be poor) represents a qualitative advance that Piaget called  formal operations : “To 
be formal, [logical inference or] deduction must detach itself from reality and take 
up its stand on the plane of the purely possible” or hypothetical (Piaget, 1928/1969, 
p. 71). Of course, even a young child’s fl ight of imaginative fancy is in a sense a 
“hypothetical” departure from concrete reality (Gopnik, 2009). What is develop-
mentally new is the deduction and interrelation of propositions  just for the sake of 
argument . “Th e formal thinker, in other words, is able to . . . formulate [and appre-
ciate the logic of] arguments independent of the truth or falsity of their premises” 
(Moshman, 2011a, p. 10). 
 Although the shift  from the concrete to the hypothetical represents only a rough 
age trend discernible during late childhood and early adolescence, it is nonetheless 
a distinct, qualitative change. David Moshman (1998) found “surprisingly strong 
support” for Piaget’s thesis “that formal or hypothetico-deductive reasoning—
deliberate deduction from propositions consciously recognized as hypothetical—
plays an important role in the thinking of adolescents and adults but is rarely seen 
before the ages of 11 or 12” (p. 973). In contrast, “few nine-year-olds grasp this dis-
tinction even aft er . . . explanation and feedback” (Moshman, 2011a, p. 209). Such 

“The Right” and Moral Development 
■ 65
thinking is a high-level example of metacognition or “thinking about thinking”: 
Th e child refl ects upon the processes and propositions of cognition. 
 Piaget suggested that the third-person perspective in social cognition emerges 
as children use their newfound hypothetical and deductive reasoning abilities to 
infer the limitations and “deeper trend” of tit-for-tat morality. Piaget’s description 
of the child’s refl ection upon pragmatic reciprocity is suggestive of the process that 
he would later term  refl ective abstraction (Piaget, 1967/1971):
 [Th e child’s] concern with reciprocity leads [him or her] beyond . . . short-sighted jus-
tice. . . . Th e child begins by simply practicing reciprocity, in itself not so easy a thing as 
one might think. Th en, once one has grown accustomed to this form of equilibrium 
in his action, his behavior is altered from within, its form reacting, as it were, upon its 
content. What is regarded as just is no longer merely reciprocal action, but primarily 
behavior that admits of indefi nitely sustained reciprocity. Th e motto “Do as you would 
be done by,” thus comes to replace the conception of crude equality. Th e child sets for-
giveness above revenge, not out of weakness, but because “there is no end” to revenge 
(a boy of 10). Just as in logic, we can see a sort of reaction of the form of the propo-
sition upon its content when the principle of contradiction leads to a simplifi cation 
and purifi cation of its initial defi nitions, so in ethics, reciprocity implies a purifi cation 
of the deeper trend of conduct, guiding it . . . to . . . the more refi ned forms of justice. 
(pp. 323–324)   
 Ironically, refl ective abstraction from  temporal  justice (based on short-term, 
unstable sequences of “merely reciprocal action”) yields a time less justice (“do as 
you  would be  done by”) and the potential for “indefi nitely sustained” relationships. 
As Singer (1981) put it, the resulting 
 higher and wider standard of conduct . . . is not a recommendation that we do to others 
as they have done to us, but that we do to them what we  would wish them to do to us. 
Nor is anything said about doing this only if they are likely to respond in kind. (p. 137; 
emphasis added) 
 Reflective Abstraction and Social Construction 
 Although refl ective abstraction and other metacognitive processes play an impor-
tant role in sociomoral and non-social cognitive development, that role is embed-
ded in social construction. So, do individual refl ection and reasoning derive from 
social construction, or is it individual reasoning that makes possible construc-
tive social interaction? Going beyond the traditional Vygotskian emphasis on the 
sociocultural origins of individual thought, Haidt and Frederick Bjorklund (2008) 
depicted reasoning as a process that remains mainly social: “reasoning happens 
between people quite oft en, . . . and within individuals occasionally”; p. 200). In 
contrast, Piaget is oft en depicted as emphasizing the primacy of individual reason-
ing. Deanna Kuhn (1997) suggested a “dual focus . . . on the social process of devel-
opment from the outside in (as forms originating in social interaction become 
interiorized) as well as from the inside out (as newly constructed forms are con-
solidated and applied in social interactions” (p. 257). Similarly, Moshman (1998) 

66 
■ Moral Development and Reality
suggested a “reciprocal infl uence” between the social and the individual reasoning 
processes:
 Reasoning is traditionally viewed as [simply] taking place within an individual. An 
alternative is to view reasoning as a fundamentally social process of group interchange, 
with individual reasoning a derivative phenomenon involving internalized aspects of 
the group process [cf. Vygotsky, 1930–1935/1978, 1934/1986]). A middle-ground pos-
sibility is that individual and collaborative reasoning are partially distinct and equally 
fundamental, developing via a complex process of reciprocal infl uence. (p. 962) 
 Stage 3 Reciprocity and Cognitive Primacy 
 Unlike that of Stage 2, Stage 3 reciprocity is a reliable cognitive source of mature 
moral motivation. Granted, in the context of positive interpersonal relations, 
both forms or “structures” of reciprocity motivate moral behavior: Reciprocating 
someone’s help may be prompted by the aim of gaining future favors from a val-
ued other (Stage 2), as readily as it can be prompted by the aim of cultivating a 
mutually caring relationship (Stage 3). Th e importance of the distinction between 
the structures of reciprocity becomes clear, however, once tensions or frictions 
jeopardize those positive relations. Th e payback logic of Stage 2 motivates action 
to restore a balance of equality or “get even,” 9 whereas Stage 3 thinking prompts 
eff orts to resolve any misunderstanding for the sake of the relationship. In this 
connection, we know of no data to suggest that chimpanzees can appreciate for-
giveness or  non reciprocation the way humans can. 10 
 Robert Kegan (1982) discovered the importance of the distinction between 
Stage 2 and Stage 3 in the cognitive primacy of moral motivation during his work 
as a secondary school teacher. One day, he asked his seventh-grade English class 
of 12-year-old boys to explain the moral of a story called “Th e New Kid” (Heyert, 
1976). Heyert’s short story depicts the feelings and behavior of an unathletic boy 
named Marty. In the choosing of sides for baseball, Marty experiences the humili-
ation of always being chosen last. He must also endure verbal abuse as he plays 
poorly. When a new kid arrives who is found to be even more unathletic, the new 
arrival receives even worse treatment, especially from—guess who—Marty. Kegan 
noted the Stage 2 level at which many of the 12-year-olds understood the point of 
the story:
 Th e story is saying that people may be mean to you and push you down and make you 
feel crummy and stuff , but it’s saying things aren’t really all that bad because eventually 
you’ll get your chance to push someone else down and then you’ll be on top. . . . Fair is 
fair! (p. 47) 
 Dramatically diff erent from these students’ Stage 2 understanding of the story 
was the emergent Stage 3 understanding of some other 12-year-olds in the class 
who argued that “Marty should be able to think about how he felt when he was 
picked on and therefore not pick on the new kid” (p. 55). Marty, in other words, 
should treat another as he (or almost anyone) would want to be treated. Th e ensu-
ing discussion, Kegan (1982) surmised, gave the less advanced thinkers in the class 

“The Right” and Moral Development 
■ 67
some stimulus for development. Th e discussion was stimulating in part because 
the prescribed behavior diff ered so greatly: Whereas the “fairness” of pragmatic 
moral reciprocity prescribed abusive behavior (one was abused, so it’s fair to abuse 
others), that of ideal moral reciprocity (one was abused and should take into 
account how that would feel) prescribed  restraint. 
 Th is important developmental distinction between pragmatic (Stage 2) and 
ideal (Stage 3) moral reciprocity is not found in the work of most evolutionary 
psychologists, social intuitionists (see Haidt, 2006 and Chapter 2), and other non-
developmental theorists (e.g., Alexander, 1987; Burgess & Huston, 1979; Hauser, 
2006; Jensen, 2008; Krebs & Denton, 2005; Trivers, 1971; Wright, 1994). One pos-
sible exception is the identifi cation of a “strong” reciprocity by evolutionary psy-
chologist Herbert Gintis and colleagues (Gintis, Henrich, Bowles, Boyd, & Fehr, 
2008); i.e., “a universal structure of human morality” that extends beyond mere 
“enlightened self-interest” or “tit-for-tat . . . forms of reciprocity” (p. 253; but cf. 
Verplaetse, Braeckman, & De Schrijver, 2009). 
 Hoff man (2000), too, failed to make this crucial distinction. Hoff man’s general 
view of reciprocity is similar to ours; namely, as a “perception of balance . . . which 
in the moral domain translates into fairness or justice” (p. 241). Furthermore, he 
concurred that the perception of violations of reciprocity presupposes “the ability 
to focus on multiple aspects of a situation” (p. 243; cf. Gibbs, 1991a). Note, how-
ever, that he does not separate ideal reciprocity (“treat others as one would wish to 
be treated by them”) as motivationally distinct among his examples of reciprocity 
in the moral domain: “earning what one deserves, being rewarded for good deeds 
and punished for bad; punishments fi tting the crime ([an] eye for [an] eye); treat-
ing others as one would [wish to] be treated by them” (p. 241). 
 Interestingly, Hoff man (2000) did acknowledge that “a cognitive preference for 
reciprocity” may exist (p. 243). Indeed, his most recent position supports the dis-
tinct status of the justice motive (Chapter 5). Perhaps a purely cognitive motivation 
to “rectify nonreciprocity,” de-confounded from empathic motives, can in some 
contexts be activated, for example, if “one encounters someone who gets more 
than he or she deserves” (Hoff man, 2000, p. 243). In a similar vein, de Waal (1996) 
acknowledged that a motive to correct an unfairness or to see balance restored may 
account for the satisfaction one feels if a bad or undeservingly fortunate individual 
“gets his comeuppance, as when a pompous or dishonest man loses his fortune” (p. 
85). Th e motive or satisfaction pertains to the primarily cognitive realm of unfair-
ness or just consequences (although one might still feel a twinge of empathic dis-
tress for the erstwhile pompous victim, however richly deserved his loss). 
 Despite his acknowledgment of a cognitive primacy in moral motivation, 
Hoff man (2000) argued that there is no  inherently moral cognitive motivation. 
Reciprocity per se is morally “neutral” or “can serve many masters,” including 
“non-prosocial ‘eye-for-an-eye’ thinking” (p. 243), Stage 2 in Kohlberg’s typol-
ogy. Insofar as reciprocity does play a role in prosocial behavior, its contribution 
(according to Hoff man) is not to motivate in its own right so much as to shape or 
transform motivating empathic aff ect. For example, “if one encounters a victim, 
one feels empathic distress, and if he or she is a victim of injustice, reciprocity 
may also be activated and transform the empathic aff ect into a feeling of injustice” 

68 
■ Moral Development and Reality
(p. 243). In short, Hoff man championed  aff ective  primacy to the near-exclusion 
of cognitive primacy in moral motivation. (We will return to this limitation in 
Hoff man’s theory in Chapters 5 and 6.) 
 Th e distinction between Stage 2 and Stage 3 reciprocities is crucial for an ade-
quate analysis of cognitive primacy and mature morality. We suspect that Hoff man 
did not distinguish “treating others as one would be treated by them” because doing 
so is inconsistent with his thesis that reciprocity is morally neutral. It is diffi  cult to 
argue that  ideal (third-person, mutual, Golden Rule, Stage 3) reciprocity is morally 
neutral or can intrinsically motivate non-prosocial behavior. Again, however, even 
pragmatic reciprocity may in  some  contexts motivate (or co-motivate along with 
empathy) moral behavior: For example, not only empathy but also the Stage 2 logic 
that hard work should be rewarded may prompt one to reward a hard worker.  
 Mature Morality, Socialization, and Culture 
 It is crucial that mature morality (especially, ideal reciprocity) be supported in the 
moral socialization practices, religious teaching, and social ecology of a society. 
Th e positive reciprocity norm that should be taught should be, more precisely, the 
ideal reciprocity norm (commonly referred to as the “Golden Rule”). For Kohlberg 
(1984), the essence of “socialization” was the provision of social role- or perspec-
tive-taking opportunities (a disciplinary practice that encourages perspective-
taking is discussed in Chapter 5). Th e child was seen as actively seeking these 
opportunities, which could derive not just from home experiences or peer interac-
tions (as Piaget emphasized) but from various aspects of the child’s social world:
 If moral development is fundamentally a process of the restructuring of modes of role-
taking, then the fundamental social inputs stimulating moral development may be 
termed “role-taking opportunities.” . . . Participation in various groups . . . [stimulates] 
development. . . . Th e child lives in a total social world in which perceptions of the law, of 
the peer group, and of parental teaching all infl uence one another. . . . Various people and 
groups . . . [stimulate]  general moral development. . . .  Th e more the social stimulation, the 
faster the rate of moral development. (pp. 74, 78) 
 Kohlberg’s emphasis on the contribution to moral development of “various 
people and groups” in the child’s social world is congruent with contemporary 
emphases in socialization research on “the interrelated eff ects of parenting, non-
familial infl uences, and the role of the broader context in which families live” 
(Collins, Maccoby, Steinberg, Hetherington, & Bornstein, 2000, p. 228). A  com-
munitarian social context “where relationships between members are direct and 
multifaceted and where individuals can know and be known” may be crucial if 
perspective-taking experiences are to lead to interpersonally mature moral judg-
ment and, in general, “a capacity for relatedness characterized by mutuality, reci-
procity, and deepening intimacy” (Guisinger & Blatt, 1994, p. 109). 
 Cultures that fail to support and cultivate mature morality may place even their sur-
vival in jeopardy. Insofar as one can extrapolate from human development to cultural 
evolution, one can justify Napoleon Chagnon’s (1988) characterization as “primitive” 
(p. 985) tribal or village cultures whose normative system prescribes revenge in blood 

“The Right” and Moral Development 
■ 69
(the culprit’s or a relative’s) for certain off enses (cf. Pinker, 2011). In any event, as 
de Waal (1996) suggested, despite the balance-restoring tendency of exchanges, their 
negative expression can get out of hand: “Revenge can be incredibly destructive if left  
untamed” (p. 161). Children and early adolescents living in an Arab village culture 
that prescribed practices of blood vengeance evidenced elevated levels of distress on 
scales measuring symptomatic behavior such as hostility, anxiety, phobias, paranoid 
ideation, depression, and somatic complaints (Al-Krenawi, Slonim-Nevo, Maymon, 
& Al-Krenawi, 2001). Chagnon (1988; cf. Anderson, 1999; Edgerton, 1992) found 
that practices of blood vengeance accounted for nearly one-third of adult male deaths 
among the Yanomamo Indians of the Amazons. And apparently the Yanomamo are 
not atypical; homicide rates among hunter-gather tribes are generally so severe that 
modern per capita homicide rates—even factoring in massive wartime casualties—
seem favorable by comparison (Diamond, April 21, 2008; Pinker, 2011). An adult 
Yanomamo man (who, we suspect, had constructed ideal reciprocity) visited  
 the territorial capital [of the Amazons]. . . . Th ere he discovered police and laws. He excit-
edly told [Chagnon] that he had visited the . . . territorial governor and urged him to 
make law and police available to his people so that they would not have to engage any 
longer in their wars of revenge and have to live in constant fear. Many of his close kins-
men had died violently and had, in turn, exacted lethal revenge; he worried about being 
a potential target of retaliations and made it known to all that he would have nothing to 
do with raiding. 11 (Chagnon, 1988, p. 990) 
 In addition to their need for such judicial institutions, the Yanomamo were in 
desperate need of a mature culture whose moral climate, social institutions, and 
socialization practices facilitate the construction, internalization, and consolida-
tion of ideal reciprocity, such that revenge can indeed be “tamed” (e.g., Damon, 
1995; Fromm, 1955; Guisinger & Blatt, 1994). Social institutions that promote 
inter-ethnic trust and connection, for example, are crucial in preventing or con-
trolling cycles of violence and vengeance. Beyond simple social contact, interde-
pendence in the context of integrated institutions such as business or professional 
organizations, trade unions, or political parties has been identifi ed as particularly 
crucial (Varshney, 2002). Musafer Sherif and colleagues’ (Sherif, Harvey, White, 
Hood, & Sherif, 1961) classic social psychological experiments established the 
eff ectiveness of joint activity toward shared superordinate goals in mitigating out-
group stereotypes and preventing cycles of violence. 
 As trust and the sense of a common cause grow, such joint activity reduces in-
group bias and expands the scope of altruism or the moral point of view (see Chapters 
1 and 6): one’s group is aft er all but “one group among others, and from an impartial 
point of view no more important than others” (Singer, 1981, p. 134). Such an expan-
sion may also entail development beyond the third stage of moral judgment.  
 Stage 3 to Stage 4:  Beyond Peer Interaction 
in Moral Judgment Development 
 Although Kohlberg in eff ect reserved moral judgment “maturity” for his Stages 5 
and 6 (see Chapter 4), our view is that moral judgment maturity (at least in the 

70 
■ Moral Development and Reality
face-to-face interpersonal context) is already evident at Stage 3, the stage of third-
person or ideal reciprocity. Stage 3 moral judgment, however, does not fully rep-
resent moral-cognitive adequacy for individuals living in a society more complex 
than that of a small community. For such individuals, moral judgment maturity 
must expand in scope from the dyadic or peer to the social system context. 
 As such adolescents or adults move beyond familiar peer interaction in small, 
local communities to societal institutions such as universities or complex work 
settings, they increasingly deal with anonymous individuals and relate to individ-
uals with diverse or heterogeneous values. As a result of this broader role-taking 
and the refl ection it stimulates, their appreciation of the need for mutual trust and 
caring (Stage 3) expands into an appreciation of the need for commonly accepted, 
consistent standards and requirements (Stage 4; see Edwards, 1975, 1978, 1982, 
1985, 1986; Harkness, Edwards, & Super, 1981; Mason & Gibbs, 1993a, 1993b). 
James Rest and colleagues (Rest, Narvaez, Bebeau, & Th oma, 1999) noted that 
“typically in adolescence there is the dawning awareness” of the need to establish 
“a system of cooperation at a society-wide level (among strangers and competitors, 
not just among kin and friends) [that] calls for impartiality, generalizable norms, 
and ‘a level playing fi eld’ among diverse ethnic, religious, and racial groups” 
(p. 15). In the words of one 18-year-old, the purpose of laws is “to set up a standard 
of behavior for people, for society living together so that they can live peacefully and 
in harmony with each other” (Adelson, Green, & O’Neil, 1969, p. 328). Commonly 
accepted standards, institutions, and requirements, then, “promote cooperation 
or social contribution and act as regulations designed to avoid disagreement and 
disorder” (Kohlberg, 1984, p. 632). As one of Kohlberg’s longitudinal participants 
said, “You’ve got to have certain understandings in things that everyone is going 
to abide by or else you could never get anywhere in society, never do anything” 
(Colby et al., 1987, p. 375). In other words, individuals in a complex society must 
generally understand their interdependence and accept a balance between their 
rights or freedoms and their responsibility to respect the rights of others as well 
as to contribute to society. In the absence of such commonly accepted “under-
standings,” not only will society “never get anywhere” but (in the words of another 
Kohlberg longitudinal participant) “chaos will ensue, since each person will be 
following his or her own set of laws” (p. 375). 
 Especially in relation to such advanced moral judgment, Kohlberg (1984), we 
note again, argued that peer interaction should be conceptualized as merely one 
mode of social perspective-taking (or role-taking) opportunity. He acknowledged 
that peer interaction “appears to stimulate development” (p. 77) and may be espe-
cially important during the childhood years. Nonetheless, Kohlberg argued that peer 
interaction “seems better conceptualized in terms of providing general role-taking 
opportunities than as having very specifi c and unique forms of infl uence” (p. 77). 
 Research Evaluation 
 Studies of social experiences in relation to moral judgment have generally been con-
sistent with Piaget’s and Kohlberg’s claims that social perspective–taking through 
peer interaction and group participation play an important role in moral judgment 
development. Kruger’s (1992) fi ndings concerning peer (as opposed to child–adult) 

“The Right” and Moral Development 
■ 71
discussions were noted earlier. Charles Keasy (1971; cf. Schonert-Reichl, 1999) found 
that moral judgment stage in childhood is positively related to social participation, 
as evidenced by more social club memberships and leadership roles. Similarly, 
Anastasia Sedikides (1989), using a measure of childhood role-taking opportunities 
constructed by Steven Schnell and myself (Gibbs & Schnell, 1986; Schnell, 1986), 
found that, for a sample of preadolescents, social role-taking opportunities were in 
fact related to movement through the fi rst three stages of moral judgment. Consistent 
more with Piaget’s than with Kohlberg’s position, a peer interaction factor (relative 
to home and school factors also found in a factor analysis) accounted for the greatest 
percentage of moral judgment stage variance. Included in the peer interaction factor 
were items such as “I have many friends and talk with them very oft en,” and “My 
friend and I talk about our opinions when they diff er.” 
 In the context of moral judgment development beyond Stage 3, Kohlberg (1984) 
conceptualized the growing individual’s new social interaction experiences in col-
lege or complex work settings as opportunities for “enlarged” (p. 428) or expanded 
role-taking. Indeed, he claimed that such experiences were crucial for development 
beyond Stage 3. To investigate this claim, Marion Mason and I (Gibbs & Whiteford 
[Mason], 1989) devised a measure of post-childhood or expanded role-taking oppor-
tunities in which participants respond (on a three-point scale from  not true or rarely 
true to  somewhat true or sometimes true to  very true or oft en true ) to items such as 
“I have encountered and become friends with other students or co-workers of diff er-
ent ethnic or cultural backgrounds (for example, a student from another country)”; 
“I have been involved in a group or organization where it was necessary for me to deal 
with various points of view”; and “I have learned just how culturally varied the world 
is since coming to college.” We administered both the Gibbs and Schnell childhood 
role-taking opportunities measure and the Gibbs and Mason post-childhood measure 
focusing on work and college role-taking experiences to a college sample evidencing 
mixtures of Stage 3 and Stage 4 moral judgment (Mason & Gibbs, 1993a, 1993b). Th e 
post-childhood measure, but not the childhood measure, was highly correlated with 
moral judgment level in this advanced sample. Using the post-childhood measure, 
Comunian and Gielen (1995, 2000) found signifi cant gains (relative to a comparison 
group) in expanded social perspective-taking and toward Stage 4 moral judgment 
among young adults who engaged in communitarian activities. Hence, Kohlberg was 
right to stress the distinct importance of  socially expanded perspective-taking experi-
ences for moral judgment development beyond childhood.  
 Assessing Stages of Immature and Mature Moral Judgment 
 Although we have not emphasized the “stage” construct in our depiction of cog-
nitive-developmental themes, it should be clear by now that many of our conclu-
sions regarding the products of moral judgment development can be summarized 
in terms of  immature and  mature stages . Immature moral judgment stages are 
superfi cial insofar as they confuse morality either with salient appearances, conse-
quences, or other objects of centration (Stage 1) or with “you scratch my back I’ll 
scratch yours” deals; that is, pragmatic reciprocity (Stage 2). Th e concrete decentra-
tion of Stage 2 moral judgment provides a certain rationality, especially in contrast 

72 
■ Moral Development and Reality
to the capricious and blithe inconsistencies of Stage 1 thinking. Accordingly, Stage 
2 is somewhat less superfi cial. Nonetheless, the light of subsequent stages exposes 
the superfi ciality even of Stage 2 judgment: Its rationality is interpersonally shal-
low, narrow, and unabashedly self-serving. 
 Perhaps through refl ection upon pragmatic reciprocity, and especially with 
socialization support, a more ideal and profound morality typically emerges in 
child development. Mature moral judgment penetrates through superfi cial con-
siderations to infer the bases of interpersonal relationships (Stage 3) or society 
(Stage 4). Th e Stage 3 ideal-reciprocity maturity constructed in the face-to-face 
interpersonal sphere extends across complex or diverse social settings (Stage 4). 
 To assess an individual’s moral judgment maturity in terms of these stages and 
thereby to study moral judgment development across cultures, we start by defi n-
ing a moral judgment stage as a structure of moral justifi cations; that is, of reasons 
supporting a decision or evaluation in the context of the right and the good (see 
Chapter 1). Accordingly, the decision or evaluation pertains to values such as keep-
ing a promise, telling the truth, helping a friend, saving a life, and not stealing. 
 Our assessment measures (even multiple-choice measures; see Gibbs, Arnold, 
Morgan, et al., 1984; Basinger & Gibbs, 1987; cf. Rest, Narvaez, Bebeau, & Th oma, 
1999) of moral judgment development are based on such a defi nition. In particu-
lar, the Sociomoral Refl ection Measure–Short Form (SRM-SF; Gibbs, Basinger, & 
Fuller, 1992; Gibbs, Basinger, & Grime, 2003; Gibbs, Basinger, Grime, & Snarey 
2007; for reliability and validity, see Basinger, Gibbs, & Fuller, 1995) asks individu-
als to evaluate and justify the importance of specifi ed moral values. Th e values are 
specifi ed through certain lead-in statements (e.g., “Th ink about when you’ve made 
a promise to a friend . . . ”). 12 Respondents’ justifi cations are then matched to induc-
tively and deductively derived “criterion” justifi cations found in the scoring manual 
(Gibbs, Basinger, & Fuller, 1992). At each stage, the justifi cations are depicted in 
terms of fi ve to seven aspects that cohere into a gestalt or “montage” that serves to 
guide the matching. Th e immature stages (1 and 2) can be illustrated in terms of 
their montages for the collective value of keeping a promise and telling the truth:
Stage 1:  Centrations • “You should always keep a promise, and never be a tattle-
tale. It’s telling a lie, and it’s not nice to lie. If you made a promise to a friend, it 
wouldn’t be nice to break it because then he won’t play with you and won’t be your 
friend any more. Or he’d cry and beat you up. Not only that, but you will get in 
trouble. Your parents will punish you if you lie or break a promise.” 
 Stage 2: Exchanges • “Your friend has probably done things for you and may return 
the favor if you help him by keeping your promise. Besides, you may like your friend, 
and this could be your only friend. Lies catch up with you sooner or later, and once 
they do and the other person fi nds out, they may get even. If it’s parents and chil-
dren, then parents should keep their promises to the children if the children have 
kept their promises to the parents. But if the promise is to someone you hardly know, 
then why bother? Th ey’ll probably never know whether you kept it or not.” 
 Illustrating mature-stage (Stages 3 and 4) moral judgment are these montages:
Stage 3: Mutualities • “Your friend has faith in you, and you shouldn’t betray 
that trust or hurt his feelings. Aft er all, you’d expect him to keep his promises to 

“The Right” and Moral Development 
■ 73
you, and having a friend to share feelings with means a lot. Even if it’s not a friend, 
honesty is still the best policy and it’s just common courtesy. It’s selfi sh to break 
promises, and once you make a bad impression, people won’t think much of you. 
If it’s a child and the parents don’t keep promises, the children will stop believing 
in their parents and will start thinking that lying is all right. Even if it’s someone 
you hardly know, you may start a good relationship by showing that you care and 
can be trusted.” 
 Stage 4: Systems • “Society is based on trust and reliability, and keeping promises 
is necessary for the sake of social order. Honesty is a standard everyone can accept, 
and you wouldn’t want to live in a society where you couldn’t trust anyone. Aft er 
all, promises have intrinsic value, and a relationship is meaningless if there is no 
trust. In the case of a child, parents have an obligation to keep their word and to 
provide an example of character so that the child develops a sense of responsibility. 
Keeping a promise is a commitment—failing to keep it, even if it’s to someone you 
hardly know, refl ects on your integrity. People must be consistent and not break 
promises whenever they feel like it, so that they can earn others’ respect, to say 
nothing of their own” (adapted from Gibbs, Basinger, & Fuller, 1992). 
 Th ese montages convey our sense of “stages” as reasonably coherent, qualita-
tively distinct frameworks, complex schemas, or cognitive structures. Each stage 
paves the way for the next, resulting in a sequence of progressively more mature 
 understanding —not merely more sophisticated verbiage designed to dress up one’s 
intuitions in order to impress others (as suggested by Haidt; see Chapter 2). Do 
growing children in fact evidence such immature and mature stages in their moral 
judgment? Can an age trend in these terms be observed around the world, consis-
tent with Kohlberg’s claim of universality in moral judgment development? 
 Moral Judgment Stage Development Across Cultures 
 Th ese questions can in fact be addressed on the basis of fi ndings from the measure 
just described. Th e SRM-SF as well as Kohlberg’s original interview instrument 
have been used to measure moral judgment development in over 100 research stud-
ies spanning over 40 countries (see Gibbs, Basinger, Grime, & Snarey, 2007; and 
Snarey, 1985). Th e countries included in the SRM-SF review (Gibbs et al., 2007) col-
lectively represented cultural diversity: Although many of the samples were urban 
and Westernized, some were non-urban (rural communities in Armenia, Kenya, 
Nigeria), and others were outside Western Europe and North America (namely, 
Armenia, Bosnia, Bulgaria, and Russia in Eastern Europe; Sweden in Northwest 
Europe; China, Japan, Malaysia, and Taiwan in Asia; Kenya and Nigeria in Africa; 
and Bahrain and Saudi Arabia in the Middle East). In this connection, the SRM-SF 
was translated into sixteen non-English languages. SRM-SF protocol attrition (from 
unscorable justifi cations, etc.) was generally low (less than 10%), suggesting that the 
questionnaire’s questions and moral values “made sense” to the respondents, and 
that a common core captures their reasons in support of those values, despite the 
diversity of the respondents’ cultural contexts. 
 Table 3.1 presents an overall picture of moral judgment development across 
cultures aggregated across the studies (not included are juvenile delinquents’ 

74 
■ Moral Development and Reality
 TABLE 3.1  Cross-cultural samples in rank order by mean Sociomoral 
Refl ection Maturity Score (SRMS), grouped by age period. 
Country, sample/age range (mean) in years
 n 
Global stage 
range
 M 
 Late childhood (approx. 9–11 years old) 
Bosnia, primary school students/7–9 (8.1)
18
1/2
164
Kenya, primary school students/8–10 (NR)
69
1/2–2
179
Nigeria, primary school students/10–11 (NR)
37
1/2–2
181
United States, 5th grade students/NR
61
2–2/3
209
Canada, 5th grade students/10–12 (11.0)
45
NR
209
Ireland, primary school students/10–11 (NR)
96
2–2/3
221
Italy, 6th graders/NR (11.2)
52
NR
223
Taiwan, primary school students/9–12 (NR)
450
2–2/3
225
Japan, 4th graders/NR (10.3)
37
2–3
239
 Early/middle adolescence (approx. 12–15 years old) 
Kenya, middle school students/11–13 (NR)
83
1/2–2
185
Belgium, primary school students/12–14 (NR)
48
NR
223
Bosnia, primary school students/11–12 (11.8)
23
2–2/3
230
Netherlands, secondary school students/12–17 (14.3)
216
2–2/3
237
United States, 6th graders/11–14 (11.8)
276
2–3
240
England, middle school students/12–15 (13.0)
789
2–3
242
China, non-delinquents/13–15 (NR)
10
NR
251
Scotland, middle school students/14–15 (NR)
157
2/3–3
255
Japan, 8th grade students/NR (14.3)
62
2–3
264
Canada, 6th and 7th grade students/10–13 (11.7)
47
NR
268
Taiwan, 5th and 6th grade students/11–12 (NR)
45
NR
272
Singapore, secondary school students/12–16 (13.1)
208
2/3–3
274
Ireland, secondary school students/14–15 (NR)
325
2/3–3
278
Italy, 9th grade students/NR (14.4)
52
NR
291
 Late adolescence (approx. 16–19 years old) 
Kenya, high school students/17–19 (NR)
94
2–3
250
Netherlands, high school students/14–17 (15.0)
120
2/3–3
260
Germany, non-delinquents/14–16 (15.6)
309
2/3–3
261
England, male high school students/14–16 (15.5)
149
2–3
264
Sweden, non-delinquents/13–18 (15.6)
29
2/3–3
266
Ireland, secondary school students/16–19 (17.3)
61
2/3–3
281
United States, high school students/13–19 (15.9)
163
2/3–3
286
Japan, 11th graders/NR (16.8)
95
2/3–3
289
Belgium, secondary school students/NR (18–20)
37
NR
292
Russia, high school students/NR (15.6)
419
NR
311
Japan, high school students/16–18 (17.1)
22
NR
320
Italy, community volunteers/NR (16.0)
70
NR
329
 Young adulthood (approx. 20–35 years old) 
Japan, university students/NR (19.8)
80
2/3–3/4
300
Belgium, university and vocational students/21–24 (NR)
57
NR
311
Bulgaria, adults in romantic relationships/19–73 (29.8)
163
3–3/4
325
England, university students/18–25 (19.5)
64
3–3/4
327
Saudi Arabia, upper-division university students/20–26 (22.5)
60
NR
333
United States, university students/17–39 (20.8)
153
3–3/4
335
Australia, university students/(26.9)
94
3–3/4
340
Italy, adult community volunteers/(33.9)
154
NR
359

“The Right” and Moral Development 
■ 75
moral judgment levels; see Chapter 7). Th e moral judgment levels are presented 
in terms of both Global Stage range and Sociomoral Refl ection Maturity Score 
(SRMS), a continuous variable ranging from 100 (pure Stage 1) to 400 (pure Stage 
4). Th e Global Stage designations in the table are derived from SRMS values as 
follows: 100–125 = Stage 1; 126–174 = Transition 1/2; 175–225 = Stage 2; 226–
274 = Transition 2/3; etc. Th e mean SRMSs for the samples reviewed are then 
ordered and grouped by Childhood (Late), Adolescence (Early, Middle/Late), and 
Adulthood (Young, Middle). 
 A full analysis of moral judgment development across these cultures is pro-
vided in our review, published elsewhere (see Gibbs et al., 2007). From even a brief 
inspection of the adapted and updated table presented here, however, support can 
be seen for Kohlberg’s universality claim: Growth beyond the superfi cial in moral 
judgment does indeed take place across diverse cultural contexts. Apparently, 
moral development is not entirely relative to particular cultures and socialization 
practices. 
 Of particular relevance to this chapter is the crucial qualitative advance that 
takes place in the years from late childhood into early adolescence. In our terms, 
the advance is from Stage 2 pragmatic exchanges to Stage 3 mutualities. As the 
table indicates, Stage 3 already makes an appearance in the stage ranges of some 
late childhood samples, but generally gains prominence (sometimes even full-stage 
prominence) during early adolescence. By late adolescence, Stage 3 normally (at 
least for non-delinquents among the cultures studied) becomes the mean global 
moral judgment stage. Older adolescents (at least in national states) may also 
begin to extend their Stage 3 mutualistic understanding to grasp the importance 
of agreed-upon standards and institutions for the common good (Stage 4). 
 Stage Mixture 
 Th e traditional cognitive-developmental approach claims that: (a) a stage is a 
structure not only conceptually but also empirically—that is, at any given time 
an individual is “in” mainly one stage or another (evidencing only minimal mix-
ture with an adjacent stage); and (b) stage development occurs step-by-step in 
Country, sample/age range (mean) in years
 n 
Global stage 
range
 M 
 Middle adulthood (approx. 40–50 years old) 
England, men/NR (40.6)
28
3–4
338
USA, university parents/NR(50.1)
58
3/4
350
 Notes:  NR indicates information “not reported.” Students include both genders unless otherwise indicated. Non-
delinquents are generally male high school students selected (sometimes matched) for use in comparison studies 
of delinquent moral judgment (see Table 7.1). Global stage range is estimated on the basis of plus or minus one 
standard deviation of SRMS. Pertinent studies are referenced in the source article, except for the study in Singapore 
(Phon, 2008) and the study of adult males in the United Kingdom (Langdon, Murphy, Clare, & Palmer, 2010). 
 Source : Adapted and updated from J. C. Gibbs, K. S. Basinger, R. L. Grime, & J. R. Snarey (2007). Moral judgment 
development across cultures: Revisiting Kohlberg’s universality claims,  Developmental Review ,  27 , 443–500. Used 
with the permission of Elsevier ScienceDirect. 
TABLE 3.1 (Continued)

76 
■ Moral Development and Reality
an invariant sequence—that is, with no reversals or skipping (see Chapter 4). 
Kohlberg’s longitudinal research team (of which I was a member) reported results 
largely consistent with these claims (Kohlberg, Colby, Gibbs, & Lieberman, 1983; 
cf. L. J. Walker, 1988). Th e longitudinal results are arguably open to criticism, how-
ever, in that the low levels of stage mixture were to some extent an artifact of the 
scoring methods (see Krebs, Vermuelen, Carpendale, & Denton, 1991). Scoring 
methods less vulnerable to these criticisms, such as those used with the SRM-SF 
(see Basinger et al., 1995), do yield higher levels of stage mixture. We agree with 
Flavell and colleagues’ (2002) suggestion, then, that the qualitative changes in 
social and non-social cognitive development should be regarded “as rough age 
trends” (p. 140). Indeed, Kohlberg’s longitudinal team (Colby et al., 1983) noted 
the overlapping “curves” of stage development, “with earlier stages dropping out 
as later stages enter, such that  the subject seems to be always in transition from one 
stage to the next ” (p. 49, emphasis added). 
 Piaget (1932/1965) himself noted the presence of considerable overlap in the 
age trend from superfi cial to more mature moral judgment. Even within a single 
child’s interview, variability in the level of moral judgment can be discerned:
  [Const., age 7] ( Let’s pretend that you are the mummy. You have two little girls. One of 
them breaks fi ft een cups as she is coming into the dining room, the other breaks one cup 
as she is trying to get some jam while you are not there. Which of them would you punish 
more severely? ) Th e one who broke the fi ft een cups. . . . ( Have you ever broken anything? ) 
A cup. ( How? ) I wanted to wipe it, and I let it drop. ( What else have you broken? ) Another 
time, a plate. ( How? ) I took it to play with. ( Which was the naughtier thing to do? ) Th e 
plate, because I oughtn’t to have taken it. ( And how about the cup? ) Th at was less naughty 
because I wanted to wipe it. ( Which were you punished most for, the cup or the plate? ) For 
the plate. ( Listen, I am going to tell you two more stories. A little girl was wiping the cups. 
She was putting them away, wiping them with the cloth, and she broke fi ve cups. Another 
little girl is playing with some plates. She breaks a plate. Which of them is the naughtiest? ) 
Th e girl who broke the fi ve cups. (pp. 125–126) 
 Th e seven-year-old’s responses vary in maturity according to whether the 
questions address her direct personal experience (a condition of “high support” 
conducive to optimal or more mature functioning) (Fischer & Bidell, 2006) or 
hypothetical situations (“low support”). Because of such variability, Piaget refrained 
from referring to his modes of moral judgment as “stages,” recommending instead 
the concept of overlapping “phases” (p. 317). Damon (1980) found in a two-year 
longitudinal study that distributive-justice stage development was “gradual, mixed, 
and uneven” (p. 1017). Siegler (1996a; cf. Colby et al., 1983; Flavell et al., 2002; 
Rest, 1979) suggested that the stage construct can be salvaged if each new stage 
were conceptualized not as a new step but rather as a beginning new “wave” that 
overlaps previous waves in the waxings and wanings of developmental advance. 
 We might describe a child as mainly “in” a certain social or non-social cogni-
tive stage, as long as we specify the context or content domain and emphasize 
that stage mixture would characterize the child’s cross-situational performance. 
Although disequilibration may not be necessary for developmental advance 
(Siegler, 1996b), high stage mixture in moral judgment development may generate 

“The Right” and Moral Development 
■ 77
disequilibration that in turn tends to facilitate longitudinal gain (Walker, Gustafson, 
& Hennig, 2001). 
 Stages as Schemas 
 James Rest and colleagues (Rest et al., 1999) were suffi  ciently impressed with stage 
mixture and other problems to suggest replacing  stage with the more generic and 
less theory-laden term  schema  in developmental theory. Schemas (or schemata) 
are frameworks for meaningful experience that can be activated in imagination, 
self-talk, or encounters with reality. Most schemas are dynamic, growing through 
cycles of interplay with the environment that take place over time (cf. Neisser, 
1976). Th rough schemas, the self perceives or experiences (anticipates, attends 
to, interacts with) an environmental event. Surprises from that event elicit refi ne-
ments or even reorganizations of the schemas. Th e newly refi ned schemas then 
contribute to more competent or adaptive interaction in the next environmental 
encounter. It is through such progressive cyclical interplay that growth beyond the 
superfi cial in morality takes place. 
 Various uses of the schema construct are evident in the literature of developmen-
tal psychology. Th e various operationalizations are of course not precisely equiv-
alent; “boundary conditions” of each usage should be specifi ed (Meichenbaum, 
1990, p. 99). Roughly speaking, however, we can state that schemas motivate, 
guide, and structure. Th e implicit or automatic quality of established (and some-
times skeletal) schemas is emphasized in the related terms  gists  and  heuristics. 
Fairly typical is Keenan and Ward’s (2003) description of schemas as “structure[s] 
containing beliefs or attitudes that follow a similar theme or pattern” or as “orga-
nizing frameworks for processing new information” (p. 145). Th at schemas can 
provide a “picture of the way the world works” is suggested by one description of 
them as “causal maps” (Gopnik, 2009, p. 39; cf. “orienting schemas,” Neisser, 1976, 
p. 111). Th at schemas are dynamic is refl ected in phrases such as “action-oriented 
representations” (Trzebinski, 1985) and “interlocking  cognitive - aff ective represen-
tations” (Cason, Resick, & Weaver, 2002, emphasis added). Piaget claimed that 
schemas have “an intrinsic need . . . to exercise themselves” (Feff er, 1970, p. 198). 13 
Seymour Epstein and colleagues (e.g., Epstein, 1991; Epstein & Morling, 1995; 
cf. Narvaez, 2008) suggested that schemas actively serve basic needs for pleasure 
or avoidance of pain, self-enhancement, consistency or predictability, and social 
relatedness. In social cognition, we build “relational schemas” (e.g., Baldwin, 
1992) that guide and shape our expectations concerning others vis- à -vis the self. 
Whereas relational schemas pertain to particular contexts of social interaction, 
 internal working models  (Bowlby, 1980; Shaver, Collins, & Clark, 1996) and “theo-
ries of mind” are thought to infl uence our basic approach to and understanding of 
social relationships. “Implicit theories” structure our perception and explanation 
of the empirical world (Gopnik & Wellman, 1994; Gopnik, 2009). In subsequent 
chapters, we will pay particular attention to moral identity or  self schemas (e.g., 
Harter, 2012) for which morality is highly relevant (Chapter 6), schemas of cogni-
tive distortion and constructive social interaction (Chapters 7 and 8), schemas by 
which people attempt to describe the near-death experience (Chapter 9), and the 

78 
■ Moral Development and Reality
epistemological distinction between  scripts for event sequences in the environ-
ment (Hoff man, 2000; Nelson, 1981) and  logico-mathematical structures  of knowl-
edge (Chapter 10). 
 In both Kohlberg’s and Hoff man’s theories,  stage can refer to a relatively broad 
and complex schema that is qualitatively distinct from—yet related to—other 
such schemas in a developmental sequence. Anne Colby (2000) defi ned moral 
judgment stages as “cognitive-moral frameworks” representing “diff erent sets of 
assumptions that help to inform and shape people’s reactions to the micro-deci-
sions they face” in everyday life (p. 162). As fundamental frameworks or sets of 
assumptions, moral judgment stages make only indirect contributions to everyday 
reactions, decisions, and perceptions. Nonetheless, a crucial point is that, once a 
stage has been constructed, its activation can be quick (as we saw in Chapter 2). 
 We continue to use the term  stage,  then, but with the caveat that its concep-
tual coherence typically does not mean concurrence in the emergence of its facets 
during childhood. In the broadest terms,  stages in cognitive development refer to 
an individual’s ways of knowing and interacting with the social and non-social 
world. Each stage paves the way for construction of the next, qualitatively new 
and more adequate or mature stage. During any ongoing interaction with reality, 
however, a given individual is likely to activate multiple stages and other schemas 
(cf. Fischer & Bidell, 2006; Siegler, 1996a). 
 If development is to take place, schemas must be open to consolidation, refi ne-
ment, transformation, and even radical reorganization as novelties and contradic-
tions are encountered. In Piagetian terms, experience is assimilated to a preexisting 
cognitive structure, which itself undergoes (or should undergo) accommodation. 14 
For example, a child who encounters a camel for the fi rst time may distortingly 
assimilate it to a horse schema but notice the hump and refl ect, “Th at surely is 
a funny-looking horse!” Correspondingly, the preconservational children in the 
Ames and Murray (1982) study were perplexed (the Piagetian term is  disequili-
brated ) by anomalous facts pressed upon them by peers who saw in terms of the 
opposing centration (e.g., a child judging “more” liquid aft er it is poured into the 
tall glass is pressed to attend to how  thin the tall glass is). 
 Eventually, accommodation to the novel features (such as the camel’s hump or 
the glass’s other dimension) will induce a diff erentiation and the construction of a 
new structure or schema (“camel”; or conservation knowledge). Once the accom-
modation and new equilibration are accomplished, these more diff erentiated and 
integrated schemas are available to inform future encounters. Accordingly, the 
next camel encountered is accurately construed, or—more relevant to the cogni-
tive developmental point—the next conservation question is understood to be a 
matter of logical inference rather than empirical perception (the “crucial” qualita-
tive and developmental diff erence described earlier in this chapter). 
 It is important to note that this general account of processes in cognitive devel-
opment obscures a fundamentally important epistemological distinction: horses, 
camels, and such represent empirical knowledge, whereas conservation, reciproc-
ity, and such pertain in part to  logico-mathematical knowledge (see Chapter 10). 
Growth beyond the superfi cial in this latter domain entails a coordination of inher-
ent  relations and the appreciation of logical and moral  necessities , not merely the 

“The Right” and Moral Development 
■ 79
accommodation of schemas to the empirical world. In Robert Siegler’s and Matija 
Svetina’s (2006) intervention (noted earlier), “there was something appealing” 
about the logical (vs. empirical) explanations that led to greater eventual eff ective-
ness: “Th e fi ve-year-olds who were exposed to both logical and empirical expla-
nations for the correct answer rated the logical explanations as smarter [or more 
adequate] even before they themselves began to solve the problems correctly” (p. 
1010; for the corresponding eff ect in moral judgment, see Boom, Brugman, & van 
der Heijden, 2001). 
evaluating haidt’s challenge 
 
■
 In the last chapter (Chapter 2), we described Jonathan Haidt’s “dose of reality” 
challenges to the cognitive developmental approach. You may recall Haidt’s (and 
others’) claim that moral judgment such as that of equality or reciprocity entails an 
inborn intuition, perhaps an innate module, in place from the outset of life even 
if initially unelaborated and unexpressed given early-childhood language limita-
tions. In the Haidtian view, “growth beyond the superfi cial” has little meaning; 
morality reduces to some mixture of moral nativism and enculturation. Moral 
 development  becomes not really so developmental aft er all. 
 Th e fi ndings presented in this chapter aff ord an opportunity to extend our 
(Chapter 2) evaluation of Haidt’s challenge. It is true that superfi ciality in early 
childhood is more  tendency than incapacity; i.e., that nascent inferential abili-
ties are discernible earlier, under optimal circumstances. Yet as we have seen, this 
superfi cial tendency is remarkably pervasive across social and non-social, verbal 
and behavioral contexts. Social and nonsocial cognitive development entails 
growth beyond this superfi cial tendency. 
 We counter, then, Haidt’s (Chapter 2) “not really” challenge to the cognitive 
developmental approach with an evidentially based “Yes, really”: Yes, the mental 
life of the young child  really is , by and large, uncoordinated and fl uctuating. 
Young children  really do tend to view, for example, victimizers and victims as 
simply “happy” and “sad,” respectively, with little or no interpenetration of per-
spectives. Young children’s paucity of ongoing mental coordination  really does 
account for a crucial qualitative diff erence between their understanding and that 
of older children. Th e fl ip side of young children’s charming whimsy is that they 
generally don’t yet quite “get” logical necessity, consistency, or moral reciprocity. 
Th e development of a qualitatively new, deeper, more mature understanding in 
this respect is, as Smedslund demonstrated decades ago, a matter of construc-
tion more than enculturation, learning, or training. Th e verbal reasoning of the 
older child is not mere “linguistic effl  uvium masking far more zoological con-
cerns,” as Sam Harris (2010, p. 51) vividly characterized Haidt’s claim. Instead, 
language development intimately relates to and facilitates cognitive develop-
ment. Decentration or mental coordination through social interaction  really 
is required if a genuinely adequate morality or mature moral competence is to 
emerge. And, as we argued in Chapter 1, caring or “the good” of welfare (vs. 
harm)  really is the main complementary pillar to “the right” of justice in genu-
inely mature morality.  

80 
■ Moral Development and Reality
summarizing comment 
 
■
 In the fi nal analysis, development must be taken seriously. Presented in this chap-
ter have been the fundamental themes of the cognitive developmental approach 
to morality. In this approach, growth beyond the superfi cial in morality entails a 
qualitative sequence of immature and mature stages (see Table 4.1 in Chapter 4). 
At the core of the mature stages are hypothetical refl ection and the construction of 
ideal moral reciprocity. Mature morality penetrates through superfi cial consider-
ations of immature morality (Stages 1 and 2) to infer the intangible bases of inter-
personal relationships or society (Stages 3 and 4). An age trend from immature to 
mature stages was evident in reviews of studies conducted in over 40 countries. 
Because the stages overlap so greatly, the stage sequence constitutes only a rough 
age trend in the use of increasingly mature ways of understanding and interacting 
with the social world. Bolder claims for extended stages of moral judgment devel-
opment were made by Kohlberg, to whose theory we next turn. 

81
  4 
 Kohlberg’s Theory 
 A Critique and New View 
 Lawrence Kohlberg’s contribution to the fi eld of moral development was enormous. 
He almost single-handedly innovated the fi eld of cognitive moral development in 
American psychology. Such work scarcely existed in the early 1960s when Kohlberg 
began to publish his research: “His choice of topics [namely, ‘morality’] made him 
something of an ‘odd duck’ within American psychology. . . . No up-to-date social sci-
entist, acquainted with [the relativism of] psychoanalysis, behaviorism, and cultural 
anthropology, used such words [as morality or moral judgment development] at all” 
(Brown & Herrnstein, 1975, pp. 307–308). Yet these social scientists could not ignore 
Kohlberg’s claim—and supporting evidence—that morality is not basically relative to 
culture; that is, that across diverse cultures one can discern a qualitative sequence of 
progressively more adequate modes of moral judgment. Kohlberg became one of the 
most frequently cited psychologists in the social and behavioral sciences (Haggbloom 
et al., 2000). His work is still noted in virtually every major developmental psychology 
textbook on the current market. Even so, it is not clear that Kohlberg’s developmental 
claim was ever fully understood. Despite Kohlberg’s (more precisely, Piaget’s) eff orts, 
many contemporary psychologists still confuse  socialization with  development (as 
evidenced, for example, in Haidt’s theoretical work; see Chapter 2). 
 Th is chapter revisits, clarifi es, and critiques Kohlberg’s theory. We conclude 
with a new view of “the right” in moral development. Th e basics of this view 
were introduced in our Chapter 3 depiction of the fundamental themes of the 
cognitive-developmental approach: themes such as growth beyond the superfi cial, 
construction, social perspective-taking, and stage sequence. Whereas Chapter 3 
went “beneath” Kohlberg’s theory, this chapter addresses Kohlberg’s theory per 
se. Kohlberg’s driving insight was that moral development is not complete by the 
end of childhood, but instead continues throughout the human lifespan. For back-
ground, we narrate how Kohlberg used Piaget’s work and the stage-developmental 
writings of philosopher John Dewey to fashion a six-stage sequence that would 
be (Kohlberg hoped) clearly invariant and lifespan in scope. As we will see, that 
attempt was costly: It resulted in a misrepresentation of “development” in the 
Piagetian sense and the nature of moral judgment maturity. Kohlberg did succeed, 
however, in establishing the increasing importance of contemplative (or hypothet-
ical-deductive) refl ection in moral judgment development. Such refl ection plays a 
key role in our proposed new view (outlined later in Table 4.1). 
background 
 
■
 In 1985 (just two years before he died), Kohlberg referred both to Dewey and 
Piaget as he recollected how his moral judgment stages started and evolved in the 
course of his “search for universal morality”: 

82 
■ Moral Development and Reality
 My views . . . were based on John Dewey’s philosophy of development and his writings con-
cerning the  impulsive, group-conforming, and refl ective stages of moral development. Th e 
fi rst empirical work to pursue this direction was taken by the great Swiss child psycholo-
gist Jean Piaget, in 1932. . . . Using [in my dissertation; Kohlberg, 1958] dilemmas created 
by philosophers or novelists, I was struck by the fact that adolescents had distinctive pat-
terns of thinking which were coherent and were their own, just as Piaget had seen distinc-
tive patterns of thinking in younger children. In my dissertation I tentatively characterized 
these patterns as qualitative stages and added three stages to those formulated by Piaget. 
 When I completed my dissertation I was well aware that by describing ninety-eight 
American boys, aged ten to sixteen, I had not created a universal theory. Th e stages I had 
postulated had to meet criteria. . . . Th e fi rst step in determining this was to follow up my 
original subjects. . . . Th e longitudinal study has led to refi nement and revision in the descrip-
tion and scoring of the stages. . . . Coordinate with [this] follow-up study was checking my 
doubts about whether the stages were really universal in non-Western cultures. . . . Th e fi nal 
stages have been found to be rare. (Kohlberg, 1991, pp. 14–15, emphasis added)  
 Kohlberg’s empirical starting point as he began his 1955 dissertation work, then, 
was the work of Jean Piaget. Kohlberg saw in Piaget’s (1932/1965) classic  Moral 
Judgment of the Child the potential for establishing a stable cognitive developmen-
tal underpinning for morality, and, in particular, a universal sequence of moral 
judgment. Piaget had identifi ed certain basic age trends, comprising successive 
schemas of moral thought that might be “invariant” across factors of social class, 
culture, sex, race, and cohort. Th e more advanced schemas were “constructed” 
through peer interaction (as well as, in Kohlberg’s revision, other experiences of 
social perspective-taking; see Chapter 3). Although social class, culture, and other 
factors might aff ect social perspective-taking and hence the rate of a child’s moral 
development, they would not alter the developmental  sequence.  Cognitive moral 
development involved a cross-culturally invariant sequence with a “defi nite direc-
tion,” an age trend of naturally upward, sustained change from “the more primitive” 
to “the more evolved” organizations or structures. Furthermore, the “more evolved” 
or mature schemas of judgment were expected to be fairly common or “universal” 
across diverse cultures (p. 335). Indeed, each structure is thought to transform into 
a qualitatively new and more adequate organization of thought. No schema could 
be skipped, because each schema was needed to pave the way for the next.  Invariant 
sequence  meant for Piaget, then, a standard, cross-culturally evident age trend of 
sustained progressive, qualitative change entailing a consecutive sequence of quali-
tatively distinct and basic schemas of action and refl ection. Once constructed, the 
more advanced competencies could not ordinarily be lost. Any regression in cogni-
tive competence (beyond ordinary variations in performance) or skipping of one of 
the schemas would violate the expectations of invariant sequence. 
 Interestingly, Piaget (1932/1965) generally refrained from labeling these basic 
moral judgment schemas  stages  and from making strong invariant sequence claims 
for them. Instead, because of variability and mixture in usage (see Chapter 3), 
“invariant sequence” in this context referred merely to “phases” (p. 317) of moral 
judgment that “partially synchronize” (p. 124); development merely meant that 
the later phases gradually gain ascendancy. Th is ascending-phases view of moral 

Kohlberg’s Theory 
■ 83
judgment development resembles contemporary models of cognitive development 
(Fischer & Bidell, 2006; Rest, 1979; Siegler, 1996). 
 Piaget (1970, 1971, 1972) reserved for  non- social cognitive development the 
bolder claim that invariant sequence refers not just to overlapping phases but to 
 stages. A basic schema or stage was a  structure d’ensemble, an overall organiza-
tion that would “hang together” in development and hence give rise to a distinct 
period or era of cognitive development. He saw his famous pre-operational, con-
crete operational, and to some extent formal operational stages, then—but not 
his moral judgment phases—as characterizing such a clear sequence in cognitive 
development. Although he did allow for considerable variability or stage mixture 
(see Chapter 3), especially during transition, Piaget characterized the developing 
child as generally “in” one or another stage or period of development. 
 In moral judgment, Kohlberg had the courage of Piaget’s bolder convictions. 
Kohlberg hypothesized, in eff ect, that Piaget was unduly conservative in his relega-
tion of moral judgment development to overlapping phases in a rough age trend. 
To put the point positively, Kohlberg anticipated that moral judgment develop-
ment data (if investigated from a more adequate conceptual, empirical, and meth-
odological framework) could support a claim of  clearly invariant  stage sequence. 
 Kohlberg (1964) scrutinized in light of subsequent research the various 
aspects of moral judgment studied by Piaget. Kohlberg found that: (a) certain 
aspects “refl ect cognitive development” (p. 398), whereas others seemed more 
“socioemotional”; and (b) the age trends in the former (cognitive) but not 
latter (socioemotional) aspects held up across variations in children’s national-
ity (at least in Western cultures), social class, or religion. Hence, the constit-
uents of these cognitive age trends held promise for satisfying Piaget’s bolder 
sense of invariant  stage sequence (requiring low stage mixture; see Chapter 3). 
Indeed, beyond merely refl ecting cognitive development, moral development 
would become “its own sequential process,” a distinct domain in its own right 
(Kohlberg, 1971, p. 187). 
 Th e promise of these age trends could be actualized, Kohlberg surmised, if the 
structure of participants’ moral judgments were more eff ectively probed for pat-
terns of reasoning. Rather than Piaget’s story pairs (see Chapter 3), Kohlberg in 
his dissertation used moral dilemmas (“created by philosophers or novelists”). Th e 
most famous dilemma is that of the husband Heinz, who must decide whether to 
steal a prohibitively overpriced drug to save his dying wife. Kohlberg also included 
adolescents in his dissertation (Piaget’s sample was restricted to ages 6–13), which 
led to the identifi cation of stages beyond Piaget’s. As noted in his recollection, 
Kohlberg was “struck by the fact” that the adolescents in his sample “had distinc-
tive patterns of thinking which were coherent and were their own.” 
 As Kohlberg recollected, he based his work not only on Piaget’s empirical work 
but also on Dewey’s philosophy and writings concerning moral stages. 1 Indeed, 
Kohlberg saw Piaget’s empirical work on moral judgment as pursuing the direc-
tion of Dewey’s (Dewey & Tuft s, 1908) philosophy of moral developmental stages 
as progressing through impulsive, group conforming, and, fi nally, refl ective levels. 
It is possible that Piaget was pursuing such a direction in his moral judgment 
research. Yet Piaget (1932/1965), in his  Moral Judgment of the Child , made no 

84 
■ Moral Development and Reality
reference to Dewey’s stage conceptions; nor do Piaget’s phases bear much resem-
blance to those conceptions. Kohlberg’s (1971) thesis that psychology and phi-
losophy can respectively inform and guide each other is well taken. Nonetheless, 
as we will see, Kohlberg’s Dewey-inspired three-level conception  mis guided the 
formulation, extension, and refi nement of the stages. 
kohlberg’s overhaul of piaget’s phases 
 
■
 In eff ect, Kohlberg overhauled and added to Piaget’s phases using an adaptation 
of Deweyan views. Dewey’s “impulsive” (hedonic desires, needs), “group-con-
forming” (customs, rules), and “refl ective” (conscience, principles) stages were at 
fi rst labeled premoral, conventional, and “self-accepted moral principles” levels 
(Kohlberg, 1963, 1964, p. 400) and later as preconventional, conventional, and 
postconventional levels (Kohlberg, 1976; cf. Rest et al., 1999). To this trichotomy 
of levels were assimilated a total of six stages: two per level. Our critique asks, 
essentially: How well did this overhaul work? Did it result in a more valid model of 
universal moral judgment stages? Did it clarify our understanding of developmen-
tal processes or of moral judgment maturity? Did the six-stage scheme evidence 
an invariant sequence in Kohlberg’s longitudinal research? 
 Dewey’s trichotomy works adequately for the fi rst two stages; that is, the term 
 preconventional is not inaccurate. Generally lacking in these stages, aft er all, is 
an understanding of the intangible and ideal  bases for interpersonal and societal 
norms or conventions. Piaget’s and Kohlberg’s descriptions of these stages roughly 
agree. Piaget’s fi rst phase, “heteronomous” morality—purged of what Kohlberg 
called its “socioemotional” aspects—constitutes a superfi cial childhood morality 
that relates fairly well to Kohlberg’s “punishment and obedience” Stage 1 (even 
though “punishment and obedience” is a misnomer; see Chapter 3). Nor is there 
great harm in relating Piaget’s Stage 2 “reciprocity as a fact” version of moral 
autonomy to Kohlberg’s “individualism, instrumental purpose, and exchange” 
Stage 2 (Kohlberg, 1976). Th e term “pragmatic exchanges” does depict this moral-
ity of concrete decentration. 
 Aft er Stage 2, however, the Deweyan trichotomy seriously distorts the nature of 
moral judgment development. Although Kohlberg was right to point out the need 
to extend Piagetian stages 2 of moral judgment beyond childhood, his use of the 
Deweyan trichotomy meant that those later stages were misrepresented. As noted 
in Chapter 3, Piaget (1932/1965) hypothesized that “reciprocity as an ideal” (our 
referent for Stage 3) is achieved as the socially interacting child refl ectively grasps 
the mutuality—the deeper, ideal social logic, as it were—underlying the concretely 
applied logic of reciprocal exchanges. Hence, Piaget’s Stage 3 marks the construc-
tion of mature or profound moral understanding (albeit only within the sphere of 
the dyad or the homogeneous community). Unfortunately, Kohlberg lost Piaget’s 
recognition of this stage’s maturity. Ideal reciprocity was largely obscured and 
even distorted in Kohlberg’s Deweyan characterization of interpersonal moral-
ity as essentially group-conforming or conventional. Ideal reciprocity, or Stage 
3, became the stage of “interpersonal conformity” or even “‘good boy–nice girl’” 
(Kohlberg, 1971, p. 164). Even later in Kohlberg’s theoretical work, Stage 3 became 

Kohlberg’s Theory 
■ 85
part of the “member of society” sociomoral perspective in which “the self is identi-
fi ed with or has internalized the rules and expectations of others, especially those 
of authorities” (Colby & Kohlberg, 1987, p. 16). 
 Use of the Deweyan typology also distorted Stage 4. Th e growing person’s grasp 
of the intangible bases for social cooperation may expand from the Stage 3 inter-
personal to broader social spheres such as that of social systems, as indicated in 
Stage 4 (see Chapter 3); in other words, profound or mature moral judgment blos-
soms, and Kohlberg was right to explore its blossom beyond the childhood years. 
Th e expansion to a fourth stage through Kohlberg’s Deweyan lens, however, was 
misrepresented as entailing an identifi cation with the authorities and internaliza-
tion of the legal and other norms of one’s society, resulting in a “law and order 
orientation” (Kohlberg, 1971, p. 164), scarcely what one could characterize as basic 
moral judgment maturity. 
 Note the reference to identifi cation or  internalization.  Such appeals to moral 
internalization contradicted Kohlberg’s appeals elsewhere (Kohlberg, 1984) for 
understanding stage-transition processes in terms of social construction or “natu-
ral” development and maturity rather than “simpler conformity or internalization 
concepts” (p. 93). One may legitimately ask: Were Stages 3 and 4 in Kohlberg’s 
hands to be understood as products of internalization or of construction? 
 Kohlberg’s handling of the question of developmental process is subtle, but in 
the end disappointing. Note that Kohlberg objected specifi cally to “ simpler con-
formity concepts” or “ direct internalization” (Kohlberg, 1971, p. 155, emphases 
added), implying that some more complex or indirect version of internalization 
might be tantamount to construction. Th at implication undermined Kohlberg’s 
original inspiration from Piaget: Piaget (1932/1965) had challenged relativistic 
Durkheimian and other sociological views of morality, arguing that truly mature 
morality is socially  constructed , not merely internalized. Yet, perhaps to retain 
continuity with the Deweyan group-conformity view, Kohlberg (1971) suggested a 
modifi ed version of internalization that he called  optimal match : “Some moderate 
or optimal degree of discrepancy” or “match” between the child’s developmental 
level and “the [more advanced] structure of a specifi c experience of the child” 
accounts for “specifi c transitions from stage to stage” (p. 18) and constitutes “the 
most eff ective experience for structural change in the organism” (p. 356). Although 
Kohlberg used “optimal match” as if it were synonymous with “cognitive confl ict” 
(p. 18) in a Piagetian sense, it is not. Albeit complex and indirect, such an optimal-
match process (cf. the Vygotskian notion of a zone of proximal development) still 
entails “an implicit moral internalization concept,” because a “match”—unlike a 
genuinely constructive mental coordination—still refers to a preexisting model 
in the environment (Hoff man, 1988, p. 523). In short, optimal match reduced 
construction to internalization. As a result, we lose one of the truly revolutionary 
insights of Piagetian developmental psychology, as emphasized in Chapter 3: the 
understanding of ideal moral reciprocity as a social  constructive product, of  con-
struction  as a process fundamentally distinct from culturally relativistic socializa-
tion, learning, or internalization processes (see Moshman, 2011). 
 Kohlberg hypothesized the existence not only of a fourth stage but also of a fi ft h 
and sixth stage, beyond the childhood moral judgment studied by Piaget. Th ese 

86 
■ Moral Development and Reality
fi nal two stages composed his Dewey-inspired postconventional level, represent-
ing a “prior-to-society” social perspective that “diff erentiates the self from the rules 
and expectations of others and defi nes moral values in terms of self-chosen princi-
ples” (Colby & Kohlberg, 1987, p. 16). Th e principles pertained to “social contract 
or utility and individual rights” (Stage 5) or “universal ethical principles” (Stage 
6). In his original cross-sectional dissertation sample, Kohlberg (1963) interpreted 
20% of the 16-year-olds’ moral judgment protocols as evidencing Stage 5 thinking 
and a much smaller percentage (5%) as using Stage 6. Neither stage was used with 
more than negligible frequency among the other participants in the sample (the 
10- and 13-year-olds). 
 Th e irony is evident. In Kohlberg’s search for a universal morality, the highest 
stages—even among the oldest participants in his dissertation sample, the ado-
lescents—were far less than prevalent. As Kohlberg subsequently discovered and 
dealt with violations of the invariant sequence claim in his longitudinal research, 
the non-universality problem worsened. Indeed, as we will see, the highest stages 
were to become (to use Kohlberg’s word) rare. 
 Discoveries of Longitudinal Research 
 As Kohlberg noted in his recollection, his dissertation stages and levels did not nec-
essarily constitute a “universal theory” of moral judgment development. Evaluation 
of the stage typology would require empirical research, especially longitudinal and 
cross-cultural studies. Kohlberg embarked on an ambitious longitudinal research 
project, following up his dissertation sample by conducting moral judgment inter-
views every three years, from the late 1950s until the early 1980s. Th e longitudinal 
results yielded problems that, as per Kohlberg’s recollection, quoted earlier, “led to 
refi nement and revision in the description and scoring of the stages.” 
 Violations and Restoration of Invariant Sequence 
 Th e most substantial revisions were prompted by the discovery of major viola-
tions of invariant sequence in longitudinal interview data collected during the 
1960s. Th e regressions were evidenced by participants whose high school moral 
judgment had been “principled-sounding,” for example, who had conceptualized 
“the moral value of life as taking precedence over obedience to laws or author-
ity” (Kohlberg, 1984, p. 447). During their college-years interviews, however, their 
moral judgments were scored as largely at Stage 2. Th e regressions to Stage 2 dur-
ing the college years were major not only in magnitude (much of it from the high-
est to the lowest stages) but also in frequency, involving approximately 20% of his 
sample. What a challenge to invariant sequence! 
 Kohlberg’s strategy for dealing with this challenge evolved. His initial response 
(Kohlberg & Kramer, 1969) was to accept the apparently downward movement 
at face value as an ego development–related regression: the respondents had 
apparently “kicked . . . their Stage 5 morality and replaced it with good old Stage 
2 hedonistic relativism” (Kohlberg & Kramer, 1969, p. 109). Elliot Turiel (1974, 
1977) argued, however, that the Stage 2 label for the college relativism belied its 

Kohlberg’s Theory 
■ 87
actual sophistication. Kohlberg came to agree; he (1973b, 1984) then reinterpreted 
the stage signifi cance of selected longitudinal data, eliminating the “regression” 
through certain refi nements in stage description and scoring. As Anne Colby 
(1978) and Kohlbergian colleagues explained (myself among them: see Colby 
et al., 1983; cf. Colby et al., 1987), seven longitudinal cases were selected for the 
refi nement work. Th e refi ned scoring system, constructed through scrutiny of 
these cases, was “used to score the remaining interviews in the longitudinal study” 
(Colby, 1978, p. 9), thereby providing a test of whether the refi ned stage constructs 
evidenced invariant stage sequence. 
 Th e refi ned system rested on Kohlberg’s reinterpretation of the apparent regres-
sion from the highest stages to Stage 2 as in fact a transition (“4½”). Kohlberg 
(following Turiel) argued that, although the moral judgment of the “regressed” 
college students resembled in content the naive hedonism and instrumental prag-
matism of the young Stage 2 participants, the college-level thinking was actually 
far more abstract and philosophical. For example, although a 20-year-old college 
student’s initial moral judgment response to Heinz’s dilemma (“If he values her 
life over the consequences of theft , he should do it”) resembled “good old Stage 2 
relativism,” further questioning revealed greater sophistication. Instead of off ering 
instrumental reasoning, the student explained that people “have varying values 
and interest frameworks [that] produce subjective decisions which are neither 
permanent nor absolute” (Kohlberg & Kramer, 1969, p. 110). Kohlberg identifi ed 
two distinct “levels of discourse” or “social perspectives”: Whereas na ï ve Stage 
2 moral judgment aimed at “justifying moral judgment to an individual selfi sh 
actor,” the discourse evident in the college students’ moral judgment protocols was 
beyond Stage 4, aimed at “defi ning a  moral theory and justifying basic moral terms 
or principles from a standpoint outside [or prior to] that of a member of a con-
stituted society” (Kohlberg, 1973b, p. 192). Th e “theory,” emphatically “defi ned” 
by the “4½” thinkers, was a meta-ethical skeptical relativism (Turiel, 1977) that 
Michael Boyes and Michael Chandler (1992) called extreme or “unbridled.” Boyes 
and Chandler attributed this epistemological and moral relativism to the impact 
of “newfound” formal operations:
 Th e achievement of formal operational models of reasoning, while a decided advantage 
to those living in a culture as riddled with abstractions as our own, is not accomplished 
without certain short-run costs. One of these is that the newfound capacity for refl ec-
tion characteristic of formal operational thinkers serves to transform the isolated or 
case-specifi c uncertainties of childhood into an altogether more ominous set of generic 
doubts . . . [leading for a time to]  unbridled relativism. (pp. 284–285, emphasis added) 
 To establish the “4½” transition as part of an invariant sequence, the refi ned 
analysis scrutinized not only the college but also the high school data; specifi -
cally, the “principled-sounding” moral judgments.  Truly principled moral judg-
ment must be more sophisticated than that. Aft er all, if the new 4½ thinking was 
at a meta-ethical, theoretical, even a philosophical level of discourse, then should 
not the moral judgment beyond 4½ also evidence at least this level? Furthermore, 
should not 4½ skepticism naturally lead to more adequate levels of moral judg-
ment? Unbridled relativism seemed to Kohlberg to be inherently unstable from 

88 
■ Moral Development and Reality
internal contradictions: if all morality is subjective, arbitrary, and relative, then 
why wouldn’t those characteristics apply to the attendant claim that one should 
not impose one’s morality on others? Accordingly, relativism undermines itself. 
Hence, sooner or later (at least for refl ective adults, postmodernists notwithstand-
ing), 4½ should destabilize. 3 Th e internal contradictions of meta-ethical relativism 
should eventually “disequilibrate” or perplex the thinker and prompt a “reequili-
bration” leading to movement beyond unbridled relativism to the achievement of 
post-skeptical rationalism:
  What comes to be understood by this class of especially mature young persons is that, 
despite the inescapably subjective character of the knowing process, it is still possible to 
settle upon methods and standards for deciding that certain beliefs and courses of action 
have better legs to stand on than do others. (Boyes & Chandler, 1992, p. 285) 
 Postskeptical rationalism in turn provides the nonrelative epistemological 
“legs” for principled, philosophical moral judgment stages (cf. Moshman, 2011). 
“From refl ection upon the limits of customary morality 4  in very varied cultural 
and educational circumstances”—and upon the internal contradictions of unbri-
dled relativism—emerges the “natural” (as opposed to professional) philosophical 
(Stage 5) structure comprising “notions of natural rights, social contract, and util-
ity” (Kohlberg, 1973a, p. 634). Whereas the level of discourse of the philosophical 
post-college adult data was seen as  genuinely principled and scored accordingly, 
the discourse of the ostensibly principled high school adolescent moral judgment 
was judged in the refi ned analysis to be merely social conformist or member-of-
society. 
 Dealing with Two New Problems 
 Although they restored invariant sequence, these refi nements of the stages cre-
ated two major new problems: (a) a strain upon the logical coherence of the so-
called conventional level and (b) a worsening of non-universality at the so-called 
postconventional level. 
 Straining “Conventional” 
 Th e fi rst problem was that the “conventional level” (now also called the “mem-
ber-of-society” perspective) was internally contradictory. Th e two supposedly 
“conventional” stages, 3 and 4, now included profound expressions of “principled-
sounding” moral ideality. How could a participant whose moral judgment repre-
sents an internalization of “the rules and expectations of others, especially those of 
authorities,” produce moral judgment conceptualizing “the moral value of life as 
taking precedence over obedience to laws or authority”? 
 Innovation of Moral Types A/B 
 Perhaps in an eff ort to deal with this problem and save the “conventional level” 
designation for Stages 3 and 4, Kohlberg (1984) introduced Moral Type A or B 
(see Chapter 6). Roughly speaking, in Kohlberg’s 1960s revision, the dissertation-

Kohlberg’s Theory 
■ 89
version Stage 3 (good boy–nice girl) and Stage 4 (law and order) moral judgment 
became designated respectively as Stage 3 Type A and Stage 4 Type A, whereas 
the previously postconventional, “principled-sounding” moral judgment became 
designated as either Stage 3 Type B (basic and universalized interpersonal ideals) 
or Stage 4 Type B (basic and universalized societal ideals). Alongside caring for 
friends and living up to interpersonal expectations (Stage 3A) were placed con-
cerns for  mutual  good faith or understanding and for  universalized caring (Stage 
3B). Alongside concerns with fi xed responsibilities or authority and the givens of 
the law (Stage 4A) were placed concerns with  ideal responsibility to contribute to 
a  better society and with  moral law (Stage 4B). 
 Although Stages 3B and 4B embody moral ideality, Kohlberg argued that they 
are still at the conventional level because, like Stages 3A and 4A, their expres-
sion is only “intuitive,” not theoretical in any clear or precisely articulated way 
(although such expression still refl ects constructive emergence rather than mod-
ular activation  à  la Haidt). Intuitive appeals to the priority of life in the Heinz 
dilemma, for example, might be (see Colby et al., 1987) that “a person’s life is 
more important than money” (Stage 3B) or that “the value of human life is more 
important than society’s need for law in this case” (Stage 4B). For a postconven-
tional score, the expression would have to make the point in a more explicitly 
principled way, such as “a human life was at stake . . . that transcends any right 
the druggist had to the drug” (Stage 5); or, best of all, a Stage 6 formulation from 
a philosopher:
 Since all property [such as the drug] has only relative value and only persons can have 
unconditional value, it would be irrational to act in such a manner as to make human 
life—or the loss of it—a means to the preservation of property rights. (Kohlberg, 
1971, p. 209) 
 Th is insistence upon explicit theoretical or philosophical formulation struck 
an odd note in the cognitive development endeavor to identify  implicitly evident 
patterns in social and nonsocial cognitive development. 
 The Rarification of Postconventional Moral Judgment 
 Th e elevation of theoretically over intuitively expressed justifi cations led to a 
second problem: rarifi cation or elitism of the highest stages (Gibbs, 1979). 
Although this refi nement did restore invariant sequence, it also generated “a 
fairly radical change in age norms” (Colby et al., 1983, p. 67). In addition to 
straining the meaning of “conventional,” the relocating of “principled-sounding” 
but roughly expressed justifi cations to the conventional level and the criteria of 
sophistication for the postconventional stages left  for those stages precious little 
material. Th is problem was evident despite an eff ort, in the fi nal scoring sys-
tem, “to put the focus of the scoring back on operative moral judgments rather 
than in ultimate justifi cation and metaethical assumptions” (Colby, 1978, p. 93). 
Given this problem, it is no wonder that, as Kohlberg recollected, the “fi nal 
stages” were “found”—or, more accurately,  refi ned —to be “rare.” As we noted, 
Kohlberg’s Stages 5 and 6 were already uncommon in his original 1950s formula-
tion, but now the problem became severe. By the new scoring stringency,  none of 

90 
■ Moral Development and Reality
Kohlberg’s longitudinal participants reached postconventional moral judgment 
before adulthood. Even in the adult years, only 13% fully or partially reached 
Stage 5, and  all of those “had some  graduate education” (Kohlberg, 1984, p. 458, 
emphasis added). Stage 6 became so rare that Kohlberg was led to “suspend” (p. 
273) his empirical claims for it and eliminate it from the scoring manual. 5 He 
acknowledged that his revised description and scoring of Stage 6 “came from 
the writings of a small elite sample, elite in the sense of its  formal philosophical 
training and in the sense of its ability for and commitment to moral leadership” 
(p. 270, emphasis added). 
 Th e rarity problem with the philosophically trained “discourse” of the fi nal 
stages was also evident in cross-cultural research. As Kohlberg (1984) noted in 
his recollection, he was especially concerned with “whether the stages were really 
universal in non-Western cultures.” In a cross-cultural review, John Snarey (1985) 
noted that Stage 5’s “frequency within any particular sample is seldom high” and 
that  none of Kohlberg’s longitudinal participants unambiguously reached Stage 6. 
Snarey concluded that even Stage 5 is based on the individualistic philosophies 
of “Kant, Rawls, and other Western philosophers” and hence is “incomplete” 
(p. 228). Snarey suggested that the characterization of Stage 5 be supplemented with 
more “collective” (p. 226) postconventional principles from non-Western societies 
(cf. Vasudev & Hummel, 1987). Yet even Stage 5 is inappropriate as a descrip-
tion of moral judgment maturity, not because it is cross-culturally incomplete, but 
more basically because  any theory-defi ning level, even in broadened form, mis-
represents moral judgment maturity as the exclusive province of the philosophi-
cally or theoretically articulate. Although many mature individuals spontaneously 
express the intangible bases for their moral values and decisions, few “people can 
 articulate a  principled justifi cation, such as that human life is a cardinal value 
that trumps social norms, social stability, or obedience to the law” (Pinker, 2011, 
p. 624; emphasis added).   
 Why Not Discard Dewey’s Trichotomy? 
 Th e two problems created by Kohlberg’s stage revisions—contradiction within 
the conventional-level construct and rarifi cation at the postconventional level—
both derive from a generic problem: Kohlberg’s persistence through his three 
decades of work in assimilating his longitudinal moral judgment data into a 
Procrustean bed; namely, his Deweyan conceptual trichotomy (preconven-
tional, conventional, postconventional). Kohlberg was correct that there is more 
to moral development than the basics of childhood and adolescence. Aspects 
of Kohlberg’s stage refi nement were quite valid; for example, his innovations of 
the Moral Types A and B. Indeed, the moral clarity or ideality of Type B judg-
ment represented a newer and more appropriate sense of “postconventional 
thinking”—not as an elite level but rather as an insightful mode of moral percep-
tion (see Chapter 6). Precisely because of these valid contributions, however, it is 
time fi nally to discard Dewey’s preconventional-conventional-postconventional 
trichotomy so that a more accurate depiction of basic moral judgment develop-
ment and maturity can emerge.  

Kohlberg’s Theory 
■ 91
adult moral development in 
 
■
kohlberg’s theory 
 Dewey’s infl uence on Kohlberg’s theory was not entirely adverse. Although the 
imposition of Dewey’s tri-level sequence (impulsive, group conforming, refl ective) 
led to serious problems of misrepresentation and elitism in Kohlberg’s work, the 
Deweyan association of metacognitive  refl ection  upon morality with the achieve-
ment of moral maturity is in principle valid. As Michael Tomasello and colleagues 
(Tomasello et al., 1996) observed, “Human beings have the seemingly unique 
capacity to treat their own behavior and cognition [and, we would add, existence] 
as ‘objects of contemplation’ in their own right” (p. 509). To treat as objects of 
contemplation one’s thought and behavior—and, indeed, the phenomena and con-
texts of one’s life—is to “disembed” oneself from those contexts (Fromm, 1947; cf. 
Kegan, 1982; Mustakova-Possardt, 2000). Accordingly, “the mature thinker may 
think about all manner of abstract ideas and ideals in such areas as morality, reli-
gion, and politics” (Flavell et al., 2002, p. 182). Although Kohlberg’s conceptualiza-
tion of refl ective moral principles in terms of adult moral judgment stages (“4½,” 
“5,” “6”) can be questioned, his association of hypothetical refl ection or cognitive 
disembedding with growth in moral judgment maturity is valid. 
 Beyond Invariant Sequence 
 Besides relating metacognitive refl ection to the achievement of higher moral judgment 
stages, Kohlberg also discussed two ways in which such refl ection contributes to adult 
moral development  beyond an invariant sequence of stages. First, a contemplative adult 
may propose a systematic or formal philosophy of ethics. Second, a contemplative adult 
 in existential crisis may develop a deeper and broader perspective on the moral life. 
 Formal Philosophy 
 Adults who become professional philosophers may refl ect on basic “natural” 
ethics and go on to develop and publish formal theories. A formal theory may 
systematize or build from a “‘natural’ moral-stage structure” such as the Stage 5 
judgment of laws “by the light of a social contract, by rule-utilitarianism, and by 
some notion of universal or natural rights” (Kohlberg, 1973a) or the Stage 6 eth-
ics of universalizable claims. Indeed, Kohlberg saw “natural” Stages 5 and 6 as 
the generative sources, respectively, for these “two major families of formal moral 
theory”; namely, contractarian and Kantian ethics (p. 634). But aft er attaining the 
maturity of the natural and even the professional moral philosopher, then what? 
 Metaphorical “Stage 7” 
 Metacognitive, contemplative refl ection can lead not only to formulations of pro-
fessional philosophy but also to existential concerns:
 Even aft er attainment of Stage 6’s clear awareness of universal principles, a fundamental 
ethical question still remains, namely, “Why be moral? Why be just in a universe that 

92 
■ Moral Development and Reality
appears unjust?” Th is question asks whether there is any  support in reality  or nature 
for acting according to universal moral principles. . . . Th is question entails the further 
question, “Why live?”; thus, ultimate moral maturity requires a mature solution to the 
question of the meaning of life. Th is in turn, is hardly a moral question  per se. (Kohlberg 
& Ryncarz, 1990, p. 192, emphasis added; cf. Kohlberg & Power, 1981) 
 Mature metacognitive thinkers encountering ultimate questions—meta-eth-
ical, existential, even spiritual and ontological—oft en fi rst experience “despair,” 
which “can arise when we fi rst begin to see . . . the fi nitude of our individual self” 
(p. 192). Th ere is hope, however, for movement beyond despair. Aft er all, individ-
ual fi nitude cannot be seen except from some (at least dimly intuited) perspective 
of holistic infi nity. Emerging from the despair of fi nitude, then, is a 
 cosmic perspective [in which] what is ordinarily ground [i.e., nature or the universe] 
becomes foreground, and the self is no longer fi gure to the ground. We sense the unity of 
the whole and ourselves as part of that unity. In the state of mind I metaphorically term 
Stage 7, we identify ourselves with the cosmic or infi nite perspective and value life from 
its standpoint. . . . If we are aware of the relationship of all people and things to the whole 
of Nature, then we continue to love the whole in spite of the disappointments or losses 
[of life]. (Kohlberg & Ryncarz, 1990, pp. 192, 196)   
 Th is initially dim but increasingly clear transcendent intuition, characterizable 
as a gestalt-like shift  in fi gure–ground perception, parallels the earlier movement 
through the 
 adolescent crisis of relativism, [transition] 4½, [which] can occur only because there 
is a dim apprehension of some more universal ethical standard in terms of which the 
cultural code is relative and arbitrary. To explore the crisis of relativism thoroughly and 
consistently is to decenter from the self, reverse fi gure and ground, and see as fi gure the 
vague standpoint of principle that is the background of the sense of relativity. (Kohlberg 
& Ryncarz, 1990, p. 195) 
 Unlike the rational, theory-defi ning resolution of 4½, however, the resolution 
of existential despair cannot be resolved “solely on the basis of formal operational 
thought.” Rather, the existential resolution seems also to require a “mystical expe-
rience” (p. 206) or “experience of a nonegoistic or nondualistic variety. . . . Even 
persons who are not religious may temporarily achieve this state of mind in certain 
situations, as when on a mountaintop or before the ocean” (Kohlberg & Ryncarz, 
1990, p. 192; cf. Haidt, 2006, pp. 193–206). 
 Despair is overcome and the moral life is again valued as existential thinkers and 
meditators shift  to this cosmic perspective. Such a perspective brings some resolu-
tion of ultimate questions: “Well-developed moral intuitions [are seen to] parallel 
intuitions about nature or ultimate reality” (p. 197). For example, we see that “our 
consciousness of justice . . . is parallel to, or in harmony with, our consciousness 
of . . . the larger cosmic order” (Kohlberg & Ryncarz, 1990, p. 196). Concurrently, 
an eternal love displaces temporal desires:
 If pleasure and power are not intrinsic ends, only the love of something eternal and infi -
nite . . . can be an intrinsic end. . . . Th e knowledge and love of Nature is a form of union. 

Kohlberg’s Theory 
■ 93
Our mind is part of a whole, Spinoza claims, and if we know and love the eternal, we 
ourselves are in some sense eternal. (Kohlberg & Ryncarz, 1990, pp. 200–201) 
 Th e resonance between mind or morality (justice, love) and a holistic, support-
ive reality will be explored further in Chapters 9 and 10. Pertinent to our present 
concerns is Kohlberg’s speculation regarding his metaphorical Stage 7 as “essential 
for understanding the potential for human development in adulthood” (Kohlberg 
& Ryncarz, 1990, p. 207). Adult moral development goes beyond invariant stage 
sequence: grasping a sense of a deeper reality “relies in part upon the self’s particu-
lar and somewhat unique life experiences” and hence is not a universal “develop-
mental stage in the Piagetian sense” (p. 207). 
a critique and new view 
 
■
 In our view, moral development beyond “natural” moral stages need not await the 
formal enterprises or meta-ethical struggles of the adult years. For that matter, 
the so-called postconventional stages (5, 6) of “natural” moral philosophy already 
represent a kind of human development beyond basic moral judgment stages of 
maturity, ones in which even the bright, well-read, contemplative adolescent can 
and sometimes does participate. 
 It is not that professional philosophical theorists draw inspiration from the 
discourse of postconventional-stage theorists (as Kohlberg would have it), but 
rather that moral theorists (whether professional ethical philosophers or “post-
conventional” thinkers) draw inspiration from the  basic stages of human moral 
understanding or social perspective–taking found in childhood and adolescence. 
Analogously, the implicit starting points for mathematical philosophers’ theo-
ries of number can be found in children’s constructions of the number concept. 
Philosophers and developmental psychologists interested in the scientifi c enter-
prise ponder analogs to scientifi c problem-solving in the hypothetical and deduc-
tive reasoning of adolescents (e.g., Kuhn & Franklin, 2006). 
 Particularly interesting are the contributions to moral philosophy made by the 
basic moral judgment stages. Th e more promising philosophies tend to be those that 
start from more mature basic assumptions. Th e emphasis on authoritarian, unilateral 
power in Hobbesian ( Leviathan ) and might-makes-right philosophies would seem to 
refl ect the centration- and appearance-oriented perspective-taking of Stage 1. Social 
contract or libertarian theories that emphasize “maximum liberty consistent with the 
like liberty of others” (Locke, Mill) require and expect no more than Stage 2–level 
“pragmatic reciprocity” perspective-taking. Finally, Kantian ethics, with its emphasis 
on respect, reversibility, and consistency, would seem to draw upon and gain richness 
from the moral point of view; that is, Stage 3–level “ideal reciprocity” perspective-
taking. In this sense, Rawls’s (1971) version of the social contract, in which initially 
egoistic participants do not know which position in the society will be theirs (the “veil 
of ignorance”), induces participants to adopt something tantamount to the moral 
point of view and agree to principles for a just society (Hoff man, 2000). 
 It must be stressed that these philosophies, whether of number, science, or 
ethics, are just that: philosophies. Th ey may derive their starting assumptions and 

94 
■ Moral Development and Reality
draw inspiration from one or another basic stage, but they are not  themselves basic 
stages (see below). 
 Adult moral development in Kohlberg’s theory includes not only the devel-
opment of philosophies of ethics but also existential refl ection. Again, whereas 
Kohlberg attributed prior-to-society, existential, and ontological refl ection to the 
sophisticated adult, such refl ection can also be found among contemplative Stage 
3 and 4 (perhaps especially Type B) adolescents. Th at even adolescents can think 
from a prior-to-society vantage point about social contractarian and communi-
tarian issues is suggested by their hypothetically refl ective responses to Joseph 
Adelson and colleagues’ classic “desert island” problem (How might the marooned 
individuals go about building a society?). One 18-year-old suggested that people 
would agree to laws “to set up a standard of behavior for people, for society living 
together so that they can live peacefully and in harmony with each other” (Adelson 
et al., 1969, p. 328). Th e adolescent was appealing, in eff ect, to the need for a social 
contract. 
 Th ere is no reason that the objects of hypothetical contemplation must be 
restricted to the phenomena of dyadic exchanges, conventions, or even normative 
ethics. Sooner or later, the mature metacognitive thinker (whether chronologi-
cally adolescent or adult) may come to refl ect on ultimate questions. Not only the 
theory-discoursing adult but even the Stage 3 but theory-discoursing  adolescent 
can ponder meta-ethical, existential, spiritual, and ontological questions such as: 
Isn’t all morality relative? Why be moral? Does our being alive matter? What is the 
meaning of life? What is reality? In one study, adolescents were asked an existen-
tial question: “If you were to look back on your life now, how would you like to be 
remembered?” (Damon, 2008, p. 135). As did Carl Jung and Erich Fromm, Harold 
Kushner (1986) asserted: “these are not abstract questions suitable for cocktail 
party conversations. Th ey [can become] desperately urgent questions. We will fi nd 
ourselves sick, lonely, and afraid if we cannot answer them” (p. 19). 6 
 A New View of Lifespan Moral Judgment Development 
 Hypothetical refl ection and contemplation, then, play a pivotal role in our broad 
reconceptualization 7 of moral development. We see the lifespan development of 
“the right” (i.e., moral judgment and refl ection concerned mainly with right and 
wrong) as entailing two major phases: standard and existential (see Table 4.1). 
Terming these modes of development  phases is appropriate in that they overlap 
in time. Like other animal species, humans undergo certain standard sequences 
of cognitive and social-cognitive development, although we (through refl ective 
contemplation)  surpass other species in the method and fl ower of our intellectual 
achievement. Th e aim of Piaget’s and Kohlberg’s work was mainly to describe this 
standard intellectual development, which, as John Flavell and colleagues (Flavell 
et al., 2002) argued, can continue in sophistication, scope, and consistency even 
in the adult years. 
 Intriguingly, the hypothetical metacognitive ability that emerges in the course of 
standard development—the formal operational ability to disembed from the con-
text of a thought or phenomenon and hold it as an object of contemplation—makes 

 TABLE 4.1  Outline of the lifespan development of moral judgment and refl ection 
 Moral judgment involves ways of understanding the basis for moral decisions or values or right and wrong (but also of caring) in morality. Th e lifespan development of moral judg-
ment and refl ection consists of two overlapping phases (standard and existential). 
 I.  Standard Development (invariant albeit high-mixture stage sequence; U.S. age norms provided in Gibbs et al., 1992; and Basinger et al., 1995; cross-cultural age norms reviewed 
in Gibbs et al., 2007). 
 A.  Th e Immature or Superfi cial Stages . Constructed in early childhood; typically, by adolescence, Stage 1 usage is negligible, and Stage 2 usage has appreciably declined. Th e 
level is superfi cial in that morality is understood in terms of the physical or momentary (Stage 1) or the pragmatic (Stage 2). Morality is also reduced to egocentric biases and 
motives (blatantly at Stage 1, more subtly at Stage 2). 
 1.  Stage 1: Centrations . Morality tends to be confused with physical size or power (“Daddy’s the boss because he’s big and strong”) or with the momentary egocentric desires 
of one’s mental life (“It’s fair because I want it”). Th e over-attention to a particular salient here-and-now feature of others or of one’s egoistic perspective is called  centration 
in Piagetian theory. Th e young child’s vulnerability to the immediately salient is evident not only in moral but more broadly in social and non-social cognitive domains. 
Adult might-makes-right philosophies draw inspiration from this stage. 
 2.  Stage 2: Exchanges . Gains in mental coordination, perspective-taking, and logic-related inference bring about a more psychological, if pragmatic and still self-centered, 
morality (e.g., the Golden Rule is misinterpreted as “do for others if they did or will do for you”). Th is concrete moral reciprocity underlies norms of “blood vengeance” 
found in some cultures and seems to be evident in the social behavior of chimpanzees. Th e emphasis on pragmatic deals provides foundational inspiration for social con-
tractarian philosophies such as that of John Locke. 
 B.    Th e Mature or Profound Stages . (Typically constructed and socialized during late childhood and adolescence, with elaboration in later years; but developmental delay is 
sometimes seen among adolescents and even adults.) Moral judgment is mature insofar as it appeals to the intangible, ideal bases (mutual trust, caring, respect) and moral 
point of view (ideal reciprocity, “How would you or anyone wish to be treated?”) of social life. Mature morality applies mainly to interpersonal relationships (Stage 3) but 
may expand in scope to social systems (Stage 4). Care-related aspects of these stages are more prevalent among highly empathic individuals (Eisenberg et al., 2006). Th ese 
stages presuppose attainment of the hypothetical and deductive abilities Piaget referred to as  formal operations (these abilities also make possible existential development; see 
below). Although “Type A” versions of these stages tend to confuse this ideal morality with the maintenance of given interpersonal (Stage 3) or societal (Stage 4) expectations, 
“Type B” versions entail particularly clear perceptions of ideal reciprocity and render problematic Kohlberg’s designation of these stages as necessarily “conventional level” and 
“member of society.” 
 1.   Stage 3: Mutualities . Do-as-one-would-be-done-by or Golden Rule morality, based on third-person perspective. Th e core appeal is to ideal reciprocity, mutual trust, or 
intimate sharing as the basis for interpersonal relationships. Kohlberg’s early “good boy–nice girl” label applies to the Type A version; Type B may inspire moral-point-of-
view (Baier, 1965) and other Kantian philosophies. A relativized version of Stage 3 (a truly sincere person’s morals are right for him or her) is termed “Transition 3/4 R” 
(Gibbs et al., 1992) or “3½” (Colby, 1978). 
 2.   Stage 4 :  Systems . Th e social contexts for mutualities expand beyond the dyadic to address the need for commonly accepted values and standards in a complex social sys-
tem. Kohlberg’s “law and order” label applies to a version termed Type A; Type B appeals to the values of an ideal society.     
 II.  Existential Development (qualitative changes no longer characterizable as an invariant stage sequence. Although associated with adulthood, this phase of life can begin as early 
as adolescence for some individuals; throughout the lives of others, however, this phase may remain absent). Existential development transcends the standard moral judg-
ment stages. Th e existential phase involves hypothetical contemplation, meta-ethical refl ection, the formulation of moral principles or philosophies, and spiritual awakening 
or ontological inspiration. In epistemological terms, meta-ethical refl ection tends to evolve from relativism [cf. Kohlberg’s “4½”] to post-skeptical rational perspectives. Th e 
theoretical products of contemplation can include those of “natural” (cf. Kohlberg’s “Stage 5” and “Stage 6”) or professional philosophies. Th e most profound expressions of 
existential development involve transcendent ethical insights (such as an ethic of interconnectedness; Lorimer, 1990) emergent from meditation, existential crises (cf. Kohlberg’s 
metaphorical “Stage 7”), or near-death crisis events. Such deep inspiration can diminish cognitive distortions and revitalize dedication to the moral life. 
 Source: Adapted from J. C. Gibbs (2010),  Moral development and reality: Beyond the theories of Kohlberg and Hoff man (2nd ed.). Boston: Pearson Higher Education. Used with permission. 

96 
■ Moral Development and Reality
possible not only basic cognitive maturity but also existential awareness and the 
impetus for development in a post-standard sense. Accordingly, the adolescent or 
adult may progress in the contexts of both standard and existential development. 
 Although no longer necessarily entailing an invariant sequence, the intellectual 
products in this latter, “existential” phase are still developmental by Moshman’s 
(2011) criteria: the endeavors are temporally extended and self-regulated, and 
the products are qualitatively distinct, tending to progress in adequacy. Without 
invariant sequence, however, “qualitative” diff erence and “progressive” adequacy 
refer mainly to the comparative status of more or less adequate intellectual endeav-
ors and formulations. Suppose that, aft er pondering morality and society, an 
abstract thinker formulates an ethical or political philosophy. His or her philoso-
phy may draw its inspiration from a basic developmental morality. As noted, the 
 maturity of that inspirational morality makes a diff erence. Does not, say, a Kantian 
ethical philosophy of reversible and universalizable perspective-taking strike us 
as more adequate in some sense than, say, a Hobbesian contractarian philosophy 
(all relinquishing power to a “Leviathan” or strong ruler)—or for that matter, a 
philosophy of “might makes right” (famously argued by Th rasymachus in Plato’s 
 Th e Republic )? Is it not more than coincidental that the corresponding bases of 
Kantian philosophy in standard development, specifi cally, of mutuality and sys-
tems (Stages 3 and 4) are more mature than are moralities of pragmatic deals and 
physical power (Stages 2 and 1)? Again, our point is that more adequate moral phi-
losophies draw inspiration from higher reaches of morality. Particularly relevant 
to moral judgment and behavior is the emergence in existential development of 
an ethic of interconnectedness (Lorimer, 1990). Th e potential contribution of a 
“near-death experience” to existential or spiritual awareness and a moral life of 
connection will be discussed in Chapter 9. 
 Our two-phase view of lifespan moral judgment development, then, involves 
the following points, articulated in this and the preceding chapter:
 i  Lifespan moral judgment development consists of two overlapping phases: 
standard (involving an invariant sequence of stages comprised in a rough 
age trend) and existential (involving meta-ethical, philosophical moral judg-
ment as well as ontological and spiritual concerns and intuitions). 
 i  Standard development consists of two overlapping levels, each of which 
nests two stages: immature (Stage 1, Centrations; and Stage 2, Exchanges) 
and mature (Stage 3, Mutualities; and Stage 4, Systems). Th e crucial event is 
the emergence of ideal moral reciprocity (Stage 3). 
 i  Th e standard stages are at least in part “constructed,” particularly through 
certain facilitative conditions of peer interaction and, beyond childhood, 
broader contexts of social perspective–taking and coordination. Th e con-
structive process also entails refl ection and presupposes gains in working 
memory. An advanced metacognitive ability—namely, hypothetical and 
deductive refl ection (in particular, refl ective abstraction)—may play a key 
role in the emergence of ideal moral reciprocity.  
 i  Although at least Stage 3 of the mature level is reached in most human soci-
eties, such maturity must be supported by societal norms, institutions of 

Kohlberg’s Theory 
■ 97
social interdependence toward common goals, and moral internalization if 
it is to displace immature morality in the social life of the culture. 
 i  Hypothetical refl ection or disembedded contemplation (e.g., upon the 
meaning of life or the universe) also plays a key role in the emergence 
(during adolescence or adulthood) of the existential phase of human 
development. Persons may develop existentially from sustained contem-
plation but also from sudden insights or inspirations (as may occur dur-
ing meditation, “soul-searching” crises, life-threatening circumstances, 
or other existentially profound events). 
conclusion 
 
■
 Th e late Lawrence Kohlberg deserved considerable credit for championing and 
elaborating the themes of the cognitive-developmental approach, putting cogni-
tive moral development on the map of American psychology, relating moral psy-
chology to philosophy and vice versa, encouraging attention to moral judgment 
development beyond the childhood years, and recognizing the role of refl ection 
or contemplation in the achievement of moral judgment maturity. Nonetheless, as 
his stage theory evolved, it increasingly distorted basic moral judgment develop-
ment and maturity. In Kohlberg’s theory of stages and Deweyan levels, construc-
tion is confused with internalization, and basic understanding with reasoning that 
refl ects philosophical training. Contractarian and Kantian philosophies should be 
seen, not as postconventional, fi nal stages in an invariant sequence, but rather as 
products of hypothetical refl ection on normative ethics, stemming from the moral-
ity of one or another of the basic moral judgment stages. Adults who contemplate 
their morality and formulate ethical principles have  not thereby constructed a new 
Piagetian stage. Th ey  have, however, engaged in a developmental process of exis-
tential inquiry with personal relevance for ethical living:
 Merely the explicit formulation of principles about obligations should make us more 
sensitive to those obligations. It should make us less liable to be deceived by selfi sh ethi-
cal reasoning in ourselves or others. It should make us more perceptive in our moral 
assessment of ourselves and our motivation. (Brandt, 1959, p. 14) 
 In other words, formulating principles of ethics should render us less vulner-
able to self-serving cognitive distortions (see Chapter 7). Generally, disembedding 
from and refl ecting on moral right and wrong should promote moral development 
and the cognitively based motivation of behavior. Also fi guring into any  compre-
hensive discussion of moral development and the motivation of moral behavior, 
however, is “the good.” At the core of the good is empathy—the primarily  aff ective 
motive—to which we now turn. 

98
 5 
 “The Good” and Moral 
Development 
 Hoffman’s Theory  
 Our exploration of moral development shift s in this chapter from the right to the 
good. In particular, we shift  from a concern with how we grow beyond superfi -
cial moral  judgment to a concern with how we grow beyond superfi cial moral 
 feeling , and from  cognitive sources of moral motivation such as justice or reci-
procity to  aff ective sources such as benevolence or empathy. Accordingly, our 
conception of moral motivation will expand to include not only cognitive but 
also  aff ective primacy. Moral motivation derives not just from cognitively con-
structed ideals of reciprocity but also from what Nel Noddings (1984) called an 
“attitude . . . for goodness” (p. 2) and what Carol Gilligan (1982) claimed 1  was a 
distinctly feminine “voice” that urges responsible caring. Nancy Eisenberg (1996) 
called empathy “the good heart” and made impressive contributions to its mea-
surement. Frans de Waal (2012) saw empathy’s underpinning in a socially and 
emotionally sensitive “perception–action mechanism” common among mam-
mals. Haidt included empathy among his posited biological and aff ective foun-
dations of morality. Particularly impressive has been the systematic, integrative 
work of Martin Hoff man (2000, 2008). As is Kohlberg’s, Hoff man’s work is noted 
in virtually every developmental psychology textbook currently on the market. 
(Hoff man [2011] has also written on empathy’s contributions—both positive and 
negative—to legal justice and the law.) 
 Decades before Haidt’s challenge to cognitive emphases in moral psychology, 
Hoff man (1982) asserted a need to redress an erstwhile imbalance favoring moral 
judgment or “the right.” Accordingly, Hoff man sought to “stimulate research on 
the role of  aff ect on moral action and moral thought” (p. 84, emphasis added). As 
did Haidt, Hoff man found inspiration in the writings of Hume, who was “at times 
explicit about giving  primacy to aff ect over cognition. . . . He used the terms ‘sympa-
thy’ and ‘fellow feeling,’ but he clearly meant what we call empathic aff ect—feeling 
what the other feels” (p. 86, emphasis added). 
 Hoff man’s aff ective-primacy theory of empathy-based moral development and 
prosocial behavior (as well as the inhibition of aggression) starts with biologically 
based predispositions. In contrast to Haidt’s treatment of empathy as a unitary 
construct, empathy in Hoff man’s theory entails multiple modes and developmen-
tal processes. Jean Decety and Margarita Svetlova (2012) construed such modes 
as “additions” successively innovated in evolutionary history (p. 3; cf. de Waal, 
2012). We will have occasion to draw upon Decety’s and others’—especially, Frans 
de Waal’s, Daniel Batson’s, and Carolyn Zahn-Waxler’s—contributions as we 
discuss Hoff man’s work. Hoff man’s theory is especially impressive in its discus-
sion not only of empathy’s relation to moral development but also of empathy’s 

“The Good” and Moral Development 
■ 99
cognitive complications and limitations as well as its key role in moral socializa-
tion. Hoff man’s research-based typology of parental discipline techniques remains 
in prominent use today. 
the empathic predisposition 
 
■
 What is empathy? Metaphorically,  empathy is the “spark of human concern for 
others, the glue that makes social life possible” (Hoff man, 2000, p. 3) and “the 
bedrock of prosocial morality” (Hoff man, 2008, p. 449). Literally, it is “feeling in,” 
or with, another’s emotion; that is, “feeling what another is feeling” (Hauser, 2006, 
p. 347). “Feeling” may refer to a joy or a sorrow (Light & Zahn-Waxler, 2012; 
Dunfi eld, Kuhmeier, O’Connell, & Kelley, 2011), but the emphasis in Hoff man’s 
theory (and the fi eld generally) has been on empathic distress. Empathic distress 
can mean enduring another’s suff ering by imaginatively “enter[ing], as it were, 
into [the suff erer’s] body,” becoming “in some measure the same person with him” 
(Smith, 1759/1965, p. 261)—but only  in some measure . Empathy is generally taken 
to mean that one retains some awareness that one is feeling and responding to 
the suff ering of the  other  person. Accordingly, empathy is “a vicarious response to 
others: that is, an aff ective response appropriate to someone else’s situation rather 
than one’s own” (Hoff man, 1981a, p. 128). Full empathy is complex; i.e., involves 
not only aff ective but also cognitive facets, components, or levels (Hoff man, 2000; 
Decety & Svetlova, 2012). In full (aff ective and cognitive) empathy, we “connect 
to  and understand others and make their situation our own” (de Waal, 2009, 
p. 225, emphasis added). Batson (2011) concluded from extensive research that 
“empathic concern—other-oriented emotion elicited by and congruent with the 
perceived welfare of someone in need—produces altruistic motivation” (p. 228; 
cf. Batson, 2012). In this chapter, we will discuss empathy as a biologically and 
aff ectively based, cognitively mediated, and socialized predisposition that contrib-
utes to prosocial behavior. 
 Background: Prosocial Behavior and Empathy 
 Ethologists and sociobiologists have posited genetic programming as well as 
more complex bases (such as the empathic predisposition) for the cooperative, 
prosocial, 2 and even sacrifi cial behaviors that have been observed in many animal 
species. An intrusion into the hives of ants, bees, or termites will trigger geneti-
cally programmed suicidal attacks against the intruder by certain members of that 
insect group. Such behaviors are adaptive for the insect group because only some 
are programmed for sacrifi cial defense; others are programmed to carry out the 
group’s reproductive activity (Campbell, 1972). Genetically programmed separa-
tion of survival and reproduction functions is not seen within groups of phyloge-
netically higher animal species. 
 More relevant to human empathy is the cooperative or prosocial behavior 
observed among social groups of mammalian and especially primate species. Aft er 
all, “to recognize the need of others, and react appropriately, is . . . not the same as 

100 
■ Moral Development and Reality
a preprogrammed tendency to sacrifi ce oneself for the genetic good” (de Waal, 
2013, p. 33). Chimpanzee groups practice adoption of a motherless infant; they 
also engage in cooperative hunting and in sharing meat aft er a kill (Goodall, 1990). 
Baboons “may suddenly increase their vigilance if one among them is injured or 
incapacitated. When a juvenile in a captive baboon colony had an epileptic sei-
zure, other baboons immediately turned highly protective” (de Waal, 1996, p. 52). 
Humans of all ages are likely to help others in distress, especially when other 
potential helpers are not around (e.g., Latane & Darley, 1970; Staub, 1974). 
 Groups whose members engage in such cooperative and prosocial behavior 
have obvious adaptive advantages. Such behavior can also be adaptive for the 
helper insofar as the individual helped is genetically related (even if the helper 
does not survive, some percentage of the helper’s genes are passed on through the 
surviving recipient) (Hamilton, 1971). Prosocial behavior is also adaptive where 
the recipient may eventually reciprocate the help (Trivers, 1971). Robert Trivers 
described this reciprocal altruism in terms of “the folk expression . . . ‘you scratch 
my back—I scratch yours’” (de Waal, 1996, p. 25). Cooperation between individu-
als in extended human groups may have crucially contributed to the global success 
of our species (see Chapter 2). 
 A certain minimum of cooperative and prosocial or altruistic behavior is essen-
tial for the survival of human societies. But given individual egoistic motives, how 
is that prosocial minimum attained? It is unfeasible for any society to have “a cop 
on every corner” to deter egoistic motives, or to have a moral exemplar on every 
corner to encourage prosocial ones. Requisite to the essential minimum of coop-
erative and prosocial behavior, then, is in turn some minimum degree of moral 
self-regulation. More than a century ago, the sociologist George Simmel (1902) 
depicted the indispensable role of moral self-reward in the regulatory functioning 
of society:
 Th e tendency of a society to satisfy itself as cheaply as possible results in appeals to “good 
conscience,” through which the individual pays to himself the wages for his righteous-
ness, which would otherwise have to be assured to him through law or custom. (p. 19; 
quoted by Hoff man, 2000, p. 123). 
 Such moral self-reward derives partly from moral socialization and the inter-
nalization of a society’s moral norms. A society needs help to accomplish moral 
socialization, however—help from a source with greater stability than “the whims 
of politics, culture, or religion” (de Waal, 2009, p. 45). In particular, given the cross-
cultural diversity of societal norms and of approaches to moral socialization, it is 
unlikely that requisite levels of prosocial behavior could be commonly achieved 
without some universal starting place in the child, as it were, for such socializa-
tion. Put positively, moral socialization and internalization must have help from 
a biological readiness or receptivity to altruistic appeals in socialization; that is, a 
predisposition to accept prosocial norms. 
 Hoff man’s word for such a biologically based predisposition is  empathy. Empathic 
responsiveness emerges at “an early age in virtually every member of our species” 
and hence may be “as natural an achievement as the fi rst step” (de Waal, 1996, 
p. 45; cf. Vaish & Warneken, 2012). From infancy on, we “aff ectively resonate with 

“The Good” and Moral Development 
■ 101
basic aff ective—positive and negative—states of others” (Decety & Svetlova, 2012, 
p. 8). One biological substratum for empathy inheres in neurophysiological path-
ways between the limbic system (specifi cally, the amygdala) and the prefrontal 
cortex (Blair, 2006; Brothers, 1989; Decety & Howard, 2013; Decety & Svetlova, 
2012; Greene, Sommerville, Nystrom, Darley, & Cohen, 2001; Maclean, 1990). 3 
Heritable individual diff erences in neural sensitivity may account for the higher 
correlation between identical compared to fraternal twins in degree of empathic 
responding (Zahn-Waxler, Robinson, Emde, & Plomin, 1992).   
modes and stages of empathy 
 
■
 Although biology imparts to empathy its earliest modes of aff ective arousal, more 
advanced modes—especially as they “coalesce” with cognitive developmental 
milestones to form stages or levels—subsequently enrich the empathic predisposi-
tion. Multiple modes, components, or stages promote the reliability and subtlety 
of the empathic response. Th at the complex human tendency to connect with the 
suff erings or joys of others is multi-determined suggests its functional importance 
for the life of the group—even though, as we will see, certain limitations and com-
plications can compromise the contribution of empathy to prosocial behavior. 
 Modes of Empathic Arousal 
 Th e full empathic predisposition is complex at least partially because its modes of 
arousal in the human adult are both immature and mature. Hoff man argues that 
empathy has biological roots and can be activated by multiple modes or mecha-
nisms. Th ese modes are classifi able as  basic  (involuntary mechanisms of mimicry, 
conditioning, direct association) or  mature (mediated association, perspective-
taking). Although the basic modes are broadly shared across mammalian species 
(de Waal, 2009, 2013), the higher-order cognitive or mature modes fl ower most 
fully in humans. Whereas basic empathic concern may have originally pertained 
to infant care or group synchrony, empathic  understanding  may have emerged 
with “maturation of the prefrontal cortex and its reciprocal connection to the lim-
bic system and development of a sense of self” (Decety & Svetlova, 2012, p. 3; cf. 
Hoff man, 1984). Th e higher-order modes are layered upon the basic ones. As de 
Waal (2009) put it:
 Th e full capacity seems put together like a Russian doll. At its core is an automated 
process shared with a multitude of species, surrounded by outer layers that fi ne-tune its 
aim and reach. Not all species possess all layers: Only a few take another’s perspective, 
something we are masters at. But even the most sophisticated layers of the doll normally 
remain fi rmly tied to its primal core. . . . Seeing another’s emotions arouses our own emo-
tions, and from there we go on constructing a more advanced understanding of the 
other’s situation. . . . Only the most advanced forms of knowing what others know may 
be limited to our species. (pp. 72, 100, 209, 241) 
 Depending on whether one’s referent for empathy is “primal” or fully layered, 
then, empathy is or is not common among mammals. Humans are uniquely 

102 
■ Moral Development and Reality
capable of reaching “the most advanced forms of knowing what others know” and 
understanding their situation (see Hoff man’s Stages 5 and especially 6, below). Yet 
the “primal core” or aff ective foundation is crucial: to neglect the basic modes and 
focus only on the most advanced modes “is like staring at a splendid cathedral 
while forgetting that it’s made of bricks and mortar” (de Waal, 2009, p. 205). 
 We now review the basic and mature modes, followed by the developmental 
stages of empathic distress (see Table 5.1). 
 The Basic Modes 
 At its most basic level, empathy is an emotional connection between self and other. 
Such “aff ective responsiveness is present at an early age, is involuntary, and relies 
on somato-sensorimotor resonance” (Decety & Michalska, 2012, p. 171). Th e basic 
modes can be seen in “the aff ective synchrony in mother–infant play”; that is, the 
mother–infant “dance” of bonding and attachment broadly observable in mam-
malian species (Decety & Jackson, 2004, p. 78; cf. Batson, 2011). Once these modes 
 TABLE 5.1  Modes, stages, and attributions of empathic distress 
 I. Modes of empathic aff ect arousal (activated singly or in combination):
Basic or non-voluntary 
 A.  Motor mimicry (automatic facial/postural imitation plus feedback) 
  B.     Conditioning (self’s distress infuses experience of other’s distress cues) 
  C.     Direct association (self’s past distress infuses experience of other’s distress) 
 Higher-level cognitive 
 D.  Verbally mediated association (other’s distress experienced via language) 
 E.  Social perspective-taking (self-focused [imagining self in other’s place] and/or other-
focused) 
 II.  Developmental stages of empathic distress (sympathy formed as arousal modes coalesce 
with cognitive development) 
 Immature (superfi cial) stages 
 1.  Global (newborn reactive cry) 
 2.  Egocentric (confuses other’s distress with empathic distress, may seek to comfort self yet 
stares at, drawn to distressed other; cf. preconcern) 
 3.  Quasi-egocentric (diff erentiates other’s distress but may seek to comfort other with what 
comforts self) 
 Mature (subtle or discerning, expanded; true sympathetic concern) stages (highest may be 
unique to humans) 
 4.  Veridical (feels what other feels or what one would normally feel in the situation) 
  5.     Beyond the situation (feels for other’s distressing life condition, future prospects) 
 6.  Distressed groups (feels for distressed group’s life condition, future prospects)    
 III.  Causal attributions or inferences (situational interpretations, cognitive appraisals that can 
complicate relations of empathy to prosocial behavior) 
 A.  Neutralization of empathy (cause of distress attributed to victim; cf. just-world hypothesis) 
  B.      Sympathetic distress (cause of distress clearly not attributable to victim) 
 C.  Empathy-based or transgression guilt (cause of victim’s distress attributed to self; cf. 
bystander guilt) 
 D.  Empathic anger (cause of victim’s distress attributed to another individual or group) 
 E.  Empathic injustice (inference that victim did not deserve distress) 

“The Good” and Moral Development 
■ 103
emerged in phylogeny, “they could be applied outside the rearing context and play 
a role in the wider fabric of social relationships” (de Waal, 2012, p. 89)—especially 
as the bodily aff ective mechanisms “coalesce” or compound with the advanced 
cognitive modes. 
 Th e three basic or primitive modes—mimicry, conditioning, direct associ-
ation—constitute empathy in the earliest months of life. Th ese modes continue 
throughout life and give face-to-face empathic distress or joy an automatic, invol-
untary, or compelling quality. 
 1.  Mimicry 
 Mimicry in moral development refers to a synchrony of changes in body and feel-
ing between self and other. “We all know how joy spreads, or sadness, and how 
much we are aff ected by the moods of those around us” (de Waal, 2013, p. 142). 
As Decety and Jackson (2004) noted, “humans mimic unintentionally and uncon-
sciously a wide range of behaviors, such as accents, tone of voice, rate of speech, 
posture and mannerisms, as well as moods” (p. 76)—even pictures of angry or 
happy faces, fl ashed on a computer screen “too briefl y for conscious perception” 
(de Waal, 2012, p. 88). An anticipatory motor mimicry is evident as we uncon-
sciously “open our mouths when trying to feed applesauce to a baby” (Pinker, 
2011, p. 576). Generally, the observer “synchronizes changes in his facial expres-
sion, voice, and posture with the slight changes in another person’s facial, vocal, 
or postural expressions of feeling.” Th ese changes “trigger aff erent feedback which 
produce feelings in the observer that match the feelings of the victim” (Hoff man, 
2000, p. 37). 
 In phylogenetic history, bodily synchrony and mimicry may have been adaptive 
in the context of not only the mother–infant dance but also intra-group coopera-
tion: “running when others run, laughing when others laugh, crying when others 
cry, or yawning when others yawn.” Such emotional convergence or “mood con-
tagion serves to coordinate activities, which is crucial for any traveling species (as 
most primates are)” (de Waal, 2009, pp. 48–49). 
 Hoff man (2000) suggested that mimicry “may not only be a prosocial motive 
but also a prosocial act” (p. 45) insofar as instant, ongoing nonverbal imitation 
can communicate emotional connection: “By immediately displaying a reaction 
appropriate to the other’s situation (e.g., a wince for the other’s pain), the observer 
conveys precisely and eloquently both awareness of and involvement with the 
other’s situation” (Bavelas, Black, Chovil, Lemery, & Mullett, 1988, p. 278). In this 
sense, Eric Nelson’s (2013) point that “motor mimicry lacks an emotional link 
between individuals” (p. 183) must be qualifi ed in some instances. 
 2.  Conditioning 
 Like mimicry, conditioning can induce quick and involuntary empathic responses. 
In terms of classical conditioning, basic empathy is an acquired or learned response 
to a stimulus that is temporally associated with one’s previous aff ect (distress, joy, 
etc.). Hoff man (2000) suggested that empathic learning in this sense may be inevi-
table as mothers hold their infants and communicate through bodily contact: “Th e 
mother’s accompanying facial and verbal expressions [of, for example, anxiety or 

104 
■ Moral Development and Reality
tension] then become conditioned stimuli, which can subsequently evoke distress 
in the child even in the absence of physical contact” (pp. 45–46). 
 By the same token, the mother can condition positive empathic aff ect:
 When a mother holds the baby closely, securely, aff ectionately, and has a smile on her 
face, the baby feels good and the mother’s smile is associated with that feeling. Later, the 
mother’s smile alone may function as a conditioned stimulus that makes the baby feel 
good. (p. 46) 
 3.  Direct Association 
 Empathy by association can take place even in the absence of conditioning. A child 
may, for example, become distressed upon seeing another child fall down on ice 
and cry simply because the scene evokes one’s painful memory of a similar acci-
dent one experienced.   
 The Basic Modes and Superficiality 
 As Hoff man (2000) noted, empathy aroused by the basic modes (mimicry, condi-
tioning, direct association) is relatively superfi cial. Early empathy is here-and-now, 
“based on the pull of surface cues and requiring the shallowest level of cogni-
tive processing” (p. 48). A young child, for example, may simply laugh along with 
a momentarily laughing but terminally ill peer. 4  Although there are precocious 
exceptions, children’s attention tends  
 to be fi xed or “centered” on the more salient personal and situational cues of another’s 
distress in the situation. Owing to the powerful impact of conditioning, association, 
and mimicry, the “pull” of these cues may be powerful enough to capture a child’s atten-
tion, with the result that his empathic response is based [exclusively] on these cues. 
(Hoff man, 2000, pp. 84–85) 
 The Mature Modes 
 Full-fl edged empathy requires not only the superfi cial aff ective modes but also 
cognitive modes of arousal. With cognitive and language development in the sec-
ond year and beyond, two more advanced modes of empathy arousal take root 
and foster more subtle and expanded empathic responding. Th ese two higher-
order cognitive modes are verbally mediated association and social perspective- or 
role-taking. 5 Th e mature empathy developed through these advanced modes is a 
deeper emotional connection with others. 
 4.  Verbally Mediated Association 
 Empathy by association can also take place through the cognitive medium of lan-
guage. For example, one may read a letter describing another’s situation and aff ec-
tive state. Empathic responding through language-mediated association entails 
the mental eff ort of semantic processing and decoding. In the process, some “psy-
chological distance” is introduced between observer and victim (Hoff man, 2000, 

“The Good” and Moral Development 
■ 105
p. 50). Accordingly, mediated association tends to be a relatively low-intensity 
mode of empathic arousal. Despite this psychological distance, verbally mediated 
association can be aff ectively intense insofar as it is grounded in direct association, 
that is, activates projections from our schemas of personal experience: “Even if 
we just read about another’s situation in a novel, our reaction still draws on well-
established neural representations [or schemas] of similar situations that we have 
encountered, allowing us to have empathy for a fi ctional character based on our 
imagination” (de Waal, 2012, p. 101; see self-focused perspective-taking, below). 
 5.  Social Perspective-Taking 
 Empathy is also aroused when one takes the role or situational perspective of the 
other person; that is, imagines oneself (or anyone) in the other person’s place. 6 
Although de Waal (2009) noted that other-oriented perspective-taking is evident 
in other species (for example, apes, dolphins, elephants, and even dogs), he also 
noted its restriction in those species largely to here-and-now perception. Even 
humans “care more about what we see fi rsthand than about what remains out of 
sight” (p. 221; see here-and-now empathic bias, below). Nonetheless, beyond that 
of any other species, “humans have great imagination. We can visualize a poor 
family wearing the clothes we sent them or children sitting in the school that we 
helped build at the other end of the globe. Just thinking of these things makes us 
feel good” (p. 194). 
 Th e imagination entailed in perspective-taking can be either self-focused 
(imagining how one would feel in the other’s situation) or other-focused (imagin-
ing how the other person feels or how most people would feel in that situation). 
Although other-focused perspective-taking is more readily  sustained, self-focused 
perspective-taking tends to be more  intense, probably because it “activates one’s 
own personal need system” (Hoff man, 2000, p. 56). 
 Th is activation, however, renders self-focused perspective-taking vulnerable to 
what Hoff man calls “egoistic drift ,” in which the observer “becomes lost in egoistic 
concerns and the image of the victim that initiated the role-taking process skips 
out of focus and fades away” (p. 56; cf. Decety & Jackson, 2004). One of Hoff man’s 
students, aft er hearing that a pregnant friend’s unborn child had Down’s syndrome, 
“became so engrossed in [her] own thoughts” and fears that she “forgot all about” 
her friend’s specifi c circumstances (Hoff man, 2000, pp. 57–58). 
 “Fully mature” (p. 58) social perspective-taking achieves the best of both 
worlds—that is, sustained intensity—by “co-occurring, parallel processing” of 
both self and other (Hoff man, 2008, p. 442). Furthermore, it specifi es the optimal 
sense of the social perspective-taking entailed in ideal moral reciprocity or full 
implementation of the condition of reversibility (Chapter 1).  
 The Complex Empathic Predisposition 
 As the infant grows into childhood and adolescence, then, the empathic predis-
position becomes less superfi cial and increasingly multi-modal. Th e interrelated 
functioning of the basic and mature modes of development renders the full-
fl edged empathic predisposition fl exibly responsive to a diverse array of distress 

106 
■ Moral Development and Reality
cues. Accordingly, the complex empathic predisposition is rich with contrasting 
qualities: shallow but also penetrating; fl eeting or immediate but also stable and 
sustained; narrow but also broad in scope (encompassing victims who are absent); 
automatic or involuntary but also voluntary; passive and unconscious but also 
eff ortful and conscious. 
 Since Hoff man’s (2000) work, others have noted as well the multifaceted or 
complex nature of the full-fl edged empathic predisposition. For example, Decety 
and Svetlova (2012; cf. de Waal, 2012) concluded that empathic “responses are 
organized across multiple levels, from lower-level systems that are rapid, effi  -
cient, but rigid, to higher-level systems that are integrative and fl exible” (p. 43). 
Nonetheless, the full-fl edged empathic predisposition is typically experienced as a 
unitary response tendency. 
 Hoff man (2000) pointed out that, although the mature modes are more “sub-
ject to voluntary control” and eff ort, “they too can be fast-acting, involuntary, and 
triggered immediately on witnessing the victim’s situation” (Hoff man, 2000, p. 61). 
A dramatic case of sudden prosocial behavior generated partly from mature but 
“fast-acting” empathy and moral judgment was introduced in Chapter 2—and will 
be further examined in the next chapter. 
 Empathy and Cognitive Development: 
Stages of Empathic Distress 
 Given our thesis that moral development entails growth beyond the superfi cial, 
we fi nd most intriguing the developmental progression in the arousal modes from 
shallow processing (attention to surface or physically salient cues) to more subtle 
discernment and expanded caring. Th is superfi cial-to-profound theme becomes 
particularly evident as the modes “coalesce” with cognitive development to form 
stages of empathy development (see Table 5.1). “Growing beyond the superfi cial,” 
then, applies not only to moral judgment (Chapter 3) but also to the development 
of empathy. As the modes of the empathic predisposition interact with cognitive 
advances, we again see a cognitive developmental age trend toward more mature 
stages of moral perception, motivation, and behavior. When the trend beyond the 
superfi cial in morality refers not to moral judgment but to empathy or caring, 
however, cognition—although still crucial—loses the limelight. As we will see, it is 
depth of  feeling in morality that is highlighted in Hoff man’s theory. 
 Hoff man’s later rendition of his model (Hoff man, 2008) posits six stages (see 
Table 5.1), from immature (Stages 1–3) to mature (Stages 4–6). Hoff man does 
not emphasize the stage construct. Although he would presumably expect his 
sequence to be fairly standard across cultures, he does not explicitly claim that the 
stage sequence is invariant. Much as Piaget might have said for moral judgment 
phases, Hoff man points out that “the age levels assigned to the stages and tran-
sitions between stages are approximate and individual diff erences can be enor-
mous” (Hoff man, 2000, p. 64). Th e developing arousal modes interact with the 
child’s growing understanding of the self and other to produce overlapping stages 
of increasingly discerning and subtle empathic emotion. One can say generally 
that the empathy stages emerge for most part in infancy and early childhood (in 

“The Good” and Moral Development 
■ 107
contrast to the stages of moral judgment). However, the emergence of Hoff man’s 
most mature stage may await adolescence (in any event, Hoff man’s examples of 
this stage are drawn exclusively from adolescents and adults). Like Kohlberg’s later 
moral judgment stages, Hoff man’s later stages of empathy entail expansions in 
subtle or accurate discernment and social scope; e.g., “an awareness” that others 
(and oneself) have “personal histories, identities, and lives beyond the immediate 
situation” (p. 64). Extending from the modes, we now describe Hoff man’s imma-
ture and mature stages of empathy development. In the course of the description, 
we will consider a challenge to the major role accorded to cognitive development 
in Hoff man’s empathy-based theory of moral growth beyond the superfi cial. 
 The Immature Stages 
 Th e immature stages of (reactive, egocentric, quasi-egocentric) empathic distress 
are seen most exclusively during the fi rst year or so of life, as a rudimentary sense 
of the physically present “other” infl uences the impact of the basic arousal modes 
(motor mimicry, conditioning, direct association) upon social behavior. Hoff man 
discusses three immature stages of empathy. 
 Stage 1.  Global Empathic Distress: Newborn Reactive Cry 
 When the newborn cries in reaction to hearing another’s cry, that reactive cry 
is more than a weak imitation or simple reaction to a noxious stimulus. Rather, 
the newborn reactive cry is just as intense and vigorous as if the newborn itself 
were in distress. Interestingly, the newborn’s reactive cry is more likely to be trig-
gered by the cry of another human newborn than by control stimuli that have 
included a computer-simulated cry, the cry of a chimpanzee, and even the new-
born’s own previous cry (Dondi, Simion, & Caltran, 1999; Martin & Clark, 1982; 
Sagi & Hoff man, 1976; Simner, 1971). Marco Dondi and colleagues (Dondi, 
Simion, & Caltran, 1999) noted that a newborn’s familiar–unfamiliar distinction 
among the auditory stimuli is further evidence that even infants process new expe-
rience in relation to established prototypes or rudimentary schemas (Walton & 
Bower, 1993). Hoff man (2000, 2008) argued that the newborn’s innate reactive cry 
response is triggered by mimicry, conditioning, or both. Th is cry is “global” insofar 
as the infant may not clearly recognize “whose feelings belong to whom” (Decety 
& Jackson, 2004, p. 71). Nonetheless, newborns’ relative non-reaction to their  own 
cry suggests at least “a primitive physiological awareness of the self as separate 
from others” (Light & Zahn-Waxler, 2012, p. 111); i.e., “some self–other distinc-
tion already functioning right from birth” (Decety & Jackson, 2004, p. 78), perhaps 
indicating “an implicit sense of self as an agentive entity in the environment.” Such 
a sense of self would not necessarily “imply,” however, “any self-consciousness or 
self-awareness” (Decety & Svetlova, 2012, p. 8; see below). 
 Stage 2.  Egocentric Empathic Distress 
 Aft er several months, the reactive cry typically attenuates (less automatic, instant, 
or intense crying). Th e infants may fi rst look sad and pucker up their lips before 
crying in the presence of another’s distress. Th is behavior, “which they also do 

108 
■ Moral Development and Reality
when actually distressed themselves, very likely refl ects the early beginning of 
their ability to control their emotions” (Hoff man, 2000, p. 67; cf. Eisenberg & 
Spinrad, 2004). By six months or so, infants “require more prolonged signs of 
another’s distress before feeling distressed themselves” (Hoff man, 2000, p. 67). 
Hoff man (2000) cited a landmark study by Dale Hay and colleagues (Hay, Nash, 
& Pedersen, 1981; cf. Roth-Hanania, Davido, & Zahn-Waxler, 2011), which found 
that, among six-month-olds, “when one infant was distressed, the other gener-
ally watched but rarely cried himself” (Hoff man, 2000, p. 66). Th e relatively few 
instances when resonant crying did occur resulted from “a cumulative eff ect: Aft er 
several instances of an infant’s showing distress, the other infant did become dis-
tressed and started to cry” (p. 66). Hoff man suggested that reactive crying is less 
common by six months or so because “other” is increasingly diff erentiated. Indeed, 
“the other is now becoming a true ‘other’ who is perceived, at least dimly, as physi-
cally separate from oneself” (p. 67). 
 By the end of the fi rst year, infants may engage in rather curious behavior 
upon witnessing a peer’s distress: whimpering and watching the peer, sometimes 
accompanied by behavior that relieves their  own distress (thumb-sucking, head in 
mother’s lap, etc.). One nine-month-old “would stare intently, her eyes welling up 
with tears if another child fell, hurt themselves or cried” (Hoff man. 2000, p. 68). 
Consistent with a high threshold for responding, subsequent self-comforting (or 
crawling to mother) reactions were only infrequently observed in young infants in 
a recent longitudinal study (Roth-Hanania et al., 2011). 
 Although one-year-olds can diff erentiate the other child as physically separate 
and respond empathically to another’s distress, they may still be “unclear about 
the diff erence between something happening to the other and something happen-
ing to the self” (Hoff man, 2000, p. 68)—hence their occasional egocentric seek-
ing of self-comfort as if that would remediate the observed distress. Empathically 
driven behavior in the egocentric or cognitively immature sense—and its useless-
ness (at least directly) for the distressed other—has been observed among infant 
rhesus monkeys:
 Once, when an infant had been bitten because it had accidentally landed on a dominant 
female, it screamed so incessantly that it was soon surrounded by many other infants. I 
counted eight climbing on top of the poor victim—pushing, pulling, and shoving each 
other as well as the infant. Th at obviously did little to alleviate its fright. Th e infant mon-
keys’ response seemed automatic, as if they were as distraught as the victim and sought 
to comfort  themselves as much as the other. (de Waal, 2012, p. 91, emphasis added) 
 Decety (2007) attributed such responses to a basic arousal mode, namely, 
mimicry or emotional contagion, perhaps “the fi rst step on the road toward full-
blown empathy” (de Waal, 2009, p. 74). Yet de Waal (2009) suspected that the self-
comforting and simple emotional contagion of this fi rst step “can’t be the whole 
story” (p. 95). Aft er all, in the above episode, the monkeys were drawn to the 
distressed peer:
 If these monkeys were just trying to calm themselves, why did they approach the 
 victim? . . . In fact, animals as well as young children oft en [stare at or] seek out distressed 

“The Good” and Moral Development 
■ 109
parties without any indication that they know what’s going on. Th ey seem blindly 
attracted, like a moth to a fl ame. Even though we would like to read real concern about 
the other into their behavior, the required understanding may not be there. I will call 
this blind attraction  preconcern. (p. 95) 
 Similarly, Hoff man (2000) suggested that egocentric empathic distress “could be 
called a  precursor of prosocial motivation” (p. 70). Hoff man (personal communi-
cation, August 29, 2012) pointed out that, like his egocentric empathic distress, de 
Waal’s preconcern is “a primitive form of empathy” lacking the advanced modes 
(such as social perspective-taking). Empathy in the early stages is posited to be, as 
de Waal put it, a “blind attraction” rather than “real [or mature] concern” for the 
other person. 
 Stage 3.  Quasi-Egocentric Empathic Distress 
 Starting in the second year, children do try to help a distressed peer. Nonetheless, 
their “help” may still be more appropriate to relieving their own discomfort 
(e.g., bringing a distressed peer to one’s own mother even though the friend’s 
mother is present, or off ering one’s own rather than the peer’s favorite toys)—
suggesting a somewhat egocentric projection of one’s own onto others’ inner 
states and needs. Th is egocentric projection is a bias that, as we have learned 
from cognitive-developmental work (Chapter 3), dissipates but does not disap-
pear entirely even among adults entirely capable of perspective-taking. De Waal 
(2009) mentioned well-intentioned but thoughtless friends whose gift s refl ected 
“what  they like.” For example, they “never noticed that we don’t have a single blue 
item in the house, but since  they  love blue, they bestow an expensive blue vase 
on us” (p. 109, emphases added). Egocentrically inclined adults notwithstanding, 
Hoff man (2000) concluded that egocentric projections are especially prevalent in 
the empathic responses of very young children. 
 The Mature Stages 
 In the social behavior of toddlers, one can discern not only the superfi cial stages 
but also empathic discernment and appropriate prosocial behavior. “Fourteen-
month-olds,” for example, “are willing and able to help instrumentally.” Th eir 
prosocial behavior orients to the here-and-now; that is, it occurs “almost exclu-
sively in situations in which helping consisted in handing over an out-of-reach 
object and not in more complex situations involving less salient goals and com-
plex forms of intervention” (Vaish & Warneken, 2012, p. 138; cf. Warneken & 
Tomasello, 2010). 
 As empathic morality deepens, the individual increasingly discerns the authen-
tic inner experience, subtler goals, and complex life situations of another indi-
vidual or group. Th is deeper level of empathic experience, characterizable in 
terms of mature stages, can be intense and even life-changing (see examples in 
Hoff man, 2008). 
 Key to this growth beyond the superfi cial, according to Hoff man as well as de 
Waal and others, are the cognitive advances in self-awareness that permit more 

110 
■ Moral Development and Reality
accurate attributions: “Th e emotional state induced in oneself by the other now 
needs to be attributed to the other instead of the self. A heightened self-identity 
allows a subject to relate to the object’s emotional state without losing sight of the 
actual source of this state” (de Waal, 2012, p. 94; cf. Hoff man, 2000). In phylogeny, 
the concurrent emergence of advanced helping behavior (e.g., consolation) with 
self-recognition is consistently evident in apes but  not Old World monkeys, sug-
gesting that these advances may be functionally linked, co-emerging relatively late 
in phylogenetic history (de Waal, 2009, 2012). 
 Is heightened self-identity or self-awareness crucial, then, for advances in 
prosocial behavior or concern for others? Extending from Hoff man, de Waal 
(2009) argued in the affi  rmative, declaring that “advanced empathy is unthinkable 
without a [distinct] sense of self” (p. 122; cf. Decety, 2007). Aft er all,  
 the child needs to disentangle herself from the other so as to pinpoint the actual source 
of her feelings. . . . Without a concept of self, we’d lack mooring. . . . In order to show genu-
ine interest in someone else, off ering help when required, one needs to be able [in a wave 
of emotion] to keep one’s own boat steady. (p. 124; cf. Decety & Svetlova, 2012) 
 Hoff man (2000) suggested that this emotionally “steady” concept of self entails an 
appreciation of one’s own—and the other’s—“inner experience.” Self-aware agents  
 sense their body as containing, and being guided by, an inner mental self, an “I,” which 
thinks, feels, plans, remembers . . . [and understand] that one is somebody separated 
from others not just physically but also in terms of inner experience; and that one’s 
external image is an aspect of one’s inner experience. Th is makes it possible for one to 
realize that the same holds true for others: Th eir external image is the other side of their 
inner experience. (pp. 72–73) 
 According to Hoff man (2000; cf. de Waal, 2009, 2012), children’s self-aware-
ness and understanding of others’ distinct subjective experience enable them to 
decenter from self, experience veridical empathic distress, and more appropriately 
perspective-take (e.g., to recognize and appreciate that one’s upset, crying friend 
would be better comforted by his or her  own  teddy bear, parent, etc.). 
 Carolyn Zahn-Waxler and colleagues have questioned this linkage of cogni-
tive development (especially, self-awareness or “heightened self-identity”) with 
advanced prosocial behavior. Aft er all, they point out, we already “enter this world 
equipped to experience a rudimentary sense of ourselves in relation to others” 
(Light & Zahn-Waxler, 2012, p. 122). It would appear that the human self can 
recognize and respond to the non-self at birth—perhaps even in utero (Castiello 
et al., 2010; Lepage & Th eoret, 2007; Martin & Clark, 1982). Other-oriented proso-
cial behavior in the fi rst year would perhaps be more prevalent if young infants 
were more capable of controlling their emotional distress (regulatory skills, keep-
ing one’s own “boat steady”) and had the motor skills to reach and help or comfort 
the distressed other (Roth-Hanania et al., 2011). 
 Th is question revisits the fundamental issue of neo-nativism: Have we been 
under-appreciating the newborn’s innate moral capacity and evolutionary heri-
tage? Zahn-Waxler and colleagues (e.g., Davidov, Zahn-Waxler, Roth-Hanania, & 
Knafo, 2013) urged moral psychologists to take “a closer look at the early roots of 

“The Good” and Moral Development 
■ 111
concern for others” (p. 4). Might a basic “self-knowledge” be all that is needed for a 
“real concern about the other,” entailing a clear awareness “that the other person is 
hurting rather than the self” (Davidov et al., 2013, p. 2)? Recall Haidt’s (Chapter 2) 
broad neo-nativist claim: namely, that moral psychology should focus on how 
diverse cultures refi ne the human infant’s biologically prepared aff ective intu-
itions (cf. Th ompson & Newton, 2010). In this neo-nativist view, “development”—
including moral development—means merely an increasing sophistication built 
upon modular activation, skill (including self-regulatory skill) acquisition, verbal 
articulation, and socialization in a particular culture. 
 Th e issue pertains at least partly to what is meant by “self-awareness” or “self-
knowledge.” Of course, “no animal can do without . . .  some self-awareness”; that is, 
even in infancy, “every animal needs to set its body apart from the surrounding 
environment” (de Waal, 2009, p. 147, emphasis added). Zahn-Waxler’s and col-
leagues’ claim is that an implicit sense of self vis a vis others in the environment may 
be all that is needed “for the purely emotional experience of feeling for or caring 
about another” (Davidov et al., 2013, p. 4). Hoff man and de Waal would not dispute 
this point; indeed, Zahn-Waxler’s “implicit” or “rudimentary” self is very similar 
to the proprioceptive (and other-diff erentiating) self discussed by Hoff man (2000, 
p. 69) (Hoff man, personal communication, April 4, 2013). Hoff man’s and de Waal’s 
claim pertains more precisely to the importance for  advanced prosocial behavior of 
a  psychological self-awareness, that is, awareness of self (or other) as a distinct inten-
tional agent with distinct inner experiences. Th eir claim is that cognitive develop-
ment brings about a psychological self-awareness in the second year that enables 
veridical empathic distress and hence appropriate, discerning prosocial behavior. 
Mirror-test results (do participants try to remove, say, a mirrored facial smudge?), 
along with concurrent indications of psychological self-awareness (such as the 
emergence of shame, guilt, and other self-conscious emotions, personal pronoun 
usage, and make-believe play; see Berk, 2013; Kartner, Keller, Chaudhary, & Yovski, 
2012), do suggest that infants’ awareness of themselves (and others) as autonomous 
intentional agents (whose “subjective experience . . . is located within, or bound to, 
their own bodies”; Kartner et al., 2012, p. 7) does generally emerge in the second 
year and does relate to advanced prosociality—but not consistently across cultures 
(Kartner, Keller, & Chaudhary, 2010). Accordingly, Joscha Kartner and colleagues 
in their 2010 study suggested an alternative “pathway” (through certain sociocul-
tural emphases) to advanced prosociality. 
 In general, children typically do grow in self-awareness, social perspective-
taking, and appropriate concern for diverse others in various situations of distress. 
Although early roots and sociocultural factors should be studied, cognitive devel-
opment plays a major role in the “substantial” increase in “acts of comforting and 
helping . . . during the second year of life” (Davidson et al., 2013, p. 3). Although 
they dispute that its role is  crucial , Davidson, Zahn-Waxler and colleagues do 
acknowledge that the emergence of psychological self-awareness does appear 
to “ facilitate  toddlers’ prosocial behavior” (Davidov et al., 2013, p. 2; emphasis 
added). 
As in “the right” of moral judgment, growth beyond the superfi cial in “the 
good” of benevolence or empathy must be recognized as entailing important 

112 
■ Moral Development and Reality
developmental advances. As Steven Pinker (2011) noted, a superfi cial “distress 
at another’s suff ering is not the same as a sympathetic concern with their well-
being” (p. 575). Th e latter sense of empathy relates to the mature stages. Although 
toddlers upon seeing others in distress continue to experience ego-oriented dis-
comfort, they also come to experience compassion or sympathetic distress. Th is 
partial “transformation” of egocentric empathy into sympathetic empathy means 
that, from early childhood on, people “want to help because they feel sorry for the 
victim, not just to relieve their own empathic distress” (Hoff man, 2000, p. 88; cf. 
Batson, 2011). Again, however, egocentric bias and “a purely [egocentric] empathy 
may remain . . . even in adulthood” (p. 89; as discussed in Chapter 3). 
 Mature (accurate or veridical, subtly discerning) empathic concern can be elic-
ited not only in the context of the immediate situation but also beyond that situ-
ation—a full empathic capacity that may be unique to the human species. Th anks 
to the contributions of advanced modes in coalescence with “abstract and domain-
general high-level cognitive abilities,” mature 
 humans are special in the sense that they can feel empathic concern for a wide range 
of others in need, even dissimilar others or members of diff erent species. . . . Executive 
function, language, and perspective-taking enhance and expand the range of behaviors 
that can be driven by empathy. When people send money to distant earthquake vic-
tims in Haiti, or petition to support a bill that would contribute to curb the violence in 
Darfur, empathy reaches beyond its context of evolutionary origins. (Decety & Svetlova, 
2012, pp. 3–4) 
 Hoff man (2008) delineates three stages (4–6) of mature or profound empathic 
understanding and concern. Th ese stages specify a cognitive developmental 
growth beyond the superfi cial in empathic morality. 
 Stage 4.  Veridical Empathy 
 As he or she becomes less egocentric or more aware of the other’s psychological 
experience as distinct from that of the self, the young child begins to experience 
socially accurate or veridical empathy. “Veridical empathy has the basic features of 
mature empathy, but becomes more complex” or profoundly discerning and fl ex-
ible with cognitive development (Hoff man. 2008, p. 445). Beyond 14 months of 
age, children increasingly accommodate in their giving to the distinct preferences 
of others, even when those preferences diff er markedly from their own (Repacholi 
& Gopnik, 1997; cf. Gopnik, 2009). Preschoolers begin to understand that an event 
can evoke diff erent emotions in diff erent people and that people can control the 
expression of their feelings. As noted in Chapter 3, older children begin to grasp 
mixed or subtle emotions and to take into account social context in judging anoth-
er’s feelings. A child may be judged to be sadder if distress over a broken toy occurs 
despite friends’ entreaties not to be a “crybaby” (Rotenberg & Eisenberg, 1997).  
 Stage 5.  Empathic Distress Beyond the Situation 
 As temporal decentration (or extension of time perspective; see Chapter 3) devel-
ops, self and others are increasingly understood to have, not only present inner 
states and situations, but also experiential histories and prospective futures; that 

“The Good” and Moral Development 
■ 113
is, to have coherent, continuous, and stable identities. Th e preadolescent responds, 
then, not only to immediate expressive or behavioral cues but also to information 
concerning the other’s life condition, knowing that momentary expressions can 
belie deeper emotions or mood states. In contrast to the child’s simple empathic 
connection with the laughter of a terminally ill peer, for example, mature individu-
als may experience a more complex emotion that encompasses joy and sadness 
(but see Note 4). 
 Stage 6.  Empathy for Distressed Groups 
 Beyond-the-situation veridical empathic distress can be distinguished as a sixth 
stage, as empathy for an entire group’s life condition emerges:
 It seems likely that with further cognitive development, especially the ability to form 
social concepts and classify people into groups, children will eventually be able to com-
prehend the plight not only of an individual but also of an entire group or class of people 
such as those who are economically impoverished, politically oppressed, social outcasts, 
victims of wars, or mentally retarded. Th is combination of empathic distress and the 
mental representation of the plight of an unfortunate group would seem to be the most 
advanced form of empathic distress. (Hoff man, 2000, p. 85)   
 Even for those evidencing mature stages of empathy, prosocial behavior may 
not ensue. In Chapter 6, we will study moral exemplars—those who evidence 
Hoff man’s mature stages of empathy in sustained action as well as feeling. Th e 
moral lifestyle and contributions of these individuals are truly remarkable. Yet we 
know that, in general, egocentric and empathic biases (see below) do not entirely 
disappear. Sociocultural and temperamental factors can also undermine empathy 
(see Hoff man, 2000, pp. 282–283). And even highly empathic individuals must 
still interpret appropriately another’s distress. As in Kohlberg’s and Piaget’s theo-
ries, stages for Hoff man may identify developing competences or potentials more 
than actual performance. Let us look, then, at factors that can complicate or limit 
the contribution of empathy to situational prosocial behavior. 
empathy and prosocial behavior: 
 
■
cognitive complications and empathy’s 
limitations 
 Although empathy may be the “bedrock of prosocial morality” (Hoff man, 2008, p. 
449), empathy even at the mature stages does not necessarily eventuate in proso-
cial behavior. Empathy’s relationship to prosocial behavior is complicated by the 
intervening role of certain cognitive processes, as well as by certain biases or limi-
tations that may be natural or intrinsic to the empathic predisposition. 
 How Is the Situation Interpreted? Attributions, 
Appraisals, and Inferences 
 Although individuals with mature empathy tend to help distressed others, the actual-
ization of that tendency is infl uenced to a great extent by how the situation is perceived 

114 
■ Moral Development and Reality
(Hoff man, 2000; see Table 5.1). “Depending on how beholders . . . interpret the straits 
of another person, their response to another person’s pain may be empathic, neutral, 
or even counterempathic” (Pinker, 2011, p. 578; cf. Hoff man, 2000). In other words, 
cognitive processes can complicate and even undermine the relationship between 
empathy and prosocial behavior. Cognition has thus far played a constructive role 
in the morality of the good: understanding or awareness of self and other facilitates 
a progressive maturity of caring for others. It is a matter of common observation, 
however, that mature empathy does not necessarily eventuate in prosocial behavior. 
As Hoff man pointed out, self-concerns (egoistic motives and biases) as well as causal 
attributions and other interpretive cognitive processes, can critically shape empathic 
emotion and hence the character of its contribution to social behavior. 
 People are mentally active, especially as mental coordination increases during 
childhood (Chapter 3). As persons perceive another’s distress, they bring to that 
perception not only their empathic predisposition but their tendencies to make 
causal attributions and inferential judgments as well (Hickling & Wellman, 2001; 
Weiner, 1985). Th ese  cognitive appraisal processes (Lamm, Batson, & Decety, 2007) 
can play a crucial mediating role. For an observer who is aware that it is another 
person who is in distress, empathy for the distressed other generally takes the 
form of, in Hoff man’s terminology,  sympathy (Hoff man, 2000, 2008). Th e for-
mation of this empathy-based sentiment (we will use  empathy loosely to mean 
 sympathy ) requires a certain causal appraisal; namely, that the distressing circum-
stances were beyond the suff erer’s control (perhaps a natural disaster, unavoidable 
accident or illness, or the death of a loved one). Empathy may not form sympa-
thy, however, if the observer attributes responsibility to the victim for his or her 
plight. Especially in ambiguous circumstances, observers may be motivated to make 
precisely that causal appraisal to reduce empathic over-arousal (discussed later). 
A victim-blaming attribution also supports the belief in moral reciprocity (studied 
in social psychology as the motivated “just world hypothesis” or need to believe that 
the world is just; Lerner, 1980; see Hafer & Begue, 2005). Accordingly, it is oft en 
tempting to blame the victim even when such a causal attribution is unwarranted (cf. 
Chapter 7). When that happens, instead of being shaped into sympathy and thereby 
prompting prosocial behavior, empathy is neutralized as the victim is derogated. 7  
Blaming the victim illustrates one transformation of empathic distress into 
a specifi c empathy-based sentiment. Th ere are others. Attributing the cause of 
another’s distress to an aggressor (whether an individual or group or even cor-
rupt society) can shape one’s empathic distress into  empathic anger , even if the 
distressed victim is not angry at the time . Empathy-based  or  transgression guilt 
derives from attributing the victim’s plight to one’s own actions.  Bystander guilt 
derives from attributing that plight to one’s  in actions (for example, more than 40 
years aft er having witnessed a continuing victimization, the author has still expe-
rienced bystander guilt over his passivity; see Chapter 1). 
 Hoff man (2000) discussed not only causal attributions but also “inferences 
about whether victims deserve their plight” (p. 107) as cognitions that can fun-
damentally shape the nature of empathy’s impact on behavior. “If the victim is 
viewed as bad, immoral, or lazy, observers may conclude that his or her fate was 
deserved and their empathic/sympathetic distress may decrease.” As noted, there 

“The Good” and Moral Development 
■ 115
is a temptation to view the victim in precisely this way. If, however, the victim can 
only be “viewed as basically good, observers may conclude that his or her fate was 
undeserved or unfair and their empathic/sympathetic distress, empathic anger, or 
guilt may  increase ” (p. 107, emphasis added). 
 Such a perceived unfairness entails the violation of one’s sense of justice or 
reciprocity and belief in a just world: Bad things should happen to bad—not 
good—people. As noted in Chapter 3, Hoff man (2000) acknowledges a common 
“preference for reciprocity” (p. 242) or fairness and even a motive to correct reci-
procity imbalances or violations, to right a wrong. An inference of injustice (or 
activated moral principles, discussed later) can even increase the intensity of 
empathic emotions. Generally speaking, however, Hoff man has emphasized reci-
procity’s mediating or shaping role: Beyond empathic anger, the reciprocity-based 
perception of an undeserved or unfair fate “may transform [the viewer’s] empathic 
distress into an empathic feeling of injustice” (p. 107). 
 Empathy’s Limitations: Over-arousal and Bias 
 In addition to certain cognitive complications or appraisals, certain limitations of 
empathy itself can compromise its contribution to prosocial behavior. Hoff man 
identifi es two such limitations: over-arousal and empathic bias. As we will see, 
regulatory cognitive strategies, beliefs, principles, and other processes can remedy 
these limitations and even promote prosocial moral development. 
 Empathic Over-arousal 
 As fi rst pointed out by Hoff man (1978), overly intense and salient or massive signs 
of distress can create an experience in the observer that is so aversive that the 
observer’s empathic distress transforms into a feeling of personal distress. Th e per-
sonally distressed observer’s feelings may then shift  into egoistic drift  (described 
earlier) or a sense of futility. Th e intensity level of empathic distress, in other 
words, can be post-optimal: “if emotions run too high, the perspective-taking 
may be lost in the process” (de Waal, 2009, p. 100). A neurosurgeon, for example, 
avoids operating on loved ones because empathic concern “may be so strong as to 
cause a normally steady hand to shake,” with potentially disastrous consequences 
(Batson, 2011, p. 189). 
 Intervention programs designed to promote empathy and prosocial behavior 
can do more harm than good. A high school “Literature and Justice” program on 
world hunger and poverty actually  reduced support for humanitarian aid—appar-
ently, the students felt overwhelmed and immobilized by the size and scope of the 
problems (Seider, 2009). Beyond the daunting statistics, the massive presentation 
of individual profi les and “graphics” may have accounted for this counter-produc-
tive over-arousal (Seider, 2009, p. 69). 
 Empathic over-arousal is the downside of empathy’s multiple arousal modes: 
combined arousals (especially if they include self-focused perspective-taking, gen-
erating vivid mental images) oft en account for the post-optimal level of distress, a 
level that, ironically, can exceed the  victim’s  actual level of distress. Chronic empathic 

116 
■ Moral Development and Reality
over-arousal, or “compassion fatigue” (Figley, 2012), is a problem well known to criti-
cal care nurses and other helping professionals. “Doctors and nurses in emergency 
rooms . . . just cannot aff ord to be constantly in an empathic mode” (de Waal, 2009, p. 
80). Indeed, “the medical profession has a longstanding struggle to achieve an appro-
priate balance between empathy and clinical distance” (Decety & Svetlova, 2012, pp. 
17–18; cf. Gleichgerrcht & Decety, 2012). In general, then (despite the dedication of 
helping professionals; see below) states of empathic over-arousal tend to induce egois-
tic drift  and hence undermine the contribution of empathy to prosocial behavior.  
 Empathic Bias 
 Empathic bias is the second limitation of empathy. Th is bias pertains to the diffi  -
culty of “identifying with people whom we see as diff erent or belonging to another 
group.” By the same token, “we fi nd it easier to identify with those like us—with 
the same cultural background, ethnic features, age, gender, job, and so on—and 
even more so with those close to us, such as spouses, children, and friends” (de 
Waal, 2009, p. 80; cf. Cikara, Bruneau, & Saxe, 2011). Even as babies, we prefer 
our “own kind” (Bloom, 2012, p. 82). 
 Within empathic bias, Hoff man distinguishes between “familiarity-similarity” 
and “here-and-now.” A prototype of the familiarity bias is the preference that can 
develop for a stimulus to which one is repeatedly exposed (e.g., Zajonc, 1968). 
Roger Brown (1965) once wondered whether the Mona Lisa owes its popular-
ity at least partly to its recognition value among museum tourists. A familiarity 
bias is adaptive in an evolutionary context where survival and security of the 
group against external threat is of paramount importance (cf. Cikara, Bruneau, 
& Saxe, 2011). In this context, the functional value of prosocial behavior per-
tains to the survival of the prosocial actor’s familiar “in-group” of family, friends, 
and others similar to oneself. Accordingly, arousal modes such as self-focused 
perspective-taking are more readily activated by the distress cues of some-
one perceived as similar to oneself. By the same token, others perceived as dis-
similar (such as Edward in the camp incident; see Chapters 1, 2) are less likely 
to elicit empathy—although some empathy may remain. Batson (2011) con-
cluded from experimental research “that  as long as perceived dissimilarity does 
not evoke antipathy , we can feel empathic concern for a wide range of targets” 
(p. 194, emphasis added; cf. Hoff man, 1984, 1987). 
 Th e “here-and-now” version of empathic bias favors distressed persons who 
are immediately present. Again, these are likely to be the members of one’s in-
group; such persons are especially likely to stimulate the primitive empathic 
arousal modes (physical salience–driven modes such as mimicry or condition-
ing). Although children with their pronounced centrations (see Chapter 3) are 
especially vulnerable, even mature observers capable of representing others’ life 
conditions beyond the immediate situation are vulnerable to here-and-now bias. 
In experiments (e.g., Batson et al., 1995) and in real life, individuals oft en act to 
relieve the distress of an immediately present other, even when that prosocial act is 
unfair to comparably distressed but absent others. Indeed, distressed (or deceased) 
victims who are no longer salient may lose out in sympathy even to “ culprits who 

“The Good” and Moral Development 
■ 117
are now the focus of attention and, for one reason or another, appear to be victims 
themselves” (Hoff man, 2000, p. 212; cf. Hoff man, 2008, 2011). 
 Empathic bias for the here-and-now distressed individual may refl ect broader 
biases of human information processing. “Human beings can’t even keep track 
of more than about 150 people, let alone love them all,” observed Alison Gopnik 
(2009, p. 216). Nor is the satisfaction of saving 150 lives 150 times more intense 
than that of saving one life. Slovic (2007) suggested that “a single individual, unlike 
a group, is viewed as a psychologically coherent unit. Th is leads to more exten-
sive processing of information and clearer impressions about individuals” (p. 89). 
Th e greater salience of individuals (faces, names, personal narratives, etc.) in par-
ticular situations is consistent with the greater sensitivity in “our cognitive and 
perceptual systems . . . to small changes [oft en signaling present, visible, and imme-
diate danger] in our environment.” Although adaptive at critical moments, this 
sensitivity comes “at the expense of making us less able to detect and respond to 
large changes. As the psychophysical research indicates, constant increases in the 
magnitude of a stimulus typically evoke smaller and smaller changes in responses” 
(Slovic, 2007, pp. 84–85).  
 Remedying Empathy’s Limitations 
 Th e limitations of empathy might not be all bad. As noted, some empathic and 
information processing bias might have some adaptive value. Aft er all, “if people 
empathized with everyone in distress and tried to help them all equally, society 
might quickly come to a halt” (Hoff man, 2000, p. 14). Pinker (2011) warned of the 
unfeasibility and adverse psychological consequences of chronic empathic over-
arousal: “a universal consideration of people’s interests . . . does not mean that we 
must feel the pain of everyone else on earth. No one has the time or energy, and try-
ing to spread our empathy that thinly would be an invitation to emotional burnout 
and compassion fatigue” (p. 591). Beauchamp and Childress (2009), too, warned of 
over-extension: “Th e more widely we generalize obligations of benefi cence, the less 
likely we will be to meet our primary responsibilities . . . to those to whom we are 
close or indebted, and to whom our responsibilities are clear rather than clouded” 
(p. 200). Haidt even mused: “Might the world be a better place if we could greatly 
increase the care people get within their existing groups and nations while slightly 
decreasing the care they get from other groups and nations?” (p. 242). 
 Th is issue relates to what Hoff man (2000) called the “multiple claimants 
dilemma” as well as to the scope of application of impartiality and equality ideals 
(Chapter 1): How can one legitimately help some needy claimants but not others 
equally in need? Yet, as noted, total equality of all claimants near and far, with no 
bias or gradient of care whatever, would place an impossible strain on the pro-
spective helper. Of course, this practical point and Haidt’s in-group emphasis 
should not be stretched to excuse doing nothing to help alleviate distant suff ering. 
Although their total elimination might be counter-productive, empathy’s biases 
should nonetheless be  reduced . We review below processes, strategies, beliefs, or 
principles that can help reduce such biases and otherwise remedy the limitations 
of empathy. 

118 
■ Moral Development and Reality
 Reducing Empathic Over-arousal 
 Generally speaking, empathic over-arousal undermines the contribution of 
empathy to prosocial behavior and hence should be reduced. Fortunately, 
empathic arousal levels can be moderated: “self-regulatory processes play an 
important role in empathy-related responding. Individuals who are well-regu-
lated are unlikely to be overwhelmed by their negative emotion when witnessing 
another person in distress or need” (Decety & Svetlova, 2012, p. 14). Helpful in 
reducing empathic intensity to a more manageable level are the development 
of prefrontal cortical maturity and self-regulatory processes. Th ese processes 
include cognitive strategies, beliefs, and perceptions, especially: (a) temporary 
“defensive” strategies such as selective attention (“if you don’t want to be aroused 
by an image, don’t look at it”; de Waal, 2009, p. 80), thinking or looking at some-
thing distracting, self-soothing, or looking ahead to a planned interlude (e.g., 
the “rest and relaxation” breaks of emergency care workers; cf. “exposure con-
trol,” Gleichgerrcht & Decety, 2012); (b) a self-effi  cacy belief (Bandura, 1977) 
that one has the requisite skills and other competencies to substantially alle-
viate the victim’s suff ering; (c) moral or “helping professional” identity; and 
(d) the activation of moral principles. Habituation or “psychic numbing” can 
also reduce empathic over-arousal (see below). 
 Several points in this connection are noteworthy. Interestingly, empathic over-
arousal may actually for a time  intensify prosocial behavior insofar as it empowers 
the role identity or moral principles of helping professionals and other individuals. 
Consider dedicated clinicians, nurses, rescue workers, and other helping profes-
sionals, especially those with self-effi  cacy beliefs and capabilities (Hoff man, 2002, 
2008). Although compassion fatigue can become a problem, empathic over-arousal 
for these individuals may temporarily “ intensify  rather than destroy one’s focus on 
helping the victim” (Hoff man, 2000, p. 201). Professional commitment or  moral 
identity (“the kind of person one is or wishes to be”; see Chapter 6) as well as the 
activation of caring as a principle may make a crucial motivational contribution:
 An observer may feel empathically motivated to help someone in distress, but he may 
in addition feel obligated to help because he is a caring person who upholds the prin-
ciple of caring. Th is activation of a caring principle and the addition of one’s “self” (the 
kind of person one is or wishes to be)  should add power to one’s situationally induced 
empathic distress and strengthen one’s obligation to act on principle. (Hoff man, 2000, 
p. 225, emphasis added)   
 Th e broad scope or abstract quality of moral principles can help the empathiz-
ing helper “to ‘decenter’ from the salient features of the victim’s plight, and thus 
respond with more appropriate . . . empathic distress” (Hoff man, 2000, p. 238). As 
we will see, moral principles are particularly helpful in the regulation of empathic 
distress. Less conscious and voluntary than strategies, beliefs, or principles is habit-
uation through repeated and excessive exposure to distress cues. If unchecked, 
however, habituation can reduce empathic arousal to suboptimal levels and even 
eliminate it. Also potentially deleterious is the radical protective defense of “psy-
chic numbing . . . against overwhelming and unacceptable stimuli.” If prolonged, 

“The Good” and Moral Development 
■ 119
psychic numbing can lead to “despair and depression, or various forms of with-
drawal and a generally constricted life pattern” (Lift on, 1967, pp. 31–32). 
 Reducing Empathic Bias 
 As have Haidt and evolutionary psychologists, Hoff man (2000) suggested that 
empathic bias refl ects our evolutionary tendency to help those with whom we share 
the most genes; i.e., our primary group. Hoff man also suggested, however, that we 
can “transcend” our empathic bias if we make a “conscious deliberate eff ort to use 
our knowledge to reduce empathic bias through moral education” (p. 267). Similarly, 
Singer (1981) suggested that we “can master our genes” (p. 131) to expand our “moral 
circle” through the use of reason (cf. “moral insight,” Bloom, 2004, p. 146). Bloom 
(2013) even suggested that “narrow, parochial, innumerate. . . . empathy will have to 
yield to [fair and impartial] reason if humanity is to have a future” (119–121). 
 What might eff ective moral education consist of, and how might we use reason to 
achieve moral insight? Moral educational or cognitive behavioral interventions are 
discussed in Chapter 8. For now, the point is worth making that our here-and-now 
and similarity-familiarity biases can be used against themselves! Hoff man suggested 
that moral educational or cognitive behavioral programs (see Chapter 8) make 
prominent use of a technique that, ironically, recruits our empathic bias to the ser-
vice of its own reduction. Th e technique is called  reframing or  relabeling , as when we 
reframe an otherwise abstract out-group with a suff ering individual. Empathic dis-
tress for a vividly presented victim can generalize, as when a well-publicized, highly 
salient victim of a widespread disaster or severely crippling illness (say, a poster child 
for muscular dystrophy) elicits empathic distress and help that extends to the entire 
group of victims. Th ose who might not help a distressed group of anonymous indi-
viduals may at least help a needy child who becomes in eff ect a “foster child” in a 
long-distance relationship (photos received, letters exchanged, etc.; Singer, 1981). 
 Similarly, a stranger in need can be assimilated into one’s sphere of familiarity if 
the stranger is imagined as a friend or family member. Parents and moral or reli-
gious educators oft en attempt to broaden the scope of social perspective-taking by 
encouraging contact and interdependence with other groups and appealing to “the 
universal qualities that make strangers similar to the self—for example, ‘all men 
are brothers’” (Maccoby, 1980, p. 349). Morally mature or exemplary individuals 
may be especially prone to discern such universal qualities and act accordingly 
(cf. Rutland, Killen, & Abrams, 2010). If members of disparate groups fi nd them-
selves working together to achieve a superordinate goal, the respective group 
members may begin to redefi ne themselves as common members of a single super-
ordinate group (e.g., Dovidio, Gaertner, Shnabel, Saguy, & Johnson, 2010; Echols 
& Correll, 2012). Accordingly, any of these techniques may expand the moral circle 
or reduce familiarity-similarity biases; i.e., prejudice against out-group members. 
 Reframing, Aggression Inhibition, and Moral Development 
 Empathy for the “human face” of a group can not only broaden the referent for 
prosocial behavior but also inhibit aggression and promote moral development. And 
reframing may refer not to a “technique” but to a feature of social experience. Mark 

120 
■ Moral Development and Reality
Mathabane (2002), a Black South African, remembered “learning to hate” white 
people as he grew up during the years of apartheid and oppression of Black people.  
 Learning to hate was . . . simple. . . . All it took was a gradual twisting of my humanity while I was 
growing up in the impoverished ghetto of Alexandria. . . . White policemen . . . would invade 
our neighborhood in the middle of the night, break down our door and march my parents half 
naked out of bed, interrogate and humiliate my father and then arrest him for the crimes of 
being unemployed and harboring his family as illegal aliens in “white” South Africa . . . White 
people could not be human. If they were, why did they not feel my pain? (p. A21)  
 Yet Mathabane also remembered that, when he was seven years old, a White 
person, a nun, did feel the pain of his family’s oppression and predicament. When 
he saw the nun cry while listening to his mother’s plight, he was “stunned by her 
tears, for they were the fi rst I’d seen streak a white face. I remember saying to myself: 
‘She feels my mother’s pain. She’s human aft er all, not a monster’” (p. A21). 
 Perhaps, then, “not all white people were unfeeling like the police.” He 
wondered whether  
  by killing whites I would also kill people like the nun whose empathy had given my 
mother hope and whose help had saved me, by making it possible for me to get an edu-
cation, from the dead-end life of the street and gangs. As long as there was that chance, 
I couldn’t bring myself to kill in the name of hate. (p. A21)  
 He refl ected that  
 guns, bombs, and tanks cannot defeat hatred. It can be vanquished only by human-
ity. . . . One is not fully human until one acknowledges and affi  rms the humanity of 
 others—including one’s enemies. Ultimately, the enemy is within the human family and 
not without. And once we acknowledge that, we will all have the courage . . . [to] move 
beyond the darkness of mutually destructive hatred and revenge into the light of recon-
ciliation and forgiveness. (p. A21) 
 It is worth noting that Mathabane’s growth beyond the superfi cial in moral-
ity is captured in Kohlbergian as well as Hoff manian theories. Mathabane’s moral 
development was in part an  empathy-based story of how empathy, refl ection, and 
reframing humanized an enemy and thereby inhibited aggression. Mathabane’s 
moral development was also in part a  cognitive-developmental  story, one of an 
appreciation and refl ection that grew his moral judgment from Stage 2 retalia-
tion to Stage 3 reconciliation and forgiveness in an expanded moral sphere (Kane, 
1994; cf. Singer, 1981). Although distinguishable, the Hoff manian and Kohlbergian 
aspects of the story are intimately interrelated and complementary. 
 Finally, Mathabane’s growth into a deeper perception of common humanity was 
perhaps ultimately a  spiritual  story with ontological implications. We will save for 
later consideration (in Chapter 10) the question of moral development and reality. 
 Role of Moral Principles 
 Besides reframing and other cognitive strategies, the activation of moral principles 
or “philosophical ideals” (Hoff man, 2000, p. 223) can also serve to remedy the 

“The Good” and Moral Development 
■ 121
limitations of empathy—not only empathic over-arousal but also empathic bias. 
Although moral principles per se are seen to “lack motive force” (p. 239) and are 
originally “learned in ‘cool’ didactic contexts [such as those of lectures, sermons]” 
(p. 239), they do have an aff ective motive power through bonding with empathy 
(we would add that moral principles can also gain  cognitive motive power from 
moral reciprocity). Hoff man argues (and we would agree) that there are basically 
two families of moral principle: caring and justice. 
 Hoff man’s additional claim that empathy bonds with and motivates moral prin-
ciples is more straightforward with respect to the principle of caring: “Th e link 
between empathic distress and [principles of] caring is direct and obvious. Indeed, 
caring seems like a natural extension of empathic distress in specifi c situations 
to the general idea that one should always help people in need” (Hoff man, 2000, 
p. 225). Empathy transforms caring ideals 
 into prosocial hot cognitions—cognitive representations charged with empathic aff ect, 
thus giving them motive force. How is this accomplished? I suggest that people in a 
moral confl ict may weigh the impact of alternative courses of action on others. Th is 
evokes images of others’ being harmed by one’s actions; these images and empathic 
aff ects activate one’s moral principles. Th e concurrence of empathy and principle creates 
a bond between them, which gives the principle an aff ective charge. (p. 239) 
 Hoff man posits the same bonding process for principles of justice; that is, ideals 
of equality and reciprocity. “Distributive justice” emphasizes equality, but includes 
consideration (and images) of particular individuals’ special neediness or eff ort 
in the determination of how much of a given set of goods should be distributed 
and to whom. 
 Aff ectively charged moral principles can reduce empathic over-arousal and 
biases insofar as they give “structure and stability to empathic aff ects” (p. 216). Th ey 
embed empathic aff ects in cognitive representations, thereby imparting longev-
ity: the empathic aff ects should survive in long-term memory. Structure, stability, 
and longevity mean that the mature individual is less vulnerable not only to over-
arousal but to under-arousal as well. In other words, moral principles can serve 
to regulate and optimize the level of empathic distress. Moral principles “charged 
with empathic aff ect” can help “stabilize” empathic responses or render them “less 
dependent on variations in intensity and salience of distress cues from victims, and 
over-arousal (or under-arousal) is less likely” (Hoff man, 2000, pp. 238–239). Moral 
principles and other cognitive regulators of empathy level, along with low impulsiv-
ity, permit eff ective and sustained prosocial behavior (Eisenberg et al., 2006).    
 
■empathy, its cognitive regulation, 
and affective primacy 
 Th e optimal regulation of aff ect is seen not only in terms of the stabilizing role of 
moral principles but also broadly in moral or rational decision-making. Although 
empathic feelings aff ectively charge an airplane pilot’s knowledge of safe landing 
procedures, for example, those feelings must not be allowed to become disruptive. 
An optimal level is called for:

122 
■ Moral Development and Reality
 Th e airplane pilot in charge of landing his aircraft  in bad weather at a busy airport must 
not allow feelings to perturb attention to the details on which his decisions depend. 
And yet he must have feelings to hold in place the larger goals of his behavior in that 
particular situation, feelings connected with the sense of responsibility for the life of 
his passengers and crew, and for his own life and that of his family. Too much feeling at 
the smaller frames and too little at the larger frame can have disastrous consequences. 
(Damasio, 1994, p. 195) 
 Although cognition can be quite active as it stabilizes, optimizes, or otherwise reg-
ulates aff ect, it is nonetheless biologically based aff ect that in the fi nal analysis plays a 
primary role in the motivation of much situational behavior. Cognition then medi-
ates or moderates (regulates, transforms, directs, etc.) the impact of that initial aff ect 
on behavior. De Waal (1996) suggested that social perspective-taking and other cog-
nitive processes permit humans to direct more appropriately and eff ectively (“fi ne-
tune”) the empathic and helping tendencies shared with other cooperative animals:
 Th e cognitive dimension [has] to do with the precise channeling of [empathy]. . . . Th us, 
in aiding a friend, I combine the helping tendency of cooperative animals with a typi-
cally human appreciation of my friend’s feelings and needs. Th e forces that propel me 
into action are the same, but I carry out the mission like a smart missile instead of a 
blind rocket. Cognitive empathy [the ability to put oneself in the “shoes” of this other 
entity without losing the distinction between self and other; cf. empathic understand-
ing, described earlier] is goal directed; it allows me to fi ne-tune my help to my friend’s 
specifi c requirements. (pp. 69, 80)   
 Like de Waal, Hoff man (1986, 2000) argues that aff ective forces (arousal modes 
of the empathic predisposition; cf. “action tendencies,” e.g., Saarni, Campos, 
& Witherington, 2006) propel action (aff ective primacy) but gain more or less 
“smart” direction from cognition. Hoff man’s (1986) emphasis, however, is on 
the interaction between aff ective and cognitive processes, rather than on aff ect 
as a prior force that can operate independently of cognition (e.g., Zajonc, 1984). 
Furthermore, since his major statement in 2000, Hoff man has modifi ed his view 
that empathy “may provide  the motive to rectify violations of justice to others” 
(p. 229, emphasis added). His modifi ed position converges with my position (see 
Chapters 1 and 6) that empathy provides  a motive along with that of injustice: the 
justice motive has an “independent origin” from the empathy motive, although 
the two primary motives are “parallel, continually interact, and are diffi  cult to 
disentangle. In any adequate theory of mature morality, you have to deal with 
them both” (Hoff man, personal communication, August 14, 2012). Hoff man also 
pointed out that the emphasis should remain on the ongoing interaction between 
aff ective and cognitive primacies. 
 Empathy plays a key role in socialization, including parental discipline. Empathy 
empowers the mental representations and causal schemas entailed in moral inter-
nalization. A mental representation of an event has been termed a “generic event 
memory,” or “script” (cf. schema, Chapter 3): 
 Scripts are derived from experience and sketch the general outline of a familiar 
event. . . . three- and four-year-olds are quite good at telling what happens in general in 

“The Good” and Moral Development 
■ 123
a familiar event such as having lunch at the preschool or going to the beach, the zoo, or 
McDonald’s (Hudson & Nelson, 1983; Nelson, 1981). . . .  
 Discipline-encounter scripts . . . can be charged with the aff ects [e.g., empathy, 
 empathy-based guilt] that accompany the event. (Hoff man, 2000, pp. 156–157) 
 Like moral principles, then, mental representations such as scripts owe their 
moral motive power to empathic aff ect. Th e development of scripts (or, more 
broadly, schemas) into morally “hot” cognitions is discussed further in the context 
of moral internalization. 
the empathic predisposition, socialization, 
 
■
and moral internalization 
 Under optimal circumstances, one who sees another in distress is likely to help. 
More specifi cally: Biologically normal, cognitively and verbally competent humans 
are likely to experience in bystander situations where no one else is around to 
help (or other situations where egoistic biases and motives are not strong) a multi-
determined empathic distress that can generate suffi  cient motive power to elicit 
prosocial behavior. 
 In addition to biological bases and cognitive development, socialization is 
crucial for an empathic predisposition to eventuate into mature and eff ective 
prosocial behavior. Most situations in life, aft er all, are less than optimal. In the 
broadest terms, the development of functionally adequate levels of cooperative 
and prosocial behavior in a human society requires not only appropriate biologi-
cal and cognitive/linguistic development, but also appropriate socialization and 
moral internalization. Socialization is needed especially because many situations 
are more confl ictual than is the simple bystander situation and, accordingly, elicit 
basic egoistic motives or desires (hunger, thirst, sex, safety, dominance, etc.), ego-
centrically biased self-chatter, and associated emotions (impulses or immediate 
desires or pleasure, pain, fears, anger, etc.). Th ese motives and biases—especially 
pronounced during the childhood years—can override empathy (cf. Zahn-Waxler 
& Robinson, 1995). Consider a situation in which a child in the fi rst place  caused 
another’s distress:
 Child A says it is his turn and grabs a toy from child B, who grabs it back. Th ey argue 
until A pushes B away, grabs the toy and runs. B starts to cry. A ignores B’s crying and 
plays with the toy. (Hoff man, 2000, p. 138) 
 Such ambiguous confl ict situations beg for adult intervention because they 
allow “each child to blame the other”; the neutralizing eff ect of other-blaming 
causal attributions on empathy was noted earlier. Furthermore, although cogni-
tively developing children are increasingly able to decenter (“that is, to transcend 
the egoistic pull, free themselves from the grip of their own perspective, and take 
another’s perspective as well”; Hoff man, 2000, p. 160), the ability to coordinate 
one’s own with other viewpoints “is not enough to keep children’s own viewpoint 
from capturing most of their attention in a confl ict situation” (p. 160) that has 
elicited powerful egoistic and angry emotions. Such emotions can “blind” (p. 135) 

124 
■ Moral Development and Reality
children to the harm they have done. Socialization support for decentration is 
necessary if each child is to understand the other’s perspective and realize it is like 
his own (“He expects to be given a reason, not a fl at refusal, just as I do”). It is also 
necessary if each child is to empathize with the other and anticipate his disap-
pointment at not getting what he wants and for each child to accept his share of 
blame and be ready to make amends or compromise (p. 138). Socialization and, 
more broadly, culture must support sociomoral development. 
 Adult intervention, then, is oft en needed in child confl ict situations. Aft er all, 
“even highly empathic children can get emotionally involved when pursuing their 
goals or when their desires confl ict with [those of] others” (Hoff man, 2000, p. 
169). Adults may also react aft er a child has already done harm or damage, espe-
cially if the harm was serious and intentional (refl ecting awareness and delibera-
tion) or negligent (the child could have been aware and more considerate) and 
did not evidence spontaneous guilt or reparative behavior. Such interventions in 
the midst of or following transgression are discipline encounters. Although par-
ent–child interactions during discipline encounters constitute but one dynamic in 
the family system (Parke & Buriel, 2006) and parent–child infl uences are to some 
extent bidirectional, Hoff man (1983, 1984, 1994, 2000) argues cogently that disci-
pline encounters are at the heart of moral socialization and internalization. 
 Socialization Through Discipline Encounters 
 Not surprisingly, Hoff man (2000) advocates interventions in the discipline situa-
tion that encourage decentration or perspective-taking through the elicitation and 
cultivation of empathy and transgression guilt—natural “allies” (p. 151; cf. Damon, 
1988) of the parent’s prosocial cause. Specifi cally, Hoff man advocates the use of 
“inductions” or parental messages that “highlight the other’s perspective, point up 
the other’s distress, and make it clear that the child’s action caused it” (p. 143). 
 To be eff ective, inductions must be delivered appropriately and with opti-
mal power or infl uence. Parents who make eff ective inductions cast the mes-
sage in a form appropriate to the maturity level of the child’s available empathic 
arousal modes and cognitive development. Inductions with a preverbal toddler 
can point out an act’s physical harm and thereby activate classically conditioned 
and direct associations. An intervening induction may point to the still-present 
crying victim: 
 For inductive information to be understood well enough to arouse empathic distress 
and guilt at that age, it must simply and clearly point up the victim’s distress and make 
the child’s role in it salient (“You pushed him and he fell down and started to cry”). 
 In processing their very earliest inductions, children probably integrate the cause–
eff ect relation between their act and the victim’s distress into the simple, nonmoral 
physical cause–eff ect scripts. [Th ese] scripts are [thereby] enriched and given a moral 
dimension (my actions can harm others). Furthermore, the scripts can be infused with 
empathic distress and a (rudimentary) guilt feeling, which gives them the properties, 
including the motivational properties, of aff ectively charged representations, or hot cog-
nitions. (Hoff man, 2000, pp. 159–160) 

“The Good” and Moral Development 
■ 125
 With cognitive and linguistic advances, the child develops role or perspective-taking 
and mediated association modes of empathic arousal. Accordingly, parents can now 
communicate more complex and subtle information concerning  emotional harm.  
 Th rough this process [of progressively integrating the information in literally thousands 
of inductions over the childhood years], children’s early, physical, nonmoral causal 
scripts are gradually transformed into complex, generalized, aff ectively charged scripts 
pertaining to the eff ects of one’s actions on others. (Hoff man, 2000, p. 161). 
 Of particular theoretical interest is Hoff man’s construal of this moral internaliza-
tion as a “constructive” process: Children “build up” or “ construct an  internalized 
norm of considering others” (p. 144, emphases added). At fi rst blush, the juxtaposi-
tion of “constructing” with “internalizing” is odd; we saw in Chapter 3 (cf. Chapter 
10) that  construction has a special referent in Piagetian usage to  logic and, in that 
sense, is not reducible to  internalization . In a broader context, however, construction 
in Piagetian theory refers to an interplay in which the person actively assimilates, 
transforms, and adapts to environmental information. Insofar as Hoff man concep-
tualizes internalization in terms not of simple transmission but instead construc-
tive transformation, his usage is not inconsistent with a broad Piagetian (or, for that 
matter, Vygotskian) conceptualization (cf. Lawrence & Valsiner, 1993). Some knowl-
edge, however adapted or transformed,  does originate in the environment or culture 
(Piaget called it  empirical knowledge ; see Chapter 10). In this sense,  social  construc-
tion can be expanded beyond peer interaction and the logic of action to encompass 
inductive infl uences and moral internalization. Th e constructive value of inductive 
discipline suggests that Piaget (1932/1965) underplayed the role that parents can 
play in the moral development of the child (see also Walker et al., 2000). 
 Eff ective inductions are not only developmentally appropriate but also refl ect an 
optimal level of parental power or infl uence. Children experience a certain degree 
of pressure to comply in a discipline encounter once they become aware of the 
relative power of parents. Furthermore, they care about parental approval and are 
vulnerable to anxiety in response to indications of parental disapproval. Induction 
and power (which generate in the child anxiety about the parent’s approval) are 
the dimensions of any discipline initiative. Parental power is expressed either in 
physical terms (demands, threats, actual punitive or restraining force, or depriva-
tion of a privilege or possession; i.e., “power assertion”; Hoff man, 1960) or psycho-
logical terms (love withdrawal). 8 Even the most nurturing, inductively disciplining 
parents bring an implicit power dimension to the discipline encounter. Hoff man 
argued that parents’ judicious use of power can promote moral socialization. 
Parents should bring to bear an optimal level of “pressure”:
 Too little pressure obviously gives children no reason to stop, attend, and process 
inductive messages. . . . Too much power assertion or love withdrawal directs children’s 
attention to the consequences of their action for themselves. . . . Induction’s explanatory 
feature reduces the arbitrary quality of the parent’s demand, and by focusing on the 
parent’s disapproval of the act and its harmful eff ects rather than on the child, . . . makes 
a high-anxiety, cognitively disruptive response less likely. (Hoff man, 2000, p. 153;  
cf. Hoff man, 1960, 1963, 1975a; Hoff man & Salzstein, 1967) 

126 
■ Moral Development and Reality
 Th e optimal level of pressure to attend elicited in inductive discipline is congru-
ent with the broader balance between parent-centered (authoritarian) and child-
centered (permissive) orientations achieved in authoritative parenting (Baumrind, 
1989; Damon, 1995). Considerations relevant to the question of what constitutes 
“optimal” pressure for an induction include the type of situation (an intense con-
fl ict requires more pressure than, say, a negligent act to reach the “optimal” atten-
tion level 9 ), a particular child’s temperament (a higher level of pressure defi nes 
“optimal” for a willful than for a shy or inhibited child; cf. Kochanska, 1995), and 
cultural context (physical discipline is less likely to be viewed as rejecting where 
such discipline is more normative; see Dodge, McLoyd, & Lansford, 2005). 
 Inductive Discipline and Moral Internalization 
 Children’s transition from compliance with parental discipline to acceptance of 
parental induction constitutes, then, moral socialization or the internalization of a 
society’s prosocial norms. It should be emphasized that an internalized moral norm 
is one that has been  appropriated  or adopted as one’s own. In other words, the child: 
(a) experiences the normative information “as deriving autonomously from within 
oneself” (Hoff man, 2000, p. 135), (b) feels compelled by an inner obligation to live 
up to it even in the absence of witnesses or external reward and punishment, and (c) 
feels empathy-based transgression guilt and/or engages in reparative or other proso-
cial behavior toward the victim in the event of a failure to live up to the norm. 
 Hence, given moral socialization and internalization—along with the biological 
and cognitive-developmental factors already discussed—an older child will at least 
experience an inner moral confl ict in a moral encounter. When a moral require-
ment and motive (for example, one promised to visit and feels sympathy for a sick 
friend) confl ict with an egoistic desire (one is tempted instead to accept an invita-
tion to join a party), the morally internalized person seeks a responsible balance 
or priority (even if it means forgoing the party). Moral socialization or internaliza-
tion can be construed as the transition from a child’s compliance to a constraining 
adult in a  discipline encounter to an inner confl ict and resources for autonomous 
 self -regulation (Bugental & Grusec, 2006; Hoff man, 2000) in a subsequent  moral 
encounter. Th e common features of confl ict (outer, inner) and infl uence (compli-
ance, self-regulation) in the discipline encounter form the basis of Hoff man’s (1983) 
argument for the importance of discipline practices to the outcome of moral social-
ization. Although nurturance and warmth or prosocial role modeling foster a more 
receptive child, neither does what inductions in the discipline encounter can do: 
teach the impact of the child’s selfi sh act on another and empower that teaching 
with empathy—the crucial connection for moral internalization.  
 Evidence for Hoffman’s Theory of Moral Socialization 
 Th e socialization component of Hoff man’s moral developmental theory, then, fea-
tures empathy. Specifi cally, the empathic predisposition is seen as playing a key 
role in the contribution made by inductive discipline to children’s subsequent 
prosocial behavior. Discipline that emphasizes power does not cultivate empathy; 

“The Good” and Moral Development 
■ 127
indeed, unqualifi ed power assertion fosters in the child self-focused concerns with 
external consequences, which can in turn  reduce prosocial behavior. Aft er all, such 
discipline “contains no message about alternative, appropriate behavior, focuses 
children’s attention away from the consequence of their behavior for others, and 
may teach children to avoid getting caught rather than to curtail the unaccept-
able behavior”; it may even encourage “children to view their appropriate behavior 
as externally imposed, rather than motivated by internal factors” (Kerr, Lopez, 
Olson, & Sameroff , 2004, p. 370; cf. Hoff man, 2000). 
 Severe levels of power assertion, or physical child abuse, can inculcate in the 
child a schema or internal working model of the world as dangerous and threaten-
ing, of others as having hostile intentions; such biased or distorted social informa-
tion processing has been linked to subsequent antisocial behavior (Dodge, Coie, 
& Lynam, 2006). In contrast, inductive discipline elicits empathic distress and 
empathy-based transgression guilt by directing the child to consider how his or 
her behavior has aff ected others. Th e elicited empathic aff ect charges or renders 
“hot” the other-oriented induction, empowering it to prevail over egoistic motives 
in subsequent moral situations. 
 Th e key claim of Hoff man’s moral socialization theory is that empathy medi-
ates the relation between parents’ use of inductive discipline and children’s proso-
cial behavior. Two contemporaneous 10  studies that have examined this claim both 
found results consistent with it. Using modeling analyses, Jan Janssens and Jan 
Gerris (1992) found that postulating children’s empathy as a mediator between 
authoritative parenting (including inductive discipline; Baumrind, 1971) and 
prosocial development (including prosocial behavior) yielded a more adequate 
causal model than did alternative models of empathy. Julia Krevans and I (Krevans 
& Gibbs, 1996) found that inductive discipline no longer predicted children’s 
prosocial behavior when variance attributable to children’s empathy was removed 
from regression analyses. Put positively, empathy provided the crucial variance in 
the link between inductive discipline and prosocial behavior. In other results, both 
studies found that parental use of harsh power assertions related  negatively both 
to children’s empathy and children’s prosocial behavior 11  (cf. Hastings, Utendale, 
& Sullivan, 2007). 
 Th e fi ndings of these studies established a precondition for further research 
using Hoff man’s theory. If the researchers had found, for example, that the rela-
tionship between inductive discipline and children’s prosocial behavior remained 
signifi cant aft er the variance attributable to empathy was removed, then the validity 
of Hoff man’s inductive discipline theory would have been seriously undermined. 
Such a fi nding would have meant that, whatever the reasons for the induction–
prosocial behavior relationship, it could not be attributed to parents’ promotion 
of children’s empathy. 
 Krevans and I (Krevans & Gibbs, 1996) also evaluated the mediating role of 
empathy-based guilt, for which the results were less consistent. Th e mediational 
status of empathy-based guilt could not be adequately tested, because the compo-
nent correlations using guilt were signifi cant only for some of the measures of the 
variables. Notably, however, guilt did strongly relate to empathy and to prosocial 
behavior for  high -empathy children, the portion of the sample for which the guilt 

128 
■ Moral Development and Reality
variance was most likely to be attributable to empathy-based guilt as opposed to 
other kinds of guilt. Th is result pointed to the importance of Hoff man’s empathy-
based guilt construct and to the need to develop more valid measures that target 
specifi cally this type of guilt. 
 Because the design of these studies was cross-sectional and correlational, the 
results are amenable to alternative causal interpretations. For example, it can be 
argued that high empathy in children leads not only to prosocial behavior but also 
to inductive discipline in the fi rst place: Aft er all, the responsiveness of such chil-
dren to inductions (they might already be noticing their act’s consequences for 
their victim) would presumably encourage parents to use this discipline technique. 
Hoff man and we argued, however, that the relations between parent and child vari-
ables were most likely bidirectional—in particular, that induction and empathy 
“feed each other . . . in complex, interlocking ways” (Hoff man, 2000, p. 169). Much 
the same can be said of the interaction between socialization contexts in general 
and other child variables such as temperament (Collins et al., 2000). Hoff man sug-
gested that, although infl uence almost certainly fl ows in the main from parent to 
child, a longitudinal research design and structured equation modeling would yield 
more defi nitive data and conclusions regarding the causality question.  
 Expressing Disappointed Expectations 
 An unexpected fi nding in the Krevans and Gibbs (1996) study pointed to the 
importance of a construct not currently included in Hoff man’s theory: parental 
expression of disappointed expectations. “Disappointment” is an elusive construct. 
Insofar as the message highlights harm to another (namely, the parent, who may 
comment, “What you said made me unhappy”), it is classifi able as an induction. 
Other versions clearly communicate love withdrawal (e.g., “I can’t trust you any 
more”) or even ego attacks (Gershoff  et al., 2010). A number of the items in the 
original Hoff man and Saltzstein (1967) measure of inductive discipline were state-
ments of disappointed  expectations, for example, “I never would have expected 
you to do that”; such expressions may connote induction or love withdrawal but 
may also go beyond both in their meanings. Th ey seem to say in eff ect to the child, 
“You know better, you can do better, and I think much more highly of  you than 
I do of what you did” (Berk, personal communication, April 1, 2002; cf. Damon, 
1995; Hoff man, 1970). Given such a message, children may be induced to refl ect 
on the kind of persons they wish to be, appropriate the parental values for them-
selves, feel a disappointment in themselves, and determine to be more honest or 
considerate toward others in the future. 
 An adaptation of the Hoff man and Saltzstein (1967) measure was used in our 
(Krevans & Gibbs, 1996) replication of the relationship between inductive discipline 
and children’s prosocial behavior. According to Hoff man’s theory, other-oriented 
inductions specifi cally account for this relationship. To evaluate this claim empiri-
cally and improve the construct validity of the Hoff man and Saltzstein measure, 
we retained some disappointed-expectations items but added items (e.g., “point 
out how his friend must feel”) that were clearly other-oriented induction appeals. 
We then created disappointment and other-oriented induction subscales and 

“The Good” and Moral Development 
■ 129
correlated each with prosocial behavior. We expected to fi nd that other- oriented 
induction mainly accounted for the inductive-discipline–prosocial behavior rela-
tionship. Instead, the results indicated the opposite: Th e disappointment subscale 
was the stronger component factor. Hence, parental expression of disappointed 
expectations may be even more important than other-oriented induction for the 
socialization of cooperative and prosocial behavior, at least for older children (our 
participants were early adolescents). 12 
 Disappointed expectations are related to other-oriented induction in positive 
discipline. In our study, disappointment statistically “behaved” like other-oriented 
induction (cf. Patrick & Gibbs, 2007): Both correlated positively with maternal 
nurturance, negatively with parental power assertion, and positively with child 
empathy. A similar pattern of correlations was found in the Janssens and Gerris 
(1992) study for a disappointment-like variable, “demandingness” (in which par-
ents “appeal to their child’s responsibility, make demands about mature behavior, 
and control whether their child behaves according to their expectations,” p. 72). 
Th ese fi ndings that disappointed expectations generally “behave” like other-ori-
ented induction led Hoff man (2000) to conclude that disappointment messages are 
oft en interpreted by the child as other-oriented inductions specifying the parent 
as the hurt “other” (but that rejecting or ego-attacking expressions of disappoint-
ment might be interpreted as love withdrawal). Accordingly, Hoff man suggested 
that disappointment items be assimilated either to induction or love withdrawal, 
“depending on how the parent usually responds in similar situations” (p. 155). 
 Yet parental expression of disappointed expectations might also foster in the child 
a sense of the relevance of morality to his or her self-concept (Patrick & Gibbs, 2007, 
2012). Hoff man (1963) suggested that parental expressions of disappointed expecta-
tions (as distinct from parental “ego attacks”) could promote positive behavior by 
communicating that the child was “capable of living up to an ideal” (p. 311). In other 
words, such expressions “may connect [the] parent’s expectations and hopes for the 
child with the child’s own self-image and developing expectations and hopes for him-
self” (Hoff man, personal communication, February 24, 2007). Indeed, parent’s more 
frequent expression of disappointed expectations in discipline encounters is related 
to higher levels of moral identity among adolescents or preadolescents (Patrick & 
Gibbs, 2012). Consider the following childhood recollection from a young woman 
(she did not recollect her age at the time of the incident): 
 I once stole some candy from a food store and was caught by the manager. He demanded 
to know my name, and, terrifi ed, I told him. He phoned my parents, told them what 
I had done, and sent me home. 
 As I rode my bicycle home in the dark, I thought about the reception and prob-
able spanking I would receive. Looking scared, I entered the house and was met by a 
rather calm father and mother. Th ey stressed that they were  very disappointed in me that 
I hadn’t lived up to their expectations. Th ey said they hoped I would never do it again, 
because it was wrong to take what didn’t belong to me. 
 My initial feeling when I was back in my room was that I had escaped with my life. 
But as I thought about it, I, too, was disappointed in myself. I resolved never to do it 
again, and didn’t. (Lickona, 1983, p. 155)   

130 
■ Moral Development and Reality
 Although the child initially reacted to the parents’ calm eschewing of power 
assertion with relief at having avoided external consequences, she then contem-
plated her parents’ disappointment in her. From this refl ection emerged a sense of 
 self -disappointment (“I, too, was disappointed in myself”). She (the “she” emergent 
through her refl ection) then found immoral acts such as theft  to violate who “she” 
is, her identity. To protect her newfound (or newly constructed and appropriated) 
moral identity against subsequent violations, she summoned her ego strength 
(“I resolved never to do it again, and didn’t”). Th e contributions of moral identity 
and ego strength to moral motivation are discussed further in Chapter 6. 
 Role of Nurturance 
 Th e studies also examined the relationship of maternal nurturance or warmth to 
parental discipline styles as well as to children’s empathy and prosocial behavior. 
Generally, an emotionally close or warm relationship between parent and child is 
thought to foster the formation of a secure attachment and, accordingly (perhaps 
through an internal working model, prosocial prototype, or positive social expec-
tations), subsequent other-concern and prosocial behavior (Hastings et al., 2007). 
In Hoff man’s theory, maternal warmth is a “background or contextual variable” 
(Hoff man, 1970, p. 303) or an example of parenting  style (Darling & Steinberg, 
1993). Children of generally warm or aff ectionate parents should care more about 
the child–parent relationship and hence more readily experience attentional 
arousal during a disciplinary encounter. Eleanor Maccoby (1983) suggested that 
parental nurturance promotes cooperativeness in the child and hence reduces 
the necessity for parents “to resort to heavy-handed, power-assertive modes of 
control” (p. 363). Accordingly, parental nurturance should be negatively corre-
lated with power assertion, a fi nding obtained in both studies (see also Hastings et 
al., 2007). Both studies also found that maternal nurturance related positively to 
parental induction, parental disappointment, and child empathy—variables that 
in turn correlate with prosocial behavior (cf. Hoff man, 1975a; Zhou et al., 2002). 
Little or no support was found, however, for a  direct correlation between warmth 
per se and child prosocial behavior, suggesting that Hoff man is correct to view 
nurturance as a mediated or interactional more than main-eff ect variable in moral 
socialization. Nurturance combined with  low levels of induction or demanding-
ness (oft en called “permissive” or “indulgent” parenting), for example, does not 
predict child prosocial behavior. 
conclusion and critique 
 
■
 Th anks to Hoff man’s theory, we gain in our exploration of moral development 
a greater appreciation of the fact that morality must contend with the egoistic 
motives of the individual—and that morality entails more than judgments of right 
and wrong. We fi nd relief in Hoff man’s theory from a decades-old (even pre-Haid-
tian) complaint against Kohlberg’s theory as “cold” in that its cognitive-develop-
mental approach “gives relatively little attention to the strong emotions” of the ego 
(Maccoby, 1980, p. 325). In contrast, Hoff man consistently respects “the hot” in 

“The Good” and Moral Development 
■ 131
morality: the naturally hot desires of the ego (or the  id in Freudian theory); the 
countervailing, naturally hot basic arousal modes of the empathic predisposition; 
and the role of empathy and evoked images in rendering “hot” various aspects of 
cognition (we have encountered, for example, self-recognition, cognitive develop-
ment, scripts or heuristics, attributions, inferences, moral principles, internalized 
moral norms, and inductions). 
 Hoff man’s attention to egoistic motives and empathic processes in moral 
socialization accounts for the major caveats he invokes as he uses cognitive-de-
velopmental themes. Doesn’t the child actively construct moral schemas? Well, 
yes—but mainly if “constructing moral schemas” can be taken beyond its clas-
sic Piagetian context of necessary knowledge (see Chapters 3 and10) to mean 
“building up moral scripts” of social sequences and gaining motivation from 
empathic aff ect in the course of moral internalization. Doesn’t peer interaction 
promote social decentration and moral development? Well, yes—but only if 
those interacting peers do not vie for dominance, and only if they have been 
socialized in inductive homes or are supervised in their confl ict by inductive 
“coaches.” Doesn’t perspective-taking promote moral behavior? Well, yes—but 
thanks mainly to the primacy of empathy; otherwise, “why should perspective-
taking serve prosocial rather than egoistic [e.g., manipulative] ends?” (Hoff man, 
2000, p. 131). 
 Hoff man’s caveats lead to a broader understanding of human nature, morality, 
and moral development. Extending from Hoff man’s work, de Waal (2009) con-
cluded: “I rate humans among the most aggressive of primates but also believe that 
we’re masters at connecting and that social ties constrain competition. . . . It’s all a 
matter of balance” (p. 45). A fully balanced and comprehensive view of human 
nature and moral development requires recognition of the right as well as the 
good. Our main  counter -caveat to Hoff man and de Waal is that “the right” is in 
a sense just as primary as “the good” in morality (as noted, Hoff man has come to 
agree with this point). Th e construction of ideal and “necessary” moral reciproc-
ity, for example, has a place in moral motivation that aff ective primacy fails to 
capture. If reciprocity is akin to logic—“the morality of thought” in Piaget’s famous 
dictum—then reciprocity (or its violation), equality, and impartiality generate a 
motive power in their own right, one that can join the motive power of empathy. 
Indeed, the Scottish Enlightenment philosopher Adam Smith (1759/1976) even 
regarded empathy or benevolence as “feeble” relative to the corrective power of 
reason, justice, or the third-person point of view:
 It is not . . . that feeble spark of benevolence . . . that is thus capable of counteracting the 
strongest impulses of self-love. It is a stronger power. . . . It is reason, . . . the great judge 
and arbiter of our conduct. . . . Th e natural misrepresentation of self-love can be cor-
rected only by the eye of this impartial spectator. It is he who shows us . . . the deformity 
of injustice . . . of doing the smallest injury to another, in order to obtain the greatest 
benefi t to ourselves. (p. 136; cited in Pinker, 2011, pp. 670–671) 
 Although Kohlberg’s theory may underplay egoistic motives and empathy, 
then, it does remind us of the role and potential power of  cognitive primacy, espe-
cially the moral motivation engendered by coordinations of social perspectives 

132 
■ Moral Development and Reality
and violations of justice. An adequate moral psychology must represent not just 
“the good,” but also “the right” in morality. 
 We will need the resources of both Hoff man’s and Kohlberg’s theories (and 
to some extent Haidt’s theory) as we now turn our attention more fully to social 
behavior and its motivation. Do Kohlberg’s and Hoff man’s theories of moral devel-
opment enable an adequate understanding of prosocial and antisocial behavior? 
Th is question will be explored in the next two chapters. 

133
  6 
 Moral Development, 
Moral Identity, and 
Prosocial Behavior 
 To know the right or feel the good is not necessarily to  do the right or good. One 
who has grasped ideal moral reciprocity, or who on multiple levels empathizes 
with others, may—or may not—actively seek to correct an injustice or come to the 
aid of someone in distress. Consistency across ideals of understanding, empathic 
feeling, and prosocial action in morality does occur in many instances. Th ose 
dedicated to humanitarian causes, who persevere through adverse circumstances, 
stand out as particularly admirable. One thinks of those who courageously cam-
paign for equal human rights, engage in nonviolent protest against social injustice, 
feed and nurture needy children of the world, care for the abandoned or neglected, 
heal the desperately ill, or comfort the dying (Ackerman & Duvall, 2000; Colby & 
Damon, 1992). Smaller-scale prosocial or altruistic behavior—a parent’s encour-
aging hug for a child, a teacher’s tutoring for a struggling student—is also impor-
tant and, fortunately, common. 
 In this chapter and the next two, we will apply what we have learned from 
Kohlberg’s, Hoff man’s, and Haidt’s theories to social behavior. Th e present  chapter 
will focus on prosocial behavior and individual diff erences in its occurrence; 
the next two (Chapters 7 and 8) on antisocial behavior and its treatment. In our 
attempt to account for the complexity of sociomoral behavior, we will revisit in 
this chapter the question of moral motivation. We will also highlight the need to 
elaborate certain underdeveloped concepts in Kohlberg’s and Hoff man’s theories: 
chiefl y, moral identity in this chapter, and cognitive distortion as well as social 
skills in the next two. A case study to be introduced at the end of this chapter will 
serve to sharpen our understanding of key points pertaining to full-fl edged proso-
cial behavior. To introduce our considerations we will revisit a case study, from 
Robert Coles’s (1986)  Th e Moral Life of Children  (see Chapter 2). 
prosocial behavior: the rescue 
 
■
 In its fullest sense,  prosocial behavior is social action intended to benefi t others 
(remedying injustice, promoting others’ welfare) without anticipation of personal 
reward; indeed, perhaps at some cost or risk to oneself. Our case study of prosocial 
behavior in eff ect fi ts this defi nition: At some personal cost and risk, one youth res-
cued another from an imminent attack. As you may recall from Chapter 2, the res-
cuer was White, the rescued was African-American; both youths were students at 
a previously segregated high school in Atlanta, Georgia, in the 1970s. Th e incident 
is described at length in Chapter 2. In this chapter, we revisit this dramatic rescue 
in order to consider the aff ective and cognitive dynamics of prosocial behavior. 

134 
■ Moral Development and Reality
 Moral Motivation: Affective, Cognitive, and Co-primacy 
 Hoff man (2000) off ered an empathy-based analysis of this incident that is bril-
liant, yet limited inasmuch as it reserved the role of moral motivation for empathy 
exclusively. Let us go with Hoff man’s aff ective-primacy analysis as far as it will 
take us. Consider the sudden, at-fi rst-inexplicable quality of the rescue and apol-
ogy. We think fi rst of Hoff man’s involuntary mechanisms of the empathic pre-
disposition (see Chapter 5). 1 Th e youth himself referred in eff ect to empathy and 
its cognitive alloys: sympathetic distress (“seeing him being insulted so bad, so 
real bad . . . soon they were pushing him in a corner”), the anticipation of worse 
sympathetic distress (“it looked like trouble, bad trouble”), and empathy-based 
guilt (“I’m sorry”). Also note the aff ective precedent in the youth’s dramatic moral 
turnabouts. Specifi cally, the emotional shift  from anger to empathy and friendship 
preceded the cognitive shift  from his segregationist ideology to the emergence of 
his philosophy of integration. 
 In Hoff man’s traditional view, then, even the White youth’s unfairness concern 
was primarily an empathic feeling, albeit one shaped by cognition. Th e White 
youth recalled seeing the African-American youth smile, be polite, and remain 
above trading insults “no matter what we called him.” Th is “contrast between the 
Black youth’s admirable conduct and the way he was treated” generated the infer-
ence that he was “a fi ne person who deserved better.” Discerned during those 
weeks, then, was an “obvious lack of reciprocity between character and out-
come” (p. 108). Th e inference of non-reciprocity, in Hoff man’s analysis, “trans-
formed . . . the boy’s empathic/sympathetic distress . . . into an empathic feeling of 
injustice” (p. 108). As noted in Chapter 3, Hoff man’s most recent position has been 
that justice can motivate in its own right. Insofar as Hoff man’s modifi ed position 
attributes a cognitive character to the justice motive, it diverges from that of other 
aff ective primacy theorists such as Haidt (see Chapter 2)—for whom  all moral 
motives, justice included, are primarily aff ective. Hoff man’s  traditional position, 
much like Haidt’s, treated justice as primarily an aff ect—hence, the injustice cog-
nition would have no motive power were it not for empathy. Furthermore,  moral 
principles  represent an empathy alloy once removed: In Hoff man’s (2000) analy-
sis, the empathic feeling of injustice itself then activated and primed (or charged 
with empathic aff ect) the youth’s moral principle of “equal rights” (p. 244) or phi-
losophy of integration. 
 For a moral theory that still emphasizes aff ective primacy, Hoff man’s is remark-
ably cognitive and developmental. His depiction of the cognitive development of 
empathy and the crucial role of cognition in structuring the empathic predisposi-
tion renders his theory less extreme than are Haidt’s claims (see Chapter 2) that 
“the action in morality is in the intuitions,  not in reasoning” and that reasoning’s 
role in morality is mainly that of self-serving, post-aff ective-fl ash rationalization 
or “confabulation” (Haidt & Bjorklund, 2008a, pp. 190, 196, emphasis added). 
Moreover, “aff ective primacy” in Hoff man’s theory does not proliferate beyond 
empathy. For example, feelings such as loyalty or purity—although they may entail 
empathy—are not identifi ed in their own right as additional legitimate founda-
tions of morality. 

Moral Development, Moral Identity, and Prosocial Behavior 
■ 135
 Again, although Hoff man’s theory is more cognitive and developmental than 
Haidt’s, Hoff man has emphasized aff ective primacy. Transformed and directed 
though it may have been by an inference of unfairness (and empathy-based guilt), 
empathy alone in Hoff man’s traditional theory exclusively provided the motive 
power that prevailed over the youth’s egocentric biases and ethnocentric preju-
dices and impelled him to action, apology, and the advocacy of integration. 
 In our view, an  exclusive aff ective primacy claim exceeds the proper bounds of 
primary aff ect in moral motivation. Th e evocative moral power of the African-
American youth’s moral dignity in the face of those bad-and-getting-worse insults 
and pushes, or, more generally, of the nonviolent protester against oppression or 
injustice (Ackerman & Duvall, 2000), is aff ective  and  cognitive. Automatic uncon-
scious and preconscious processes entail feelings or emotions but also judgments 
or cognitions—in the case at hand, the empathic predisposition as well as the logi-
cally and morally necessary ideals of justice or reciprocity. As we argue in Chapter 
2 and throughout this book, justice is a moral motive in its own right, just as pri-
mary as empathy. 
 Th e motivational primacy issue has long been pondered in psychology. 
Regarding the two “fl atly opposed doctrines” of cognitive and aff ective primacy 
(respectively, that “judgment in every case produces the emotion” and that 
“emotion always determines the judgment”), William McDougall (1926) simply 
declared: “We must recognize that both are partially true” (p. 220). Similarly, 
Orobio de Castro (2010) supported both standpoints,” namely, “that a stimulus is 
fi rst represented cognitively . . . [which] then evokes a specifi c emotion”  and “that a 
relevant stimulus directly evokes an emotion, which then evokes a specifi c cogni-
tion” (p. 57). Philip Cowan (1982) characterized co-primacy as a joint “approach” 
or “emphasis”:
 Th ree approaches have dominated attempts to understand the aff ective/cognitive con-
nection. Some theorists have adopted an aff ective emphasis in which emotion precedes 
and dominates thought [aff ective primacy]. Others have taken a cognitive emphasis in 
which meaning precedes and determines feeling [cognitive primacy]. A very few theo-
rists appear to have accorded equal status to both [co-primacy]. (p. 53) 
 Although Hoff man has moved toward a joint approach that recognizes the cog-
nitive contribution of justice or reciprocity, he has not distinguished  ideal from 
pragmatic reciprocity. Such a distinction is particularly important in the case at 
hand. Th e non-reciprocity discerned by the White youth represented the violation 
of an  ideal ; he seemed to have been impressed with the African-American youth’s 
dignity “no matter what we called him.” Less mature youths (such as the rescuer’s 
peers?) might not have been moved, indeed, might have thought the Black youth a 
fool not to pay back, not to reciprocate tit-for-tat every insult with a counter-insult 
(Kohlberg’s moral judgment Stage 2). But the White youth may have constructed 
a more mature or ideal understanding of reciprocity: Again, he was moved as he 
appreciated a fi ne person, an authentic and dignifi ed character morally  above the 
level of trading insults. Th e sense of justice or construction of reciprocity gen-
erates its own motivating aff ect, known as the feeling of logical or moral neces-
sity. In this case, the White youth’s inference of non-reciprocity, his perception of 

136 
■ Moral Development and Reality
 in justice generated a distress akin to that of “conservational” children confronted 
with (spurious) non-reciprocity outcomes in the conservation task (Smedslund, 
1961; see Chapter 3). Unfortunately, in the sociomoral realm, non-reciprocity is 
not spurious but all too real and in need of correction. 
 If exclusive aff ective primacy is untenable, so is exclusive cognitive primacy as 
a suffi  cient account of moral motivation. Certainly, any attempt to argue for cog-
nitive (justice) primacy  instead  of aff ective (empathy) primacy is an intellectual 
nonstarter. If it is true that true (logic-based) reciprocity generally does not “kick 
in” until age 7 or so, then cognitive primacy is an ontogenetic latecomer relative 
to the basic empathic arousal modes of the infant. And empathy, insofar as it con-
tributes to love, may be linked to the “ultimate” moral motive (see Chapter 10). 
We argue, not for cognitive primacy as  the motive, just for cognitive primacy as 
 a motive. Again, in our co-primacy view, justice contributes moral motive power 
along with that of empathy. Primary in the rescuer’s social perception and impetus 
to act were both sympathetic distress (“seeing him insulted so bad, so real bad”) 
 and the violation of ideal reciprocity (“seeing him behave himself, no matter what 
we called him”). 
 Th e rescuer’s case suggested a strong sense of co-primacy, insofar as he may 
have been initially struck by both wrong and harm. In less concurrent versions of 
co-primacy, the coalescence may take time. Eventually, however, as Paul Bloom 
(2004) pointed out, “empathy and rationality [or injustice inference] can be mutu-
ally reinforcing” and facilitating. For example, a rational conclusion that slavery is 
unjust can lead one to empathize with the plight of a slave; just as “someone who, 
for whatever reason, . . . feels empathy [for a slave] might be driven to explore the 
notion that slavery in general is immoral” (p. 144; cf. Decety & Batson, 2009). 
Either way, the wrong  and  harm of slavery eventually coalesce (co-primacy) to 
motivate moral action. 
 As can the aff ective, the cognitive source of morality can motivate throughout 
one’s life. In 1992, Anne Colby and William Damon published their landmark study 
of 23  moral exemplars , a term subsequently defi ned by Lawrence Walker, Jeremy 
Frimer, and William Dunlop (2012) as “people who have engaged in extraordi-
nary moral action that has real-world signifi cance” (p. 276)—particularly where 
their action refl ects a sustained moral commitment. Such individuals’ expression 
of moral obligation  
 evokes a quality similar to numerical necessity, as when one realizes that two plus two 
must equal four and therefore simply cannot be convinced to say that it equals something 
else. 2 Virginia Durr expresses this certainty when she says that all people must be treated 
equally and that this must apply to blacks as well as whites. Cabell Brand . . . expresses it 
when he says that it is wrong for poor children to have less opportunity than rich chil-
dren. . . . Th e great certainty that we observed in our moral exemplars was the certainty 
established by  logical necessity once the truth is found. (pp. 75–76, emphasis added) 
 Consistent with our co-primacy analysis is the fi nding of some motiva-
tional confl uence among “helper” altruists and “reformer” altruists. Th e aims of 
the helper and the reformer respectively correspond to the good and the right: 
Whereas the helpers empathically identify with and seek to alleviate the distress of 

Moral Development, Moral Identity, and Prosocial Behavior 
■ 137
the people they are helping, the reformers aim to correct social injustice (Carlson, 
1982). Many helpers are also reformers to some extent, and vice versa. Indeed, we 
interpret these aims as matters of emphasis and their motivational sources as dis-
tinguishable yet inextricable and complementary: Although the prosocial behav-
ior of helpers concerns mainly the alleviation of suff ering, helpers may also seek to 
alleviate a cause of that suff ering pertaining to social injustice. Correspondingly, 
the reformer’s cognitive motive to correct injustice or inequality as a logical or 
moral necessity coalesces with the motivating power from empathizing with the 
victims of that injustice. Th e interrelated helper and reformer categories of proso-
cial behavior are both primary—as are the basic sources of moral motivation to 
which those categories correspond. 
individual differences in prosocial 
 
■
behavior 
 Th e prosocial behavior of rescue and apology in our case study is remarkable not 
only because of its suddenness but also because the rescuer-to-be, an ordinary 
youth (Coles, 1986, described him as “a tough athlete, a poor student, not a well-
read boy of fourteen,” p. 27) who had yelled “Go nigger, go!” at the very African-
American youth he was subsequently to rescue, was a most unlikely candidate for 
such action. Again, the White youth was impelled to act by a primarily cognitive 
motive to stop an injustice  and a primarily aff ective motive to relieve or prevent 
another’s pain and suff ering (co-primacy). But then why were not his White bud-
dies also moved by injustice and empathic distress? Why were they “not as swift  as 
he to show a change in racial attitudes” (Coles, 1986, p. 28)? How was this White 
youth able to resist their social infl uence? Had he been, perhaps, less identifi ed 
with or committed to his peers’ in-group segregationist ideology (see Tarrant, 
Calitri, & Weston, 2012)? Yet he recollected that he had “meant it” as he had joined 
in shouting the epithets. More broadly, what factors might account for individual 
diff erences in the likelihood of prosocial behavior? 
 In a study of this question (Gibbs et al., 1986), we explored the extent to 
which individual-diff erence and moral-judgment-stage variables could account 
for the variance in prosocial behavior among high school students. Teachers 
characterized students they knew well in terms of one or another of fi ve “nut-
shell” descriptions of “how the subject tends to act in social situations.” Th e 
rating instrument was developed by Robert Havighurst and Hilda Taba (1949) 
and adapted by us to measure moral courage, which can be characterized as 
prosocial behavior in the face of major adverse circumstances. Representing 
the bottom of our adapted four-point scale was a description of a person who 
“would only consider joining a just or rightful cause if it is popular with his/
her friends and supported by adult authorities. He/she would prefer to remain 
in the background even if a friend is being taunted or talked about unfairly.” At 
the highest level was a person who  
 consistently stands by his/her principles. He/she would stand up for a just or rightful 
cause, even if the cause is unpopular and will mean criticizing adult authorities. He/she 

138 
■ Moral Development and Reality
will defend someone who is being taunted or talked about unfairly, even if the victim is 
only an acquaintance. (Gibbs et al., 1986, p. 188) 
 Th is description of moral courage is pertinent to our case study from Coles 
(1986), insofar as the White youth did indeed defend an acquaintance who was 
being taunted (and worse), and to many of the exemplars studied by Colby and 
Damon (1992). Of course, neither Coles’s nor Colby’s and Damon’s participants 
were among the high school students studied in our research. We can speculatively 
apply to these cases, however, our and other fi ndings concerning individual diff er-
ences in prosocial behavior. 
 Moral Types A and B 
 Th e main individual diff erence variable we studied was Moral Types A and B, 
introduced in Chapter 3. Th e Type A/Type B distinction pertains to the extent to 
which the prescriptive ideals of the mature stages are evidenced. Even the Type A 
versions of Stage 3 and Stage 4 judgments indicate a profound understanding of the 
bases for viable interpersonal relationships and societal systems. However, 3A and 
4A thinking is more embedded in existing social arrangements and hence is less 
clearly ideal than that of 3B and 4B. High school students evidencing Stage 3 Type 
A judgment, for example, may “care so much about what others think of them that 
they can turn into moral marshmallows, willing to do something because ‘every-
body’s doing it’” (Lickona, 1983, p. 161). In contrast to the asymmetrical social 
conformist tendencies of Type A, Moral Type B is 
 more balanced in perspective. A 3A decides in terms of What does a good husband do? 
What does a wife expect? A 3B decides in terms of What does a good husband who is a 
partner in a good mutual relationship do? What does each spouse expect of the other? 
Both sides of the equation are balanced; this is fairness. At 4A, the subject decides in 
terms of the question, What does the system demand? At 4B the subject asks, What does 
the individual in the system demand as well as the system, and what is a solution that 
strikes a balance? 
 Because of this balance, B’s are more prescriptive or internal, centering more on their 
judgments of what ought to be. Th ey are also more universalistic, that is, willing to 
carry the boundary of value categories, like the value of life, to their logical conclusion. 
(Kohlberg, 1984, p. 185)   
 Accordingly, we operationalized Moral Type B as composed of three com-
ponents:  balancing or reciprocal perspective-taking,  fundamental or universal 
 valuing,  and  conscience or prescriptive internality (cf. moral identity, discussed 
below). Whereas “parents should not expect to be respected if they don’t treat 
their children fairly” illustrates the balancing component, “parents will lose their 
self-respect if they treat their children unfairly” illustrates the conscience compo-
nent. One component may support another in a moral justifi cation. For example, 
a participant may evaluate saving even a stranger’s life as important because “all 
life is precious” and “people shouldn’t just care about those in given relationships 
but about all humanity” (fundamental valuing) and then support that universal 

Moral Development, Moral Identity, and Prosocial Behavior 
■ 139
appeal by asking, “How would you feel, if you were the stranger and no one cared 
enough to save your life?” (balancing). Th e Type B participant may add something 
like: “Aft er all, I have to live with myself as a person and respect that person” (con-
science; Harter, 2012, p. 125). 
 A central fi nding of our study was that Moral Type B is related to prosocial 
behavior. Adolescents who make appeals in their moral judgment to balanced per-
spectives, fundamental values such as the basic humanity of people, and personal 
conscience are rated by their teachers as individuals likely to engage consistently 
in acts of moral courage and other exemplary prosocial behavior. Anna Laura 
Comunian and Uwe Gielen (1995, 2000) found that Italian adolescents and adults 
evidencing Moral Type B (as well as those evidencing mature moral judgment in 
societal [Stage 4] as well as interpersonal [Stage 3] spheres) were more likely to 
engage in volunteer services assisting disabled, elderly, and refugee individuals. 
Relevant to fundamental valuing and prosocial behavior is Sam and Pearl Oliner’s 
(1988) classic fi nding that European rescuers of Jews during the Holocaust tended 
to perceive superfi cially dissimilar others as essentially similar to themselves. 
 Moral Type B, Field Independence, and Veridical 
Moral Perception 
 A clue to the signifi cance of Moral Type B lies in its correlation with a cognitive 
style variable called  fi eld dependence-independence , also known as  psychological 
diff erentiation (Ferrari & Sternberg, 1998) and relevant to perceived locus of con-
trol (see below). Traditionally, this variable pertains to perceptual or kinesthetic 
ability: Individuals high in fi eld independence are able to orient vertically despite 
biasing infl uences, such as a tilted chair or window frame, or (as in the measure we 
used) discern and diff erentiate geometric fi gures that are embedded or concealed 
in more complex designs or “fi elds.” Th e social relevance of the variable is indicated 
by the relative autonomy or independence from conformity infl uences of fi eld-
independent individuals in social judgment tasks (Witkin & Goodenough, 1977). 
 Th e relationship we found between fi eld independence and Moral Type B sug-
gests that Moral Type B individuals are more likely to engage in prosocial activ-
ity because they are more able to discern a core injustice in a situation despite 
distortive, obscuring, or distracting infl uences from the social context or “fi eld” 
of a social group. Th e distorting fi eld in which the White youth was embedded 
included the immediate social-conformity pressures from his peers and, more 
broadly, an ecological context (Bronfenbrenner & Morris, 2006) or custom com-
plex (Haidt; see Chapter 2) in which ideological norms of segregation and out-
group rejection were prevalent. Nor were the fi eld infl uences merely external 
pressures: In Herbert Kelman’s (1958) classic terms of social infl uence, the White 
youth had not only complied with his buddies’ expectations but had also identifi ed 
with their anti–African-American norms (although he may not have fully inter-
nalized those norms). 
 Th e fi eld-independence interpretation of Moral Type B fi ts with the “moral clar-
ity” (p. 173) and “resistance to illusory interpretations of events” (p. 289) shown 
by moral exemplars (Colby & Damon, 1992, p. 173), including whistleblowers 

140 
■ Moral Development and Reality
(Anderson & Morgan, 2007; Andrews, December 3, 2006; Glazer, 2002; Lacayo 
& Ripley, 2002; Walsh, November 18, 2007) and other individuals who resist ille-
gitimate conformity or authority demands. In a replication of the famous Stanley 
Milgram obedience-to-authority experiment, a resistor (that is, a participant who 
refused to continue administering ostensible shocks to a “learner”), responded to 
“Aren’t we supposed to do what we’re told?” with a fi eld-independent retort: “Do 
you have a brain? Shouldn’t you use it, too? If someone walks up to you and says, 
‘Th e blackboard is white,’ and they’ve got on a lab coat, do you believe him? No. 
You’ve got your own eyes.” (Burger et al., 2011). 
 Again, Moral Type B (vs. Type A) individuals clearly see moral wrong (even 
amid obfuscating norms, pressures from authority, rationalizations, and ideolo-
gies). Accordingly, they experience a stronger sense of the violation of moral neces-
sity and, at least in part because of this cognitive motive, feel impelled to act. For 
example, in light of the prominent concern with the ideal perspective-taking bal-
ance in Type B, would not a Type B-oriented individual be more primed to discern 
an essential moral  im balance (non-reciprocity of treatment, unfairness) even in a 
complex and confusing social situation? Might not a Type B-oriented individual 
be especially “able to discriminate between the demands of convention and the 
requirements of justice”—and, accordingly, “attempt to transform societal arrange-
ments embedding inequalities and injustices” (Turiel, 2008, p. 4)? Moreover, in 
light of the prominent concern with fundamental values that go beyond superfi cial 
role boundaries, would not a Type B individual be more primed to discern the 
essential humanness of a member of an out-group? Signifi cantly, a “human abil-
ity to treasure the spark of humanity in everyone” (p. 279) was common among 
Colby’s and Damon’s (1992) exemplars. 3 
 Given the perceptual emphasis in the fi eld independence construct, it is inter-
esting that the White youth in our case study repeatedly used a visual fi gure of 
speech in explaining his intervention: He kept “ seeing him [the African-American 
youth] behave himself, no matter what we called him, and  seeing him being insulted 
so bad, so real bad” (Coles, 1986, p. 28, emphasis added); “aft er a few weeks, 
I began to  see a kid, not a nigger” (p. 27, emphasis added). It is as if the youth had 
a “good eye” for the ethical dimension of life. Much as a child penetrates mislead-
ing appearances despite superfi cial impressions to infer an underlying reality of 
conservation, our White youth inferred injustice and saw through stereotypes and 
superfi cial diff erences to see a human being. Indeed, his maturity and growing 
clarity, accuracy, or veridicality of moral perception may have fed his empathic 
distress and his distress at the violation of morally necessary ideals. Th ese factors 
may have related to the “something in him” that “began to change.” Given that 
internal change, the remaining fi eld pressures were restricted to the extrinsic (such 
as compliance) and were insuffi  cient to suppress his mounting motivation to do 
something as the unjust victimization escalated. 
 Morality and the Self-Schema: Moral Identity 
 Individuals who seem primed to discern and respond to the ethical core in the 
complexities of human social existence tend to be those for whom morality is 

Moral Development, Moral Identity, and Prosocial Behavior 
■ 141
relevant to their sense of self, or even, as David Moshman (2011a) put it, “central 
to your deepest sense of who you are” (p. 113; cf. Blasi, 1995). In other words, 
mature and accurate or discerning moral perception should be related to moral 
self-identity (Kohlberg & Candee, 1984). Colby and Damon (1992) concluded 
that their exemplars’ “hopes for themselves and their own destinies are largely 
defi ned by their moral goals” (p. 300); that is, there is “a moral center” to their 
self-understanding or an exceptional degree of “unity between self and morality” 
(p. 300; cf. Frimer & Walker, 2009; Patrick & Gibbs, 2012). Given this moral cen-
ter, moral schemas in moral exemplars are “chronically accessible for appraising 
the social landscape” (Lapsley & Narvaez, 2006, p. 268). And the scope of their 
concerns is “exceptionally broad”: “Th ey drop everything not just to see their own 
children across the street but to feed the poor children of the world, to comfort the 
dying, to heal the ailing, or to campaign for human rights” (p. 303). Daniel Hart 
and colleagues (Hart, Atkins, & Donnelly, 2006; cf. Aquino & Reed, 2002) found 
that adolescents who engaged in extensive volunteer community work were more 
likely to describe themselves in terms of moral personality traits and goals. By the 
same token, those who use  fewer moral terms in their self-description are more 
likely to engage in  anti social behavior (Barriga, Morrison, Liau, & Gibbs, 2001; 
Aquino, Reed, Th au, & Freeman, 2007). 
 Individual diff erences in the relevance of morality to one’s sense of self are 
greater than, say, individual diff erences in the relevance of gender to self-concept. 
As the toddler becomes aware of the distinction between  self and  other , the sense 
of self (or “self-schema”) grows through interplay with the environment. Gender 
is perceived from the start as relevant to self. Th e toddler picks up the self-label 
“boy” or “girl” and accordingly diff erentially attends to, prefers, and remembers 
social information in the environment. Within a few years, gender becomes con-
solidated into the self-schema; the child has a gender identity (Martin, 2000). 
 Not necessarily so for morality. Whereas a sense of self as male or female 
develops relatively early as a stable and central feature of one’s emergent identity, 
a consolidated sense of one’s essential self as moral may take place more gradu-
ally (Blasi, 1995; Damon & Hart, 1988; Frimer & Walker, 2009; Patrick & Gibbs, 
2012). “Early in life, morality and self are separate conceptual systems with little 
integration between them” (Colby & Damon, 1992, p. 305; but see Krettenauer, in 
press-a, in press-b, for senses of “moral self” in childhood). By mid to late ado-
lescence, some measure of integrity—i.e., of integration of moral ideals into the 
self’s explicit identity—is typically achieved (Giesbrecht & Walker, 2000; Harter, 
2012; Moshman, 2011a). Th e rescuer had to reconcile his sense of self and even 
his worldview with his strange moment of intervention to reduce the cognitive 
inconsistency between his act of rescue and apology and his erstwhile beliefs in 
segregation (Abelson et al., 1968). As we noted in the last chapter, parental expres-
sion of disappointed expectations aft er a transgression can stimulate the child (at 
least the adolescent) to refl ect on self and gain in moral identity. Individual diff er-
ences in the  degree  of moral identity, however, are still considerable even among 
adults (Colby & Damon, 1992, pp. 305–306). In George Kelly’s (1963; cf. Markus 
& Wurf, 1987) terms, morality for some is a “core construct” in their identity and 
self-evaluation, whereas for others it is more peripheral. Along a continuum of 

142 
■ Moral Development and Reality
the prominence of moral schemas in identity, those for whom schemas of moral-
ity are central to their self-schema and interpretation of social events defi ne one 
pole (highly schematic; moral character or integrity); defi ning the other pole are 
those for whom morality is entirely irrelevant (aschematic; cf. clinical sociopathy 
or psychopathy; Lykken, 1995). Most individuals are of course in the middle range 
of moral self-relevance (Baldwin, 1992; cf. Arnold, 1993). 
 Th e high moral schematicity or almost total integration of self and morality 
evidenced by Colby and Damon’s (1992) moral exemplars is what “makes them 
exceptional” (p. 301). Th is integration, as well as the evolution of their goals, was 
achieved as the exemplar connected with others in a transformative process of 
social construction in the broad sense of the term, called “co-construction” by 
Colby and Damon:
 Both the exemplar and his or her colleagues are active agents in determining the shape 
of the transformation. All new ideas must owe their shape to some interaction between 
external guidance and internal belief: the transformation is, in one precise word, a 
“co-construction.” Over an extended period of time, the new or expanded moral goals 
are co-constructed in the course of many negotiations between the exemplar and other 
persons. (p. 184) 
 At one or another point during co-construction, there may occur a critical 
event or experience triggering an “abrupt change” (Colby & Damon, 1992, p. 185). 
“We never quite know . . . how an event will connect with ourselves” (Coles, 1986, 
p. 29). Th e White youth of our case study certainly did not know that the encoun-
tered scene of worsening “bad trouble” would personally connect with him the 
way it did, that it would evoke his empathy and guilt and sense of injustice and 
stimulate a “strange” moment of moral intervention and apology. Nor could he 
have anticipated his subsequent transformation and expansion of friendships and 
attitudes—in eff ect, substantial changes in his identity, perhaps the “something in 
him” that “began to change.” (Coles tells us nothing of the White youth’s subse-
quent life. It is intriguing to fancy that he subsequently co-constructed such a life 
of moral commitment that in the 1980s, he was among those recruited for study as 
moral exemplars by Colby and Damon!) 
 Beyond the contributions of ideal reciprocity and empathy, then, a moral iden-
tity may motivate one to live up to (act consistently with, express, fulfi ll in life) pro-
foundly self-attributed moral principles, ideals, or goals (cf. Bergman, 2004; Blasi, 
1995). Similarly, Hoff man (2000) suggested that a person with internalized moral 
principles will act morally not only because of empathy (and, we would add, ideal 
moral reciprocity) but also as “an affi  rmation of one’s  self ” (p. 18); to do otherwise 
would be a violation of consistency, a  betrayal  of self. Accordingly, although atten-
tion to self can become detrimental (Baumeister, 1991), moral identity plays an 
important role in moral behavior. A person with a moral identity may refrain from 
padding his expense account not only because doing so would betray his employer’s 
trust and because he would feel guilty, but also because “it would violate his sense 
of integrity” (Colby, 2002, p. 133). Kohlberg and Candee (1984) even posited that 
persons make “responsibility judgments” of the extent to which “that which is mor-
ally good or right is also strictly necessary for the self” (p. 57; cf. Blasi, 1995). 

Moral Development, Moral Identity, and Prosocial Behavior 
■ 143
 Th e central place of moral identity in our chapter title mirrors its mediating 
role in the dynamic relation between moral development and exemplary prosocial 
behavior. Within that dynamic, exemplary prosocial behavior may foster moral 
identity, as it may have for the Atlanta youth. For moral exemplars, moral identity 
even becomes, as it were, a  meta -primacy of moral motivation, a dynamic frame-
work of personally invested moral goals that encompasses the primacies of justice 
and care. 4 Keep in mind, however, one intriguing fact about the Atlanta rescuer: 
at the “strange” moment of rescue, his conscious identity—in Moshman’s (2011a) 
terms, his explicit theory of self—was still that of a segregationist who would never 
engage in such an act, who certainly (in his conscious mind) owed no apology 
to a rejected out-group member. He acted not from moral identity but instead 
from “the nonarbitrary and nonrelativistic force of morality itself” (Nucci, 2004, 
p. 126). Specifi cally, he acted out of justice and care (cf. Nucci, 2004); those moti-
vational primacies were joined only later by the meta-primacy of moral identity. 
In general, moral identity is best viewed “as an important  supplementary source of 
motivation” (Moshman, 2011a, p. 178, emphasis added), contributing especially 
to “consistent moral behavior and enduring moral commitment” (Hardy & Carlo, 
2005, p. 234; cf. Hardy & Carlo, 2011). 
 Moral Judgment Stage, Empathy, and Locus of Control 
 Although Moral Type B and fi eld dependence-independence (associated with 
moral identity) were the main foci of our study of prosocial behavior (Gibbs et 
al., 1986), we also explored the possible role of certain other variables: moral 
judgment stage, empathy, and a variable related to fi eld dependence-indepen-
dence; namely, locus of control. Moral type correlated with moral judgment stage 
(cf. Comunian & Gielen, 1995, 2000, 2006; Krettenauer & Edelstein, 1999). Even 
controlling for moral type, moral judgment stage correlated with prosocial behav-
ior (cf. Brabeck, 1984; Comunian & Gielen, 1995, 2000), indicating that the moral 
perception involved in prosocial behavior (at least in the sense of moral courage) 
is not only veridical but also mature. 
 Morally courageous prosocial behavior also related to self-reported empathy, 
but only marginally so (the correlation only approached statistical signifi cance). 
Anecdotally, the rescuer in our case study did retrospectively appeal to empathic 
distress (“seeing him insulted so bad, real bad”) in accounting for his action. Other 
studies have found a fairly consistent relationship between empathic distress and 
altruistic or prosocial behavior (see Eisenberg, Huerta, & Edwards, 2012; Krevans & 
Gibbs, 1996; Oliner & Oliner, 1988). Empathic distress by itself may not be suffi  cient 
where doing the right thing requires willpower or ego strength (see below). In the 
Milgram experiment replication, highly empathic participants were nonetheless just 
as likely to continue to administer shocks (Burger, Girgis, & Manning, 2011). Blasi 
(2005) suggested that “virtues” such as empathy must be combined with “higher 
order” character qualities such as willpower (cf. ego strength, below) and personal 
responsibility “in order to have stability and motivational strength” (p. 71). 
 Finally, among the male participants, exemplary or courageous prosocial 
behavior related to internal locus of control. Internal locus of control is a belief 

144 
■ Moral Development and Reality
that one’s own actions are the main determinants of one’s outcomes in life (cf. 
self-effi  cacy theory, Bandura, 1977). Within our adolescent sample, males who 
were rated high in moral courage were  less likely to evidence  external  locus of 
control; in particular, to attribute events in their lives to the eff ects of chance 
or actions of powerful others. Perhaps the rescuers’ overcoming of inhibitory 
peer expectations was attributable not only to accurate moral perception but also 
to an implicit belief that his actions are not necessarily controlled by external 
forces. Accordingly, one would tend to hold oneself rather than others account-
able for the consequences of one’s actions. Colby and Damon (1992) observed 
that, among their moral exemplars, “blaming others, even impersonal forces” was 
rare, and personal accountability (“the importance of taking full responsibility 
for their actions”) was common (p. 290). In the Milgram experiment replica-
tion, participants who expressed a sense of personal responsibility (e.g., “If he 
died, I would feel a deep responsibility”) were more likely to stop administering 
the shocks (Burger et al., 2011). Individuals evidencing the full host of support-
ive attributes—not only internal locus of control but also Type B/fi eld indepen-
dence, moral judgment maturity, moral identity, empathy and ego strength (see 
below)—would be most likely to intervene as a bystander among others in an 
emergency situation (Latane & Darley, 1970).  
 Prosocial Behavior, Moral Perception, and Information-
Processing Models 
 In our study of prosocial behavior thus far, we have mainly addressed the ques-
tion of how such individuals see others and interpret their social world; that is, the 
variables entailed in their  moral perception. Our and other studies suggest that the 
moral perception of prosocial actors is veridical, mature, and empathic and that 
they see or defi ne  themselves  in moral terms. Perception in the broadest sense—
that is, meaningful experiencing—is dissected in information-processing models 
of behavior. In Kohlberg and Daniel Candee’s (1984) model of moral action, per-
ception is composed of the “functions” of interpretation (based on one’s stage, 
type, and other factors), choice or decision, and self-attribution (or non-attribu-
tion) of personal responsibility. Similar to these functions are the “components” of 
moral sensitivity (e.g., empathy), moral judgment, and prioritizing of moral values 
in James Rest’s model (e.g., Narvaez & Rest, 1995). Th e broader model of Kenneth 
Dodge and colleagues (e.g., Dodge & Schwartz, 1998) specifi es not functions or 
components but  steps. Th e “steps” include encoding and interpreting situational 
cues, clarifying a goal (or orientation toward a desired outcome) in the situation, 
and evaluating and deciding among prospective responses pertinent to that goal. 
 Such analyses of perception in terms of components or steps have strengths 
and weaknesses. On one hand, these models do identify factors and processes that 
are typically involved in one way or another as individuals encounter events; that 
is, as we anticipate, experience, and react to the environment. On the other hand, 
they can give the misleading impression that the meaningful experience of events 
typically involves extensive calculations or sequential steps of decision-making. 
Colby and Damon (1992) criticized such models insofar as their depiction of the 

Moral Development, Moral Identity, and Prosocial Behavior 
■ 145
individual as “constantly in the throes of decision” was not seen in the “simplicity 
of moral response” evident among their moral exemplars (pp. 69–70). 
 Colby and Damon (1992) might agree, however, that seemingly simple or sudden 
responses can stem from a complexity of cognitive factors and processes—an 
important point that, as we saw (Chapter 2), is neglected in Haidt’s conceptualiza-
tion of morality. In a reformulation of the social information-processing model, 
Nicki Crick and Kenneth Dodge (1994) suggested that a situational response is 
a function not only of the event per se but also of the schemas (proximal mental 
representations or attributions as well as “latent knowledge structures”) that are 
brought to and activated by the event. Th e schemas may be complex and might 
have been slow to develop. Th eir development may even have entailed conscious 
refl ection. Once the schemas have developed and become well practiced and 
dominant, however, their implicit activation can be very quick indeed (cf. post-
conscious automaticity as described by Bargh, 1996). “Th at a concept is used rap-
idly does not mean that it does not involve [in its history] complex processes of 
reasoning” (Turiel, 2006b, p. 19). 
 Th e point can be made in terms of non-social cognition (e.g., conservation 
knowledge) as well as moral principles. Consider the older child who promptly 
justifi es a conservation response with a complex appeal. Th e child’s schemas and 
resultant sense of necessary reciprocity took a while to develop, but once they have 
become dominant, they can be readily activated—much like the schemas and sense 
of moral necessity of the moral exemplars. Gordon Moskowitz and colleagues 
(Moskowitz, Gollwitzer, Wasel, & Schaal, 1999; cf. Pizarro & Bloom, 2003) found 
that male undergraduates who had become highly committed to moral principles 
of gender equality were (in contrast to low-commitment controls) uninfl uenced 
in a verbal task (concerning the pronunciation of female attributes) by prejudi-
cial stimuli (negative female stereotypes). Th e equality principles they were highly 
committed to can be regarded as complex and dominant schemas. Th e prejudicial 
stimuli—and their control by the activated equality schemas—happened quickly, 
even preconsciously: Th e stimulus was quite brief (presented for less than 200 mil-
liseconds) and immediate (presented less than 200 milliseconds prior to the task 
judgment). Th e prejudicial stimuli (e.g., “irrational”) facilitated the low-commit-
ment participants’ but  not the high-commitment participants’ response times, pre-
sumably because the stimuli were in the latter case controlled or inhibited by the 
activated equality schema. Again, it all happened very quickly; the control oper-
ated “so early [in preconscious processing] that there [was] no associated experi-
ence of will or agency” (Barrett, Tugade, & Engle, 2004). Th e schema had already 
been activated and done its implicit inhibition of the prejudicial stimulus before 
the respondent could even know what happened. 
 Similarly, sudden moments or simple responses of prosocial behavior can have 
a complex cognitive background. Th e rescuer’s sudden intervention stemmed not 
just from the scene of imminent assault per se but also from the dominant, complex 
schemas that he had developed and brought to his perception of that scene. Th ese 
were schemas of wrong (violation of ideal moral reciprocity) and harm (empathic 
alloys such as sympathy, guilt) that had been developed and, recently, applied to 
the African-American youth (perceived as “a kid, not a nigger”). Th e White youth 

146 
■ Moral Development and Reality
was, in a way, primed to act, even though he didn’t know it at the time. Only 
later did he realize that a (schema-based) line had been formed in his mind. Th at 
moral line divided levels of both wrong and harm. In both respects, the line was 
crossed as he saw his peers escalate from verbal abuse to imminent assault. In gen-
eral, sudden and ostensibly simple responses can derive from complex processes 
and schemas that operate implicitly in various ways and degrees (Bargh, 1996; 
Bushman & Anderson, 2001; Hossin, 2013; Pizarro & Bloom, 2003; Wegner & 
Bargh, 1998; see Chapter 2). Again, the suddenness of an action does not necessar-
ily preclude the action’s derivation from mature rationality or morality. 
 Ego Strength and the Regulation of Affect 
 Beyond moral perception, a fi nal component or step included within processing 
models of social behavior links perception to action. Th is component has been 
characterized as “follow-through” skills enabling goal attainment (Kohlberg & 
Candee, 1984), implementation (Narvaez & Rest, 1995; Rest et al., 1999), and 
enactment (Dodge & Schwartz, 1998). Trait-like individual diff erences in these 
follow-through skills or attributes have gone by various names, such as willpower, 
goal-directed aff ect regulation, executive attention, conation, character, self-con-
trol, non-distractibility, perseverance, drive, and bravery. Blasi (2005) interpreted 
willpower as a “higher order” attribute related to integrity, consistency, or personal 
accountability (p. 72). We have referred to this attribute as “ego strength,” given its 
muscle-like properties: one’s ego strength can be temporarily weakened from over-
exertion (“ego depletion,” see process analysis by Inzlicht & Schmeichel, 2012), 
yet can also improve through regular exercise (see Baumeister, 2002; Baumeister 
& Tierny, 2011). Ego strength involves  grit , defi ned by Duckworth and colleagues 
(Duckworth, Peterson, Matthews, & Kelly, 2007) as “perseverance and passion for 
long-term goals” (p. 1087). A slightly broader term is  performance control , pertain-
ing especially to “focusing your energy on the task at hand [and] fi nding the right 
combination of speed and accuracy” (Baumeister & Tierny, 2011, p. 37). 
 Th e moral exemplars evidenced ego strength, grit, or performance control 
in that they were extraordinarily persistent in pursuing their moral goals, partly 
because of their (earlier noted) positive attributional style in the face of failure. 
Similarly, the courageously prosocial male high school students we studied were 
less likely to attribute their actions to external infl uences (i.e., were higher in inter-
nal locus of control). Yet the moral exemplars did not need to struggle (and thereby 
deplete their ego strength) to attain and maintain their resolve. Moral necessity, 
deep empathy, and moral identity meant that they saw no morally acceptable alter-
native course of action and hence did not need to will themselves to overcome fear 
or doubt (Colby & Damon, 1992). Th e White youth regarded his rescue interven-
tion as “the strangest moment of [his] life” partly because of its abrupt spontaneity; 
that is, the absence of any conscious reasoning and resolve to do the right thing 
despite the costs. 
 Nonetheless, ego strength is oft en needed for the attainment of behavioral 
goals. Ego strength links perception to action and goal attainment, irrespective of 
the  content  of the goal. A similar point can be made with respect to corresponding 

Moral Development, Moral Identity, and Prosocial Behavior 
■ 147
virtues such as courage, diligence, and loyalty, which “help individuals and groups 
achieve their goals regardless of the morality of those goals” (Moshman, 2011a, 
p. 81; see Chapter 1). Aft er all, an impressive “level of ego strength and will capaci-
ties” were recruited “to carry out the Holocaust” (Blasi, 2005, p. 78). 
 Ego strength and related attributes are admirable, then, insofar as they are 
applied toward the attainment of  moral  goals, ranging from prosocial behavior to 
completing a task honestly (which may involve resisting a temptation to cheat). 
Honesty has been linked to non-distractibility or the stable maintenance of atten-
tion. Paul Grim, Sheldon White, and Kohlberg (1968) found that elementary 
school children’s degree of attentional stability (operationalized as a low standard 
deviation in the reaction time of their response to a visual stimulus) was related 
to the extent to which they avoided cheating. “Stable attention seems to promote 
honesty primarily by leading to a higher threshold for distracting thoughts of the 
opportunity to cheat” (p. 250). 
 Contributing to the ego strength to resist a tempting distraction are aff ect-
 regulating strategies also useful for achieving self-control or delaying gratifi cation. 
Th e research question has been whether individuals of various ages can eschew 
a smaller immediate reward (such as a treat) in order to obtain a larger but later 
reward (perhaps two treats). Delay of gratifi cation means regulating one’s appetitive 
aff ect. Strategies or skills for regulating aff ect may include reducing the salience of 
the “hot” stimulus (e.g., covering the treat or avoiding attending to it), enhancing 
the salience of alternative stimuli or thoughts (e.g., singing a song or thinking of 
engaging in some alternative activity), and reinterpreting the meaning of the hot 
stimulus (e.g., minimizing a marshmallow treat’s chewy, sweet, tasty qualities by 
reframing the marshmallow as “just a picture” or as a non-appetizing object such 
as a cloud or cotton ball) (Metcalfe & Mischel, 1999). In general, “when people 
construe events in terms of their abstract, essential features rather than their con-
crete, incidental details, they are more likely to look beyond salient local rewards 
and make decisions in accordance with their global concerns” (Fujita, 2008, 
p. 1491; cf. Fujita & Carnevale, 2012; Fujita & Roberts, 2010). Also strategic for 
aff ect regulation are the positive attributions (e.g., “learning opportunity”) by 
which the moral exemplars interpreted the signifi cance of failure. 
 Ego strength  qua aff ect regulation or executive attention tends to grow during 
child development. As we know from earlier chapters, the young child’s behav-
ior tends to be impulsive, egocentrically biased, and uncoordinated or centered 
on momentary here-and-now stimuli (in Metcalfe and Mischel’s [1999] terms, 
“responsive primarily to the urgencies of internally activated hot spots and the 
pushes and pulls of hot stimuli in the external world,” p. 8). Th e child gains ego 
strength through learning, socialization, language acquisition, cognitive develop-
ment (primarily, decentration, mental coordination, and inferential ability), fron-
tal lobe maturation, and increasing attentional stability. Accordingly, appetitive 
aff ect can be increasingly regulated and gratifi cation delayed. 
 In later childhood, cognitive gains helpful for self-control or aff ect regulation 
come to include metacognitive awareness or understanding (e.g., understanding 
the value of “cool” ideation in sustaining gratifi cation delay). A metacognitively 
savvy 11-year-old explained that, in the delay-of-gratifi cation situation, he would 

148 
■ Moral Development and Reality
tell himself, “I hate marshmallows, I can’t stand them. But when the grown-up 
gets back, I’ll tell myself ‘I love marshmallows’ and eat it” (Mischel & Mischel, 
1983, p. 609). 
conclusion: a spurious “moral exemplar” 
 
■
 In addition to Coles’s (1986) adolescent rescuer and Colby and Damon’s (1992) 
23 moral exemplars, a fi nal case warrants consideration. With charity, we might 
characterize this man as caring and imbued with a strong sense of justice; he 
apparently cared intensely for relatively defenseless people perceived to be suff er-
ing injustices at the hands of cruel bullies or arrogant governments. He became 
totally dedicated to a campaign against those perceived cruelties and injustices; in 
Colby and Damon’s terms, he merged his sense of self and his personal goals into 
his campaign. In the process, he evidenced impressive qualities of perseverance or 
ego strength, as well as self-effi  cacy or internal locus of control. He sought to do 
something big or spectacular for his cause, and succeeded. Th e name of this exem-
plar? Timothy McVeigh, ideological terrorist, willful prisoner of hate (Beck, 1999) 
whose big, spectacular event for his cause succeeded in killing 168 innocent men, 
women, and children. Despite the presence in his story of factors we have seen to 
be associated with prosocial behavior, he is an exemplar not of love, mature and 
accurate perception, and compassion, but instead of distorted anger, vengeance, 
and hate (Damon, personal communication, October 14, 2001). His ostensibly 
“moral” identity is more accurately identifi ed as, to use David Moshman’s term 
(2004, 2011a; cf. Skitka, 2012), a  false moral identity. McVeigh was found guilty 
of bombing a federal building in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; he was executed on 
May 19, 2001. 
 Th is spurious “moral” exemplar prompts us to refi ne the thrust of the present 
chapter and move us toward our next topic: antisocial behavior. Th e acts of McVeigh 
refl ect a nature-nurture interplay and are amenable to analysis on many scales of 
context or level. Much as it would be fascinating to explore the gradual twisting of 
his humanity (to borrow a phrase from the South African Mark Mathabane, 2002; 
see Chapter 5), that is not our goal. Rather, we seek to use McVeigh as a counterfoil 
in a discriminant analysis of the meaning of prosocial behavior. Hence, we will 
probe as best we can the mind of this man, his worldview, his schemas for mean-
ingful social experiencing. (Our probe owes much to the hundreds of hours of 
verbal data that McVeigh accorded interviewers Lou Michel and Dan Herbeck in 
2001, as well as their interviews with key individuals associated with McVeigh.) As 
Dodge (1993) suggested, it is the level of cognitive phenomenology, one’s  mind set, 
that is the most “proximally responsible” (p. 560) for a person’s overt behavior in a 
given situation. We will mainly use McVeigh to make three points regarding full-
fl edged prosocial behavior. 
 First,  the moral basis for prosocial behavior must be mature. Although even 
preschoolers can act prosocially (see Chapter 5), prosocial behavior in the deep-
est sense requires mature morality. Th e adolescent rescuer appreciated that the 
prospective victim (an African-American student) was responding in a forgiving 
way to taunts and threats, and forgiveness was a common quality among the 23 

Moral Development, Moral Identity, and Prosocial Behavior 
■ 149
exemplars (Colby & Damon, 1992, pp. 278–279). As Piaget emphasized, forgive-
ness and reconciliation (where feasible) are key indicators of ideal reciprocity or, 
more broadly, mature moral judgment. In contrast, forgiveness was absent in the 
pronouncements of McVeigh. He might have seen the African-American youth’s 
non-reciprocation as foolish or cowardly and perhaps deserving of contempt. 
 Prominent instead in his pronouncements was that of eye-for-an-eye reciproc-
ity: vengeance, retribution, or retaliation. McVeigh embraced a “philosophy” of 
“dirty for dirty” (Michel & Herbeck, 2001, p. 17). Particularly chilling threats of 
vengeance were reserved for McVeigh’s former compatriots. Having reached a 
“philosophical impasse” with a former Army friend named Steve, McVeigh wrote 
Steve a 23-page letter that concluded with a transparent threat: “Blood will fl ow in 
the streets, Steve. . . . Pray it is not your blood, my friend” (pp. 153–155). 
 Th e case of Timothy McVeigh drives home just how crucial for social behavior 
is the diff erence between the initial, developmentally primitive version of “moral 
reciprocity” and its more advanced form—that is, between pragmatic reciproc-
ity (moral judgment Stage 2) and reciprocity as an ideal (moral judgment Stage 
3, especially Stage 3 Type B). Hoff man’s (2000) claim that reciprocity “can serve 
many masters” (p. 243)—including hate—is tenable specifi cally with reference 
to pragmatic reciprocity. As we will discuss in the next chapter, moral judgment 
developmental delay is a risk factor for antisocial behavior. 
 Empathic distress as an empowerment of violence through immature moral 
judgment is illustrated with particular clarity in the case of McVeigh. As a child, 
McVeigh loved animals. He “cried . . . for days” aft er seeing kittens drown; he “let out 
a scream of shock and terror and ran for his parents in tears” (Michel & Herbeck, 
2001, p. 17) to obtain help for an attacked and fatally injured rabbit. A decade or so 
later in McVeigh’s life, a more complex empathic distress (specifi cally, self-focused 
perspective-taking and empathic anger) partly motivated his primitive reciprocity, 
activated as he watched on television the violence at Waco, Texas: 
 Th ere it was. . . . Mount Carmel, the wooden complex where the Branch Davidians wor-
shiped and lived under the rule of David Koresh, was engulfed in fl ames. Armored 
vehicles were ramming the walls. . . . Th e Davidians’ Star of David fl ag . . . drift ed into the 
fi re . . . tears were streaming down [McVeigh’s] cheeks. 
 When federal agents raised their own fl ag over the smoldering ruins, McVeigh’s anger 
neared the point of exploding.  People died in that house, he thought.  How crude and 
ruthless and cold-blooded can these guys be? . . . Th e government’s use of CS gas, the tear 
gas McVeigh had been doused with as a soldier, enraged him. Th e memory of his own 
experience with the gas made the thought of using it on women and children unbearable 
to him. . . . In his mind, it was the ultimate bully attack. . . . Something . . . would have to be 
done. (Michel & Herbeck, 2001, pp. 135–136, 160) 
 Years later, aft er doing his “something,” McVeigh invoked his Stage 2 vengeance 
philosophy to defend the murders of those in and around the federal building: 
“Women and kids were killed at Waco and Ruby Ridge. You put back in [the gov-
ernment’s] faces exactly what they’re giving out. . . .  Dirty for dirty, he thought.  You 
reap what you sow. Th is is payback time ” (pp. 2, 225). Th e moral immaturity of 
McVeigh’s social perception could scarcely be more explicit. 

150 
■ Moral Development and Reality
 Second,  the social cognitive basis for prosocial behavior must be veridical. Th e 
moral exemplars studied by Colby and Damon (1992) achieved not only mature 
moral understanding but also “ever greater moral clarity” (p. 173), which, again, 
we interpret as a kind of fi eld independence in moral perception. As noted, they 
were rigorously truthful or veridical, resisting illusory interpretations of events: 
“Distortion . . . was not a mental process to which they would readily bring them-
selves” (p. 290). Th e vision or optimism that sustained them was, in Sandra 
Schneider’s (2001) terms, “realistic” rather than biased. 5  In contrast, McVeigh’s 
visions and pronouncements, despite elements of truth, were rife with grandiose 
biases, cognitive distortions, and contradiction. McVeigh’s cognitive distortions 
are examined more systematically in Chapter 7. 
 Th e distorted character of McVeigh’s “moral” perception was especially evi-
dent as he attempted to cope with the problem that his act of ostensible morality 
meant the murder of innocent human beings. Aft er all, Stage 2 “dirty-for-dirty” 
reciprocity still meant that the act was, well, dirty (i.e., morally reprehensible), 
and McVeigh was not devoid of empathy. Indeed, perhaps precisely because he 
 was  vulnerable to empathic distress, he needed to rationalize, distort, and thereby 
preempt any adverse feelings of self-blame or guilt for his actions (see Chapter 7). 
McVeigh did fi nd a way to blame the victims. He 
 summoned an image that had remained with him since his childhood: the destruction 
of the Death Star in the 1977 motion picture  Star Wars. 
 McVeigh saw himself as a counterpart to Luke Skywalker, the heroic Jedi knight 
whose successful attack on the Death Star closes the fi lm. As a kid, McVeigh had 
noticed that the  Star Wars movies show people sitting at consoles—Space-Age cleri-
cal  workers—inside the Death Star. Th ose people weren’t storm troopers. Th ey weren’t 
killing anyone. But they were vital to the operations of the Evil Empire. . . . As an adult, 
McVeigh found himself able to dismiss the killings of secretaries, receptionists, and 
other personnel in the Murrah Building with equally cold-blooded calculation. Th ey 
were all part of the evil empire. (Michel & Herbeck, 2001, pp. 224–225) 
 To elaborate on this rationalization, McVeigh used the military phrases he had 
learned as a soldier in the U.S. Army. As he prepared to bomb, he was “in a combat 
mode” (Michel & Herbeck, 2001, p. 156). “If he seemed devoid of feelings and 
sensitivity,” then, “that was because he was a soldier” (p. xix) preparing for an “act 
of war” (p. 3), with a “duty to carry out . . . a mission” (p. 288). His “positive off en-
sive action” (p. 332) against the government would need to generate a large “body 
count” (p. 169) if it was to make its point. 
 Th e military metaphor, then, enabled him to minimize the enormity of the 
crime with euphemisms. Th e dead among the “body count” who were peripheral 
to the evil empire were “collateral damage”: “‘In any kind of military action,’” he 
explained, “‘you try to keep collateral damage to a minimum. But a certain amount 
of collateral damage is inevitable’” (p. 331). McVeigh’s apparent need to use this 
minimizing distortion suggests that his assimilation of his killing innocent people 
to his Stage 2 dirty-for-dirty philosophy was not entirely successful. We do know 
from experimental research that maintaining distortions can require the expendi-
ture of cognitive resources (Valdesolo & DeSteno, 2008). 

Moral Development, Moral Identity, and Prosocial Behavior 
■ 151
 In other words, McVeigh’s “fi eld” of rationalizations and minimizing strate-
gies could not entirely obscure the heinousness of his crime. Even the murderous 
“Unabomber,” Th eodore Kaszynski, a fellow inmate for several months, criticized 
McVeigh’s allegedly moral perception as seriously fl awed in its crudity; aft er all, 
“most of the people who died at Oklahoma City were . . . not even remotely respon-
sible for objectionable government policies or for the events at Waco” (Michel & 
Herbeck, 2001, p. 364). 
 Th ird, and in summary,  ego strength serves morality insofar as it links mature 
and veridical moral perception to action. As noted, ego strength or persistence 
toward goal attainment depends partly on the use of strategies or skills for reg-
ulating aff ect and thereby maintaining attentional stability or avoiding distrac-
tions. Ego strength per se is neutral with respect to morality; hence, in Lawrence 
Walker’s and Karl Hennig’s (2004) study of moral exemplarity, the character attri-
bute “brave” is a moral quality only insofar as it is contextualized by “just” and/
or “caring” qualities. Indeed, ego strength in the service of attaining  moral goals 
(e.g., prosocial behavior or honest task completion) rests ultimately on processes 
of mature and accurate moral perception. A money-hungry and egocentrically 
biased man walking past a blind beggar is distracted by the sight of the beggar’s 
many coins in a nearby cup and thinks how easy it would be to take them. Th is 
man will have little motivation to resist acting on this thought unless he processes 
the situation in moral terms. For example, the man might automatically activate 
a Stage 3 schema pertaining to how he or anyone would wish to be treated in that 
situation (ideal reciprocity  à la Kohlberg or Piaget), or, relatedly, he might attend 
to that person’s plight and imagine how he would feel or how that person must feel 
(empathic perspective-taking  à la Hoff man). 
 McVeigh’s ego strength served an ideology of hatred. Against such perversely 
guided regulations of aff ect, empathic aff ect  for the prospective victims scarcely had 
a chance. According to Michel and Herbeck (2001), McVeigh did have at least 
one moment of moral clarity. As McVeigh drove his bomb-laden truck toward the 
federal building and “his eyes fell upon it,” he was “hit . . . by the enormity of what 
he was about to do.” But “just as quickly, he pushed the thought aside” (p. 230). 
Our speculative translation: As he saw all the unsuspecting, innocent people in 
and around the building, he anticipated with some beginning moral maturity and 
accuracy what his bomb would do to them. He experienced incipient moral inhi-
bition from empathic distress, empathy-based guilt, and justice violation. Before 
the aff ective and cognitive moral motives could eff ectively inhibit him, however, 
he reestablished his distorted mindset and mustered his resolve; that is, he empa-
thized again with the Waco victims, generating empathic anger and reactivating 
his developmentally delayed morality (crude “payback” reciprocity) and inaccu-
rate schemas of interpretation (e.g., “positive military action”). He thereby neu-
tralized his moment of moral clarity. Such perverse use of ego strength—that is, 
such regulation of aff ect through cognitive distortion in the service of antisocial 
goals—is discussed further in the next chapter. 

152
  7 
 Understanding 
Antisocial Behavior 
 Th is chapter and the next continue the application of moral knowing and feeling—
especially what we have learned of moral knowing and feeling through study of 
Kohlberg’s and Hoff man’s developmental theories—to social behavior. From the 
last chapter’s focus on variables of prosocial behavior, we shift  at this point in our 
exploration to the understanding and treatment of  anti social behavior. According 
to Kohlberg’s and Hoff man’s theories, the key principle of treatment for antisocial 
behavior is at least in part the same as that for facilitating children’s social decen-
tration and moral judgment development or for socializing prosocial norms and 
empathic motivation. Whether the aim is to cognitively facilitate or empathically 
socialize, the key is to give egocentrically biased or self-centered individuals—
children, adolescents, adults—opportunities and encouragement to take the per-
spectives of others. Perspective-taking treatment programs will be discussed in 
Chapter 8. 
 Th is chapter will focus on self-centration and other limitations characteristic 
of youths with antisocial behavior problems. Th ree caveats to the term  limita-
tion should be noted. First, pronounced egocentric bias and other “limitations” 
are best construed as tendencies, not incapacities evident in all circumstances. 
Second, such tendencies are best studied in the context of theories that take devel-
opment seriously; e.g., conceptualize antisocial behavior in relation to sociomoral 
immaturity, social perceptual inaccuracy, and imbalanced social interactive skills. 
We seek, aft er all, to understand in order to  treat antisocial behavior (Chapter 
8). Accordingly, our examination will draw on Kohlberg’s and Hoff man’s develop-
mental theories rather than Haidt’s non-developmental and generally descriptivist 
approach (see Chapter 2). 
 Finally, these tendencies result from “a complex interplay of nature and nurture” 
(Rutter, 1997, p. 390). “Nature” encompasses partially neurophysiological variables 
such as diffi  cult temperament and hyperactivity, and “nurture” encompasses not 
only relatively direct eff ects such as those of abuse and neglect but also the indirect 
eff ects of macrocontexts such as social class, negative youth culture, and economic 
disadvantage (Collins et al., 2000; Dodge, Pettit, & Bates, 1997; Kazdin, 1995; cf. 
Bronfenbrenner & Morris, 2006). Although they are not the focus of this chapter, 
the background factors of nature and nurture should be kept in mind as we discuss 
the limitations that tend to characterize antisocial youths. 
limitations of antisocial youths 
 
■
 Aft er extensive work with antisocial and aggressive youths in Cleveland, Ohio, 
high school teacher Dewey Carducci (1980) reached three main conclusions 
regarding the limitations ( problematic tendencies might be a better term) of such 

Understanding Antisocial Behavior 
■ 153
adolescents. First, according to Carducci’s impressions, the antisocial juvenile is 
“frequently at a stage of arrested moral/ethical/social/emotional development in 
which he is fi xated at a level of concern about getting his own throbbing needs 
[i.e., impulses and desires] met, regardless of eff ects on others.” Second, such juve-
niles were seen to “blame others for their misbehavior.” Th ird, they “do not know 
what specifi c steps [in a social confl ict] . . . will result in [the confl ict’s] being solved 
[constructively]” (pp. 157–158). Th e research literature concerning conduct dis-
order, opposition-defi ance disorder, and other patterns of adolescent antisocial 
behavior (e.g., Kazdin, 1995; Stams, Brugman, Dekovic, van Rosmalen, van der 
Laan, & Gibbs, 2006) strikingly corroborates Carducci’s impressions. 
 We (Gibbs, Potter, Barriga, & Liau, 1996) have termed these limitations, respec-
tively, (a) developmental  delay  in moral judgment, (b) self-serving cognitive  dis-
tortions, and (c) social skill  defi ciencies —the “three Ds,” so to speak, common 
among antisocial youths. Although distinguishable, the limitations are interre-
lated (Barriga, Morrison, Liau, & Gibbs, 2001; Larden, Melin, Holst, & Langstrom, 
2006; Leeman, Gibbs, & Fuller, 1993) and commonly point to a paucity of social 
perspective-taking/coordinating. Following our review of the literature pertinent 
to these three main interrelated limitations of antisocial youths, we will revisit for 
illustrative purposes the case of Timothy McVeigh (who was still in his 20s when 
he committed his atrocity), which was introduced in the last chapter. 
 Moral Judgment Developmental Delay 
 Moral developmental delay refers chiefl y to the persistence of immature moral-
ity into adolescence and adulthood. Just as prosocial behavior stems in part from 
the mature moral perception (or meaningful experience) of events (Chapter 6), 
 anti social behavior stems in part from moral perception based on developmen-
tally delayed morality (other risk factors are noted in Chapter 1). As discussed 
in Chapter 2, immature morality is composed of pronounced egocentric bias or, 
more broadly, superfi cial social and moral cognition. Among adolescents’ accounts 
of having harmed another person or persons, violent adolescents refer frequently 
to actions or objects—and infrequently to emotional or other psychological states 
(especially, their victims’). In these respects, the violent adolescents’ narratives dif-
fered from those of nonviolent adolescents and were comparable to the superfi -
cial discourse characteristic of young children (Wainryb, Komolova, & Florsheim, 
2010; cf. Dunn & Hughes, 2001; Krettenauer, Malt, & Sokol, 2008; see Chapter 3). 
 Superficial Moral Judgment 
 Superfi cial moral judgment reduces morality to the salient surface features of 
people, things, or actions: either to impressive physical appearances, and physi-
cal consequences or action–reaction sequences (Stage 1) or to concrete, tit-for-tat 
exchanges of favors or blows; that is, pragmatic reciprocity (Stage 2). Relative to 
controls, delinquent or conduct-disordered adolescents evidence a delay in moral 
judgment stage level (even aft er controlling for socioeconomic status [SES], intel-
ligence, and other correlates), attributable mainly to a more extensive use of moral 

154 
■ Moral Development and Reality
judgment Stage 2 (see meta-analyses by Nelson, Smith, & Dodd, 1990; and by Stams 
et al., 2006; for overviews, see Blasi, 1980; Palmer, 2003). Our cross-cultural review 
(Gibbs, Basinger, Grime, & Snarey, 2007) found that delinquents were delayed in 
moral judgment (relative to matched or group-selected comparison controls) in 
all seven countries where the question was studied (the delinquents’ delay in the 
Netherlands became non-signifi cant when participants from “a high-risk urban 
area” were added to the comparison group; Brugman & Aleva, 2004, p. 325). 
Inspection of Table 7.1 reveals an almost total absence of overlap between delin-
quents’ and non-delinquents’ moral judgment means across the seven countries.  
 We also studied moral judgment delay by area of moral value (keeping prom-
ises, helping others, respecting life, etc.). Although we found delay in  every area 
(Gregg, Gibbs, & Basinger, 1994; Palmer & Hollin, 1998), the area of greatest delay 
concerned the reasons off ered for obeying the law. Non-delinquents gave relatively 
more Stage 3 and Transition 3/4 reasons—for example, the typical selfi shness of 
lawbreaking such as stealing, and its ramifi cations in society for chaos, insecurity, 
or loss of trust. In contrast, the delinquents’ reasoning mainly concerned the risk 
of getting caught and going to jail. 
 It should be emphasized that the superfi ciality of delayed moral judgment 
pertains mainly to the  reasons or  justifi cations for moral decisions or values. I 
remember discussing moral values in the late 1980s with Joey, a 15-year-old at a 
specialized middle school in Columbus, Ohio, for juveniles with behavior prob-
lems. Joey seemed earnest and sincere as he emphatically affi  rmed the importance 
 TABLE 7.1  Cross-cultural samples of male delinquents and non-delinquents 
in rank order by mean Sociomoral Refl ection Maturity Score (SRMS) 
 Country, sample/age range (mean) in years 
 n 
 Global stage range 
 M 
Bahrain, non-delinquents/17–18 (17.7)
 30
3–3/4
313
United States, non-delinquents/13–19 (15.7)
 86
2/3–3
272
Sweden, non-delinquents/13–18 (15.6)
 29
2/3–3
266
England, non-delinquents/14–16 (15.5)
149
2–3
264
Germany, non-delinquents/14–16 (15.6)
309
2/3–3
261
Bahrain, delinquents/14–19 (16.8)
 30
2/3–3
254
China, non-delinquents/13–15 (NR)
 10
NR
251
Netherlands, non-delinquents/NR (15.1)
 81
2–3
249
Germany, delinquents/14–17 (15.6)
 39
2–3
243
United States, delinquents/13–18 (15.9)
 89
2–2/3
243
Netherlands, delinquents/NR (16.5)
 64
2–2/3
241
Sweden, delinquents/13–18 (15.5)
 29
2–2/3
228
England, delinquents/14–17 (15.9)
147
2–2/3
223
Australia, delinquents (1 female)/14–18 (16.5)
 38
1/2–2/3
   211 a 
China, delinquents/13–15 (NR)
 10
NR
182
 Notes:  NR indicates information not reported. Global stage range is estimated on the basis of plus or minus one 
standard deviation of Sociomoral Refl ection Maturity Score. Non-delinquents are generally male high school 
students selected (sometimes matched) for a comparison study of delinquents. Th e studies are referenced in the 
source article. 
 a Mean pretest score in an intervention study. 
 Source: Adapted from J. C. Gibbs, K. S. Basinger, R. L. Grime, & J. R. Snarey (2007), Moral judgment development 
across cultures: Revisiting Kohlberg’s universality claims.  Developmental Review, 27 , 443–500. Used with permission 
of Elsevier ScienceDirect. 

Understanding Antisocial Behavior 
■ 155
of moral values such as keeping promises, telling the truth, helping others, saving 
lives, not stealing, and obeying the law. “And why is it so important to obey the 
law or not steal?” I asked Joey. “Because [pause], like in a store, you may think no 
one sees you, but they could have cameras!” His other explanations were generally 
similar: Keeping promises to others is important because if you don’t, they might 
fi nd out and get even; helping others is important in case you need a favor from 
them later; and so forth. Th e more Joey justifi ed his moral evaluations, the less 
impressed I became. Could Joey be trusted to live up to his moral values in situ-
ations where his fear of observers and surveillance cameras would be less salient 
than his egocentric motives? Despite their evaluation of moral values as important 
(Gregg et al., 1994; Palmer & Hollin, 1998), many antisocial juveniles are develop-
mentally delayed in that they do not evidence much grasp of the deeper  reasons or 
bases for the importance of those values and associated decisions. 
 Pronounced and Prolonged Egocentric Bias 
 Th e high salience of egocentric biases and egoistic motives in superfi cial moral 
judgment means that the antisocial youth tends to be concerned with “getting his 
own throbbing needs [or desires] met, regardless of eff ects on others” (Carducci, 
1980, p. 157). Accordingly, relative to non-delinquent adolescents, antisocial 
youths respond empathically to others less frequently and less intensely, and more 
frequently make self-references (Robinson, Roberts, Strayer, & Koopman, 2007). 
Like children, they tend to “complain of mistreatment if their wishes are not given 
priority over those of other[s]” (Beck, 1999, p. 236). Th eir 
 energy tends to go into asserting  their needs and desires and making the world accom-
modate to them. Th ey have a supersensitive Unfairness Detector when it comes to fi nd-
ing all the ways that people are unfair to them. But they have a big blind spot when it 
comes to seeing all the ways they aren’t fair to others and all the ways parents and oth-
ers do things for them. (Lickona, 1983, p. 149; cf. Redl & Wineman, 1957, pp. 153–154) 
 As we have seen, it is normal for egocentric bias to be pronounced in early child-
hood; young children tend not to decenter from their own very salient needs, desires, 
or impulses. With perspective-taking opportunities such as those aff orded by peer 
interaction and inductive discipline, egocentric bias normally declines. In a study of 
the development of children’s reasons for obedience, Damon (1977) found later rea-
sons to be less egocentric: “Th e self’s welfare is still important, but at . . . later levels 
self-interest is increasingly seen in the context of the welfare of everyone in the rela-
tion” (p. 221). Th e oft en highly power-assertive and harsh parenting homes of chil-
dren at risk for conduct disorder (Kazdin, 1995), however, preclude opportunities to 
take the perspectives of others. Accordingly, bias of self over the welfare of others and 
superfi cial moral judgment generally remain pronounced into the adolescent years.  
 Self-Serving Cognitive Distortions 
 Moral judgment stages are not the only schemas relevant to social perception 
and behavior. Just as prosocial behavior can stem from schemas of mature and 

156 
■ Moral Development and Reality
veridical moral perception (Chapter 6), antisocial behavior can stem from per-
ception structured by schemas of self-serving cognitive distortion. Cognitive dis-
tortions (cf. “thinking errors,” Yochelson & Samenow, 1976, 1977, 1986; “faulty 
beliefs,” Ellis, 1977) are inaccurate or non-veridical schemas for perceiving events. 
Reviewed below are self-serving cognitive distortions that, at elevated levels, facili-
tate aggression and other antisocial behavior. 
 Self-Centered: The Primary Self-Serving Cognitive Distortion 
 Th e longer that pronounced egocentric bias persists through childhood, the more 
it tends to consolidate into a primary self-serving cognitive distortion that we 
have called  Self-Centered . In the absence of moral judgment perspective-taking 
opportunities, the self-centration (including “I want it  now ” temporal centra-
tion) characteristic of early childhood can evolve in later years into a network of 
self-skewed schemas that guides one’s perception and explanation of events and, 
indeed, one’s basic approach to life, one’s worldview. We have defi ned (Gibbs et al., 
1996) the Self-Centered schema network as “according status to one’s own views, 
expectations, needs, rights, immediate feelings, and desires to such an extent that 
the legitimate views, etc., of others (or even one’s own long-term best interest) are 
scarcely considered or are disregarded altogether” 1 (p. 108). Th e combination of 
a radically self-centered worldview with even the normal array and intensity of 
egoistic motives constitutes a risk factor for antisocial behavior. 
 Numerous clinicians working with antisocial youths have discerned a link 
between the youths’ antisocial behavior and a self-centered attitude or approach to 
social relations. Stanton Samenow (1984) quoted a 14-year-old delinquent: “I was 
born with the idea that I’d do what I wanted. I always felt that rules and regula-
tions were not for me” (p. 160). Redl and Wineman (1957) gave as an example the 
responses of a youth who had stolen a cigarette lighter and was confronted:
 His only defense seemed to be, “Well, I wanted a lighter.” When further challenged, “Yes, 
you wanted a lighter but how about going to such lengths as to steal it from someone?” 
he grew quite irritated. “How the hell do you expect me to get one if I don’t swipe it? Do 
I have enough money to buy one?” . . . Th e act . . . was quite justifi able to him . . . “I want it, 
there is no other way, so I swipe it—just because I want it.” (pp. 154–155) 
 Similarly, in our group work with antisocial youth (see Chapter 8), one group 
member seemed to think that he had suffi  ciently justifi ed having stolen a car with 
this explanation: “I needed to get to Cleveland.” Other group members, refl ecting 
on their shoplift ing and other off enses, have recollected that their thoughts at the 
time concerned whether they could do what they wanted and get away success-
fully. Th e only perspective these juveniles took was their own; spontaneous refer-
ences to the victims’ perspectives (except perhaps to their vulnerabilities) were 
almost totally absent. 
 Self-centered and manipulative social perspective-taking may be especially 
evident among some psychopathic or violent individuals. “Some intelligent psy-
chopaths do learn to read other people’s emotional states, the better to manipu-
late them, though they still fail to appreciate the rich emotional texture of those 

Understanding Antisocial Behavior 
■ 157
states” (Pinker, 2011, p. 575; cf. de Waal, 2012). Indeed, they can manipulate and 
harm others precisely because of their “insensitivity” to the rich texture of others’ 
emotions (Hoff man, 2000, p. 36). Cecilia Wainryb and colleagues (Wainryb, 
Komolova, & Florsheim, 2010; cf. Carr & Lutjemeier, 2005) found that only 10% 
of violent youths (versus 89% of comparison youths) made reference to their 
victims’ emotions or feelings in narrating a time of having harmed someone. 
Whereas nonviolent adolescents focused on the consequences their actions had 
for others or for relationships, the violent adolescents generally focused on exter-
nal consequences for themselves. “Th eir lack of attention to their  victims’ emo-
tions is especially troublesome” (Wainryb et al., 2010, p. 196). Possibly even more 
troubling are the relatively few cases in which violent off enders  do attend to a 
victim’s emotions—that “attention” could refl ect the sadism seen in some aveng-
ers, hit men, or interrogative torturers. Aft er all, “torture requires an apprecia-
tion of what others think or feel. . . . Cruelty, too, rests on perspective-taking” (de 
Waal, 2009, p. 211). Although some aggressors (such as sadistic torturers) may 
(perversely) appreciate the “rich emotional texture” of their victims’ suff ering, 
generally speaking, “perspective-taking” in the service of manipulation and harm 
is inadequate (see Chapter 1). 
 A pronounced self (or inadequate social perspective-taking) orientation has 
also been evident in the responses of aggressive male juveniles to the follow-
ing vignette (used in connection with the anger management component of our 
EQUIP group program, discussed in Chapter 8):
 Gary is in the kitchen of his apartment. Gary’s girlfriend, Cecilia, is angry at him for 
something he did to hurt her. She yells at him. She pushes his shoulder. Th oughts run 
through Gary’s head. Gary does nothing to correct the errors in his thoughts. Gary 
becomes furious. He swears at Cecilia. A sharp kitchen knife is nearby. Gary picks up 
the knife and stabs Cecilia, seriously wounding her. (Potter et al., 2001, p. 56; cf. DiBiase, 
Gibbs, Potter, & Blount, 2012) 
 Our impression is that aggressive youths seem to identify with Gary. In response 
to the probe question, “What thoughts do you think ran through Gary’s head?” the 
juveniles readily and with some genuine feeling off er thoughts such as, “Who does 
she think she is? She has no right to treat me that way. Nobody hits  me. I wear 
the pants around here. I do what I want. How dare she  touch me!” Self-centered 
and other self-serving cognitive distortions correlate highly with self-reports, 
parent or peer ratings, and records of violent or aggressive behavior (e.g., Barriga 
& Gibbs, 1996; Barriga, Landau, Stinson, Liau, & Gibbs, 2000; Liau, Barriga, & 
Gibbs, 1998; McCrady, Kaufman, Vasey, Barriga, Devlin, & Gibbs, 2008; Paciello, 
Fida, Tramontano, Lupinetti, & Caprara, 2008; Shulman, Cauff man, Piquero, & 
Fagan, 2011; Wallinius, Johansson, Larden, & Dernevik, 2011). 
 Antisocial youths, then, “generally believe that their entitlements and rights 
override those of others” (Beck, 1999, p. 27). Accordingly, their egoistic motives 
gain full sway in their social behavior. Although off enders victimize others, they 
generally misperceive their victims as the off enders and themselves as victims. 
Aft er all, they have been thwarted or disrespected and thereby wronged, their 
(egocentrically elevated) entitlements or rights violated:

158 
■ Moral Development and Reality
 Consider the following scenarios. Th e driver of a truck curses a slow driver . . . [or] a large 
nation attacks a smaller, resistant neighbor for its abundant supply of oil. Interestingly, 
although there is clearly a diff erence between victimizer and victim in these examples, 
the aggressor in each case is likely to lay claim to  being the victim: . . . Th e object of their 
wrath, the true victim (to disinterested observers), is seen as the off ender by the victim-
izers. (Beck, 1999, p. 26, emphasis added) 
 Proactive and Reactive Aggression 
 Th is infl ated sense of one’s prerogatives and readiness to see oneself as wronged 
refl ect a Self-Centered ego that is either (a) grandiose from a sense of superi-
ority or (b) vulnerable from a sense of potential inadequacy. In the grandiose 
version of the Self-Centered ego, the individual perceives and treats others as 
weaker beings who should not dare to interfere and who can be manipulated 
or controlled through violence. Aggression, then, is part of his basic approach 
to life. In the vulnerable version of the Self-Centered ego, the individual views 
the world mainly as a place where people do not adequately respect (and may 
actively seek to humiliate) him; he becomes violence-prone when he perceives 
(or misperceives) a threat or insult (Beck, 1999). In the terms we will use, the 
aggression of the Self-Centered ego is either (a)  proactive (at clinically severe lev-
els, psychopathic) or (b)  reactive (Dodge & Coie, 1987; Dodge, Coie, & Lynam, 
2006). In either case, the Self-Centered worldview is a risk factor for aggressive or 
other antisocial behavior. 
 Both proactive and reactive off enders evidence infl ated self-esteem (Baumeister, 
1997) or narcissism (e.g., Th omaes, Stegge, Olthof, Bushman, & Neziek, 2011). 
Th ey “assert their prerogatives—for example, ‘You have no right to treat me that 
way’” (Beck, 1999, p. 138). Th e reasons behind such assertions diff er, however. Th e 
proactive off ender “takes for granted that his rights are supreme and confi dently 
imposes them on other people” (pp. 138–139). Following instrumental aggression, 
he feels “triumphant” (aft er all, he has righted the wrong of interference or resis-
tance). In contrast, “the reactive off ender feels that nobody recognizes his rights 
and reacts with anger and sometimes violence when others reject him or do not 
show him respect” (pp. 138–139). 
 Susan Harter (2012) noted that, in contrast to high self-esteem that is healthy 
(reality-based, authentic, and relatively secure), the infl ated self-esteem associ-
ated with aggression tends to be unrealistic, fragile, and defensive (cf. Th omaes, 
Brummelman, Reijntjes, & Bushman, 2013). In a study of young adolescents, 
those high in narcissism were especially likely to react to shame or ridicule with 
“humiliated fury” (Th omaes et al., 2011, p. 786). Th e reactive aggressor is not only 
volatile but also vulnerable to bouts of despair. Aft er harming someone, the reac-
tive off ender on some occasions may feel vindicated (he, too, has righted a wrong, 
the wrong of undeserved disrespect). Yet on other occasions, the reactive aggres-
sor “may feel shame or guilt,” suggesting a capacity for empathic distress and self-
attribution of blame despite their negative misattributions of others’ intent (Beck, 
1999, pp. 138–139; cf. Arsenio, 2010). 
 Men who are wife-batterers—the Garys of our vignette—may be either reactive 
or proactive (Chase, O’Leary, & Heyman, 2001). Th e majority are reactive; that is, 

Understanding Antisocial Behavior 
■ 159
they hit “impulsively, out of rage aft er feeling rejected or jealous, or out of fear of 
abandonment” (Goleman, 1995). In contrast, the proactive aggressive men hit 
 in a cold, calculating state. . . . As their anger mounts . . . their heart rate  drops, instead of 
climbing higher, as is ordinarily the case. . . . Th is means they are growing physiologically 
calmer, even as they get more belligerent and abusive. Th eir violence appears to be a cal-
culated act of terrorism, a method of controlling their wives by instilling fear. (Goleman, 
1995, pp. 108–109; see also Gottman et al., 1995) 
 Secondary Cognitive Distortions 
 To continue his Self-Centered attitude and antisocial behavior, the off ender 
(at least the reactive off ender) typically develops protective rationalizations, or 
what we term  secondary cognitive distortions. Th ese secondary cognitive distor-
tions protect the off ender against certain types of psychological stress that tend to 
be generated by his (or her) harm to others. 
 One type of stress, primarily aff ective, refers to empathic distress and empathy-
based guilt that may begin to be aroused by salient victim distress cues (Eisenberg, 
Fabes, & Spinrad, 2006; Redl & Wineman, 1957). Psychopaths (or high-end pro-
active off enders) experience little or no empathic distress as they harm others. 
Haidt (2012) put it bluntly: “Psychopaths reason but do not feel. . . . [Th ey] seem 
to live in a world of objects, some of which happen to walk around on two legs” 
(pp. 61–62). De Waal (2009) noted that psychopaths can “understand what others 
want and need  as well as what their weaknesses are , but they couldn’t care less 
about how their behavior impacts them” (p. 212, emphasis added; see also Cullen, 
2009). Not all antisocial individuals, however, are psychopaths. Among individ-
uals with ordinary (unconsolidated) egocentric bias, lack of opportunity to use 
“seemingly reasonable justifi cations” (p. 1265) reduces antisocial behavior (Shalvi, 
Eldar, & Bereby-Meyer, 2012). If the claim of Hoff man, de Waal, and others as to 
the near-ubiquity of empathy (Chapter 5) is accurate, then endogenous or primary 
psychopathy should be relatively rare. Even among children with psychopathic 
tendencies (i.e., with callous and unemotional traits), some potential “capacity for 
empathy [may] exist” (Kahn, 2012, p. 35) and off er some hope for treatment. 
 Accordingly, it may be the case that most of those who characteristically do 
salient harm to others must use protective rationalizations to neutralize incipient 
empathic distress and even guilt. Th e implied inverse relationship between use of 
self-serving distortions and empathy for others is in fact evident in many off ender 
samples (e.g., McCrady, Kaufman, Vasey, Barriga, Devlin, & Gibbs, 2008). 
 Th e second type of stress, primarily cognitive (but relating to guilt and moral 
identity), results from the potential inconsistency with self represented by salient 
and unfair harm to others (Aronson, 1992). Morality is less relevant to self for 
those with a preeminent sense of entitlement and who engage in antisocial behav-
ior (Aquino et al., 2007; Barriga et al., 2001). Even so, the impression of many cli-
nicians is that, like most individuals (Epstein & Morling, 1995), antisocial persons 
(even proactive off enders, if only to avoid scrutiny) seek to retain and maintain a 
“good” image (Beck, 1999; Samenow, 1984, 2004) in some sense (others are harmed 

160 
■ Moral Development and Reality
only for good reason). Accordingly, highly salient, obviously unfair harm to others 
may contradict the good-person presentation to self and others and thereby gener-
ate psychological stress from cognitive inconsistency or dissonance (Blasi, 1995; 
Kelman & Baron, 1968; Swann et al., 1999; cf. Monin & Merritt, 2012). 
 Maintaining self-serving cognitive distortions to cope with these stresses oft en 
requires cognitive eff ort (“cognitive resources” in information-processing terms; 
“psychic energy” in psychodynamic terms). In many cases, one’s distortions (the 
nobility of one’s actions, the inhumanity or blameworthiness of one’s victims, etc.) 
must be repeated if the stresses (empathic distress, threat to moral self-image) gen-
erated by one’s antisocial behavior are again to be quelled. Experimental work has 
shown that self-protective (and self-deceiving) distortions attenuate once some of 
one’s cognitive resources are diverted (Valdesolo & DeSteno, 2008), or once one is 
“primed” with salient moral terms (caring, compassionate, fair, friendly, kind, etc.; 
Aquino, Reed, Th au, & Freeman, 2007). 
 Nonetheless, secondary distortions can function as a perversely eff ective 
coping mechanism. Th rough their use, the antisocial individual can reduce the 
stresses of empathy and inconsistency (as well as other stresses, such as humili-
ation; see below) and preserve his primary Self-Centered orientation 2 as well 
as self-esteem. Higher self-esteem children with antisocial tendencies are more 
likely to use self-serving cognitive distortions (minimizing the harm of their 
aggression or blaming their victims; Menon, Tobin, Corby, Menon, Hodges, & 
Perry, 2007). Also, as noted, self-serving distortions relate inversely to empathy 
for victims and self-reported delinquency (Larden, Melin, Holst, & Langstrom, 
2006; McCrady et al., 2008). Adolescents with high levels of self-serving distor-
tions are more aggressive and subsequently less likely to express feelings of guilt 
(Paciello et al., 2008). In psychodynamic terms, Fritz Redl and David Wineman 
(1957) described the “special machinery [that antisocial children have] developed 
in order to secure their [ego and impulse-gratifying] behavior against . . . guilt” 
(p. 146). In the language of Albert Bandura’s (1999) cognitive social learning 
theory, rationalizations permit one to “disengage” one’s unfair, harmful conduct 
from one’s evaluation of self. In our typology (Barriga, Gibbs, et al., 2001; Gibbs, 
Barriga, & Potter, 2001), these empathy reducers and protectors of self-centered 
attitudes and self-esteem are termed  Blaming Others, Assuming the Worst, and 
 Minimizing/Mislabeling.  
 Blaming Others 
 As Carducci (1980) noted, antisocial or aggressive individuals tend to blame oth-
ers for their own misbehavior. Blaming Others naturally follows from the self-
centered sense of entitlement; in the examples noted earlier, the aggressive truck 
driver blamed his verbal attack on the slow driving of his victims. In the Gary 
vignette (above), several of the group members suggested that Cecilia “was asking 
for it.” “If she bothered to clean up around the kitchen,” one group member opined, 
“she wouldn’t have gotten hurt with that knife.” Indeed, a man who expected oth-
ers to accommodate to his every whim fl ew into a rage and fatally stabbed his 
wife upon discovering that she and their children had fi nally started eating dinner 
without him. He told her as she died, “You pushed me to the limits. You did this to 

Understanding Antisocial Behavior 
■ 161
yourself” (Aloniz, 1997, p. 5A). Harry Vorrath and Larry Brendtro (1985) noted 
the “elaborate systems” developed by antisocial youths 
  for displacing responsibility for their problems onto some other person or circumstance. 
When we ask a youth why he got into trouble he will say his parents were messed up, or 
he had the wrong friends, or the police were out to get him, or the teachers hated him, 
or his luck turned bad. Projecting, denying, rationalizing, and avoiding, he becomes an 
expert at escaping responsibility. (p. 37) 
 Generally, Blaming Others can be defi ned as “misattributing blame for one’s harm-
ful actions to outside sources, especially to another person, a group, or a momentary 
aberration (one was drunk, 3 high, in a bad mood, etc.), or misattributing blame for one’s 
victimization or other misfortune to innocent others” (Gibbs et al., 1995, p. 111). Th e 
misattribution of illegitimate aggression to military authorities (“I was just following 
orders”) has been called “authorization” (Kelman, 1973; Kelman & Hamilton, 1989). 
 Th e ego-protective role of secondary cognitive distortions such as Blaming Others 
means that they serve as strategies for regulating or neutralizing interfering aff ects 
in the service of antisocial behavioral goals. Ordinarily, an individual may use cog-
nitive strategies to regulate appetitive aff ect and thereby achieve prosocial goals (see 
Chapter 6). In contrast, an antisocial individual may use a cognitive distortion such 
as Blaming Others to preempt, neutralize, or at least attenuate inhibitory threats 
such as empathy-based guilt (or the aversive aff ect generated by inconsistency with 
self-concept) to achieve or resume the pursuit of  anti social behavioral goals. And as 
noted, the neutralization of guilt with self-serving cognitive distortions can require 
mental eff ort (Valdesolo & DeSteno, 2008). Looking back on his burglaries and vic-
tims, one delinquent refl ected, “If I started feeling bad, I’d say to myself, ‘tough rocks 
for him. He should have had his house locked better and the alarm on’” (Samenow, 
1984, p. 115). Th is delinquent would seem to be saying in eff ect, “Upon experienc-
ing empathy-based guilt and bad self-concept for causing innocent people to suff er, 
I would neutralize my aversive aff ect by blaming the victims; they were negligent 
in protecting their homes and so deserved whatever  happened to them.” Hoff man 
(2000) concurred with this view of externalizing blame as serving to neutralize, 
displace, or otherwise regulate aff ect, noting that it  
 fi ts my [Hoff man’s 1970] own fi nding that seventh graders with an external moral 
 orientation (stealing is bad if you get caught) oft en respond with guilt feeling to story-
completion items in which the central fi gure harms another, but it is only a  momentary 
guilt feeling that is followed  quickly by externalizing blame and other forms of guilt 
reduction. (p. 291, emphases added) 
 Besides neutralizing empathy-based guilt, externalizing blame can momen-
tarily spare the ego the aversive aff ect of hurt or humiliation from an off ense. Th is 
benefi t may be especially important in the case of the reactive off ender. One of 
Aaron Beck’s (1999) patients was a mother who “became angry with her children 
for very minor infractions.” In therapy, she recognized her belief that 
 “If kids do not behave themselves, it means they are bad kids.” Th e hurt came from a 
deeper meaning yielded by the belief, “If my kids misbehave, it shows I’m a bad mother.” 

162 
■ Moral Development and Reality
Th e overgeneralized belief led to an overgeneralized interpretation. Th e mother  diverted 
her attention away from the pain of the negative images of herself by blaming her chil-
dren. (p. xii, emphasis added; cf. Th omaes et al., 2011) 
 Although this woman’s blame did not lead to physical child abuse, Blaming 
Others—especially when the pain experienced includes humiliation or negative 
self-image—does oft en eventuate in aggression. Blaming Others can protect the 
self by preempting psychological stresses (empathy, self-concept dissonance) atten-
dant upon anticipated or enacted aggression. An interpretation that the source of 
a perceived (or misperceived) slight “is asking for it” or “deserves to be punished” 
can precipitate or rationalize an assault. If—as in the case of the reactive ego—the 
insult activates a negative self-image and attendant thoughts generating distress 
(“everybody thinks they can put me down, that I am weak, powerless, inferior”), 
that distress can be temporarily neutralized by an externalization of blame and 
punitive act of aggression. Although momentarily obscured, the underlying sense 
of inadequacy and vulnerability persists. 
 For some reactive off enders, “only a violent act would be suffi  cient to neutralize 
their deep sense of humiliation. Hitting and killing are strong forms of empow-
erment and powerful antidotes to a debased self-image” (Beck, 1999, p. 266; cf. 
Th omaes et al., 2011). So is sexual violence. A sadistic rapist who believed that 
women deprecated him attributed his criminal “excitement” to “the prospect of 
having a young, pure, upperclass girl and bring[ing] her down to my level—a feel-
ing like ‘Well there’s one fi ne, fancy bitch who [has been humiliated]. . . . Bet she 
don’t feel so uppity now’” (Groth & Birnsbaum, 1979, pp. 45–46). Timothy Kahn 
and Heather Chambers (1991) found higher sexual recidivism rates among juve-
nile sex off enders who blamed their victims for the off enses than among those 
who did not. 
 It is worth noting that the victim in the above example had not even known 
the off ender, let alone deprecated him in any way; in the off ender’s mind, however, 
her mere membership in the off ending class of humanity (women) was suffi  cient 
to justify the assault. Many off enders over-generalize their grievances and targets 
of vengeance (Wilson & Herrnstein, 1985). One of Redl and Wineman’s (1957) 
Pioneer House children “really tried to prove that his stealing [from other House 
children] was all right because ‘somebody swiped my own wallet two weeks ago’” 
(p. 150). A 16-year-old who had just fatally shot several classmates explained the 
violence to the school’s assistant principal (who was holding him until the police 
arrived): “Mr. Myrick, the world has wronged me” (Lacayo, 1998). 
 Th e sense that one has been  wronged  adds motive power to one’s antisocial 
behavior. As Beck (1999) noted, an individual who has perceived himself to have 
been diminished in some way typically perceives that putdown to be unfair, 
prompting a mobilization of “his behavioral system . . . in preparation for coun-
terattack” (p. 31). One must rape, steal, or kill not only to neutralize one’s hurt 
or restore one’s self-esteem but more nobly to reestablish one’s rights, to cor-
rect an injustice that has been committed against one, to “get even” or “settle the 
score.” Hoff man (2000) characterized off enders’ rationalization “that because they 
have been victimized in the past it is legitimate for them to victimize others” as 

Understanding Antisocial Behavior 
■ 163
representing “an inverted form of [eye-for-eye] reciprocity which . . . illustrates 
my claim . . . that reciprocity . . . can serve antisocial as well as prosocial purposes” 
(pp. 292–293). Th e youth who killed to get even with the world that had wronged 
him was evidencing both Stage 2 moral judgment and a Blaming Others distor-
tion to cover his highly salient, otherwise obviously unjustifi able harm to innocent 
others. Moral judgment delay and a tendency to externalize blame can be a deadly 
combination. 
 Assuming the Worst 
 Th e sadistic rapist who imagined that a young woman “felt uppity” and deprecated 
him not only evidenced a Blaming Others cognitive distortion (“it was her fault 
she was raped”) but also an “Assuming the Worst” distortion that she specifi cally 
and deliberately meant to off end him (cf. Gannon, Polaschek, & Ward, 2005). We 
defi ne Assuming the Worst as “gratuitously attributing hostile intentions to others, 
considering a worst-case scenario for a social situation as if it were inevitable, or 
assuming that improvement is impossible in one’s own or others’ behavior” (Gibbs 
et al., 1996, p. 290). Our EQUIP group members’ responses to our “What thoughts 
went through Gary’s head?” question (see above) included Assuming the Worst 
distortions such as “she hates me,” “she thinks I’m no good,” “she’s trying to kill me, 
I have to defend myself!” and “she’s going to leave me!” Much like Blaming Others, 
such exaggerated attributions can then function as facilitative and protective ratio-
nalizations for violence against the victim. 
 Attributing to another, on insuffi  cient grounds, hostile attitudes or negative 
intentions toward oneself has been linked to antisocial behavior. Kenneth Dodge 
and colleagues (see Coie & Dodge, 2006; cf. Orobia de Castro, Veerman, Koops, 
Bosch, & Monshouwer, 2002) found evidence consistent with the thesis that such 
misattributions precede aggression: Although the other boys’ intentions were actu-
ally ambiguous, highly aggressive (relative to low-aggressive) boys gratuitously 
attributed hostile intentions to the other’s acts. Dodge and colleagues (Dodge, 
Price, Bachorowski, & Newman, 1990) found higher levels of hostile attribution 
among severely reactive-aggressive juvenile off enders. 
 Extreme levels of Assuming the Worst can be recognized in clinical mental 
health populations. Th e psychiatric diagnosis of “delusional paranoid” is applied 
when individuals assume the worst regarding events and behavior irrelevant to 
themselves. An agitated paranoid patient of Beck’s interpreted the laughing of a 
lively group of strangers at a street corner “as a sign that they were plotting to 
embarrass him” (Beck, 1999, p. 28). 
 Physical abuse is apparently a risk factor for the development of self-protective 
or Assuming the Worst biases and aggression. Dodge, Bates, and Pettit (1990) 
found in a longitudinal study that four-year-olds who were physically abused sub-
sequently evidenced hostile attributional bias and other distortions in a vignette-
based assessment, followed by high rates of aggressive behavior in kindergarten. 
Hence, Assuming the Worst about others’ intentions and other “deviant” modes 
of social information-processing mediate the relationship between physical abuse 
and subsequent aggressive behavior. Beck (1999) suggested that “harsh parent-
ing shapes the child’s [over-generalized] inimical views of others and his view of 

164 
■ Moral Development and Reality
himself as vulnerable to the hostile actions of others” (p. 134). Beck described the 
following clinical case of reactive aggression:
 Terry, an eight-year-old boy, was referred to the clinic because of a history of demand-
ingness, disobedience, disruptive behavior at school, continuous fi ghts with his younger 
siblings, and rebellion against his parents and teachers. . . . Spanking and slapping by 
his father in order to curb his attacks on his younger brother were largely unsuccess-
ful. . . . By the time Terry was six, his father would slam him against the wall, wrestle 
with him, or drag him to his room and lock the door. . . . One of Terry’s most common 
complaints was, “Everybody is against me.” Th is belief shaped his interpretation of other 
boys’ behavior. If a fellow student walked by without making a sign of noticing him, he 
took this as a deliberate attempt to put him down. His interpretation was, “He’s trying 
to show that I’m a nobody, not worth noticing.” . . . Aft er his initial hurt feeling, he felt 
a craving to salve his injured self-esteem by yelling at the other student, precipitating a 
fi stfi ght. He regarded his “counterattack” as defensive and justifi ed. (pp. 132–133) 
 Like Blaming Others, Assuming the Worst distorts in part as it over-generalizes 
(e.g., “ every body is against me”). Highly aggressive adolescents have frequently 
been found to endorse statements such as “If you back down from a fi ght,  every one 
will think you’re a coward” (Slaby & Guerra, 1988, emphasis added), and “ Every one 
steals—you might as well get your share” (Gibbs, Barriga, & Potter, 2001; emphasis 
added). As Beck (1999) observed, “It is obviously far more painful for a person to 
be ‘always’ mistreated than mistreated on a specifi c occasion. Th e over-generalized 
explanation, rather than the event itself, accounts for the degree of anger” (p. 74). 
 Among the secondary cognitive distortions, Assuming the Worst is distinctive 
in that it is not only “aggressogenic” but also “ depressogenic ”: Antisocial individuals 
(at least, reactive off enders) oft en assume the worst not only about others but also 
about  themselves (their capabilities, future, etc.). We (Barriga, Landau, Stinson, Liau, 
& Gibbs, 2000) have studied not only self-serving but also self-debasing cognitive 
distortions (e.g., “I can never do anything right”). 4 Th e main picture is one of spe-
cifi c cognition-behavior relationships: Th e more closely matched the cognition to 
the behavior, the stronger the correlation (Dodge, 1986). In our study, self- serving 
distortion correlated more strongly with  externalizing behavior disorders than it did 
with  internalizing behavior disorders, and self- debasing distortion correlated more 
strongly with  internalizing  disorders than it did with  externalizing disorders (Barriga 
et al., 2000). Essentially, exaggerated  other -blaming is  aggress ogenic, whereas exag-
gerated  self -blame is  depress ogenic. Self-serving cognitive distortions do correlate, 
however, with internalizing behavior problems; this weak but signifi cant relationship 
is accounted for, among the self-serving categories, mainly by Assuming the Worst 
(Barriga, Hawkins, & Camelia, 2008). Hence, although ego-protective like the other 
secondary distortions, Assuming the Worst can also function as a self- debasing dis-
tortion (Barriga et al., 2000; cf. Quiggle, Garber, Panak, & Dodge, 1992),  especially 
among comorbid (aggressive but also self-destructive) individuals.  
 Minimizing/Mislabeling 
 Antisocial behavioral tendencies can be protected from inhibiting factors (empathy, 
inconsistency with or threat to self-concept) not only by blaming or attributing the 

Understanding Antisocial Behavior 
■ 165
worst of intentions to the victim but also by disparaging the victim or minimizing 
the victimization. Th e use of minimizing to protect one’s positive self-concept was 
almost transparent in one off ender’s protest: “Just because I shot a couple of state 
troopers doesn’t mean I’m a bad guy” (Samenow, 2004, p. 172). We (Gibbs et al., 
1995) defi ne Minimizing/Mislabeling as “depicting antisocial behavior as causing 
no real harm or as being acceptable or even admirable, or referring to others with 
belittling or dehumanizing labels” (p. 113). One of our group members who had 
grabbed a purse dangling from a supermarket cart recalled thinking that the theft  
taught the purse’s owner a good lesson to be more careful in the future. Similarly, 
group members have suggested Gary’s stabbing his girlfriend was good for her, to 
teach that “bitch” her “place.” Vandalism is sometimes minimized as “mischief” or 
“a prank” (Sykes & Matza, 1957), and premeditated violent crimes as “mistakes” 
(Garbarino, 1999, p. 134). Slaby and Guerra (1988) found that highly aggressive 
adolescents were more likely to endorse statements such as “People who get beat 
up badly probably don’t suff er a lot.” Beck (1999) noted a common belief among 
rapists that a woman will “enjoy” being raped (p. 141; cf. McCrady et al., 2008). 
 “One way to resolve the tension between unethical behavior and moral self-
image,” then, “is to creatively interpret an incriminating behavior” (Ayal & Gino, 
2012, p. 151). Th e linguistic abuse entailed in this “creative interpretation” (that 
phrase itself abuses “creative”) can be quite noticeable for nonviolent as well as vio-
lent off enses. A manufacturing company executive and his engineers altered test 
result data so that a prospective military aircraft  brake assembly, which in fact had 
failed all tests, would nonetheless be approved for production. Borrowing from—
and abusing—the notion of poetic license, the executive explained to federal pros-
ecutors that he and his associates were not “really lying. All we were doing was 
interpreting the fi gures the way we knew they should be. We were just exercising 
engineering license” (Vandivier, 2002, p. 163). In a television interview, an incar-
cerated off ender who had murdered a sales clerk explained his lack of remorse: 
Th e woman had aft er all refused to “cooperate” and “follow the rules.” In addition 
to blaming the victim, he was using certain words to obscure his self-centered 
aggrandizement:  Cooperation, a socially decentered word that means “working 
together toward a common end,” was abused to mean “giving me what I unfairly 
want,” and  the rules was similarly seized and abused to mean “my desires.” 
 Minimizing and mislabeling such as dehumanization is a staple feature of ideo-
logical “crimes of obedience” (Kelman & Hamilton, 1989). A common practice 
during combat training of soldiers—or, for that matter, of gang members who are 
to fi ght another gang—is to use derogatory and dehumanizing labels for the class 
of human beings who are to be the enemy, so that harming or killing them will 
be easier. Many government torturers, to be able to continue, must frequently be 
reminded that their victims are “vermin” (Haritos-Fatouros, 2003; cf. Moshman, 
2004, 2007)—perhaps to avoid conscious empathic recognition that their victims 
are also human beings “with intentions and desires and projects” (Appiah, 2008, 
p. 145; cf. Batson, 2011, pp. 192–193).  
 A Nazi camp commandant was asked why the Nazis went to such extreme lengths to 
degrade their victims, whom they were going to kill anyway. Th e commandant chillingly 

166 
■ Moral Development and Reality
explained that it was not a matter of purposeless cruelty. Rather, the victims had to be 
degraded to the level of subhuman objects so that those who operated the gas chambers 
would be less burdened by distress. (Bandura, 1999, p. 200) 
 In addition to dehumanizing their victims, glorifying or ennobling their behav-
ior may be essential if non-psychopathic individuals are to continue to engage 
in otherwise obviously immoral acts. Consider the troubled recollection of a 
Communist activist who aided in the forced starvation of 14 million Ukrainian 
peasants and had to see and hear “the children’s crying and the women’s wails”:
 It was excruciating to see and hear all this. And even worse to take part in it. . . . I 
 persuaded myself, explained to myself I mustn’t give in to debilitating pity. [Th ey were 
enemies of the Plan.] We were realizing historical necessity. We were performing our 
revolutionary duty. We were obtaining grain for the socialist fatherland. For the Five-
Year Plan. (Conquest, 1986, p. 233)   
 Th is former activist’s previous resistance against “debilitating pity” became 
guilt-wracked, belated compassion as Stalin’s monstrous regime ended and real-
ity sank in. Persistent guilt despite eff orts to minimize or mislabel questionable 
actions can be a factor in post-traumatic stress disorder among military combat 
veterans (Grossman, 1995). 
 One can also attempt to minimize and insulate oneself from the enormity of 
one’s actions through their “routinization” (Kelman, 1973; Kelman & Hamilton, 
1989) or “deconstruction” (Baumeister, 1991; Ward, Hudson, & Marshall, 1995); 
i.e., selective or tunnel-vision attention to concrete details or ordinary, repetitive, 
and mechanical details of the off ending activity. Beck’s term (1999; cf. Hollander, 
1995) for this cognitive strategy was  procedural thinking, which was “typical of the 
bureaucrats in the Nazi and Soviet apparatus”:
 Th is kind of “low level” thinking is characteristic of [fastidious] people whose attention 
is fi xed totally on the details of a destructive project in which they are engaged. . . . Th ese 
individuals can be so focused on what they are doing—a kind of tunnel vision—that they 
are able to blot out the fact that they are participating in an inhuman action. (p. 18) 
 Facilitating Research on Self-Serving Cognitive Distortions: 
The “How I Think” (HIT) Questionnaire 
 Th e primary (Self-Centered) and secondary (Blaming Others, Assuming the Worst, 
Minimizing/Mislabeling) self-serving cognitive distortions play an important role, 
then, in the maintenance of antisocial behavior. Accordingly, it is important to have 
a means of assessing such distortions reliably and validly. Building from previ-
ous assessment advances (e.g., Bandura, Barbaranelli, Caprara, & Pastorelli, 1996; 
Paciello et al., 2008), we (Barriga, Gibbs, Potter, & Liau, 2001; cf. Barriga, Gibbs, 
Potter, Konopisos, & Barriga, 2008) developed the “How I Th ink” (HIT) question-
naire (Gibbs Barriga, & Potter, 1992, 2001). Th e HIT questionnaire is a group-
administrable, paper-and-pencil measure that is composed of items representing 
mainly the four categories of self-serving cognitive distortion. To provide broad 
and meaningful content for the cognitive distortions, these items also refer to one 

Understanding Antisocial Behavior 
■ 167
or another of four main categories of antisocial behavior derived from the conduct 
disorder and oppositional defi ant disorder syndromes listed in the fourth edition 
of the  Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders ( DSM-IV ; American 
Psychiatric Association, 1994): disrespect for rules, laws, or authorities (i.e., opposi-
tion-defi ance); physical aggression; lying; and stealing. For example, the item “People 
force you to lie if they ask too many questions” represents a Blaming Others cogni-
tive distortion applied to a “lying” category of behavioral referent. Also included 
were “Anomalous Responding” items (for screening out approval-seeking, impres-
sion management, incompetent, or otherwise suspect responding) and positive fi ller 
items (e.g., “When friends need you, you should be there for them”), used mainly for 
camoufl aging the distortion items and encouraging full use of the response scale. 
 Th e HIT would appear to be a valid and reliable assessment contribution to 
studies of the role of self-serving cognitive distortions in the initiation and main-
tenance of antisocial behavior. Th e factor structure of the HIT questionnaire was 
supported by confi rmatory factor analysis. Internal consistency estimates were 
very high, with Cronbach’s alphas ranging from 0.92 to 0.96. Th e cognitive distor-
tion subscales, behavioral referent subscales, and Anomalous Responding scale 
were also high, with alphas ranging from 0.63 to 0.92. Th e measure correlated with 
self-report, parental report, and institutional indices of antisocial behavior, indi-
cating good convergent validity. It did  not correlate with socioeconomic status, 
intelligence, or grade-point average, indicating good divergent validity. Regarding 
discriminant validity, the measure consistently discriminated (incarcerated and 
non-incarcerated) adolescent and adult samples with antisocial behavior prob-
lems from comparison samples. Construct validity results have been reported 
in both U.S. and European samples (e.g., Barriga et al., 2008; Bogestad, Kettler, 
& Hagan, 2010; Chabrol, van Leeuwen, Rodgers, & Gibbs, 2011; McCrady et al., 
2008; Plante et al., 2012; Wallinius, Johansson, Larden, & Dernevik, 2011; see 
Helmond, Overbeek, Brugman, & Gibbs, 2013). 
 Social Skill Deficiencies 
 Recall that Mac neglected to balance his concerns with the legitimate expectations 
of the staff  member. Antisocial youths generally evidence not only moral devel-
opmental delays and self-serving cognitive distortions but also social skills defi -
ciencies—the third of the “three Ds” found in the literature.  Social skills typically 
refers to the consolidated and implicit mental schemas that regulate balanced and 
constructive behavior—especially needed in diffi  cult interpersonal situations. An 
example is the behavior of a youth who deals constructively with deviant peer pres-
sure by suggesting a non-deviant alternative. Another example is that of a youth 
who calmly and sincerely off ers clarifi cation or apologizes to an angry accuser. 
Such behavior is “neither aggressive nor obsequious” (Carducci, 1980, p. 161; cf. 
Jakubowski & Lange, 1978); that is, it achieves a fair balance between one’s own per-
spective and that of another. Similarly, Robert Deluty (1979) conceptualized social 
skills as appropriately assertive responses intermediate between threats or aggres-
sion, on one hand, and submission or running away, on the other (although calmly 
leaving the scene can be appropriate or balanced in some circumstances). While 

168 
■ Moral Development and Reality
asserting or explaining his or her own perspective, the socially skilled individual also 
communicates awareness of the other person’s viewpoint, feelings, and legitimate 
expectations. Th e use of social skills by participants in a dialogue should reduce 
self-centration and promote mutual respect. Arnold Goldstein and Ellen McGinnis 
(1997) operationalized various types of balanced, constructive social problem solv-
ing in terms of concrete and limited sequences of “steps” or component schemas. 
 Social Skill Deficiencies as Imbalanced Behavior 
 Research on social skills has generally found defi ciencies among antisocial youths 
relative to comparison groups, corroborating Carducci’s (1980) impression that 
these youths typically “do not know what specifi c steps [in a social confl ict] . . . will 
result in [the confl ict’s] being solved” (pp. 157–158). Such defi ciencies are per-
haps not surprising given the typical absence of models of constructive problem-
solving in the youths’ home environments (Kazdin, 1995). Barbara Freedman and 
colleagues (Freedman, Rosenthal, Donahoe, Schlundt, & McFall, 1978) found 
evidence of extensive social skill defi cits or defi ciencies among male incarcerated 
juvenile off enders, as measured by a semi-structured interview rating measure, the 
Adolescent Problems Inventory (API). Lower API scores were found not only for the 
delinquents overall but also for a delinquent subgroup that frequently violated insti-
tutional rules. Relations between social skill defi cits and antisocial behavior were 
replicated by Dishion, Loeber, Stouthamer-Loeber, and Patterson (1984) but not by 
Hunter and Kelly (1986). We (Simonian, Tarnowski, & Gibbs, 1991) corrected for a 
procedural fl aw in the Hunter and Kelly study and used a streamlined and adapted 
version of the API, the Inventory of Adolescent Problems–Short Form (IAP-SF; 
Gibbs, Swillinger, Leeman, Simonian, Rowland, & Jaycox, 1995). Using the IAP-SF, 
we found that social skills did correlate inversely with numerous indices of antisocial 
behavior (most serious off ense committed, number of correctional facility place-
ments, self-reported alcohol problems, and absent-without-leave [AWOL] attempts 
and successes). We (Leeman et al., 1993) also found that social skills as measured by 
the IAP-SF correlated inversely with frequency of unexcused school absences, pre-
incarceration off enses, institutional misconduct, and institutional incident reports. 
 Given our framework for conceptualizing social skills as balanced and con-
structive interpersonal behavior in diffi  cult situations, socially unskilled behavior 
involves unbalanced and destructive behavior in two categories of interpersonal 
situations: (a) irresponsibly submissive behavior in deviant peer-pressure situa-
tions (an imbalance that favors others and is tantamount to disrespect for self) and 
(b) irresponsibly aggressive behavior in anger-provocation situations (favoring self 
and tantamount to disrespect for the other; more typical and another aspect of pro-
nounced egocentric bias or self-centeredenss). Using factor-analytic techniques, 
Susan Simonian and colleagues (Simonian et al., 1991) confi rmed the validity of 
these categories. Th ey labeled the peer pressure category “Antisocial Peer Pressure” 
(“peer pressure to engage in serious violation of social norms/legal mandates,” 
p. 24). Th e anger provocation category was represented by “response demand” or 
provocative pressure situations. Th e “Provocation Pressure” items either required 
an immediate response in the face of a clear and present provocation or permitted 

Understanding Antisocial Behavior 
■ 169
“more response-planning time” (p. 23; example: one is late for work and knows 
one will be facing an irate employer). Socially skilled responses to Antisocial Peer 
Pressure and Provocation Pressure situations correlated inversely with covert and 
overt forms of antisocial behavior, respectively. 
a case study 
 
■
 Although atypical in some respects, an antisocial individual introduced in the last 
chapter—the infamous terrorist Timothy McVeigh—would seem to refl ect as a 
young man in his 20s the problematic tendencies we have discussed under the cat-
egories of moral judgment developmental delay, self-serving cognitive distortions, 
and social skill defi ciencies. 
 McVeigh’s Moral Judgment Developmental Delay 
 McVeigh, even as a young adult, evidenced both concrete morality and pronounced 
egocentric bias. As we noted in Chapter 6, eye-for-an-eye reciprocity was “a theme 
that became McVeigh’s philosophy” (Michel & Herbeck, 2001, p. 68). His descrip-
tion of his philosophy—dirty for dirty, you reap what you sow, payback time—is an 
explicit description of the concrete logic of Kohlbergian moral judgment Stage 2. 
“Anyone who mistreated McVeigh—or made him think he was being mistreated—
was making a formidable enemy with a long memory” (Michel & Herbeck, 2001, 
p. 68). Indeed, anyone who even disagreed with McVeigh was likely to induce in 
McVeigh a perception of mistreatment and a motive to retaliate. 
 McVeigh’s moral developmental delay can be understood—but only to some 
extent—from what we know about his home history. Although McVeigh’s home 
history did not entail signifi cant abuse, it bordered on neglect and apparently did 
not provide opportunities to take the perspective of others. McVeigh had “very 
few memories of interactions” with his parents and “never really felt close” to them 
or most other relatives (Michel & Herbeck, 2001, p. 21). His father did not off er 
support or advice even aft er an incident in which McVeigh was humiliated by a 
bully. McVeigh did experience some nurturance through a close relationship with 
his grandfather; their relationship, however, “revolved around an interest the two 
had in common: their mutual enjoyment of guns” (p. 23). 
 McVeigh’s Self-Serving Cognitive Distortions 
 Both primary (Self-Centered) and secondary (Blaming Others, Assuming the 
Worst, Minimizing/Mislabeling) cognitive distortions were amply evident in 
McVeigh’s mental life. 
 Self-Centered 
 McVeigh’s egocentric bias consolidated into a Self-Centered cognitive distortion. 
Aspects of his Self-Centered orientation suggested grandiosity or even psychopa-
thy. In quitting college, he declared that he knew more than the teachers and that 

170 
■ Moral Development and Reality
the classes were “just too boring” (Michel & Herbeck, 2001, p. 38). In the Army, he 
arrogantly expressed disdain for others—even offi  cers—who seemed less knowledge-
able regarding weapons and procedure manuals. Although the Army initially off ered 
“thrills” (p. 103) and glory, McVeigh eventually became “suff ocated by the repetition 
of ordinary life” and “restless, dissatisfi ed by daily life, increasingly eager to set his own 
rules” (pp. 112, 196). To impress his younger sister, he fabricated a military adventure. 
Alluding to the planned bombing, he bragged that “something big is going to hap-
pen” (p. 196). His plans were methodical, and he manipulated or intimidated others 
into helping him. He was convinced that “historians would call him a martyr, maybe 
even a hero” (p. 166). Incidentally, McVeigh’s anticipated glory of martyrdom belied 
his self-presentation as a humble, selfl ess, sacrifi cial crusader. In David Moshman’s 
(2004) terminology, McVeigh evidenced a  false moral identity  (Chapter 6). 
 Yet it is not clear that McVeigh was psychopathic in the classic sense. His absence 
of guilt over harm to others seemed to stem not from an absence of empathy so 
much as the eff ective use of self-righteous, self-serving distortions. As described 
in the last chapter, he at times seemed to evidence a genuine empathy. He also at 
times evidenced an insecurity and vulnerability suggestive of the reactive off ender. 
In a rambling letter to his sister, he expressed “an urgent need for someone in the 
family to understand me.” He even made reference to his “lawless behavior and 
attitude” (Michel & Herbeck, 2001, p. 145), although he quickly attributed it to a 
(fabricated) encounter with lawless government agents. 
 McVeigh’s volatile shift s between extremes in self-esteem were also more sug-
gestive of the reactive than the proactive (clinically, the psychopathic) off ender. 
Aft er the thrills and status of the Army, back in his small hometown, McVeigh felt 
“it was all crashing down . . . the long hours in a dead-end job, the feeling that he 
didn’t have a home, his failure to establish a relationship with a woman” (Michel 
& Herbeck, 2001, p. 103). Aft er considering suicide, he “regrouped,” taking “to 
the notion of becoming a hunter—not just any hunter, but one who could kill his 
quarry with a single long-range shot” (p. 104). 
 Especially consistent with the interpretation of McVeigh as a reactive off ender 
is his preoccupation with his status, with whether he was receiving respect or 
humiliation from the world. Upon receiving an invitational magazine-subscription 
form letter referring to “the readership of leading professionals such as yourself,” 
McVeigh commented, “It’s about time someone gave me the proper respect” (Michel 
& Herbeck, 2001, p. 376). McVeigh felt humiliated and wronged not only by the 
bullying incidents of his own childhood but also by government actions against 
his “people”: “Th e government, he felt, was laughing at people in the Patriot and 
gun communities” (p. 167). It was “time to make them all pay” (p. 168), to silence 
“the laughter of the bully” (p. 167). He wrote to his sister, “My whole mindset has 
shift ed, from intellectual to . . . animal, Rip the bastards ( sic ) heads off  and shit down 
their necks!” (p. 196). Indeed, to the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms, he 
wrote, “All you tyrannical mother fuckers will swing in the wind one day” (p. 180). 
 Th e nuances of McVeigh’s Self-Centered orientation seemed to refl ect, then, 
a mixture of proactive and reactive features. Such cases of mixture or comorbid-
ity are not uncommon. Although there do seem to be qualitatively distinct types 
of aggressors, the prevalence of mixed types among aggressive individuals has 

Understanding Antisocial Behavior 
■ 171
prompted some researchers to advocate a continuum-of-features rather than 
dichotomy-of-types model of aggressive behavior (Bushman & Anderson, 2001 
see Th omaes et al., 2011).  
 Blaming Others 
 Th e secondary distortions, including Blaming Others, were also thematic. In 
high school, McVeigh insisted that his fl agging interest in academics was “the 
teachers’ fault” (Michel & Herbeck, 2001, p. 32). His list of blameworthy agents 
included “crooked politicians, overzealous governmental agents, high taxes, politi-
cal correctness, gun laws” (p. 2). He even blamed “American women” for “sexu-
ally shortchanging the opposite sex” (p. 114). At his trial, he sought to present a 
“necessity defense” to the eff ect that “Waco, Ruby Ridge, and other government 
excesses . . .  drove him ” to respond in kind (p. 277, emphasis added).  
 Assuming the Worst 
 Much the way highly aggressive boys point to the hostility they create as proof 
they were right all along about others’ attitudes toward them (Lochman & Dodge, 
1998), McVeigh welcomed execution as proving “that the American government 
was heartless and cruel” (Michel & Herbeck, 2001, p. 350). McVeigh explicitly 
Assumed the Worst regarding the ostensible threat from the government:
 “If a comet is hurtling toward the earth, and it’s out past the orbit of Pluto, . . . it is an 
imminent threat.” And if the U.S. government was allowed to get away with what hap-
pened at Waco and Ruby Ridge, there was an imminent threat to the lives of gun owners, 
McVeigh said. (Michel & Herbeck, 2001, pp. 285–286) 
 McVeigh saw the world as a dangerous place, necessitating constant vigilance and 
preparedness. He kept guns “all over” (Michel & Herbeck, 2001, p. 89) his house and 
in his car because of the ever-present danger, in his mind, of attack. While in the Army, 
he rented a storage shed where he stockpiled a hundred gallons of fresh water, food 
rations, guns, and other supplies in case “all hell broke loose in the world” (p. 60). 
 McVeigh’s habitual overreaction to perceived dangers or threats may have had 
a heritable component. Such a possibility is suggested by his mother’s subsequent 
commitment to a psychiatric hospital in part for paranoid delusions (an extreme 
level of Assuming the Worst) (Beck, 1999). McVeigh himself 
 fi rst noticed odd [even for him] behavior in his mother more than two years before the 
bombing. . . . She constantly pulled plugs from electrical outlets. At fi rst, he thought she 
was trying to save electricity; only later did he realize she was afraid of health dangers 
from electromagnetic fi elds. (Michel & Herbeck, 2001, p. 381) 
 Minimizing/Mislabeling 
 Numerous examples were provided in Chapter 6 of McVeigh’s minimizing and 
mislabeling of his crime. Much of his Minimizing/Mislabeling and prideful ego 

172 
■ Moral Development and Reality
strength entailed the abuse of a military metaphor: “War means action. Hard 
choices. Life and death” (Michel & Herbeck, 2001, p. 212). In this hard war, he 
was a courageous patriot, or perhaps a Robin Hood. At times, he would refer to 
himself as “we,” as if he were part of a political group or military organization, 
obscuring the fact that in the end he was alone with his bomb in his truck. Th e 
innocent people he killed were, aft er all, “part of the evil empire” (p. 225), provid-
ing the “body count” (p. 300) he desired; the dead babies were “collateral damage” 
(p. 331). Much as did the Communist activist quoted earlier—and as does the 
typical ideological terrorist—McVeigh saw himself as having a necessary “duty,” 
in terms of which empathy for his victims was a sign of debilitating weakness. 
McVeigh had learned from example in childhood that “the men of the McVeigh 
family were not supposed to cry” (p. 19). To his victims and their families, he 
minimized that death “happens every day” (p. 324). In a perverse expression of 
ego strength, he rejected suggestions that he show empathic distress or guilt for the 
victims’ losses as a pathetic capitulation: “I’m not going to . . . curl into a fetal ball, 
and cry just because the victims want me to do that” (p. 325). 
 McVeigh also minimized empathic aff ect in diverting his thoughts and percep-
tions from the crime. His extraordinary attention to detail preparing the bomb 
as if it were a “science project” (Michel & Herbeck, 2001, p. 288) is suggestive of 
the tunnel-vision strategy described earlier. Also, aft er positioning and activat-
ing the bomb, he walked briskly away, wearing earplugs and not looking back at 
the devastation upon hearing the blast. Later, seeing on television the children 
among his victims “did cause him a moment’s regret.” His overall reaction, how-
ever, was disappointment that the eff ect of his bomb was not more spectacular. 
“‘ Damn, ’ he thought, ‘ the whole building didn’t come down’ ” (Michel & Herbeck, 
2001, p. 245).  
 McVeigh’s Social Skill Deficiencies 
 McVeigh was, to say the least, socially unskilled in diffi  cult interpersonal situa-
tions. His biographers (Michel & Herbeck, 2001) do not report a single instance 
in which McVeigh maintained a balanced perspective to deal with and resolve a 
problem constructively. Instead, McVeigh would (a) prematurely withdraw, (b) 
threaten or attack, or (c) strategically withdraw in order to plan an attack. Starting 
work at a gun shop, McVeigh had a dispute with one of the other workers; “instead 
of trying to work things out, McVeigh backed off . He quit his job at the gun shop 
aft er just a few weeks” (p. 101). Finding resistance to his assertions among people 
met in mainstream contexts, he gravitated toward gun shows where he encoun-
tered fewer challenges requiring him to “justify his positions” (p. 125). 
 McVeigh would also make threats. Merely disagreeing with him was a provo-
cation for McVeigh. Again, we can speculate that McVeigh was in part a reactive 
off ender, for whom the distorted Assuming the Worst belief, “If people disagree 
with me, it means they don’t respect me,” is readily activated by provocations 
(Beck, 1999). As is typical, the hurt quickly transformed into anger. In response 
to a prank, McVeigh called the prankster’s mother and said in a frightening tone, 
“‘Listen very carefully, ma’am, . . . If your son doesn’t stop this shit—and he knows 

Understanding Antisocial Behavior 
■ 173
what I’m talking about—I know where you live. I’m going to burn your fucking 
house down’” (Michel & Herbeck, 2001, p. 98). 
 McVeigh was perhaps most dangerous when his withdrawal was strategic. 
Aft er hearing a complaint from a friend, McVeigh became extremely angry but 
“never said anything. He set his jaw and sat down and picked up a magazine and 
started reading” (Michel & Herbeck, 2001, p. 152). McVeigh might even at that 
point have been thinking of vengeance; he did subsequently mastermind a brutal 
and terrifying robbery. Although pleased by the success of the robbery, McVeigh 
was intensely disappointed that the man had not been murdered but only severely 
beaten and terrifi ed. 
 Case Study Summary and Comments 
 Overall, then, McVeigh was a very self-centered, vindictive, and threatening indi-
vidual. Among McVeigh’s possessions at the time of his arrest was a copy of the 
U.S. Constitution, on the back of which McVeigh had written, “Obey the 
Constitution of the United States and we won’t shoot you” (Michel & Herbeck, 
2001, p. 228). Translation: “Agree with me and I won’t kill you.” Th ere lies an epit-
ome of McVeigh’s self-centration as manifested in classic limitations characteristic 
of chronic and serious antisocial youth: the egocentric bias and payback-and-then-
some morality (moral developmental delay); the arrogant judge-jury-executioner 
attitude supported by externalizations of blame, hostile attributions, and euphe-
misms (self-serving cognitive distortions that support chronic anger); and the 
habits of threat rather than balanced communication and constructive confl ict-
resolution (social skill defi ciencies). 
 McVeigh’s self-centration or failure to take others’ perspectives in any adequate 
sense meant that he was generally neither fair nor empathic in his interactions 
with others, as per the theories of Kohlberg and Hoff man. Yet McVeigh’s case also 
presents those theories with some challenges. Consider the implicit challenge to 
Kohlbergian theory. Given McVeigh’s developmental delay in his moral under-
standing of fairness, should he not have come from a home more severely defi -
cient in social perspective-taking opportunities—say, a home of abuse and of more 
serious neglect? Perhaps McVeigh was temperamentally ill-suited to benefi t from 
whatever modest social perspective-taking opportunities might have come his 
way in school and elsewhere. 
 Consider as well the challenge (at least at fi rst blush) to Hoff man’s theory. 
What happened to the multi-layered, near-universality of empathy, especially for 
those of one’s group? Surely McVeigh was cognizant that his victims were fellow 
Americans; how could he not have felt empathy for them? Was McVeigh simply 
a cold psychopath? Again, probably not. His childhood empathic distress for 
injured animals was noted in Chapter 6. He did have to “brush aside” moments 
of empathic distress for his victims both before and aft er the bombing. Indeed, 
Hoff man might argue cogently that McVeigh’s crime refl ected not the absence so 
much as the  presence of empathy. Tragically, McVeigh’s empathy only made things 
worse: His intense empathic distress at seeing the victims at Waco was structured 
and channeled into vindictive, self-righteous rage by his “payback” level of moral 

174 
■ Moral Development and Reality
reciprocity, cognitive distortions, and habits of threat. For a more mature, veridi-
cal, and balanced individual, the empathic distress would have helped to motivate 
a constructive and appropriately targeted response. 
 Although Kohlberg’s and Hoff man’s theories can address these challenges to 
some extent, their theories must systematically and explicitly include self-serving 
cognitive distortions to account for severe or chronic antisocial behavior. With a 
suffi  cient prevalence of such distortions, aggression can be initiated and perpetu-
ated even in empathic individuals from non-abusive homes. Nor do the theories 
integrate into their frameworks the positive contribution of social skills to the cul-
tivation of schemas or habits of constructive and balanced social behavior. Th ese 
theories need expansion, then, in their application not only to prosocial but also 
to  anti social behavior. With the key concepts of moral judgment developmental 
delay, self-serving cognitive distortions, and social skill defi ciencies in place, we 
now shift  from understanding to treating antisocial behavior. 

175
  8 
 Treating Antisocial Behavior 
 In 1993, at a juvenile correctional facility in Columbus, Ohio, a group of eight 
residents and a staff  group leader were having a “mutual help” meeting. Th e focus 
of the meeting was the problem reported by 15-year-old Mac, one of the group 
members. Mac had resisted and yelled profanities at a staff  member who, in accor-
dance with institutional policy, had begun to inspect his carrying bag. Th e group 
and Mac agreed that Mac’s defi ance and profanity represented, in the language of 
the program, an “Authority Problem”; but the group wanted to know the  mean-
ing of that problem, its underlying thinking error or cognitive distortion. Angry 
as he thought about the incident and his subsequent disciplinary write-up, Mac 
explained that the bag contained something very special and irreplaceable—pho-
tographs of his grandmother—and that he was not going to let anyone take the 
photos from him. Mac’s peers understood his point of view but saw it as one-sided: 
Mac thought only of safeguarding his photos, without considering for a moment 
the staff  member’s perspective or the facility’s necessary rules: She was only carry-
ing out institutional policy concerning inspection for possible contraband. Nor did 
Mac consider that she was not abusive and that he thus had no reason to assume 
that the photos would be confi scated. Generating the anger and overt behavior 
identifi ed as an Authority Problem, then, were “Self-Centered” and “Assuming 
the Worst” thinking errors. Th e group also criticized Mac’s anger at staff  for his 
subsequent disciplinary write-up: In reality, Mac could blame no one but him-
self for those consequences. In program terms, Mac also had an “Easily Angered” 
problem generated by a “Blaming Others” thinking error. Helpful in addressing 
Mac’s self-centered or one-sided viewpoint were certain tools or “equipment” 
acquired elsewhere in the program. Th is equipment included the mature rea-
sons for an institution’s policy pertaining to possible contraband, how Mac could 
have corrected his thinking errors and used other skills to manage his anger, and 
how he could have expressed his concern to the staff  member in a balanced and 
constructive fashion. 
 As the meeting progressed (it lasted more than an hour), Mac’s anger dissipated 
considerably, and he began to regret his verbal assault on the staff  member. He 
started to take into account her perspective. He could see the unfairness of his 
behavior toward her and the way the facility she served had to work, empathize 
with her, 1 and attribute blame to himself (correcting his Blaming Others thinking 
error). Over the course of subsequent sessions, Mac continued to work on correct-
ing or remediating his cognitive limitations and taking the perspectives of others 
in various ways, as prescribed in both Kohlberg’s and Hoff man’s theories. With 
encouragement, accountability, and practice, social perspective-taking became 
easier, more spontaneous. Constructive and responsible behavior was increas-
ingly evident as Mac’s Authority and Easily Angered problems attenuated. As Mac 
made gains toward responsible thought, so he also made gains toward responsible 
behavior. 

176 
■ Moral Development and Reality
 Processes of treatment for antisocial behavior are more concentrated, system-
atic, and short-term than are the processes of moral development or socializa-
tion. In essence, however, the principle of treatment does not diff er from that of 
moral development: namely, self-centration and its remedy in social decentra-
tion through social perspective-taking. As we saw in the last chapter,  multiple 
limitations associated with self-centeredness (moral developmental delays, social 
cognitive distortions, social skill defi ciencies) contribute to antisocial behavior. 
Accordingly, treatment programs for antisocial youth must be  multicomponen-
tial  (Kazdin, 1995) to address these limitations. As we discuss the treatment of 
antisocial behavior in this chapter, we will focus on a multicomponent treatment 
program that incorporates a wide variety of social perspective-taking opportuni-
ties; namely, our EQUIP program (DiBiase, Gibbs, Potter, & Blount, 2012; Gibbs, 
Potter, & DiBiase, 2013; Gibbs, Potter, & Goldstein, 1995; Gibbs, Potter, DiBiase, 
& Devlin, 2009; Horn, Shively, & Gibbs, 2001; Potter, Gibbs, & Goldstein, 2001; cf. 
Glick & Gibbs, 2011; Goldstein, Glick, & Gibbs, 1998). 
 EQUIP is multicomponential primarily in the sense that it integrates two basic 
approaches to treating antisocial behavior: the mutual-help approach and the cog-
nitive-behavioral approach. Th is latter approach, especially as adapted in EQUIP, 
aims to facilitate more mature and accurate cognitive habits and behavioral skills. 
Th e cognitive behavioral approach is itself multicomponential, encompassing areas 
that include moral judgment development, anger management (including the cor-
rection of cognitive distortion), and social skills training (e.g., see Glick, 2009). 
Our description of the mutual help and cognitive behavioral approaches and how 
they are integrated in EQUIP will emphasize the ways in which they induce social 
perspective-taking. Such inductions should facilitate sociomoral development in a 
broad sense, that is, should help remedy self-centered cognitive limitations, facili-
tate growth beyond the superfi cial in social and moral life, and induce respon-
sible thought and behavior. We conclude the chapter with a consideration of more 
intensive perspective-taking techniques such as crime reenactment role-play, used 
with severe off enders.  
the mutual help approach 
 
■
 Th e 1993 “mutual help” meeting illustrated mainly one aspect of the EQUIP 
program; namely, our cognitive version of “Positive Peer Culture” (Vorrath & 
Brendtro, 1985) or, more generally, what we call the  mutual help approach . Positive 
Peer Culture has sought to “make caring fashionable” (p. 21) and thereby motivate 
erstwhile antisocial youth to help one another change. 
 Although people have been motivated to help one another in groups for thou-
sands of years, the modern support group or mutual help movement originated in 
1935 with the founding of Alcoholics Anonymous. Such groups quickly prolifer-
ated. Approximately 500,000 mutual help groups have emerged in the United States 
alone, involving more than 12 million Americans (Hurley, 1988; Wuthnow, 1994). 
Like Alcoholics Anonymous, some of these groups address the struggle against 
an addictive behavior (e.g., Gamblers Anonymous). Other groups are composed 
of individuals enduring stressful or painful situations (e.g., single parenthood, 

Treating Antisocial Behavior 
■ 177
widowhood, heart disease, breast cancer, rape or incest, or the murder of one’s 
child). Still other groups (e.g., Alcoholics Anonymous and National Alliance on 
Mental Illness aim to provide help for friends and relatives of the person with 
the problem. 
 Beginning in the 1940s, the mutual help approach began to be applied to indi-
viduals who regularly victimize others and society. At a psychiatric hospital in 
Great Britain, Maxwell Jones (1953) innovated techniques for cultivating a “thera-
peutic community” among sociopathic patients. Independently and concurrently, 
in New Jersey, Lloyd McCorkle, Albert Elias, and Lovell Bixby (1958) applied 
similar techniques to delinquent boys in an intervention they termed  guided group 
interaction. Th ese techniques were subsequently refi ned by Vickie Agee (1979) 
for use with violent adolescents and for a broader population of antisocial youth 
by Harry Vorrath and Larry Brendtro (1985). Vorrath and Brendtro called their 
mutual help program  Positive Peer Culture . 
 The Challenge of a Negative Youth Culture 
 Aggressive and other antisocial youths represent a formidable challenge to the 
mutual help approach. Unlike most mutual help groups, which are initiated and 
joined voluntarily by participants, mutual help groups for antisocial youths are ini-
tiated by adults and may be mandated by the courts. Hence, forming such groups 
typically encounters at least initial resistance (“storming” or “limit-testing” is in 
fact an early phase of group development; Vorrath & Brendtro, 1985). Researchers 
and practitioners have noted the negative (and, we would add, distorted) group 
norms of antisocial youths: “Drug use is cool [Minimizing/Mislabeling], sexual 
exploitation proves manliness [Minimizing/Mislabeling], and you have to watch 
out for number one [Self-Centered]” (Brendtro & Wasmund, 1989, p. 83). In their 
analysis of the “moral atmosphere” (also called  moral climate ) of a Bronx, New 
York, high school, Kohlberg and Higgins (1987) identifi ed certain  oppositional or 
“counternorms” (in our terms, “culturally normative cognitive distortions”) such 
as Assuming the Worst or Blaming Others; e.g., “Look at me the wrong way and 
you’re in for a fi ght,” or “It’s your fault if something is stolen—you were careless 
and tempting me” (p. 110). In correctional settings, the negative youth culture 
is generally “characterized by opposition to institutional rules and goals, norms 
against informing authorities about rule violations, and the use of physical coer-
cion as a basis of infl uence among inmates” (Osgood, Gruber, Archer, & Newcomb, 
1985, p. 71). Although Kohlberg and Higgins (1987) did not explicitly characterize 
negative or oppositional norms as distortive, they did emphasize that such norms 
undermine adherents’ “capacity to empathize” or perspective-take (p. 110). In 
longitudinal studies, the oppositional or “rule-breaking” content of social inter-
changes with antisocial peers predicted subsequent violent behavior, delinquency, 
and substance abuse (Dishion, McCord, & Poulin, 1999). 
 Mutual help programs applied to antisocial youths aim to transform this self-
centered, distorted, and harmful culture. Th e aim is to create a caring and  positive 
peer culture 2 in which group members work with one another’s perspectives and 
thereby help themselves and one another to change toward responsible behavior. 

178 
■ Moral Development and Reality
Techniques for accomplishing this aim include selecting for the initial peer group 
relatively positive (or at least less limited) peers; the cognitive behavioral tech-
nique of relabeling, reframing, or cognitive restructuring (e.g., characterizing 
helping others as a  strong rather than a weak or sissy thing to do); confronting or 
reversing responsibility (see below); encouraging the honest sharing of personal 
histories (“life stories”); isolating and redirecting specifi c negative group mem-
bers; and providing community service (cf. Hart, Atkins, & Donnelly, 2006) as well 
as faith-building opportunities 3 (see Vorrath & Brendtro, 1985). 
 Mutual Help Perspective-Taking 
 Th e 1993 EQUIP mutual help meeting illustrated some of the features of Positive 
Peer Culture, especially the problem language. Antisocial youths’ (such as Mac’s) 
typical problems with authority, anger, stealing, lying, and so forth are identifi ed in 
terms of a standard “Problem List” (see Table 8.1), one of the most basic of which 
is being “Inconsiderate of Others”—implying the need for remedial work in social 
perspective-taking. 
 A Positive Peer Culture technique particularly relevant to social perspective-
taking and inductive discipline (Chapter 5) is called  confronting or  reversing 
responsibility  (cf. correcting Blaming Others), in which group members (at least 
in theory) are made aware of the eff ects of their actions on others. Essentially, 
the group or group leader respectfully but forthrightly challenges the antisocial 
group member to put himself or herself in others’ positions, to consider their 
legitimate expectations, feelings, and circumstances. Vickie Agee (1979) argued 
that eff ectively confronting violent off enders typically requires concrete, personal, 
and “blunt” techniques if they are to grasp the harm their violence has caused 
others. If a violent off ender has a sister and cares about her, for example, that is 
an opening. Th e therapist might frame a female victim as someone’s sister and 
appeal to moral reciprocity: “‘If it’s okay for you to do that to someone else’s sister, 
is it okay for them to do it to your sister?’” (pp. 113–114). Another example of a 
concrete, blunt confrontation is provided by a question asked of the then-incarcer-
ated Timothy McVeigh by Oklahoma City psychiatrist John R. Smith several years 
before McVeigh’s execution: 
 Smith once tried to confront McVeigh about the pain his bomb had caused others. 
Smith had noted how much McVeigh seemed to enjoy talking to people, and now he 
tried to use this quality to provoke a reaction from him. “Instead of the death penalty, 
Tim, they should put you in a tiny little cell,” Smith said. “You wouldn’t be allowed to 
talk to anyone, ever again.” 
 McVeigh looked surprised. He stood straight up from his chair. “You’d put me in a 
little cell like that?” he said. 
 “Tim, that’s what you did to your victims and their families,” Smith said. “Th ey’ll 
never be able to communicate with each other again.” (Michel & Herbeck, 2001, p. 289) 
 Samuel Yochelson and Stanton Samenow (1977) suggested that confrontation 
should include teaching the “chain of injuries” (p. 223)—extended to absent and 
indirect victims—resulting from every crime. Similarly, Hoff man (2000) suggested 

Treating Antisocial Behavior 
■ 179
 TABLE 8.1  Problem Names and Th inking Errors 
Student: ____________________________________ Date: ______________________________
 PROBLEM NAMES 
Social/behavioral problems are actions that cause harm to oneself, others, or property. Of the twelve 
problems listed on this handout, three are general, and nine are specifi c.
 1. Has someone else’s problem(s) ever hurt you?       □  Yes  □  No 
 Th ink of a time that someone’s problem(s) have hurt you. Choose the best name for that problem 
and write it here. 
_______________________________________________________________________________
 2. Have your problem(s) ever hurt someone else?       □  Yes  □  No 
 Th ink of a time that your problem hurt someone else. Choose the best name for that problem from 
the list below and write it here. 
_______________________________________________________________________________
 GENERAL PROBLEMS 
Th e fi rst three problems are general problems. Th ese general problems may be related to any of the 
specifi c problems. When you use one of the general problem names to describe a behavior, to get a good 
understanding of the situation, you must also name one of the specifi c problems (Numbers 4–12).
 1. Low Self-Image 
Th e person has a poor opinion of himself or herself. Oft en feels put down or of no worth. Quits eas-
ily. Plays “poor me” or perceives self as victim even when victimizing others. Feels accepted only by 
others who also feel bad about themselves.
 Briefl y describe a situation in which you or someone you know showed a Low Self-Image problem. 
_______________________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________________
 Was a specifi c problem shown at the same time?       □  Yes  □  No 
 What was the problem? 
_______________________________________________________________________________
 2. Inconsiderate of Self 
Th e person does things that are damaging to himself or herself. He or she tries to run from problems 
or deny them.
Briefl y describe a situation in which you or someone you know showed an Inconsiderate of Self 
problem.
_______________________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________________
 Was a specifi c problem shown at the same time?       □  Yes  □  No 
 What was the problem? 
_______________________________________________________________________________
 3. Inconsiderate of Others 
Th e person does things that are harmful to others. Doesn’t care about needs or feelings of others. Enjoys 
putting people down or laughing at them. Takes advantage of weaker people or those with problems.

180 
■ Moral Development and Reality
 Briefl y describe a situation in which you or someone you know showed an Inconsiderate of Others 
problem. 
_______________________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________________
 Was a specifi c problem shown at the same time?       □  Yes  □  No 
 What was the problem?
_______________________________________________________________________________ 
 SPECIFIC PROBLEMS 
 4. Authority Problem 
Th e person gets into major confrontations with teachers, parents or guardians, and others in authority, 
oft en over minor matters. Resents anyone telling him or her what to do or even giving advice. Won’t listen.
 I know someone who has this problem.           □  Yes  □  No 
 I have this problem.                   □  Yes  □  No 
 5. Easily Angered 
Th e person quickly takes off ense, is easily frustrated or irritated, and throws tantrums.
 I know someone who has this problem.            □  Yes  □  No 
 I have this problem.                  □  Yes  □  No 
 6. Aggravates Others 
Th e person threatens, bullies, hassles, teases, or uses put-downs to hurt other people. “Pays back” 
even when others didn’t mean to put the person down.
 I know someone who has this problem.           □  Yes  □  No 
 I have this problem.                  □  Yes  □  No 
 7. Misleads Others 
Th e person manipulates others into doing his or her dirty work; will abandon them if they are 
caught.
 I know someone who has this problem.           □  Yes  □  No 
 I have this problem.                 
□  Yes 
□  No 
 8. Easily Misled 
Th e person prefers to associate with irresponsible peers, is easily drawn into their antisocial behav-
ior. Is willing to be their fl unky—hopes to gain their approval.
 I know someone who has this problem.           □  Yes  □  No 
 I have this problem.                  □  Yes  □  No 
 9. Alcohol or Drug Problem 
Th e person misuses substances that can hurt him or her and is afraid he or she will not have friends 
otherwise. Is afraid to face life without a crutch. Avoids issues and people through substance abuse. 
Usually is very self-centered and minimizes the use of drugs by saying they are not bad or are within 
his or her control. When the person does something wrong, he or she blames the drugs by saying, 
“I was high—I couldn’t help it.”
 I know someone who has this problem.           □  Yes  □  No 
 I have this problem.                   □  Yes  □  No 

Treating Antisocial Behavior 
■ 181
 10. Stealing 
Th e person takes things that belong to others. Does not respect others. Is willing to hurt another 
person to take what he or she wants.
 I know someone who has this problem.          □  Yes  □  No 
 I have this problem.                 □  Yes  □  No 
 11. Lying 
Th e person cannot be trusted to tell the truth or the whole story. Twists the truth to create a false 
impression. Denies everything when he or she thinks it is possible to get away with it. Finds it excit-
ing to scheme and then get away with a lie. May lie even when there is nothing to be gained.
 I know someone who has this problem.         □  Yes  □  No 
 I have this problem.                 □  Yes  □  No 
 12. Fronting 
Th e person tries to impress others, puts on an act, clowns around to get attention. Is afraid to show 
his or her true feelings.
 I know someone who has this problem.         □  Yes  □  No 
 I have this problem.                 □  Yes  □  No 
 How many problems do you have? 
_______________________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________________
 What are your most serious problems? 
_______________________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________________
 Number 1 problem? ______________________________________________________________
 Number 2 problem? ______________________________________________________________
 Number 3 problem? ______________________________________________________________
By correctly identifying your problems, you have taken a big step in helping yourself. Save this 
handout to use later in the program. You may fi nd it very useful.
 THINKING ERRORS 
Th e following terms are used to identify thinking errors. Th ese terms are used throughout the 
program. When you name your behavioral problem, the thinking error that caused it is also named. 
Remember: It is your thinking error that led to your social/behavioral problem.
 THE PRIMARY THINKING ERROR 
 1. Self-Centered 
Self-Centered thinking means that you think your opinions and feelings are more important than 
the opinions and feelings of other people. Self-Centered is the primary, or basic, thinking error. 
Th e Self-Centered thinking error can severely limit one person’s consideration for the viewpoint of 
another person.
 Does someone you know seem to have a Self-Centered thinking error? How do you know? Explain 
without using the person’s name. 
_______________________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________________

182 
■ Moral Development and Reality
It is important to understand that a person’s thoughts cannot be known by anyone other than that 
person. You can guess what a person is thinking, but you will not know for sure until that person 
shares his or her thoughts.
 Has anyone ever said to you, “I know what you are thinking,” but then was wrong? Explain. 
_______________________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________________
 If you want to know what another person is thinking, what do you have to do? 
_______________________________________________________________________________
 SECONDARY THINKING ERRORS 
Th e Self-Centered person uses other (secondary) thinking errors to avoid feeling bad (guilt, 
remorse, low self-concept) about his or her antisocial behavior and to allow the selfi sh thoughts and 
behaviors to continue. For example, a 17-year-old used a secondary thinking error (Blaming Others) 
to make himself feel better about breaking into people’s homes. He said, “If I started feeling bad, 
I’d say, ‘Tough rocks for him. He should have had his house locked better and the alarm on.’” Th e 
Self-Centered person almost always shows his or her basic Self-Centered thinking error and one or 
more of the following secondary thinking errors.
 2. Minimizing/Mislabeling 
Example: “He was a fool and got jumped.” What really happened: “I punched and kicked him 
because he told his neighbor the truth, that I was the person who stole the neighbor’s sound system.” 
Or what really happened: I brutally beat him because he told the principal that I had a gun and 
threatened some other kids.
 Write another example and explain. 
_______________________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________________
 3. Assuming the Worst 
Example: A guy bumped into you. You think he did it on purpose, instead of thinking it may have 
been an accident, and you get furious. What really happened: Everyone was late and rushing to get 
to class on time; the bump was accidental and the guy said “Excuse me.”
 Write another example and explain. 
_______________________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________________
 4. Blaming Others 
Example: “I got mixed up with the wrong people.” What really happened: You agreed to help your 
friend take something that belonged to someone else.
 Write another example and explain. 
_______________________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________________

Treating Antisocial Behavior 
■ 183
 Are thinking and behaving connected? Explain. 
_______________________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________________
 How many thinking errors do you have? 
_______________________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________________
 What are your most common thinking errors? 
_______________________________________________________________________________
 Number 1 thinking error? __________________________________________________________
 Number 2 thinking error? __________________________________________________________
 Number 3 thinking error? __________________________________________________________
By identifying your thinking errors, you have taken a big step in helping yourself to correct faulty 
thinking. It takes a strong person to admit to thinking errors and the behavioral problems they cause.
 Source: From  Teaching Adolescents to Th ink and Act Responsibly: Th e EQUIP Approach , ©2012 by A.-M. DiBiase, 
J. C. Gibbs, G. B. Potter, and M. R. Blount. Champaign, IL: Research Press (800-519-2707; www.researchpress.com). 
Reprinted with permission. 
that “these confrontings should also include the other’s life condition beyond 
the immediate situation, . . . which the delinquents seem to ignore on their own” 
(p. 292). Agee’s emphasis on bluntness notwithstanding, Vorrath and Brendtro 
(1985) stressed that, to be eff ective, confronting must be done in a constructive 
and caring fashion. 
 Value and Limitations of Mutual Help Programs 
 Outcome evaluation studies of Positive Peer Culture and related programs at 
schools, juvenile correctional facilities, detention centers, private residential 
facilities, and community group homes have yielded a mixed picture. Although 
these programs have generally been found to promote youths’ self-concept or 
self-esteem, reductions in recidivism were less likely to be found in more rigor-
ously controlled studies (see Gibbs et al., 1996). Worse, some peer group programs 
have actually  increased participants’ delinquency and substance use (see Dishion 
et al., 1999). 
 In our view, mutual help–only programs have had mixed success at least 
partly because they do not adequately address the limitations of antisocial youths 
(Carducci, 1980; see Chapter 7). Such programs can succeed for a while in induc-
ing erstwhile antisocial youths to become “hooked on helping,” perhaps because, 
as Vorrath and Brendtro (1985) suggested, the helper in the process “creates 
his own proof of worthiness” (p. 6) and thereby a genuine basis for self-respect. 
Furthermore, the “confronting” technique—if done properly—can induce genu-
ine social perspective-taking. Unless they acquire additional skills and maturity 
for helping recalcitrant peers, however, antisocial youths oft en eventually become 

184 
■ Moral Development and Reality
frustrated in their helping or “confronting” attempts and fall back on what they 
know best: putdowns and threats. To investigate mutual help problems and needs 
for improvement, Brendtro and Albert Ness (1982) surveyed 10 schools and facili-
ties using Positive Peer Culture or related programs. Cited as a problem at nine 
out of 10 centers was “abuse of confrontation” (e.g., “harassment, name-calling, 
screaming in someone’s face, hostile profanity, and physical intimidation,” p. 
322)—going rather beyond Agee’s call for bluntness! Th e pervasiveness of such 
abuse should not be surprising: How can a youth with antisocial behavior prob-
lems be helped by fellow group members who lack skills and maturity for dealing 
with such problems—and who have such problems themselves? To promote its 
eff ectiveness, then, the mutual help approach needs the helping resources pro-
vided by a cognitive behavioral approach. 
remedying the limitations and 
 
■
generating synergy: the cognitive 
behavioral approach 
 Mac’s mutual help meeting in 1993 illustrated more than the traditional Positive 
Peer Culture approach. For example, Mac reported and the group discussed not 
only Mac’s Authority and Easily Angered problems but also the underlying think-
ing errors generating those problems—an innovation that deepens Positive Peer 
Culture problem work. Th is “deeper” work is our cognitive modifi cation of Positive 
Peer Culture, which defi nes our version of the mutual help approach. Even such 
deeper problem work, however, does not fully address a basic problem: the limita-
tions of antisocial youths (see Chapter 7) and hence their groups. Th ese limitations 
include not only distorted thinking but, in general, a paucity of skills and maturity 
needed for behavioral change (cf. Carducci, 1980). In other words, juvenile off end-
ers and other behaviorally at-risk youths must be not only adequately motivated 
but also adequately  equipped  if they are to succeed in helping one another and 
themselves. 
 Corresponding to the two basic approaches (mutual help, cognitive behavioral) 
integrated in EQUIP are two basic types of group meetings. Mac and the group 
learned the thinking errors and other helping-skill tools as part of a cognitive 
behavioral approach (see Glick, 2009), which strengthens the mutual help approach 
in the EQUIP program. In the EQUIP program, a cognitive behavioral curriculum 
(featuring cognitive change, behavioral practice) is designed to remedy the limita-
tions that undermine antisocial youths’ eff ectiveness as they—both as individuals 
and collectively as a group—become motivated to try to help one another. Once a 
group is suffi  ciently motivated to be receptive, mutual help meetings are supple-
mented or interspersed with “equipment” meetings, so called because they equip 
the group with the skills and maturity needed for helping others and themselves 
to achieve cognitive and behavioral change. One facility conducted its mutual help 
meetings Monday through Wednesday and its equipment meetings on Th ursday 
and Friday each week. 
 Whereas a peer culture of caring and mutual help is cultivated during mutual 
help meetings, then, the needed social perspective-taking skills and maturity are 

Treating Antisocial Behavior 
■ 185
taught during the equipment meetings. It was during its equipment meetings that 
the 1993 prototypical EQUIP group was learning relevant insights and tools such as 
the need for institutions to have rules against contraband, techniques for correcting 
thinking errors and managing anger, and steps of constructive and balanced social 
behavior. Th ese resources were crucial as Mac worked on his Authority and Easily 
Angered problems during the meeting and beyond. Put in general terms, groups 
in the EQUIP program become equipped with skills and maturity that address the 
youths’ limitations (see Chapter 7). Hence, the curriculum components include: 
(1) mature moral judgment (moral education or social decision-making); (2) skills 
to correct thinking errors and manage anger; and (3) social skills (for constructive 
and balanced behavior). Hence, in addition to being multicomponential in the 
sense that mutual help and cognitive behavioral approaches are integrated and 
expanded (e.g., with attention to the self-serving cognitive distortions), EQUIP 
is also multicomponential in another crucial respect:  Its cognitive behavioral 
approach entails three interrelated curricula that correspond to the three interrelated 
limitations of antisocial youths. 
 Synergy Between Cognitive Behavioral and Mutual Help 
Approaches in EQUIP and Related Programs 
 Th e equipment meetings are introduced to the EQUIP groups with the explana-
tion that what they learn in those meetings will help them help one another more 
eff ectively. Given its emphasis on group members’ helping potential rather than on 
their targeted limitations, this explanation itself tends to promote antisocial youths’ 
amenability to treatment. Litwack (1976) found that both the juvenile off enders’ 
motivation to learn constructive skills and the learning itself improved when they 
were told that they would subsequently be using the skills to help other adoles-
cents. In contrast, traditional or direct psychoeducational teaching or cognitive-
behavioral training programs may implicitly stigmatize the learner as dependent 
and inadequate, thereby eliciting defensiveness and exacerbating resistance and 
noncompliance problems (Riessman, 1990). 
 Th e motivational benefi ts deriving from introducing the curriculum with the 
mutual help rationale make the point that the mutual help approach can enhance 
the eff ectiveness of the cognitive behavioral approach. Indeed, cognitive behav-
ioral or psychoeducational programs may not accomplish much if young off end-
ers’ resistance to treatment and negative group norms are not addressed; i.e., if 
a receptive group is not fi rst cultivated. 4  As noted, the contributions fl ow in the 
reverse direction as well. If their cultivated good intentions are to fare well, pro-
spective helpers must gain skills, knowledge, and maturity so that they can help 
constructively. Th is bidirectionality or interdependence is worth emphasizing: Th e 
two approaches need each other. Th e integration of mutual help and cognitive 
behavioral approaches can stimulate a kind of positive synergy. And in the posi-
tive spiral, the institution (typically a school or correctional facility) becomes safer 
and more humane. 
 Th e synergistic integration of the mutual helping and cognitive behavioral 
approaches can be discerned in various treatment contexts besides that of EQUIP. 

186 
■ Moral Development and Reality
Recovery Training and Self Help (National Institute on Drug Abuse, 1993), a pro-
gram for supporting recovery from alcohol or substance addiction, features “a 
recovery skills training curriculum in combination with a guided peer support 
group” (p. 19). Th e skills training curriculum was added to the support group 
because “an aft ercare group could do more than just talk about whatever came up 
at a given meeting and need not be limited to the ideas of whoever happened to be 
at that meeting” (p. 33). Goldstein and colleagues’ skills training program for dys-
functional families of antisocial youths (Goldstein, Glick, Irwin, Pask-McCartney, 
& Rubama, 1989) takes place in a support-group context. In cooperative learning 
programs, teaching skills or competence is an implicit component insofar as more-
capable students are included in each cooperative learning group (e.g., Carducci & 
Carducci, 1984). Skills are typically provided in youth-to-youth service programs, 
wherein motivated older youths are trained in how to help at-risk younger youths. 
Finally, teaching skills for identifying and correcting “thinking distortions [cogni-
tive restructuring] is now standard practice in PPC [Positive Peer Culture] pro-
grams” (Brendtro, Mitchell, & McCall, 2009, p. 66).  
 Cognitive Restructuring, Social Perspective-Taking, and the 
Three EQUIP Curriculum Components 
 In the EQUIP program, cognitive restructuring and social perspective-taking 
characterize, not only mutual help, but also cognitive behavioral training or facili-
tating. Th e three-component EQUIP cognitive behavioral curriculum as taught 
in the equipment meetings is summarized in Table 8.2 (the sessions progressively 
build and hence are best conducted in the sequence indicated). Although the self-
serving cognitive distortions are assimilated into one component (anger manage-
ment) of the curriculum, the thinking-error language is crucially important for 
the entire program, not only for the youth culture but for the staff  “culture” as 
well. Hence, the language is introduced in a preliminary session using a hands-on 
activity specifi cally tailored for that purpose (the  EQUIPPED for Life game; Horn, 
Shively, & Gibbs, 2007). Th e perspective-taking opportunities provided in the 
EQUIP curriculum are described below in terms of its three components. 
 Component 1:  Equipping with Mature Moral Judgment (Social 
Decision-Making) 
 In Kohlbergian theoretical terms, morally delayed youths need an enriched, concen-
trated “dosage” of social perspective-taking opportunities to stimulate them to catch 
up to age-appropriate levels of moral judgment. As others’ perspectives are considered 
in their own right (not just as a means to one’s own ends), more ideal and mutual moral 
understanding begins to displace superfi cial and egocentrically biased judgments. A 
Stage 1- or Stage 2-thinking participant—who may usually dominate peers—may lose 
in a challenge from a more mature peer and may accordingly experience an inner con-
fl ict or disequilibration that could stimulate a more mature moral understanding. 
 Delayed youths are challenged to consider the perspectives of others in the 
context of either a macrointervention (involving reform of the institution itself) 
or microintervention (small-group) program. Broadly, the goal of such prosocial 

Treating Antisocial Behavior 
■ 187
 TABLE 8.2  Th e Ten-Week EQUIP Curriculum in a Nutshell 
 Week 
 Anger Management/Th inking 
Error Correction 
 Social Skills 
 Social Decision Making 
 l 
 l 
 Evaluating and Relabeling 
Anger/Aggression 
 Reevaluating, relabeling 
 Anger management, not 
elimination 
 2 
 Expressing 
a Complaint 
Constructively 
 Th ink ahead what 
you’ll say 
 Say how you con-
tributed to problem 
 Make a constructive 
suggestion 
 3 
 Scott’s Problem Situation 
 Key value: Affi  liation 
School A seen as self-
centered 
 School B labeled truly strong 
Guiding students toward 
School B 
 2 
 4 
 Anatomy of Anger (AMBC) 
 Self-talk (mind) as a 
source of anger 
 Early warning signs 
(body) 
Anger-reducing self-talk 
 5 
 Caring for Someone 
Who Is Sad or Upset 
 Notice and 
think ahead 
 Listen, don’t 
interrupt 
 6 
 Jerry’s and Mateo’s Problem 
Situations 
 Key values: Relationship 
and respect 
 Value of close friendships 
Breaking up in a 
considerate way 
 Getting even is immature 
 3 
 7  
 Monitoring and Correcting 
Th inking Errors 
 Gary’s Th inking Errors 
exercise 
Daily logs 
 8  
 Dealing 
Constructively 
with Negative 
Peer Pressure 
 Th ink, “Why?” 
 Th ink ahead to 
consequences 
 Suggest something 
else (less  harmful) 
 9 
 Jeff ’s Problem Situation 
 Key values: Honesty and 
respect for property 
 Can’t trust friend with a 
stealing problem 
 Stealing is wrong even if 
from a stranger 
 4 
 10  
 Relaxation Techniques for 
Reducing Anger 
 Deep breathing, 
backward counting, 
peaceful imagery 
 Anger reducers to buy 
time 
 11  
 Keeping Out of Fights 
 Stop and think 
 Th ink ahead to 
consequences 
 Handle the situation 
another way. 
 12  
 Angelo’s and Sabrina’s 
Problem Situations 
 Key values: Honesty and 
respect for property 
 Shouldn’t let friend steal 
 Harm from stealing 
 True friend wouldn’t put 
you on the spot 
 Closing the gap between 
judgment and behavior 
(relabeling, using social 
skills) 

188 
■ Moral Development and Reality
 Week 
 Anger Management/Th inking 
Error Correction 
 Social Skills 
 Social Decision Making 
 5 
 13  
 Th inking Ahead to 
Consequences 
 Th inking ahead (if-then 
thinking) 
 14  
 Helping Others 
 Th ink, “Is 
there a need?” 
 Th ink ahead how to 
help, when to off er 
to help 
 15  
 Greg’s and Lamar’s Problem 
Situations 
 Key values: Quality of life, life 
 Should tell on someone 
breaking the law 
 Others could get hurt 
or killed 
 Important to send drug 
dealers to jail 
 Should tell staff  about 
plans to escape 
 Life is precious 
 6 
 16  
 Using “I” Statements for 
Achieving Constructive 
Consequences 
 “You” statements (put-
downs, threats) 
 Use of “I” statements 
instead of “you” 
statements 
 17  
 Preparing for 
a Stressful 
Conversation 
 Imagine ahead your 
feelings, the other 
person’s feelings 
 Th ink ahead 
what to say 
 Th ink ahead how 
the other person 
might reply 
 18  
 Duane’s Problem Situation 
 Key value: Quality of life 
 Shouldn’t deliver drugs 
for friend 
Sister’s life may be at stake 
 Closing gap between 
judgment and behavior 
(relabeling, correct-
ing thinking errors, 
exhorting) 
 7 
 19  
 Self-Evaluation 
 Self-evaluation, self-
refl ection 
 Talking back to 
thinking errors 
 Staying constructive 
 20  
 Dealing 
Constructively 
with Someone 
Angry at You 
 Listen openly and 
patiently 
 Th ink of something 
you can agree with, 
say the person is 
right about that 
 Apologize or 
explain, make a con-
structive suggestion 
 21  
 Joe’s Problem Situation 
 Key value: Life 
 Should tell on 
suicidal friend 
 Suicide is Self-
Centered error 
 Existential/spiritual 
concerns 
 8 
 22  
 Reversing 
 Th ings you do that make 
other people angry 
 Reversing exercise (cor-
recting Blaming Others 
error) 
 23  
 Expressing Care and 
Appreciation 
 Th ink if the person 
would like to 
know you care 
 Th ink ahead what 
you’ll say, when 
 Tell the person how 
you feel 
 24  
 Katie’s Problem Situation 
 Key values: Honesty and 
respect for property 
 Should tell on friend who 
shoplift ed 
 Important to prosecute 
shoplift ers 
 Store owner is not to 
blame 

Treating Antisocial Behavior 
■ 189
 Week 
 Anger Management/Th inking 
Error Correction 
 Social Skills 
 Social Decision Making 
 9 
 25  
 Victims and Victimizers 
 Th ink of the other 
person (TOP) 
 Consequences for victims 
 26  
 Dealing 
Constructively with 
Someone Accusing 
You of Something 
 Th ink how you 
feel, tell yourself to 
calm down 
 Th ink if the 
accuser is right 
 If the accuser is 
right, apologize/
make restitution; if 
wrong, say it is not 
true, it is a wrong 
impression 
 27  
 James’s Problem Situation 
 Key value: Honesty 
 Shouldn’t help friend 
cheat 
 Can’t trust “friend” with 
cheating problem 
 10 
 28  
 Grand Review 
 Learning how to say why 
you are angry without 
put-downs and what you 
want the other person 
to do 
 29  
 Responding 
Constructively 
to Failure 
 Ask yourself if 
you did fail 
 Th ink what you 
could do diff erently 
 Decide on a plan to 
try again 
 30  
 Stephanie’s Problem Situation 
 Key values: Quality of life 
and truth 
 Should reveal violent 
dad’s drinking 
 Should do what’s best 
for family 
 Wouldn’t want someone 
to lie to you 
 But mother wrong to put 
Stephanie on spot 
 Final 
Session 
 31  
 Up or Down? 
 Up represents mature, 
accurate, constructive, 
responsible. 
 Down represents imma-
ture, inaccurate, distorted, 
destructive, irresponsible. 
 Spans all three curriculum 
components and provides 
opportunities for motiva-
tional comments. 
 Tests knowledge of the 
content of curriculum 
components. 
 Encourages the use of 
concepts or skills learned 
in sessions to help others 
and self. 
 Note : Numbers at the top of the boxes indicate the order in which the diff erent types of sessions are held.
 Source: From A.-M. DiBiase, J. C. Gibbs, G. B. Potter, and M. R. Blount,  Teaching adolescents to think and act 
 responsibly: Th e EQUIP approach.  Champaign, IL: Research Press. Reprinted with permission. 

190 
■ Moral Development and Reality
education is to promote sociomoral development in the context of a moral climate 
or positive youth culture (Brown, Corrigan, & Higgins-D’Alessandro, 2012). In the 
macrointervention, or Just Community program, attempts are made to restructure 
the institution (school or correctional facility) in accord with principles of democ-
racy and justice, such that subjects (students, residents, or inmates) participate as 
much as is feasible in the rule-making and enforcement processes that aff ect insti-
tutional life (e.g., Power & Higgins-D’Alessandro, 2008). Macrointerventions such 
as Multi-Systemic Th erapy (MST) (Henggeler et al., 1998) have sought to provide 
services both directly to youths and indirectly at the family and community levels. 
Particularly promising are Youth Charter Programs in which those who infl u-
ence the youths in a community (parents, teachers, sports coaches, police, clergy, 
employers) meet to orchestrate and implement coherent standards and expecta-
tions (Damon, 1997; cf. Hart, Atkins, & Donnelly, 2006). 
 Th e narrower microintervention programs focus on peer-group discussion 
of relevant sociomoral problem situations as a stimulus for perspective-taking 
experiences. Participants must justify their problem-solving decisions in the face 
of challenges from more developmentally advanced peers (or, in the case of a 
highly limited group, initially from a group leader; e.g., Gibbs, Arnold, Ahlborn, 
& Cheesman, 1984; cf. Taylor & Walker, 1997). Although the EQUIP program 
emphasizes the importance of a just and caring “staff  culture” as well as youth 
culture, along with the system-wide use of the thinking-error vocabulary (Self-
Centered, Blaming Others, etc.) and other “equipment,” EQUIP’s focus on the 
youth group means that it is, at its core, a microintervention. 
 Moral judgment interventions target basic, long-term developmental processes. 
Although moral judgment–based macro- and microinterventions generally stim-
ulate more mature moral judgment, reduction of antisocial or aggressive behavior 
does not necessarily follow (Gibbs, Arnold, Ahlborn, & Cheesman, 1984; Niles, 
1986). One intervention that did eff ect behavioral change, however, was a four-
month group program by Jack Arbuthnot and Donald Gordon (1986). Antisocial 
juveniles (as identifi ed by teachers) showed gains not only in their moral judgment 
stage but also in their behavior (in terms of disciplinary referrals, tardiness, and 
grades), both on conduct assessments made two to three weeks aft er the interven-
tion and on one-year follow-up post-tests, relative to a randomly assigned, pas-
sage-of-time control group. Interestingly, subsequent classroom conduct (in terms 
of absenteeism and teachers’ ratings) did not reveal signifi cant improvement for 
the experimental group relative to the controls  until the one-year follow-up, sug-
gesting a possible “sleeper eff ect.” In a similar study, we (Leeman et al., 1993) also 
found a sleeper eff ect: Although we found no signifi cant moral judgment gains 
overall for the EQUIP group, individual group members who gained the most in 
moral judgment were the least likely to have recidivated  a year later (at 12 months 
but not at six months aft er release from the institution). 
 It is probably not coincidental that the two moral judgment programs that 
produced long-term behavioral gains (those of Arbuthnot & Gordon, 1986, and 
Leeman et al., 1993) were also the ones that were multicomponential, in two senses. 
First, like EQUIP, the Arbuthnot and Gordon (1986) program worked on peer 
culture and interaction issues before initiating the moral judgment intervention. 

Treating Antisocial Behavior 
■ 191
Th is preliminary group work entailed exercises designed to promote group cohe-
siveness, openness, and rapport. Second, also like EQUIP, the Arbuthnot and 
Gordon program was multicomponential: Beyond moral judgment, several ses-
sions were spent “on active listening and communication ([non-threatening] ‘I’ 
messages) skills, an unplanned diversion from the dilemma discussions  necessi-
tated by the participants’ general lack in these skills, a lack which appeared to impede 
eff ective discussions ” (p. 210, emphasis added). Arbuthnot and Gordon concluded 
that a comprehensive program should encompass not only moral discussion but 
also (a) techniques to promote group cohesion and mutual caring (cf. Positive 
Peer Culture) and (b) “social skills (for translation of new reasoning into action)” 
(p. 215). 
 Some of EQUIP’s equipment meetings pertain, then, to moral education or 
“social decision-making.” In these sessions, already-motivated group members 
strive to develop moral reasons, decisions, and values (especially, to develop 
 mature moral reasons for those decisions and values) pertaining to socially rel-
evant problem situations and probe questions. Th e situational contexts for the 
problems range from the home to the school, or from the correctional facility to 
the workplace. Th e situations themselves are designed to stimulate ethical dis-
cussion and perspective-taking and thereby promote a deeper understanding of 
the reasons for moral values or decisions such as telling the truth, keeping prom-
ises, not stealing or cheating, having honest peer and family relationships, resist-
ing drugs, and preventing suicide. Helpful to Mac’s contraband-related problem 
work in the 1993 meeting, for example, was Juan’s problem situation, pertaining to 
whether Juan should reveal to a staff  member where Juan’s depressed and suicidal 
roommate Phil has hidden some razor blades (through discussion, the group came 
to understand and accept the need for an institution’s inspection policy against 
contraband). 
 Th e potential of problem situations to stimulate perspective-taking is exploited 
through their associated probe questions. Th e fi nal question for Juan’s problem 
situation, for example, asks, “Who might be aff ected (in addition to Phil himself) 
if Phil were to commit suicide?” (Gibbs et al., 1995, pp. 94–95; see also Potter 
et al., 2001). Th is question prompts group members to take the perspectives of 
loved ones; specifi cally, to empathize with the distress and grief caused by sui-
cide and hence to identify the Self-Centered thinking error in Phil’s intentions. 
In another problem situation, Angelo’s (see Table 8.3), Question 7—“Let’s say the 
car is  your car”—directly stimulates the group participants to take the perspective 
of the prospective victim in the spirit of ideal moral reciprocity. Th ere is a certain 
clever irony to how this “you’re the victim” technique uses Self-Centered think-
ing against itself! Other questions stimulate group members to consider possible 
adverse consequences for Angelo’s friend Ramon (Question 8) as well as Ramon’s 
family (Question 5). Still other questions remove impediments to perspective-
taking in that they “plant” secondary cognitive distortions such as Blaming Others 
(Question 2) and Minimizing/Mislabeling (Questions 3 and 4) for participants to 
identify and correct. 
 Other problem situations and probe questions encourage group members to 
take the perspective of someone not immediately present in the situation, as when 

192 
■ Moral Development and Reality
the group decides that stealing a sound unit is wrong even if from a stranger’s 
car or—considering that the life of one’s drug-dependent sister may be at stake—
decides against making a drug delivery to her neighborhood. Like the “you’re the 
victim” technique that uses egocentric bias against itself, encouraging participants 
to imagine harm to someone close to them “is a way of turning empathy’s familiar-
ity and here-and-now biases against themselves and recruiting them in the service 
of prosocial motive development” (Hoff man, 2000, p. 297; Chapter 6). 
 Besides the stimulation from the probe questions, challenges to take the per-
spectives of others are also cultivated through the format of the meeting, spe-
cifi cally its four phases: introducing the problem situation, cultivating mature 
 TABLE 8.3  Angelo’s Problem Situation 
Week 4A 
Angelo is walking along a side street with his friend Ramon. Ramon stops in front of 
a beautiful new sports car. Ramon looks inside and then says, excitedly, “Look! 
Th e keys are still in this thing! Let’s see what it can do! Come on, let’s go!”
What should Angelo say or do?
1. Should Angelo try to persuade Ramon not to steal the car?  (Check one.) 
 □ should persuade  □ should let steal  □ can’t decide
2.  What if Ramon says to Angelo that the keys were left  in the car, that anyone that careless deserves 
to get ripped off ? Th en should Angelo try to persuade Ramon not to steal the car?  (Check one.) 
 □ should persuade  □ should let steal  □ can’t decide
3.  What if Ramon says to Angelo that the car owner can probably get insurance money to cover 
most of the loss? Th en should Angelo try to persuade Ramon not to steal the car?  (Check one.) 
 □ should persuade  □ should let steal  □ can’t decide
4.  What if Ramon tells Angelo that stealing a car is no big deal, that plenty of his friends do it all the 
time? Th en what should Angelo do?  (Check one.) 
 □ should persuade  □ should let steal  □ can’t decide
5.  What if Angelo knows that Ramon helps his parents with their household expenses and that they 
will suff er if Ramon is caught, loses his job, and goes to jail? Th en should Angelo try to persuade 
Ramon not to steal the car?  (Check one.) 
 □ should persuade  □ should let steal  □ can’t decide
6.  Let’s say the car is your car. Th en should Angelo try to persuade Ramon not to steal the car? 
 (Check one.) 
 □ should persuade  □ should let steal  □ can’t decide
7. In general, how important is it for people not to take things that belong to others?  (Check one.) 
 □ very important  □ important  □ not important
8.  Let’s say that Angelo does try to persuade Ramon not to steal the car, but Ramon goes ahead and 
takes it anyway. Angelo knows that Ramon is in bad shape from being high—he could have a 
serious accident, and someone could get killed. Th en what should Angelo do?  (Check one.) 
 □ contact the police  □ not contact the police  □ can’t decide
 Source: From  Teaching Adolescents to Th ink and Act Responsibly: Th e EQUIP Approach , ©2012 by A.-M. DiBiase, J. 
C. Gibbs, G. B. Potter, and M. R. Blount. Champaign, IL: Research Press (800-519-2707; www.researchpress.com). 
 Reprinted with permission. 

Treating Antisocial Behavior 
■ 193
morality, remediating developmental delay, and consolidating mature morality 
(see DiBiase et al., 2012; Gibbs, 2004a, 2004b; Glick & Gibbs, 2011; Potter et al., 
2001). In the best group sessions, each phase fl ows into the next. Once the group 
understands clearly what the problem situation is and how it relates to their lives 
(Phase 1), the group’s potential for mature morality can be cultivated (Phase 2); 
once the group has voiced some degree of mature morality (Phase 2), the group’s 
mature (or at least less delayed) members are in a stronger “cultural” position 
to eff ectively challenge other group members’ delayed and distorted judgments 
(Phase 3); and, fi nally, reducing pockets of delay (Phase 3) means the strengthen-
ing of mature reasons and decisions that can then be consolidated as the group is 
helped to achieve some consensus concerning decisions and reasons (Phase 4). In 
the fi nal phase, the “best” (typically the most mature) reasons for the group’s deci-
sion (typically the responsible decision) are underlined, as illustrated for Angelo’s 
problem situation in Figure 8.1. 
 Social Decision-Making and Cultivating a Positive Youth Culture 
 Cultivating a mature morality through perspective-taking in the social decision-
making meeting not only contributes to remedying a limitation of antisocial youth 
but also contributes “back” to the important foundational need for a culture of car-
ing. In fact, the fi rst problem situation, the “Martian’s Adviser’s Problem Situation,” 
is designed mainly to facilitate the discovery of common values and to foster a 
cohesive, prosocial group spirit. It reads as follows: 
 A man from Mars has decided to move to another planet. He has narrowed his search 
down to two planets, Planet A and Planet B. Planet A is a violent and dangerous place to 
PERSUADE
LET STEAL/NOT IMPORTANT
Hurts trust.
Owner worked hard for it.
You’d get locked up.
I’ve been robbed—it sucks.
Owner’s family might suffer.
Against the Bible.
Rodney could go to jail.
Could be your car.
It’s not important for people not to steal.
You’d be a big shot.
Lots of fun.
Now you can drive, get money, booze, girls.
Shouldn’t interfere in friend’s business.
Help your friend not get in trouble.
You’d feel bad, scared, angry, guilty.
Put yourself in the other’s position.
IMPORTANT
 Figure 8.1      Alonzo’s problem situation: reasons for proposed group decisions. 
 Source: A.-M. DiBiase, J. C. Gibbs, G. B. Potter, and M. R. Blount,  Teaching adolescents to 
think and act responsibly: Th e EQUIP approach.  Champaign, IL: Research Press. Reprinted 
with permission.  

194 
■ Moral Development and Reality
live. People just care about themselves and don’t care when they hurt others. Planet B is a 
safer, more peaceful place. People on Planet B do care about others. Th ey still have fun, but 
they feel bad if they hurt someone. Planet B people try to make the planet a better place. 
 You’re the Martian’s adviser. Which planet should you advise him to move to? 
 Answer : Planet A/Planet B/can’t decide (circle one) 
 Th rough this exercise, a group of antisocial youths can discover that they do 
aft er all share values of caring and prosocial behavior. Moving to the prosocial 
planet, Planet B (alternatively labeled School B in the prevention version of this 
exercise), is typically the majority decision. When asked for the reasons for their 
decision, many group members appeal to the respective planet descriptions: Th ere’s 
not as much violence on Planet B, it’s safer, it’s more peaceful, people have fun 
without hurting others, and people want to help one another, work to make things 
better, and feel bad and apologize if they do hurt others. In a poignant moment, 
a younger group member once wistfully added that, on Planet B, “parents spend 
more time with their kids.” Planet B off ers a concrete representation of the mature 
moral climate toward which the group should be working. 
 Component 2:  Equipping with Skills to Manage Anger 
and Correct Thinking Errors 
 Although egocentric bias is reduced as mature moral judgment is cultivated dur-
ing the perspective-taking of the Social Decision-Making component, egocentric 
bias in its consolidated cognitive distortion form, Self-Centered, is such a major, 
immediate problem that it requires treatment attention in its own right. Aaron T. 
Beck (1999) was right to characterize righteous self-centeredness (the key problem 
of the reactive off ender) as “the eye (‘I’) of the storm” (p. 25) of anger in antisocial 
behavior. Fift een-year-old Mac, with his Authority and Easily Angered problems 
in the illustrative 1993 mutual help meeting, was typical of this type of antisocial 
youth. Our description of the 10 sessions of the EQUIP anger management com-
ponent will refer to relevant previous cognitive-behavioral literature (reviewed by 
Beck & Fernandez, 1998; see also Dahlen & Deff enbacher, 2000) and will empha-
size the perspectives, techniques, and other information pertinent to the manage-
ment of anger. 
 Session 1—Reevaluating and Relabeling Anger/Aggression 
 Like a number of anger control programs, EQUIP anger management begins with 
a metacognitive discussion of anger and aggression that induces antisocial youths 
to gain perspective or “distance” on their anger, reevaluate it, and see its disadvan-
tages—insights that oft en emerge from continued discussion of its superfi cial and 
short-term advantages. In EQUIP discussions, some group members mentioned 
liking the “rush” or feeling of power they get from pushing people around. With 
continued discussion, however, that sense of power was seen to involve a Self-
Centered thinking error and to lead to disadvantages: “You lose friends” because 
people “can’t trust you”; other people fear you but “don’t respect you, don’t want 
to be around you.” Similarly, proposed advantages of anger and aggression (that 

Treating Antisocial Behavior 
■ 195
they enable you to “get even” and “not let others get away with putting me down 
or pushing me around”) provoked refl ection: “Th en the other guy would try to 
get back at you.” As a particularly verbal and morally non-delayed EQUIP group 
member put it, “Th e cycle of revenge never stops.” 5 
 Beyond the refl ective discussion, anger is also reevaluated through relabeling 
or reframing. Th e group leader makes the point that a self-controlled, nonvio-
lent individual is not necessarily a loser or wimp by drawing on illustrations from 
prominent athletes and other popular fi gures who have succeeded through self-
control and self-discipline—or have failed when they have lost control. Group 
members “are  more powerful  when they are in control of their reactions to others 
despite the attempts of others to provoke them” (Goldstein, 1999, p. 83; cf. Feindler 
& Ecton, 1986). Similarly, to a man who hit his wife because her criticism made 
him feel like “less of a man,” Beck (1999) made this point: “Is he more of a man by 
hitting a weaker person? Or is he more of a man by being cool: taking insults with-
out fl inching and maintaining control of himself and the problematic situation?” 
Like group members, the man could then manage his anger partly by reminding 
himself “that the way to feel more manly was to be cool and masterful [and self-
controlled]” (p. 267). A particularly helpful visual exercise provides group mem-
bers with the image of a provocateur as a clown who “wants to attach his strings to 
you, pull you into the clown ring with him, and make you a clown, too” (adapted 
from Feindler & Ecton, 198). Developing nonviolent, self-controlled options is 
labeled  empowering in that it bestows fl exibility by reducing one’s dependency on 
a single (violent) response. Although some situations require self-defense, other 
situations are better handled through a nonviolent response. Th e point is the con-
structive control or management, but not the elimination, of anger. 
 Session 2—Key Role of Mind in Anger; Monitoring 
Mind and Body; Reducing Anger 
 Gaining perspective or distance on the problem of anger continues in Session 2. 
Th is session entails teaching the sequential dynamics of anger and aggression: 
an  activating event or provocative “hot spot,”  mind activity in response to that 
activating event,  bodily responses (tense muscles, etc.) to that mind activity, and 
 consequences (summarized in the acronym AMBC). Th e point of the teaching is 
to convey the key role of the mind—not the outer event—in generating either 
anger or calm (cf. Novaco, 1975). Th e group learns to monitor anger-generating 
thoughts and to displace them with responsible self-talk (e.g., “If he wants to 
make a fool of himself he can, but he’s not gonna make a fool out of me”) that 
reduces anger and buys time for more controlled, constructive behavior (see 
Equipping with Social Skills section). Particularly helpful is self-talk that corrects 
Self-Centered thinking; that is, promotes social perspective-taking (e.g., “I can’t 
expect people to act the way I want them to,” or “For someone to be that irritable, 
he must be awfully unhappy”). Group members also learn to recognize and mon-
itor bodily “Early Warning” signs (rapid heartbeat, fl ushed face, clenched fi sts, 
etc.) that anger is building and must be reduced. Similarly, Beck (1999) teaches 
clients how to recognize that they are approaching their “red zone” (p. 263) and 
take corrective action.  

196 
■ Moral Development and Reality
 Session 3—Monitoring and Correcting Thinking Errors 
 Th e third session focuses on mind activity, especially thinking errors. Because 
anger is caused by the schema-based meaning of the activating event and not 
the event directly, mind activity deserves special attention in anger management 
(although techniques such as deep breathing [Session 4] are also valuable, espe-
cially as quick and easy buying-time techniques). Th e group begins use of a struc-
tured daily log that helps them monitor and become more aware of their problem 
behaviors and associated generative thinking errors. Th e group leader uses the 
exercise “Gary’s Th inking Errors” (introduced in Chapter 7; see Table 8.4) to bring 
home the connection between distorted thinking and violence and, accordingly, 
the importance of correcting thinking errors before it is too late. For example, to 
correct Self-Centered thinking, one group member at the 1993 meeting suggested 
that, like the hypothetical Gary, the group member Mac could say to himself, “She 
has a right to expect better from me.”      
 If Gary—or group members in such a situation—are to become more fair and 
empathic, then, they must also learn to identify and “talk back to” or correct their 
secondary thinking errors. Group members have suggested that Blaming Others 
thoughts to the eff ect that violence against Cecilia is her fault could be corrected 
with self-talk such as, “Nobody’s forcing me to grab that knife—it’s my fault if I 
do.” Assuming the Worst thoughts of hopelessness can be corrected with, “Th ere’s 
hope for us if I start treating her decently.” Correcting an intention to “teach her 
a lesson” (Minimizing/Mislabeling) might be a thought such as, “You don’t teach 
anybody anything by stabbing and maybe killing them.” 
 Session 4—Relaxation Techniques for Reducing Anger 
 A key technique in anger management is engaging in activities incompatible with 
anger (counter-conditioning). Calming self-talk is one example. Other activities, 
covered in the fourth session, are breathing deeply, counting backward, and invok-
ing peaceful imagery. Th ese activities are important because they are simpler and 
therefore more readily used than self-talk. For example, one can prevent anger 
buildup by starting to take deep breaths even before one begins to deal with think-
ing errors, thereby “buying time” for cognitive correction.  
 Session 5—Self-Talk Techniques for Reducing Anger: Thinking 
Ahead to Consequences, and TOP (Think of the Other Person) 
 Th e group leader in this session returns to anger-reducing techniques that involve 
self-talk. One of the two techniques taught has been called “if-then” thinking or 
“thinking ahead” (Feindler & Ecton, 1986); its importance is suggested by fi nd-
ings that highly aggressive, poorly adjusted children are poorer at anticipating and 
describing the possible consequences of a completed action for themselves and 
others (Spivack & Shure, 1989). To develop an awareness of consequences that can 
then be used in self-talk, the group leader teaches thinking ahead to consequences 
in a way that includes systematic discussion of the many ramifi cations of aggres-
sive or antisocial behavior (immediate and long-term, practical and emotional, for 
self and for others). With its emphasis on consequences for others, the discussion 

Treating Antisocial Behavior 
■ 197
 TABLE 8.4  Gary’s Th inking Errors 
Name ________________________________________________ Date ____________________
Gary is in the kitchen of his apartment. Gary’s girlfriend, Cecilia, is angry at him for something he 
did to hurt her. She yells at him. She pushes his shoulder. Th oughts run through Gary’s head. Gary 
does nothing to correct the errors in his thoughts. Gary becomes furious. He swears at Cecilia. A 
sharp kitchen knife is nearby. Gary picks up the knife and stabs Cecilia, seriously wounding her.
1.  What thoughts ran through Gary’s head, do you think, both during the situation and aft erward? 
Suggest some sample thoughts.
____________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________
2.  What are the errors in these thoughts? Cecilia was mad at Gary because he did something to hurt 
her. What do you think that might have been?
____________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________
3.  What might Gary have told himself in this situation? In other words, how might Gary have 
“talked back” to his thinking errors? Suggest some things Gary could have said to himself to cor-
rect each type of thinking error.
____________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________
4. If Gary had corrected his thinking errors, would he still have stabbed Cecilia?
____________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________
 Source : G. B. Potter, J. C. Gibbs, & A. P. Goldstein (2001):  Th e EQUIP implementation guide . Champaign, IL: 
Research Press. Reprinted with permission. 
naturally leads into a second self-talk technique that has the acronym TOP, for 
“think of the other person.”  
 Session 6—Constructive Consequences 
 In this session, group members learn that accurate self-talk enables them to engage 
in calm, non-infl ammatory communication (social skills) that leads to construc-
tive consequences. For example, group members learn to replace “you” statements 
(e.g., “You jerk—you’d better return my radio”) with “I” statements (e.g., “I need 

198 
■ Moral Development and Reality
the radio back now”) in confl ict situations. “I” statements are more likely to induce 
empathy (in Hoff man’s terms, other-focused perspective-taking; see Chapter 5), 
whereas “you” statements are more likely to be counterproductive insofar as they 
provoke defensive responses.  
 Session 7—Self-Evaluation 
 Self-talk is important not only in correction but also in self-evaluation (self-reward 
and constructive self-criticism), the focus of this session. Group members’ devel-
opment of a habit of self-evaluation promotes moral identity (see Chapter 6) and 
provides an excellent prelude to the more metacognitive or consciousness-raising 
material encountered in the remaining sessions. 
 Session 8—Reversing 
 Given the declines in self-righteous defensiveness that should be evident by this 
point in the program, the eighth session should successfully shift  the perspective 
in anger management from oneself as the victim of provocations to oneself as a 
provocateur of others. 6 Th e focus, then, is on group members’ (such as Mac’s) ten-
dencies to ignore their own provocations and to blame others totally when they are 
in fact partly at fault; that is, to make Self-Centered and Blaming Others thinking 
errors. Each group member suggests two things he or she does to aggravate or 
hurt others. Group members then discuss how to correct their Self-Centered and 
Blaming Others thinking errors and practice the “reversing” technique for helping 
group members who inappropriately blame others. For example, a group member 
may say, “I don’t have any problems. You dudes are the ones with the problems, 
man. Th e only problem I have is you keep hassling me, man.” A sample “reversing” 
response: “You know, it’ll be great when you get the courage to face your problems. 
Th en you’ll thank people trying to help you instead of putting them down and 
blaming them” (cf. Vorrath & Brendtro, 1985). Th e  Teaching Adolescents (DiBiase 
et al., 2012) version of this session includes a supplementary exercise called “A 
Story from Two Points of View” (upon fi nishing rewriting a story from the other 
person’s point of view, the student is asked, “Is the story more complete now that 
both sides are included?”).  
 Sessions 9 and 10—More Consequences for Others; Correcting 
Distorted Self-Views; Developing Commitment to Change 
 Th e aim of the fi nal sessions is to induce empathy-based guilt and a genuine 
commitment to maintain the mind of a person who manages anger and lives 
responsibly. Certain exercises (e.g., “Victims and Victimizers”; see Table 8.5) are 
used to make the key points pertaining to the Self-Centered mind of a victim-
izer: the many ways in which acts of victimization harm others, the fact that 
most victims are not in turn victimizers, the error of thinking that having been 
a victim entitles one to “get back at the world” by victimizing innocent oth-
ers (that deadly combination of moral judgment Stage 2 and Blaming Others), 
and the acknowledgment by many group members that they have been victim-
izers more than victims. Th e group leader expands the meaning of TOP from 

Treating Antisocial Behavior 
■ 199
 TABLE 8.5  Victims and Victimizers 
Name ________________________________________________ Date ______________________
You are attending a family wedding when you are asked to drive your grandparents home. Your 
grandparents have lived in that home for many years. You arrive home and help your grandparents 
into the house. When you open the front door, you see that the house has been broken into. Many 
of your grandparents’ things have been thrown all around. Th eir crystal glasses have been smashed. 
Th e family photo album has been destroyed. Some of their things, like a wedding ring that belonged 
to your great grandmother, have been stolen.
1. What would be the fi rst thing that you would do?
____________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________
2.  How do you think you would be feeling? Have you ever had anything stolen from you? How did 
you feel? Does that help you understand how your grandparents feel?
____________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________
3.  Would you leave your grandparents in the house alone for the night? Why or why not? Do you 
think your grandparents would feel afraid or worried? When have you felt afraid or worried? 
Does that help you understand how your grandparents would feel?
____________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________
4.  Do you think your grandparents will get their things back? Do you think the insurance (if they 
have any) can make the situation all right? Why or why not?
____________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________
5.  Who are the victims in this situation? Can you think of any long-term or indirect victims? List 
some ways that victims suff er (in body, in mind, in money, in daily living, with their friends).
____________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________
6.  Who are the main victimizers in this situation? If a victimizer were to think ahead to the many 
ways a victim would suff er, would he or she still go ahead and do the crime?
____________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________
7.  Have you been a victim? From whom? Have you victimized others? Whom have you victimized? 
Do most people who have been victimized go on to victimize others?
____________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________
8. Which have you been more of, victim or victimizer?
____________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________
 Source : G. B. Potter, J. C. Gibbs, & A. P. Goldstein (2001):  Th e EQUIP implementation guide. Champaign, IL: 
Research Press. Reprinted with permission. 

200 
■ Moral Development and Reality
“think of the other people” to include “think of the pain your actions have caused 
other people”:
 Th is is self-evaluation on a big scale—evaluating your life, how you’ve harmed others, 
where you want to go from here. In the Alcoholics Anonymous 12-step program, this 
step is called “taking a searching and fearless moral inventory.” Now, instead of thinking 
ahead, you’re thinking back. And that’s the best way to think ahead to consequences 
for others—to think  back to how your past irresponsible behavior has harmed them. 
Imagine yourself as your victim—the pain, how it feels. Continue to think TOP, to think 
of the other person  and the pain you’ve caused, to stop yourself before you harm your-
self or someone else again. (Gibbs et al., 1995, p. 160) 
 Component 3:  Equipping with Social Skills 
 Anger-managing skills are requisite to the use of social skills: Aft er all, as long 
as rage grows rather than declines in diffi  cult situations, balanced and construc-
tive behavior is virtually impossible. Following the learning of anger manage-
ment skills, then, EQUIP group members learn 10 social skills (cf. Goldstein & 
McGinnis, 1997; McGinnis & Goldstein, 1997) through four phases: modeling 
or “showing the skill”; role-playing or “trying the skill” (if a group member can-
not think of a relevant situation, a list of typical situations is provided); providing 
feedback on the role-play or “discussing the skill”; and practicing the skill (at the 
facility or in the community). 
 Social skills can in many instances be construed as step-by-step, practical training 
in reducing self-centration or taking the perspectives of others in specifi c social situ-
ations. Perspective-taking is implicitly involved in many of the social skills and is an 
explicit step in several of them (e.g., “How might the other person feel at the start of the 
stressful situation? Why?” in the social skill “Preparing for a Stressful Conversation”; 
or “Th ink, ‘What is the other person accusing me of? Is he or she right?’” in the social 
skill “Dealing Constructively with Someone Accusing You of Something”). 
 Illustration 
 We can illustrate learning social skills as practical social perspective-taking train-
ing with the social skill “Expressing a Complaint Constructively.” Th is was the 
social skill recommended to Mac in the 1993 meeting. Th e steps of this skill opera-
tionalize perspective-taking in specifi c interpersonal situations involving the need 
to express a complaint.  
 Step 1 : Identify the problem. How are you feeling? What is the problem? Who is respon-
sible for it? Did you contribute—or are you contributing—to the problem in any way? 
 Step 2 : Plan and think ahead. To whom should you express your complaint? When? 
Where? What will you say? (See Step 3.) 
 Step 3 : State your complaint. Greet the person in a friendly way. Calmly and straightfor-
wardly tell the person the problem and how you feel about it. If you’ve contributed to the 
problem, mention how you may be partly at fault and what  you are willing to do. 

Treating Antisocial Behavior 
■ 201
 Step 4 : Make a constructive suggestion. Tell the person what you would like done about 
the problem. Ask the other person if he or she thinks your suggestion is fair. If the other 
person makes a constructive suggestion, say that you appreciate the suggestion or that it 
sounds fair. (Potter et al., 2001, p. 81) 
 Aft er seeing the skill modeled, an EQUIP youth named Joe role-played a situ-
ation “between me and my father . . . him always wanting to go to the bar instead 
of spending time talking to me.” Going through the steps, he reported that he was 
feeling “angry.” He said that his father was responsible for the problem but that he 
did contribute by trying to avoid it, for example, by “running off  and partying” 
(Step 1). Joe planned to bring the matter up when his dad was “at home when 
he’s in a good mood and just say it in a polite way” (Step 2). A very touching 
interchange followed: Aft er acknowledging his own contribution to the problem 
(running away), Joe constructively expressed the complaint to his “dad” (a fellow 
group member):
 Dad, I’d like to talk to you about how you like to go to the bar and not spend time with 
me. I feel that I’m coming home from school and you’re at the bar and I’m upset about 
something and want to talk to you and you’re not there to talk to me. 
 Joe and his “dad” worked out times when “Dad” agreed to be home and avail-
able (Step 3). Furthermore, “Dad” agreed that Joe’s complaint and suggestion were 
fair, and Joe said that he appreciated “Dad’s” responsiveness (Step 4). Th e group 
and group leader gave Joe feedback on his role-play (he did all the steps well). 
Applied practice of the skill followed group completion of the role-plays (unfor-
tunately, we do not know whether Joe ever found an occasion to express his com-
plaint constructively to his father, but at least he became “equipped” for that and 
similar situations). 
 Because they involve maintaining balance through an ongoing social inter-
play of perspectives, social skills might more accurately be called social  interac-
tion skills. For example, Joe considered the moment when his “dad” would be 
approachable, anticipated and accepted his “dad’s” likely viewpoint by acknowl-
edging at the outset his own runaway behavior, listened openly to his “dad’s” ideas 
as an understanding was reached, solicited his “dad’s” feelings about the agree-
ment, and expressed appreciation for the “dad’s” cooperation. 
 Adaptations and Evaluations:  Issues of Implementation 
 Since its introduction in the early 1990s, the EQUIP Program has been imple-
mented, adapted, and (to some extent) evaluated at various facilities or institutions 
in North America, Great Britain, and Europe. Th e institutions include juvenile 
correctional facilities, community-based adult correctional facilities (or halfway 
houses), and high schools; the young persons served have ranged in age from pre-
adolescence through young adulthood. 
 Implementations of EQUIP typically involve adaptations and include the pro-
gram in an array of services. Peter Langdon and colleagues innovated an adapta-
tion for adult off enders with intellectual disabilities such as mental handicaps and 

202 
■ Moral Development and Reality
Asperger’s syndrome (Langdon, Murphy, Clare, Palmer, & Rees, 2013. 7 Langdon’s 
and colleagues’ adaptation enhances social perspective-taking for these indi-
viduals through the use of interactive video techniques. Another adaptation was 
implemented at the Minnesota Correctional Facility in Red Wing, which provides 
treatment, education, and transition services for chronic male juvenile off enders. 
Th e Red Wing implementation has adapted use of the “Problem Names” (only 
the generic names “Inconsiderate of Others” and “Inconsiderate of Self” are used) 
and “Cognitive Distortions” (“Minimizing” is separated from “Mislabeling”). To 
promote coherence and reduce program isolation, the Red Wing staff  uses their 
adapted version of the EQUIP problem and thinking error language throughout 
the facility’s Restorative Justice, Refl ection Journaling, Substance Abuse Treatment, 
Sex Off ender Treatment, and Relapse Prevention program. Some implementa-
tions are only partial; for example, the Alvis House, a halfway house for adults in 
Columbus, Ohio, does not include Mutual Help meetings in its adaptation. 
 Some adaptations have modifi ed or even eliminated the EQUIP name. Although 
Colorado’s Youthful Off ender System (YOS) does not identify EQUIP by name, 
much of the material, in consultation with one of us (Potter), has been assimilated 
into the YOS core program interventions (the Colorado consultation resulted 
in our  EQUIP Implementation Guide ; Potter, Gibbs, & Goldstein, 2001). Potter 
has also adapted EQUIP for use at Ohio’s Franklin County Community-Based 
Correctional Facility, where it is called Responsible Adult Culture (RAC; Potter, 
Gibbs, Robbins, & Langdon, in preparation). Ann-Marie DiBiase and colleagues 
(DiBiase et al., 2012) innovated a well-craft ed prevention version of EQUIP for 
behaviorally at-risk middle and high school children, a version called  Teaching 
Adolescents to Th ink and Act Responsibly: Th e EQUIP Approach. 
 EQUIP should in theory be at least as eff ective as other cognitive behavioral 
programs, given that EQUIP also addresses motivational issues. One-year recidi-
vism at Red Wing declined from 53% to 21% following implementation of EQUIP 
in 1998 (a contemporaneous comparison sample was not available; Handy, per-
sonal communication, February 2, 2008). One-year recidivism following the RAC 
version of EQUIP was also at 21%, compared to 29% at a facility with a program 
that was equivalent except that it did not include cognitive restructuring tech-
niques such as correcting thinking errors (see Devlin & Gibbs, 2010). Nonetheless, 
like that of other cognitive behavioral programs, EQUIP’s eff ectiveness appears to 
require high-fi delity implementation. Mark Lipsey and colleagues’ meta-analysis 
of studies comparing cognitive behavioral with non-cognitive behavior programs 
(Lipsey, Chapman, & Landenberger, 2001; cf. Landenberger & Lipsey, 2005) found 
an overall eff ectiveness for the cognitive behavioral programs; e.g., a mean recidi-
vism rate substantially less than that of the non-cognitive behavioral programs 
(37% versus 53%, respectively). Lipsey and colleagues noted that the weakest 
recidivism results were found for cognitive behavioral programs “low in strength 
and fi delity of implementation” (p. 155); e.g., inadequate staff  training, two or three 
rather than fi ve weekday meetings, and high turnover among participants. Th ree 
outcome evaluation studies of EQUIP conform to Lipsey et al.’s pattern: a high-
fi delity implementation of EQUIP was found to have substantial institutional con-
duct and recidivism eff ectiveness (12-month recidivism rate at 15.0% versus 40.5% 

Treating Antisocial Behavior 
■ 203
for the control group; see Leeman, Gibbs, & Fuller, 1993), in contrast to weaker or 
negligible results for lower-fi delity implementations (Liau, Shively, Horn, Landau, 
Barriga, & Gibbs, 2004; Nas, Brugman, & Koops, 2005; cf. Helmond, Overbeek, 
& Brugman, 2012). EQUIP can be included among the referents for Lipsey et al.’s 
conclusion that “a great deal of improvement may be possible in the implementa-
tion of [cognitive behavioral] programs” (p. 155). 
social perspective-taking for severe 
 
■
offenders 
 Th e outcome evaluation research on EQUIP suggests, then, that—given adequate 
implementation—the program can induce responsible behavior among broad 
groups of initially antisocial youth. To be eff ective with groups of more serious 
and chronic off enders, however, EQUIP perspective-taking may require supple-
mentation. EQUIP can be strengthened, in other words, through integration 
with programs emphasizing even more intensive and extensive modes of social 
perspective-taking. Quite compatible with EQUIP, for example, are 12 Step and 
victim awareness programs (e.g., California Department of the Youth Authority, 
1994; Hildebran & Pithers, 1989; Mendelson, Quinn, Dutton, & Seewonarain, 
1988; Murphy, 1990; but cf. Hilton, 1993). Th ese programs aim to induce perspec-
tive-taking and empathy for victims through specifi c depicted situations (e.g., our 
“Victims and Victimizers” exercise [see Table 8.5], adapted from the California 
Department of the Youth Authority [1994] victim awareness program), as well 
as other stimulations of victim awareness through video or fi lm presentations, 
newspaper or magazine articles, guest speakers (especially recovering victims or 
family survivors of murder victims), role-plays, personal journals, homework, and 
reminder posters. 
 A particular type of powerful or intense role-play that deserves special attention 
entails the reenactment of a crime perpetrated by the off ender. Reenactive role-play 
as perpetrator and then as victim has been used in the Texas Youth Commission 
Capital Off ender Group program (Alvarez-Saunders & Reyes, 1994), an intensive 
four-month therapy designed “to break a participant’s psychological defenses to 
force him to see his victim’s suff ering, to help him discover his conscience and feel 
remorse” (Woodbury, 1993, p. 58). Th e juveniles role-play many aspects of their 
own histories, including family relationships and the homicidal events themselves. 
In a role-played reenactment of a crime, the perpetrator must remain at the scene 
even though in the actual event he typically had fl ed. He must hear the pleas and 
see the suff ering of the victim (played by a group peer), and thereby experience 
empathic distress and guilt (“great care must be taken,” however, to insure that 
the role play does not instead elicit violent or predatory desires among the group 
members; Marshall, Anderson, & Fernandez, 1999). In a second reenactive role-
play, the perpetrator must directly put himself in the victim’s place: Th is time the 
perpetrator feels what it is like to be the victim by taking the victim’s role (cf. 
reverse role-play activity in Beck, 1999). Outcome evaluations of the Capital and 
Serious Violent Off enders Treatment Program have indicated substantial reduc-
tions in recidivism (Heide, 2003; Texas Youth Commission, 2011). 

204 
■ Moral Development and Reality
 Agee and McWilliams (1984; cf. Pithers, 1999) used vivid crime-reenactment 
role-play (albeit without the victim role-play addition) to achieve therapeutic 
breakthroughs with violent juvenile off enders in the context of a mutual help pro-
gram. Particularly powerful and worth quoting at length is the apparent realiza-
tion of empathic guilt in 14-year-old Larry, a serious sex off ender. Larry 
 asked for the agenda. He was committed to the unit for the kidnap and rape of a two-
year-old girl. Several times he had attempted to have [a] group [session] on his crime, 
but was unsuccessful in doing more than a very mechanical, emotionless relation of 
the details. By prearrangement, he had agreed to act out the crime on a large baby doll 
in the hopes of bringing out more of the emotion in the situation. Larry proceeded to 
describe the situation in the room where he kidnapped the baby and [to] talk about what 
was going through his mind. He saw the sleeping child as a good opportunity to have 
sex and thought about where he could take her where he would be undiscovered. He left  
the home with the baby, with his hand over her mouth so she couldn’t cry. He went to 
a nearby park, and with considerable diffi  culty, raped the baby, and then left  her there 
injured. He stated he had no interest in whether she lived or died, but did feel a little 
scared at what he had done. 
 When the role play with the baby [doll] was acted out, there was clearly shock 
and disgust among all the group members, both male and female, and also the Group 
Leader. All of the group members took some physical action wherein they were trying 
to distance themselves from Larry, such as scooting their chairs back. One girl (who had 
been sexually abused herself in childhood) screamed when another youth accidentally 
touched her as he moved his chair back. Aft er some diffi  culty in getting started, the 
peers expressed their shock and disgust to Larry. He had frequently stated that he had 
no feeling for his victim, but in this group, he seemed to be stunned by the enormity of 
what he had done. He listened mutely to the feelings of his peers and appeared notice-
ably stricken when the Group Leader also told him of his feelings of disgust for what he 
had done. Th e group concluded in somewhat of a shocked state, and one of the girls in 
the group asked the Group Leader to please take the doll off  the unit. 
 It was not until two or three months later that the eff ects of this particular group 
on Larry were seen. At that time, he had a repeat court appearance, and when asked by 
the judge what he felt for his victim, gave an extremely moving and honest statement 
which showed much awareness of the harm he had done to his victim. Th is was in sharp 
contrast to his earlier behavior in court when he had been very cocky and unrepentant. 
(Agee, 1979, pp. 292–293) 
 Th e contribution of crime reenactment role-play to Larry’s problem work was 
extraordinary. Th e vivid reenactment certainly did bring out “more of the emo-
tion” of his horrifi c crime—fi rst for Larry’s peers and the group leader, and then, 
as a result, for Larry. Note that once Larry completed his role-play, the reaction of 
every other person in the room was a shock and disgust 8  so total and profound that 
it at fi rst could scarcely even be expressed. All of Larry’s peers literally distanced 
themselves from him. Th e reenactment using the large doll had communicated the 
horror of Larry’s crime so eff ectively that Larry now found himself utterly isolated, 
with no physical, emotional, social, or other connection to anyone else, not even 
the group leader—the group leader’s feedback of disgust left  Larry “noticeably 

Treating Antisocial Behavior 
■ 205
stricken.” Th e deep harm and wrong of Larry’s unconscionable crime pierced 
through Larry’s callous smugness and cognitive distortions. In a powerful and 
profound way, he decentered. Th at is, he saw his crime through clear, third-person 
eyes and was himself shocked and stricken by what he saw. No longer “mechani-
cal” or emotionless and devoid of feelings for his victim, Larry now “seemed to be 
stunned by the enormity of what he had done.” At court months later, instead of 
displaying an unrepentant and even cocky demeanor, Larry evidenced contrition 
and awareness of the grievous harm. Although Larry continued to need therapy 
(to consolidate the gain and prevent relapse), a breakthrough was evident. 
 Th e chapters in the fi nal section of Aaron Beck’s (1999)  Prisoners of Hate con-
cern “the brighter side of human nature” and the promise of cognitive therapy as 
it uses human resources of rationality or social decentration, ideal moral reciproc-
ity, and empathy. Role reversal or crime reenactment role-plays constitute useful 
supplementary techniques for activating and helping to develop these resources 
and may be especially needed in working with the severe off ender population. 
Although Larry’s crime shocks and disgusts us in its depravity, Larry’s redemp-
tion is inspiring: Th rough social perspective-taking, conscience fi nally emerged 
in the mind of the perpetrator of an unconscionable crime. Larry’s case appears to 
vindicate not only Beck’s emphasis on rationality but also Kohlberg’s (or Piaget’s) 
emphasis on social decentration, Hoff man’s emphasis on the reliability of the 
empathic predisposition, and the emphasis of all three theorists on the attainabil-
ity of veridical moral perception. 
 Th e title of Beck’s (1999; cf. Garbarino, 1999) fi nal section, on change, is “From 
Darkness to Light.” Does Larry’s change represent a transition from the darkness 
of distortion to the light of truth in some sense that goes beyond metaphor? In 
other words, did Larry change in a deeper spiritual sense? In the next chapter, 
we will go beyond Kohlberg’s and Hoff man’s theories of moral development and 
behavior to consider their ontological implications and foundations. 

206
 9 
 Beyond the Theories 
 A Deeper Reality? 
 Just why  Homo sapiens should carry the spark of rationality that 
provides the key to the universe is a deep enigma. We, who are 
children of the universe—animated stardust—can nevertheless 
refl ect on that same universe, even to the extent of glimpsing the 
rules on which it runs. How we have become linked into this cosmic 
dimension is a mystery. Yet the linkage cannot be denied. (Davies, 
1992, p. 232) 
 As we have seen, growing beyond superfi ciality characterizes the primarily  aff ective 
and primarily cognitive strands of human development toward mature moral per-
ception and behavior. Consider fi rst Hoff man’s theory of the primarily aff ective 
(empathic) strand. According to Hoff man’s theory, cognitive development, lan-
guage acquisition, and socialization enable the child’s empathic predisposition 
to evolve beyond simple attention to the surface cues of another’s emotion and 
thereby to attain a deeper, more veridical or authentic  caring for others. In Piaget’s 
and Kohlberg’s theories of the  cognitive  strand, that evolution beyond simple 
attention to surface cues is a constructive process leading to a decentered  under-
standing of the intangible, ideal bases in mutuality for interpersonal relationships 
and society. In the related context of non-social cognitive development, simple 
attention to surface cues gives way to  logical understanding: Th e child is said to 
penetrate through superfi cial, sometimes misleading appearances by construct-
ing conservation and other “necessary” knowledge of “underlying reality” (Flavell 
et al., 2002, p. 141). 
 Flavell et al.’s (2002) characterization of conservation and related necessary 
logic as a reality that underlies physical appearances and impressions is reminis-
cent of mathematician Roger Penrose’s (1994) reference to “profound mathemati-
cal substructure[s]” or “underpinnings” that are “hidden in the very workings of 
the world” (p. 415). Indeed, conservation, transitivity, class inclusion, and so forth, 
insofar as their properties are logico-mathematical (see Chapter 10), are integral 
to these substructures. Perhaps in cognitive development, then, we not only con-
struct and understand but in the fi nal analysis  discover conservation—and, more 
systematically, using the methods of science,  discover  in logic and mathematics the 
very substructures or foundations of the physical world. 
 We are indeed “linked” to the universe, but what is the ontological signifi cance 
of that linkage? When we use our “spark of rationality” to discover and thereby 
“glimpse the rules on which it [the universe] runs,” as astrophysicist Paul Davies 
put it in the opening quotation, do we in eff ect glimpse a more fundamental 

Beyond the Theories 
■ 207
reality? Penrose’s neo-Platonist answer is “yes.” He argued that the world of tan-
gible impressions and appearances—and in part the rational minds of those who 
perceive and seek to understand that tangible world—derive ultimately from those 
underpinnings, that substructural realm of logic and mathematics. 
 Testifying to this enigmatic linkage of the physical (and, in turn, mental) worlds 
with a deeper logico-mathematical reality is “the amazing precision and subtle 
applicability of sophisticated mathematics that physicists continually and increas-
ingly fi nd in their descriptions” of the workings of the physical world (Penrose, 
1994, p. 415). Riemannian space and imaginary numbers illustrate constructions 
that, despite their purely abstract origins in mathematical deduction, subsequently 
came to “serve as indispensable frameworks for physical phenomena” (Piaget, 
1967/1971, p. 341). Davies (1992) asked how such abstract, pure mathematics, 
“worked out . . . long before it was applied to the real world,” nonetheless proved to 
be so “spectacularly successful” once technology permitted its empirical applica-
tion (p. 151). Penrose answers that logical or mathematical “rules” or necessary 
relations, regardless of when they are discovered, partake of a primary (“profound, 
timeless, and universal,” p. 413) reality. 1 
 As we know from Chapter 3, Piaget and Kohlberg argued that morality— 
especially, the reversibility of ideal moral reciprocity (also called “the condition of 
reversibility”)—is akin to logic. If so, then might the prescriptive truths of mature 
morality join those of logic and mathematics in refl ecting a deeper reality? 2  In an 
essay aptly titled “Right and Wrong as a Clue to the Meaning of the Universe,” C. S. 
Lewis (1943) likened the reciprocation of kindnesses and unselfi shness to neces-
sary and universal truths such as mathematics:
 Th ink of a country where . . . a man felt proud of double-crossing all the people who 
had been kindest to him. You might just as well try to imagine a country where two 
and two made fi ve. Men have diff ered as regards what people you ought to be unselfi sh 
to—whether it was only your own family, or your fellow countrymen, or everyone. But 
they have always agreed that you ought not to put yourself fi rst. Selfi shness has never 
been admired. (p. 5) 
 Although the right of reciprocity is distinct from the good of caring (or although 
betrayal of kindness and trust is distinct from selfi shness), Lewis legitimately 
included both in his universalist appeal. Do not both represent cross-cultural 
ideals, even if they are honored in the breach? 3  And is not the ideal of justice, of 
mutual respect, of honoring and reciprocating others’ kindnesses, intimately con-
gruent with the ideal of unselfi shness, of veridical empathy, of, we might even say, 
love? As Piaget (1932/1965) noted, “Between the more refi ned forms of justice and 
love properly so called, there is no longer any real confl ict” (p. 324). Ideal moral 
reciprocity, in other words, formulates what love looks like when the perspectives 
of all concerned are taken into account. (Granted, how broadly we can or should 
apply ideal moral reciprocity and love [to one’s own family? fellow citizens? every-
one?] can be an issue, one that we will have occasion to visit later in this chapter.) 
 Perhaps “growing beyond superfi ciality” toward the right and the good of mature 
morality, then, has a transcendent signifi cance. Are love and the ethic of mutual 
respect clues to the meaning of the universe? Do they, like  logico-mathematical 

208 
■ Moral Development and Reality
knowledge, refl ect a primary reality? Can that primary reality be to some extent 
accessed? Can one thereby gain insight and inspiration for living the moral life? 
Th ese ontological (nature of reality), existential, and moral questions are addressed 
in this chapter. To ponder them, we venture beyond Kohlberg’s, Hoff man’s, and 
Haidt’s theories to explore the relationship of moral development and behavior to 
a deeper reality. 
 We need not start from scratch. Although Haidt and Bjorklund (2008b) doubted 
the existence of “objective [moral] facts” that would be “true for any rational crea-
ture anywhere” (p. 214), Hoff man does take an implicitly objective ontological 
stance in his argument for humans’ potential to overcome biases and to connect 
 veridically with another. Mature caring, aft er all, is deeply accurate or true. It is 
Kohlberg, however, who off ers the stronger line of continuity from moral to exis-
tential and ontological concerns. On the basis of case studies and philosophical 
literature, as we saw in Chapter 4, Kohlberg answered the ontological question 
affi  rmatively: In the throes of existential crisis, perhaps in meditation or prayer, 
some morally mature persons begin to see daily life from the vantage point of its 
cosmic “ground.” Th ey begin to sense or identify with a unitary “whole of nature” 
of which we are individually but parcels. From that vantage point (“Stage 7”), one 
transcends existential despair and experiences inspiration from a deeper reality 
for living in the light of love and justice—albeit in a world oft en dark and divisive 
from self-centered, angry distortion as well as genuine injustice. 
 Darkness and light have been used as a metaphor (by Beck, 1999; and see 
Chapter 8) to characterize the perspective-taking progress of initially antisocial 
individuals from self-centeredness to the ideals of love and ideal moral reciprocity. 
Could this progress from “darkness to light,” from self-centeredness and antisocial 
behavior to love and ideal reciprocity, be more than a metaphor? 
 As did Kohlberg, we will suggest an affi  rmative answer to the question of 
whether there is a deeper reality to the strands of moral development (or, for that 
matter, the remedial moral development of erstwhile antisocial individuals). If 
there is a deeper reality represented by love and ideal reciprocity, perhaps it is 
sometimes glimpsed and even accessed not only through meditation or existential 
crises but also, serendipitously, through life-threatening crises. In particular, we 
refer to an extraordinary phenomenon of human perception that has been the 
subject of increasing attention in the medical literature: the “near-death experi-
ence” (Moody, 1975; van Lommel, 2010), defi ned by psychiatrist Bruce Greyson 
(2000b; cf. Kelly et al., 2007) as “profound psychological events with transcenden-
tal and mystical elements, typically occurring to individuals close to death or in 
situations of intense physical or emotional danger” (p. 316). Because of its poten-
tially major implications for our understanding of moral development and reality, 
the phenomenon will be studied here at some length. 
two case studies 
 
■
 We will introduce the near-death experience phenomenon through the presen-
tation and extensive study of two independent cases involving life-threatening 
physical crises (radical surgery and serious accident). Th e fi rst case, that of 

Beyond the Theories 
■ 209
Pamela Reynolds Lowery, was described by cardiologist Michael Sabom (1998); 
the second, that of Tom Sawyer, by writer Sydney Farr (1993). Tom had not 
heard of near-death experiences prior to his near-death event; whether Pam 
had heard of such experiences is not known. Pam and Tom provided the inter-
view and other data for these accounts at least two years aft er their near-death 
events. Recollections reported sooner aft er the events would probably have 
been highly similar, however. Cardiologist Pim van Lommel and colleagues 
(van Lommel, van Wees, Meyers, & Elff erich, 2001) found almost no longitu-
dinal diff erence in survivors’ near-death recollections at three points in time 
(a few days, two years, and eight years later). 4  Greyson (2007; cf. Long, 2010) 
found similar results for consistency of reports across two longer time intervals 
(20 and 40 years later). 
 Pam Reynolds Lowery’s Near-Death Experience 
 Starting in the morning of August 15, 1991, at the Barrow Neurological Institute 
in Phoenix, Arizona, a 35-year-old musical composer and mother of three named 
Pamela Reynolds Lowery underwent a daring surgical procedure and had a near-
death experience. Th e six-hour surgery was daring in that its aim was to remove 
a brain aneurysm so large and deep as to be inoperable by traditional procedures. 
Excision of the giant aneurysm required its collapse (“like a defl ated balloon,” 
Sabom, 1998, p. 45) as the blood in the arteries of the brain was drained “like oil 
from a car” (p. 43). 
 Preliminary procedures prepared Pam for surgery. Her eyes were taped shut. 
Instruments were inserted or attached fi rst to anesthetize Pam intravenously and 
then to monitor many vital signs: her blood pressure, pulmonary pressure, heart 
rate and rhythm, blood oxygen level, body temperature, and brain (cerebral cortex, 
brain stem) electrical activity. Th e brain stem monitoring device, inserted through 
Pam’s ear canals, meant that physical hearing was impossible. Th e surgical scene is 
depicted in Figure 9.1. 
 Pam’s near-death experience began as neurosurgeon Robert Spetzler opened 
her skull with a cranial saw (she was already “under deep anesthesia”: Spetzler, 
personal communication, July 2, 2002). Pam recounts: 
 Th e next thing I recall was the sound: It was a natural D [tone]. As I listened to the 
sound, I felt it was pulling me out of the top of my head. Th e further out of my body I 
got the more clear the tone became. . . . I remember seeing several things in the operating 
room when I was looking down. I was the most aware that I think that I have ever been 
in my entire life. . . . I was metaphorically sitting on Dr. Spetzler’s shoulder. It was not like 
normal vision. It was brighter and more focused and clearer than normal vision. . . .  
 I thought the way they had my head shaved was very peculiar. I expected them to 
take all of the hair, but they did not. . . .  
 Th e saw thing that I hated the sound of looked like an electric toothbrush. . . . Th e 
[electric saw] blades were in what looked like a socket wrench case. . . . I heard the saw 
crank up. . . . It was humming at a relatively high pitch and then all of a sudden it went 
 Brrrrrrrrrr! like that. (Sabom, 1998, p. 41) 

210 
■ Moral Development and Reality
Surgical microscope
Assistant surgeon
Assistant surgeon
Assistant surgeon
Assistant
surgeon
Neurosurgeon
Neurosurgeon
Neurosurgeon
Neuroanesthesia
Scrub
Scrub
nurse
nurse
Scrub
nurse
Scrub
nurse
C.V. Surgeon
C.V. Surgeon
C.V. Surgeon
Blood
warmer
Pump oxygenator
Evoked potential
and EEG monitoring
 Figure 9.1    Diagram of the operating room at the Barrow Neurological Institute. 
 Source: M. Sabom, M.D., 1998.  Light and death . Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan. Reprinted 
with permission.  

Beyond the Theories 
■ 211
 Th e neurosurgeon was cutting through Pam’s skull. Th rough a cranial opening, 
a microscope was inserted into Pam’s brain to inspect the aneurysm deep in her 
brain. Th e aneurysm’s giant size meant that its reduction through a radical proce-
dure, called hypothermic cardiac arrest, would indeed be necessary. A cardiovas-
cular surgeon began preparing access to Pam’s blood vessels.  
 Someone said something about my veins and arteries being very small. I believe it was 
a female voice and that it was Dr. Murray, but I’m not sure. She was the cardiologist 
[cardiac surgeon]. I remember thinking that I should have told her about that. (Sabom, 
1998, p. 42) 
 Th e vein and artery in Pam’s left  groin area (those in the right groin area had 
been found to be too small) were connected to a cardiopulmonary bypass machine, 
so that her blood could circulate through the machine and be cooled by it. Th e 
machine lowered Pam’s body temperature to the point that her heart stopped beat-
ing and her brain ceased electrical activity. 5 Her blood was then drained from her 
brain and body and temporarily stored in the cylinders of the machine. Her near-
death experience continued: 
 Th ere was a sensation like being pulled, but not against your will. I was going on my own 
accord because I wanted to go. I have diff erent metaphors to try to explain this. It was 
like the Wizard of Oz—being taken up into a tornado vortex, only you’re not spinning 
around like you’ve got vertigo. You’re very focused and you have a place to go. Th e feel-
ing was like going up in an elevator real fast. And there was a sensation, but it wasn’t a 
bodily, physical sensation. It was like a tunnel but it wasn’t a tunnel. 
 At some point very early in the tunnel vortex I became aware of my grandmother 
calling me. But I didn’t hear her call me with my ears. . . . It was a clearer hearing than 
with my ears. I trust that sense more than I trust my own ears. Th e feeling was that she 
wanted me to come to her, so I continued with no fear down the shaft . It’s a dark shaft  
that I went through, and at the very end there was this very little tiny pinpoint of light 
that kept getting bigger and bigger. 
 Th e light was incredibly bright, like sitting in the middle of a light bulb. It was so 
bright that I put my hands in front of my face fully expecting to see them [the hands] 
and I could not. But I knew they were there. Not from a sense of touch. Again, it’s ter-
ribly hard to explain, but I knew they [my hands] were there. . . .  
 Th e “incredibly bright” light “was real warm and real comfortable and real 
loving” (Benz, 2001). Pam   
 began to discern diff erent fi gures in the light . . . they were all covered with light, they 
 were light, and had light permeating all around them . . . they began to form shapes 
I could recognize and understand. I could see that one of them was my grandmother. I 
don’t know if it was reality or projection, but I would know my grandmother, the sound 
of her voice, anywhere. 
 Everyone I saw, looking back on it, fi t perfectly into my understanding of what that 
person looked like at their best during their lives. 
 I recognized a lot of people. My uncle Gene was there. So was my great-great-Aunt 
Maggie, who was really a cousin. On Papa’s side of the family, my grandfather was 
there. . . . Th ey were specifi cally taking care of me, looking aft er me. 

212 
■ Moral Development and Reality
 Th ey would not permit me to go further. . . . It was communicated to me—that’s the 
best way I know how to say it, because they didn’t speak like I’m speaking—that if I 
went all the way into the light something would happen to me physically. Th ey would be 
unable to put this me back into the body me, like I had gone too far and they couldn’t 
reconnect. So they wouldn’t let me go anywhere or do anything. 
 I wanted to go into the light, but I also wanted to come back. I had children to be 
reared. (Sabom, 1998, pp. 44–45)   
 With the aneurysm sac drained of blood, the neurosurgeon was able to excise 
it. Th en the machine began to warm Pam’s blood and reintroduce it into her body; 
Pam’s brain and heart began to resume electrical activity. 
 Th en they [deceased relatives] were feeding me. Th ey were not doing this through 
my mouth, like with food, but they were nourishing me with something. Th e only way 
I know how to put it is something sparkly. Sparkles is the image that I get. I defi nitely 
recall the sensation of being nurtured and being fed and being made strong. I know it 
sounds funny, because obviously it wasn’t a physical thing, but inside the experience 
I felt physically strong, ready for whatever.   
 Pam “returned” to her physical body: 
 My grandmother didn’t take me back through the tunnel or even send me back or ask me 
to go. She just looked up at me. I expected to go with her, but it was communicated to me 
that she just didn’t think she would do that. My uncle said he would do it. He’s the one 
who took me back through the end of the tunnel. Everything was fi ne. I did want to go. 
 But then I got to the end of it and saw the thing, my body. I didn’t want to get into 
it. . . . It looked terrible, like a train wreck. It looked like what it was: dead. I believe it was 
covered. It scared me and I didn’t want to look at it. 
 It was communicated to me that it was like jumping into a swimming pool. No 
 problem, just jump right into the swimming pool. I didn’t want to, but I guess I was late 
or something because he [the uncle] pushed me. I felt a defi nite repelling and at the same 
time a pulling from the body. Th e body was pulling and the tunnel was pushing. . . . It was 
like diving into a pool of ice water. . . . It hurt! . . . When I regained consciousness, I was 
still on the respirator. (Sabom, 1998, pp. 46–47) 
 Pam made an adequate recovery from her operation. In addition to citing her 
children (“I had children to be reared”) as her purpose for returning, she subse-
quently referred to social harmony as well (expressed in terms of her background 
in musical composition): “Everyone has a diff erent tone . . . the beauty is in the har-
mony. . . . My reason for being is to learn to make harmony . . . with all the variables 
that present themselves in my little world” (Benz, 2001). On May 22, 2010, nine-
teen years aft er her hypothermic cardiac arrest surgery and near-death experience, 
Pam at age 54 died of heart failure. 
 Thomas Sawyer’s Near-Death Experience 
 On May 23, 1978, in Rochester, New York, Th omas Sawyer, a 33-year-old father 
of two boys was crushed under his truck and had a near-death experience. Tom 

Beyond the Theories 
■ 213
was working under his truck with the help of his older son Todd when a support 
gave way; the frame of the truck depressed the center of his chest, rendering him 
unable to breathe. Todd screamed and phoned for an ambulance. Hearing Todd’s 
scream, Tom’s wife also arrived, as did neighbors. Tom lost consciousness and 
his heart stopped beating. Despite losing consciousness, Tom reportedly heard 
“the . . . rough and hard . . . conversation of the paramedics getting into the ambu-
lance a couple of miles away . . . just as though I was with them for the ride” (Farr, 
1993, p. 25). He then 
 had a feeling of absolutely, positively, waking up, very quickly and suffi  ciently. . . . All 
pain and pressure [were] gone. I felt I could see very clearly, but the problem was I saw 
nothing but absolute, total blackness. . . . I had the desire to look around inquisitively. 
What is this place? Where am I? . . . Instantaneously [with my questions], this darkness 
took the shape of a tunnel. It was very vast. . . . If you took a tornado and stretched it 
out straight, it would be similar to that, without the houses and doors fl oating around 
inside. . . . I had the feeling of fl oating, or that I was moving through it—and it was okay; 
it was comfortable. . . . I went faster and faster. . . .  
 Th e next thing is that way, way off  in the distance—to infi nity—there appeared this 
little speck of light. Th at light was very special; it was . . . extremely bright. . . . brighter 
than something that would immediately blind you. . . . It was utter beauty. . . . Th e light 
was way off  in the distance and got larger as I got closer to it. . . . Th ere were such feelings 
of warmth and love coming from the light that it made me feel good. (p. 28) 
 Tom communicated with the light concerning the meaning of his life as 
well as the nature of God and the universe. Th e communication “was not in 
words. . . . Instantaneously it emanated . . . thought-pattern to thought-pattern. . . . As 
I thought of and formulated a desire or a question, it would already have been rec-
ognized, acknowledged, and . . . answered” (Farr, 1993, p. 28). Tom interpreted the 
light as divine, although he found adequate description diffi  cult:
 Th ere are characteristics and aspects of that part of my experience that I would really 
wish to talk about a little deeper. I’ve not found the words. . . . Some of the things are 
regarding the aspect of, “What is the Light?” Well, the light is God. And what is God? 
God is unconditional love. God is total beauty. God is  everything ! (Farr, 1993, p. 38) 
 In order to choose “intelligently” whether to return or “become part of the 
light” (p. 29), Tom also experienced a “complete” or “total” (p. 29) review of the 
events of his life “from the fi rst breath of life right through the accident” (p. 35). 
He saw and relived the events simultaneously from multiple perspectives: (a) as 
his adult self, observing the events “from a third-person viewpoint” (p. 37) looking 
down at the scene; (b) as his self at the time; and (c) as another person involved in 
the event. An example is an incident that occurred when he was eight. His father 
had told him 
 to mow the lawn and cut the weeds in the yard. . . . [Regarding some weeds in the back, 
Aunt Gay had said,] “Leave them alone now, Tom . . . and as soon as they blossom we’ll 
make tiaras for all the girls, and fl ower necklaces for some of the guys.” . . . We were look-
ing forward to that. . . . [But] I deliberately decided to be bad, to be malicious. . . . I called 

214 
■ Moral Development and Reality
it “Operation Chop-Chop.” . . . And I went ahead. . . . I thought, “Wow, I got away with it; 
I did it. And if Aunt Gay ever says anything I’ll just tell her Father told me to do it. Or if 
Father asks me I’ll say, well that’s what you told me to do.” . . . My Aunt Gay never said a 
word to me; nothing was ever mentioned; I got away with it totally. 
 [In my life review] I was observing this entire event. . . . I not only re-experienced my 
eight-year-old attitude. . . . I also experienced it exactly as though I was my Aunt Gay, 
several days later aft er the weeds had been cut . . . “Oh my goodness, what has happened? 
Oh well, he must have forgotten. But he couldn’t have forgotten, everyone was looking 
forward to—Oh no, knock it off . Tommy is—he’s—He’s never done anything like that. 
I love him so—Oh, come on, cut it out. Gee, it was so important. He had to know . . . he 
couldn’t have known.” . . . I was in my Aunt Gay’s body, I was in her eyes, I was in her 
emotions, I was in her unanswered questions. I experienced the disappointment, the 
humiliation. It was very devastating to me. (Farr, 1993, pp. 29–30) 
 Tom also relived an event that occurred in 1968, when he was 23. Upon arriving 
at the airport in Chicago for the Olympic trials in cycling, Tom discovered that his 
racing bicycle had been irreparably damaged by a baggage handler: 
 I was myself [in the life review] in all of my rage and indignation and righteousness. 
But I was simultaneously that young kid who had worked his fi rst day at the airport and 
didn’t know what “Escort Service” meant. It was, to him, simply a canvas bag in the way. 
He had no idea there was a bicycle in there. . . . He made a mistake through ignorance. 
 Did that help me to understand? Of course it did. I realized that there was, in his life, 
almost no interaction at all with me, Tom Sawyer. It was only a moment in his life, trying 
desperately to do a good job. (Farr, 1993, p. 32)   
 Tom also reviewed an altercation with a man who had darted in front of his 
truck in the street. Th e man had almost made contact with Tom’s truck: “Now my 
attitude in those days was, God forbid that you should put even a smudge on my 
truck. A smudge made me furious.” In the course of the original altercation, the 
man swore at and slapped Tom, which “instantly gave me license to annihilate 
him. . . . I almost killed that man” (Farr, 1993, p. 32). Once again, in the life review 
re-experiencing of the event, Tom was observing not only himself at the time (at 
age 19) but also the other person. He experienced 
 Tom Sawyer’s fi st come directly into my face. And I felt the indignation, the rage, the 
embarrassment, the frustration, the physical pain. . . . I felt my teeth going through my 
lower lip—in other words, I was in that man’s eyes. I was in that man’s body. I expe-
rienced everything of that interrelationship between Tom Sawyer and that man that 
day. . . .  
 Okay. He hit me fi rst. Try  that  in your life review! . . . I wish that I could tell you how 
it really felt and what the life review is like, but I’ll never be able to do it accurately. 
(Farr, 1993, pp. 32–34, emphasis added) 
 Like Pam, Tom wanted to go into the light. Whereas Pam also wanted to return, 
Tom wanted to stay. Nonetheless, just as he was “becoming homogeneous” and 
experiencing “total knowledge” (p. 38) with the light, Tom “reversed through the 
tunnel” (p. 40). Like Pam’s, Tom’s return to his body was jolting: “As I reentered my 

Beyond the Theories 
■ 215
body, it was with a bang. It was a very slamming experience, a shocking experience 
similar to grabbing on to a 220-volt line” (Farr, 1993, p. 40). 
 Immediately aft er reentering his body, Tom regained consciousness and 
could again breathe as the truck was lift ed. As Tom was removed from under-
neath the truck, paramedics administered oxygen. Tom momentarily lost con-
sciousness again and was taken to the hospital, where X-rays showed no broken 
bones. He  recuperated at home. In retrospect, he described himself as having 
“abruptly” changed aft er the accident “from a [self-]righteous, self-motivated 
person to a spiritually motivated individual who now prioritizes helping others” 
(Farr, 1993, p. 60). 
 As did Pam, Tom died in the fi rst decade of this century. On April 28, 2007, 
nearly three decades aft er his nearly fatal accident and near-death experience, Tom 
Sawyer, at age 62, also died of heart failure. 
a deeper reality? 
 
■
 What are we to make of such experiences? Interestingly, Pam Reynolds explicitly 
raises the ontological issue in noting that she did not know whether her perception 
of her deceased grandmother “was reality or projection.” In Susan Blackmore’s 
(1993) terms, the near-death experience is basically either “a glimpse . . . pen-
etrating into [an] underlying reality” of human existence or a composite of 
“hallucinations, imaginings, and mental constructions” (such subjective men-
tal projections, attributed to a dying brain, presumably “stop when the brain’s 
activity stops”; pp. 3–4, 161). In Mark Fox’s (2003) stark terms, near-death expe-
riences are either “windows into transcendent realities” or “mere mirrors refl ect-
ing nothing more than a bundle of culturally derived fantasies and psychosocial 
expectations” (p. 100). 
 A full treatment of this ontological issue is not feasible within the space of this 
chapter (see literature reviews and related articles of mine: Gibbs, 1985, 1997, 
1999, 2005, 2010c; as well as those by Fox, 2003; Greyson, 2000b, 2010a, in press; 
Greyson, E. W. Kelly, & E. F. Kelly, 2009; Kelly et al., 2007; Long, 2010; Parnia, 
2006, 2013; Potts, 2002; Sabom, 1982, 1998; and van Lommel, 2010). “Dying 
brain” explanations of the phenomenon have included references to endorphins, 
cerebral hypoxia, hypercarbia, hallucinogenic agents such as ketamine and phen-
cyclidine, serotonin pathways, limbic system activation, and temporal lobe anoxic 
seizures (Blanke, Ortigue, Landis, & Seeck, 2002; Fox, 2003; Parnia, 2006, 2013; 
Parnia & Fenwick, 2002). 
 Using our case studies and the research literature, we will ponder fi ve ontologi-
cally relevant questions: (1) Does the context of the near-death experience infl u-
ence and even determine its content? (2) Do near-death experiencers interpret the 
experience as real? (3) Are verifi able aspects of the near-death experience in fact 
accurate or veridical? (4) Is the likelihood or depth of the experience associated 
with proximity to physical death? Finally, (5) Does the typical near-death experi-
ence actually take place during near-death? 
 Again, a literature review based on these questions could easily consume a book 
in its own right; even the “brief” treatment given here will be lengthy. Yet moral 

216 
■ Moral Development and Reality
development and  reality  is a crucial relation to ponder, as Kohlberg recognized. 
Could it be that the near-death experience does aff ord some sort of access into a 
deeper reality, a glimpse that then promotes existential and moral development? 
Once we attain some tentative closure regarding the ontological signifi cance of 
this phenomenon, then we will be in a position to move to existential and moral 
questions. 
 1.  Does the Context of the Near-Death 
Experience Influence and Even Determine the 
Content of the Experience ? 
 Near-death experiences have occurred across a broad range of life contexts. 
A “context” is a relevant background, condition, or surrounding set of circum-
stances. Th e immediate context of the near-death experience is a life-threatening 
situation (in our case studies, radical surgery or serious accident; other near-death 
circumstances include serious illnesses, suicide attempts, and intense danger). 
More broadly, however, the context includes everything brought to the experience 
by the experiencers themselves: their age, gender, educational level, ethnic status, 
marital status, occupation, culture, religious background, mental health, knowl-
edge of near-death experiences, historical time period, and so on; to say nothing 
of their particular lifestyles, schemas, and schema-related attitudes, beliefs, needs, 
desires, hopes, and expectations at that point in time. 
 Although near-death experience survivors do not diff er in most contextual 
respects from non-experience survivors 6 (Greyson, 2000b, in press; Schwaninger, 
Eisenberg, Schechtman, & Weiss, 2002), context may nonetheless make a diff er-
ence in the particular content of the experience or how the experience is inter-
preted. For example, experiencers may project what they need, hope, expect, or are 
readily able (have the schemas) to see. Pam’s grandmother was one of the “shapes” 
(formed from fi gures in the light) that Pam “could recognize and understand.” 
Furthermore, each shape “fi t perfectly into [Pam’s] understanding of what that 
person looked like at their best during their lives.” During her life-threatening 
operation, Pam may have needed to see and so projected an image of her familiar, 
nurturing, optimally healthy grandmother. Tom, desiring to understand his dark 
surroundings, may have projected something he  could understand (he reported 
that his surroundings—instantaneously with his desire to understand them—
“took the shape of a tunnel”). 
 Part of the context that Pam and Tom brought to their near-death experiences 
was their technology- and industry-oriented Western culture. Th eir references to 
elevators, light bulbs, electric toothbrushes, lawn mowers, and voltage lines are 
absent from many non-Western and most historical accounts. Th e more broadly 
the features of the near-death experience have been defi ned, of course, the more 
they have been evaluated as universal—that is, evident across diverse individual, 
situational, demographic, and cultural or historical contexts. Allan Kellehear 
(1996; 2009) found that descriptions such as movement through a tunnel or cyl-
inder (such as a pipe; a truck driver experienced being “shot through a tailpipe 
toward a brilliant light,” Cox-Chapman, 1995, p. 17) are generally provincial to 

Beyond the Theories 
■ 217
Western near-death experiences. Indian, Chinese, Melanesian, and other rural 
or village cultures described experiences such as walking through dark fi elds, 
or emerging through the calyx (throat) of a lotus fl ower, or traveling through 
subterranean caves. Although Western and non-Western respondents brought 
diff erent contexts to their experience, Kellehear (1996; cf. 2008) inferred that 
respondents in both types of culture were “attempting to describe some kind of 
movement through darkness” (p. 37) and into some otherworldly, usually bright 
realm. Based on a study of over 1300 cross-cultural reports (spanning over 110 
countries) at his research website, oncologist Jeff rey Long (2010; cf. Parnia, 
2013) concluded: “Whether it is a near-death experience of a Hindu in India, a 
Muslim in Egypt, or a Christian in the United States, the same core elements are 
present” (p. 149). 
 Various typologies for classifying and studying core elements or broad features 
of the near-death experience have been proposed (see Greyson, 2000b; Holden, 
2009). Th e most elegant of these typologies is Sabom’s (1982, 1998) tripartite classi-
fi cation of near-death experiences as (a)  autoscopic  (literally, self-visualizing; more 
broadly, perceiving from an elevated vantage point one’s physical body and its sur-
rounding earthly situation), (b)  transcendental (or moving through a dark region 
or void to an otherworldly realm; encountering and mentally communicating in 
that realm with a being or beings of light, deceased loved ones, or spiritual fi gures; 
reviewing events of one’s earthly life; and reaching some border, limit, barrier, or 
juncture point), and (c)  combined or  comprehensive , such that “the transcendental 
portion of the experience followed the autoscopic portion in a continuous, unbro-
ken sequence” (Sabom, 1982, p. 52). 
 In Sabom’s (1982) Western-culture study of 78 hospital patients who had had 
a physical near-death crisis event, more than one-third (34) had had a near-death 
experience (this proportion was also found by Ring, 1980; in prospective studies, 
however, the incidence rate has been found to range from 10% to 23%; Greyson, 
1998; Parnia, Waller, Yeates, & Fenwick, 2001; Schwaninger et al., 2002; van 
Lommel et al., 2001; see Zingrone & Alvarado, 2009). Slightly more than one-half 
(38) of the near-death experiences in Sabom’s total collection of 71 such cases were 
transcendental, slightly less than one-third (21) were autoscopic, and approxi-
mately one-sixth (12) were comprehensive. In our case studies, Pam’s category was 
comprehensive, whereas Tom’s was transcendental (although his reported hearing 
of the distant conversation in the ambulance might be classifi able as autoscopic, 
rendering his experience comprehensive as well). In these basic terms, Kellehear 
(1996, 2009) found autoscopic, comprehensive, and especially transcendental 
near-death experiences to be broadly evident across diverse Western and non-
Western cultural contexts. 
 Th e cross-cultural incidence of one feature of the transcendental or comprehen-
sive near-death experience—namely, the life review (such as Tom’s)—is controver-
sial. Kellehear (1996; 2009) found this feature among Western and Asian (Chinese, 
Indian, Th ai, and Tibetan) accounts but not among those from the Pacifi c Area 
(such as Hawaii and Guam) and hunter-gatherer societies (Native American, 
Aboriginal Australian, African). Long (2010), however, found that a life review was 
consistently and substantially represented (approximately 25%) among near-death 

218 
■ Moral Development and Reality
experience accounts submitted at his website in English, Chinese, Indonesian, 
Arabic, and other languages. 
 Th e circumstances occasioning the near-death experience may infl uence the 
likelihood of experiencing a life review. In our two cases, the life review occurred 
for the accident victim but not for the surgery patient; this diff erence is consistent 
with fi ndings that life reviews are more likely to occur in the context of serious 
accidents. In fact, life reviews occur in more than 50% of accident-related near-
death experiences, a signifi cantly higher percentage relative to the incidence rate 
for near-death experiences associated with other types of near-death events (Ring, 
1980; cf. Stevenson & Cook, 1995). Ring (1980) speculated that life reviews may 
be especially needed in such  unexpected near-death crises, in which one must sud-
denly prepare for apparently imminent death (Stevenson and Cook found only a 
trend in this direction, however). Even given the circumstances of a life-threaten-
ing accident, the life review is relatively rare in childhood near-death experiences, 
perhaps because children “don’t yet have much of a life . . . to review” (Morse, 
1990, p. 142). 
 Life reviews are not uncommon among the relatively rare (or underreported), 
“distressing,” “frightening,” or “less than positive” versions of the near-death expe-
rience (Bush, 2002; Greyson & Bush, 1992; Rommer, 2000; not included are cases 
that convert to a positive experience). Bruce Greyson and Nancy Bush (1992) 
classifi ed these distressing near-death experiences into four categories. First 
are experiences that have fairly typical broad features, yet are distressing. Th ese 
respondents seem to have been terrifi ed by their inability to control the anomalous 
events experienced (Barbara Rommer called these experiences “misinterpreted”; 
“most” of her experiencers in this category said that they had been “used to being 
in total control of all situations in their lives,” p. 35). A second category is defi ned 
as a void or realm of total blackness, engendering a sense of emptiness, aloneness, 
and despair (we wonder whether Tom Sawyer was at risk for such aff ect in his 
“problem” of “absolute, total blackness” had his experience not converted to move-
ment toward the light). Th e third category entails hellish imagery idiosyncratic to 
the experiencer. 
 Life reviews occurred in approximately one-third of cases in the fi rst (lack-of-
control) and second (void/blackness) categories, and in approximately one-fi ft h 
of the hellish-imagery cases. Life reviews occurring in the distressing near-death 
experience tend to be negative or frightening. Aft er fi nding a number of cases 
consisting chiefl y of a frightening life review, physician Barbara Rommer (2000) 
proposed this experience as a fourth category of the distressing near-death expe-
rience. In this category, the primary transcendental experience is a life review 
in which the experiencer typically feels negatively judged and then laments his 
or her earthly actions (cf. near-death experience accounts in medieval folklore 7 ; 
Zaleski, 1987). 
 In the life review category as well as the other categories of distressing near-
death experiences, suicide attempts (“either intentionally or unintentionally, 
through self-destructive behavior,” p. 41) constituted approximately one-third (on 
average) of the precipitating situational contexts. A “very frequent” impression 
gained by survivors of distressing near-death experiences was “that suicide is not 

Beyond the Theories 
■ 219
an [acceptable] option” (p. 44), at least for the self-centered sorts of suicidal cases 
reviewed by Rommer. 
 Context does make a diff erence, then, in the content and likelihood of the near-
death experience. Although movement through a dark region or void (usually 
toward a lighter, increasingly bright and dominant realm or being) is universally 
evident across cultures, the way a person makes sense of and describes that experi-
ence will depend partly on cultural context: Characterizations of that dark region 
in the imagery of a tunnel, cylinder such as a pipe, and so on are more likely in 
the context of cultures in which those objects are familiar. And although the life 
review may be a fairly widespread feature, its incidence may be higher in situ-
ational contexts such as accidents. So contextual factors do infl uence the imagery 
and likelihood of particular features of the near-death experience. 
 Does context not only infl uence but also  determine  the experience? In other 
words, is the near-death experience entirely reducible to an individual’s imaginal 
projection of some sort, such as a dream or hallucination? As Fox (quoted earlier) 
put it, perhaps a near-death experience is “nothing more than a bundle of cultur-
ally derived fantasies.” We do know “that the imagination can be made to produce 
realistic images that can . . . be projected outward as though a part of the perceived 
world” (Blackmore, 1993, p. 69). Some of the “events” of the experience do seem 
like imaginal projections (e.g., hellish imagery). Th e “sparkles” representing “feed-
ing” or “nourishing” of Pam by her loved ones could have been dreamlike imag-
ery epiphenomenal to the fact that her brain and heart were reactivating as the 
increasingly warm blood circulated through her body. 
 In general, however, although the near-death experience is context-infl uenced, 
we doubt that it is entirely attributable to the projection of contextual factors such 
as culture, expectation, and situation. Autoscopic, transcendental, and compre-
hensive near-death experiences have been evident even among persons who (like 
Tom and perhaps Pam) had not known of near-death experiences. Such experi-
ences have been reported even by two- and three-year-old children—“certainly 
too young to have had any concept of death or the aft erlife” (Parnia, 2013, p. 155; 
cf. Long, 2010; Morse, 1990). It is intriguing that child survivors whose parents 
were present and highly salient nonetheless generally report having encountered 
in the light  deceased loved ones (Greyson, 2000b, 2010a, in press; cf. Long, 2010). 
It is also intriguing that, in Long’s (2010) large cross-cultural database, 
 the age of the NDEr [near-death experiencer] did not make any diff erence in whether 
or not they encountered a deceased being. If the deceased relatives encountered during 
[near-death experiences] were only a product of earthly memory, it would be expected 
that older individuals, who would have experienced more deaths of people that they 
knew in their lifetimes, would have encountered more deceased relatives. (p. 132)  
 Unlike a typical dream or hallucination, then, the near-death experience does 
not accommodate  entirely to the experiencer’s schemas of cultural imagery and 
personal experiences or psychosocial expectations. Prior to his experience, Tom 
not only had been unaware of near-death experiences but had regarded notions of 
spirituality as “hocus-pocus bullshit” (Farr, 1993, p. 55). Tom and Pam were sur-
prised by specifi c aspects of their experience. Tom expected to stay with the light 

220 
■ Moral Development and Reality
but instead found himself returning to his body. Pam knew her hands were there 
and “fully expected” to see them, yet she could not. And although Pam expected 
her grandmother to escort her on her return, her grandmother “just didn’t think 
she would do that” (her uncle instead escorted her and facilitated her return). 
 Departures from specifi c personal or religious expectations are not rare in near-
death experiences (Abramovitch, 1988; Morse, 1990; Ring, 1984); indeed, such 
departures were common in the Long (2010) study. Although they do not constitute 
strong evidence (Blackmore, 1993), unexpected or surprising events— especially 
those that continue to baffl  e—do suggest an ontological status beyond that of sub-
jective imagination. An experiencer named Elinor remembered that her 
 father loved having friends and family around. Th e fact that it still seems odd to Elinor 
that her father would have turned down her company [“All he said to me was, ‘Sweetheart, 
don’t come’”] gives credence to the possibility that her vision is not simply a construct of 
her imagination. (Cox-Chapman, 1995, p. 134) 
 Another experiencer, a woman who nearly died from sinus infection compli-
cations, also experienced surprise at the behavior of a fi gure encountered. She 
recalled suddenly leaving her body and feeling “overjoyed to see” the much-be-
loved (deceased) pastor of her church:
 But he seemed very upset and had a very worried face and began waving his arms 
around, and he was just acting frantic. So I said, “Aren’t you glad to see me? I’ve missed 
you so much since you died last summer!” And then it hit me, and I said, “If you’re dead 
and I’m here with you, then. . . . ” And he started nodding his head frantically. Just as sud-
denly, I slammed back into my body. (NDE archives, March 18, 2003) 
 Also suggestive of something beyond ordinary imagination is the diffi  culty 
encountered by experiencers as they seek to communicate their experiences. Pam 
and Tom found it diffi  cult adequately to convey numerous extraordinary and 
anomalous aspects of their experiences. An example is their movement through a 
dark region, channel, or void. Although both Pam and Tom invoked the tunnel 
imagery, neither was entirely content with that characterization. Declaring that 
“it was like a tunnel but it wasn’t a tunnel,” Pam also invoked the “metaphors” of 
tornado vortex and elevator but found nothing quite adequate. Similarly, the dark 
region only  partially took on the character of a tunnel for Tom, who had to add 
the image of a straightened tornado. Th eir interchanges with the fi gures or the 
light took place through a non-auditory “communication” (“that’s the best way I 
[Pam] know how to say it”) or instant “emanations” (Tom) of thoughts. Pam found 
it “terribly hard to explain” how she could sense yet not see her “hands” in the 
experience. Tom’s particular frustration was in attempting to convey aspects of the 
light, inadequately communicated with phrases such as “unconditional love” and 
“total beauty.” (Typical in the literature was Tom’s and Pam’s reference to the light 
as extremely bright, loving, warm, and “comfortable” such that one “feels good.”) 
A near-death experiencer exclaimed of his simultaneous vantage points in his life 
review: “I don’t know how this works” (see below). 
 In this connection, we note that a classic criterion of a genuinely transcen-
dent or mystical experience is “ineff ability,” that is, that “no adequate report of 

Beyond the Theories 
■ 221
its contents can be given in words” (William James, 1903/1958, pp. 292–293). By 
this criterion, Pam’s and Tom’s experiences were genuinely transcendental. It is 
perhaps not coincidental that ineff ability (as implied in expressions of commu-
nicative frustration, surprise, or baffl  ement) was totally absent from a near-death 
experience account that was subsequently acknowledged to have been a fabrica-
tion (reported by Ring & Lawrence, 1993; see Gibbs, 1997). 
 2.  Do Near-Death Experiencers Interpret the 
Experience as Real? 
 Although Pam expressed uncertainty as to whether her encounter with her 
deceased grandmother was a matter of projection or reality, she also reported 
her impression that the sound, as it were, of her grandmother’s calling her was 
extraordinarily clear (“a clearer hearing than with my own ears”) and authentic 
(“I trust that sense more than I trust my own ears. . . . I would know my grand-
mother, the sound of her voice, anywhere”). Similarly, the pitch of the cranial 
saw became “clearer” with her sense of emergence from her physical body. Her 
visual perception as well was “brighter and more focused and clearer than normal 
vision.” Tom also referred to “waking up” and seeing “very clearly” (even though 
all he saw at fi rst was “absolute, total blackness”). Finally, Pam felt that during the 
experience she “was the most aware that I think I have ever been in my entire life.” 
Such impressions of heightened conscious awareness and clarity of perception are 
commonly evident in these experiences (see Kelly et al., 2007; Long, 2010). 
 Experiencers usually report, not only enhanced awareness and perceptual 
clarity, but also a sense that their experience was real. In contrast to Pam’s initial 
uncertainty as to whether her perception of her grandmother was projected or real, 
Tom was emphatic that his experience was real. Experiencers who remember their 
dreams or have had hallucinations typically distinguish their near-death experience 
as neither dream nor hallucination (Ring, 1980; Sabom, 1982; cf. Long, 2010). One 
respondent said, “It was too real. Dreams are always fi ctitious.  Th is was  me, happen-
ing at  that time and there was no doubt that it was reality” (Ring, 1980, p. 82). 
Regarding the distinguishability of hallucinations as only pseudo-real in com-
parison, Bruce Greyson (2001; cf. 2010b) recounted an astonishing incident 
in which a 33-year-old psychiatric patient began a suicide attempt (by overdosing 
on a medication), changed his mind and dialed the phone for help, started halluci-
nating (seeing little people in his kitchen and crawling around his legs), and then 
had an autoscopic near-death experience:
 He drew back out of his body and from a position of about 10 feet behind his body he 
looked at himself holding the phone. He saw his body looking around. . . . He couldn’t 
see any little people; he was mentally clear. But he remembered being inside the body 
and he knew that his body was hallucinating. He told me: “ I  wasn’t hallucinating but my 
 body was!” 
 “By his account,” then, “his mind could function much more clearly and was 
not subject to drug-induced hallucinations once it was liberated from the brain” 
(Greyson, 2010b, pp. 160–161). Like other experiencers, he identifi ed his mind, 

222 
■ Moral Development and Reality
self, or identity as “the part that was above, rather than the body” below (Parnia, 
2013, p. 125). 
 Some near-death experiencers even suggest that their experience was more real 
than is the physical world (Long, 2010). According to Tom, “Th e reality in which 
we are currently existing is in fact a lesser reality than the reality of the Light” (Farr, 
1993, p. 51). Similarly, one of Sabom’s (1982) patients described the experience as 
“realer than here” (p. 16). Nonetheless, this “lesser” or less-real reality of earthly 
existence is evidently of some ontological status and importance in its own right: 
An additional common impression of near-death experiencers is that their return 
has some reason or purpose, typically involving spiritual growth, learning or edu-
cation, and helping or caring for others, 8  including in some cases broad humani-
tarian concerns. Although interpreting an experience as real does not make it so 
(Blackmore, 1993), the “reality” claim does invite investigation as to whether it is 
to any degree supportable. To that question we now turn.  
 3.  Are Verifiable Aspects of the Near-Death 
Experience in Fact Accurate or Veridical? 
 A crucial empirical strategy for assessing whether near-death experiences are 
purely subjective imagined projections or something more than that is to inves-
tigate the empirical accuracy or veridicality of their confi rmable features. Most 
amenable to such investigations are, of course, perceptions reported in the auto-
scopic near-death experience (or the autoscopic portion of the comprehensive 
near-death experience). 
 Vague reports, of course, could derive from purely imaginal projections. In his 
one possibly autoscopic feature, Tom reportedly heard a distant ambulance con-
versation that was “rough and hard,” but that report is diffi  cult to evaluate given the 
lack of specifi cs or of corroboration. Tom’s claims to paranormal abilities  following 
his experience are more specifi c, but uncorroborated. Such claims are common in 
the near-death experience literature, but their validity status remains controversial 
(e.g., Bem, Palmer, & Broughton, 2001; Bierman, 2001; LaBerge & Gackenbach, 
2000; Radin, 2006; Targ, Schlitz, & Irwin, 2000; Tart, 2009). 
 Pam, however, provides us with more specifi c and hence more verifi able earthly 
recollections. Recall that throughout the surgery Pam’s eyes were taped shut, her 
ear canals occluded, and her body deeply anesthetized. Nonetheless, she reported 
numerous idiosyncratic visual and auditory details (e.g., the pitch and shape of 
the cranial saw, her partially shaven head, and surgeons’ comments)—all of which 
were corroborated by the medical staff . Sabom (1998) was particularly “shocked 
with the accuracy of Pam’s description of the saw as an ‘electric toothbrush’ with 
‘interchangeable blades’ . . . and with a ‘socket wrench’ in which this equipment is 
kept” (p. 187), although he did also note a minor inaccuracy (Pam mislabeled an 
overhanging edge along the cranial saw as a “groove” near the “top” of the saw). 
Sabom tentatively attributed this misimpression to Pam’s viewing the instrument 
“from a distance” (p. 189). 
 Pam’s accuracy corroborates an earlier fi nding by Sabom (1982; cf. Sartori, 
2008) of veridicality in autoscopic near-death experiences. Before his fi rst study, 

Beyond the Theories 
■ 223
Sabom had been convinced that “the near-death experience, if properly studied, 
could be reduced to a simple scientifi c explanation” (Sabom, 1998, p. 175). At the 
onset of his fi rst near-death experience study of hospital patients, Sabom (1982) 
 was anxiously awaiting the moment when a patient would claim that he had “seen” 
what had transpired in his room during his own resuscitation. Upon such an encoun-
ter, I intended to probe meticulously for details that would not ordinarily be known 
to nonmedical personnel. In essence, I would pit my experience as a trained cardiolo-
gist against the professed visual recollections of lay individuals. . . . [In so doing,] I was 
convinced [that] obvious inconsistencies would appear which would reduce these pur-
ported “visual” observations to no more than “educated guesses.” (p. 83) 
 Sabom (1982) interviewed 32 such patients. All of their accounts of hospital 
CPR procedure were accurate, including six particularly detailed recollections. 
Th e recollected details in each case were “fairly specifi c for the actual resuscita-
tion being described and . . . not interchangeable with the clinical circumstances of 
other near-death crisis events” (p. 114). One participant did make apparent errors 
in his describing the operation of a defi brillating meter—until Sabom, to his aston-
ishment, discovered that that description matched an older model that was “still in 
common use in 1973, at the time of [the patient’s] cardiac arrest” (p. 104). 
 To establish a baseline rate of accuracy attributable to educated guesses, Sabom 
(1982) also interviewed a control group of 25 patients with comparable cardiac-
 related background and hospital experience but who had  not reported a near-
death experience. It should be noted that only four of the 25 control group patients 
had actually been resuscitated from cardiac arrest (Blackmore, 1985). Th ese 25 
patients were asked what they would expect to see if they were to watch a hos-
pital CPR procedure. Th e baseline rate of accuracy was extremely low: only two 
of these participants  avoided making a “major error” (p. 85) in their imaginative 
descriptions. Th e accuracy rate of the group reporting specifi c autoscopic recollec-
tions, then, was overwhelming and not attributable to projections from common 
knowledge. 
 Other cases of verifi ed perceptual recollections, from experiences apparently 
taking place during clinical death or coma, have been reported in the literature. 
Indeed, researchers have reported many cases of verifi ed perceptual recollections 
from experiences apparently taking place during deep anesthesia or near-death 
conditions (e.g., Long, 2010), and high proportions of the reported details have 
been independently corroborated, in many instances by medical professionals 
(Holden, 2009; Parnia, 2013). In one case, a seven-year-old girl, deeply comatose 
from having nearly drowned, nonetheless subsequently recalled idiosyncratic 
details of her emergency care such as her unusual intubation—nasal instead of 
oral. Much to her parents’ astonishment, she even recalled accurate details con-
cerning her parents’ exact locations, clothing, and activities at home during her 
hospitalization (Morse, 1990). In another case, a man who remained deeply coma-
tose and under artifi cial respiration for days, nonetheless upon recovering rec-
ognized a nurse who had removed his dentures for intubation. He asked for the 
return of his dentures, correctly identifying their whereabouts (on a sliding shelf). 
He also accurately described details of the operating room, the procedure, and the 

224 
■ Moral Development and Reality
appearance of other staff  members (van Lommel et al., 2001, p. 2041; cf. Parnia, 
2013, p. 142). In yet another case, a surgery patient under anesthesia and draped 
above the neck subsequently described leaving his body and watching the cardiac 
surgeon “fl apping his arms as if trying to fl y.” Th e surgeon verifi ed this descrip-
tion of his movements, explaining that in an eff ort to prevent contamination aft er 
scrubbing in, he directed the preliminary procedures of the surgery team in this 
way (Cook et al., 1998, pp. 399–400). 9 
 Psychiatrist Brian Weiss (2000; cf. van Lommel, 2010, pp. 23–26) reported the 
corroborated recollection of an elderly—and blind—woman who 
 suff ered a cardiac arrest during her stay in the hospital where I [Weiss] was the chair-
man of the psychiatry department. She was unconscious as the resuscitation team tried 
to revive her. According to her later report, she fl oated out of her body and stood near 
the window, watching [the resuscitation]. She observed, without any pain whatsoever, 
as they thumped on her chest and pumped air into her lungs. During the resuscitation, 
a pen fell out of her doctor’s pocket and rolled near the same window where her out-
of-body spirit was standing and watching. Th e doctor eventually walked over, picked 
up the pen, and put it back in his pocket. He then rejoined the frantic eff ort to save her. 
Th ey succeeded. 
 A few days later, she told her doctor that she had observed the resuscitation team at 
work during her cardiac arrest. “No,” he soothingly reassured her. “You were probably 
hallucinating because of the anoxia [lack of oxygen to the brain]. Th is can happen when 
the heart stops beating.” 
 “But I saw your pen roll over to the window,” she replied. Th en she described the pen 
and other details of the resuscitation. Th e doctor was shocked. His patient had not only 
been comatose during the resuscitation, but she had also been blind for many years. 
(pp. 169–170) 
 In a later publication, Weiss (2004) noted that “the cardiologist was still 
shaken days later when he told me [Weiss] about it. He confi rmed that every-
thing the woman related had indeed taken place and that her descriptions were 
accurate” (p. 10). Other cases of verifi ed perceptual recollection by near-death 
survivors blind since birth have also been reported in the literature (Ring & 
Cooper, 1999). 
 Although verifi ability pertains mainly to the earthly perceptions of the 
autoscopic near-death experience, it can also apply in an indirect way to tran-
scendental near-death perceptions of deceased loved ones. In the transcenden-
tal portion of Pam’s near-death experience, she “recognized a lot of people” 
(all deceased) among the “fi gures in the light” that “began to form shapes.” 
In some cases, experiencers describe encounters with fi gures whose death is 
only subsequently revealed or whose identity is only subsequently recognized. 
For example,  
 Child near-death experients purportedly describe meeting persons, whom they did 
not know, in suffi  cient detail to allow their parents to recognize those persons as 
deceased relatives, or the child may later identify the person from the NDE  [near-death 

Beyond the Theories 
■ 225
experience] in a family portrait [or photograph] he or she had never seen before. 
(Greyson, 2000b, p. 341) 
 An adult whose near-death experience occurred in childhood reported that while 
in the light, he became aware that 
 there were some presences there. Th ere were some ladies. . . . I didn’t know them 
at the time. . . . Th ey were so loving and so wonderful and I just didn’t want to come 
back. . . . I didn’t see any pictures of them until I was an adult, but then I said, “Oh, 
yeah.” . . . Th ey were my great-grandmothers who had died years before I was born. 
(Wilson, 1995; cf. Greyson, 2010b, in press; Parnia, 2013, pp. 136–137) 
 An NDE survivor named Sandra, who had contracted encephalitis and had lost 
(ordinary) consciousness, upon recovery drew a sketch of a girl she met during 
her coma. 
 When she told her parents what she was drawing, they became ashen and left  the room. 
Later they returned and told her about the sister she never knew she had, who was 
struck by a car and died before she [Sandra] was born. (Long, 2010, p. 129; cf. van 
Lommel, 2010, pp. 32–33)   
 Such corroboration of encounters that could scarcely be projections of the 
familiar also sometimes occurs in connection with the related phenomenon of 
deathbed visions or “nearing-death awarenesses” (Callanan & Kelley, 1992), in 
which the experiencer sees—oft en with some surprise—recently deceased loved 
ones whose deaths were unknown to them (Greyson, 2000b). Maggie Callanan 
and Patricia Kelley (1992) recounted the case of a dying 93-year-old woman, Su, 
whose visions began to include not only her late husband but also her sister: 
 “Why is my sister with my husband?” she asked. “Th ey are both calling me to come.” 
 “Is your sister dead?” I [Callanan] asked. 
 “No, she still lives in China,” she said. “I have not seen her for many years.” 
 When I related this conversation to the daughter [Lily], she was astonished 
and tearful. 
 “My aunt died two days ago in China,” Lily said. “We decided not to tell Mother—her 
sister had the same kind of cancer. It was a very painful death; she lived in a remote 
village where good medical care wasn’t available. We didn’t want to upset or frighten 
Mother, since she is so sick herself.” . . .  
 When Lily tearfully told her mother about her sister’s illness and death, Su said, with 
a knowing smile, “Now I understand.” Her puzzle solved, she died three weeks later, at 
peace and with a sense of anticipation. (pp. 98–99) 
 In sum, although some projective participation does seem to be involved, the 
fi ndings on balance seem to suggest that there is some noteworthy degree of accu-
racy or veridicality to verifi able aspects of the perceptions reported in autoscopic 
and even transcendental near-death experiences. We next consider the questions 
of whether the accurate recollections are in fact associated with a proximity to 
physical death and whether they are attributable to perceptions occurring during 
the near-death time period. 

226 
■ Moral Development and Reality
 4.  Is the Likelihood or Depth of the Experience 
Associated with Proximity to Physical Death? 
 Despite her documented condition of clinical brain death, Pam not only 
felt she experienced extraordinary perceptual awareness and clarity but also 
reported a comprehensive-type and “deep” near-death experience. Although 
measures of near-death experience “depth” raise questions of validity (see 
Greyson, 2000b, pp. 342–345), it is worth noting that Pam’s depth score on 
Greyson’s (1983) Near-Death Experience Scale was 27 out of a possible maxi-
mum score of 32. (She responded, for example, not merely that time “seemed 
to go faster than usual [1 point],” but that “everything seemed to be hap-
pening all at once [2 points];” she felt not only peace or happiness or had 
unusually vivid senses [1 point each], but “incredibly” so [2 points each]; 
she not only “lost awareness” of her body [1 point], but “clearly left the body 
and existed outside it” [2 points]; she was not only in an “unfamiliar, strange 
place” [1 point] but a “clearly mystical or unearthly realm” [2 points]; she not 
only “sensed the presence of deceased persons” [1 point] but “saw them” [2 
points]; etc; data supplied by M. Sabom, personal communication, November 
3, 2001.) Overall, Pam’s total score of 27 far exceeded the mean of 13.3 in 
Sabom’s (1998) sample of 47 experiencers and in fact was the highest score of 
anyone in the sample. 
 Th e concurrence of a clinically extreme near-death condition with a deep 
near-death experience is consistent with research fi ndings of an association 
between proximity to physical death and the likelihood of having a near-death 
experience. Although many aspects of the so-called near-death experience can 
occur in deep meditation or “situations of intense physical or emotional danger,” 
typically it occurs “to individuals [actually] close to death” (Greyson, 2000b, 
pp. 315–316). It is also noteworthy that, although “near-death” is of course not 
death  per se , the cardiac standstill, brain non-function, and sensory shutdown 
entailed in clinical death represent “the closest model [we have] to the process 
of dying” (van Lommel, 2006, p. 136; cf. Greyson, 2010a). Indeed, resuscitation 
physician Sam Parnia (2013) noted that, “biologically and medically speaking,” 
cardiac arrest is virtually “synonymous” with death (p. 23). Ring (1980) and 
Sabom (1982) found that NDE depth or likelihood correlated with closeness to 
physical death in their samples. Van Lommel and colleagues (van Lommel et al., 
2001) partially replicated this relationship in their prospective study. On one 
hand, unlike those in Sabom’s study, survivors in the van Lommel et al. study 
who remained unconscious for longer periods were not more likely to have had 
a near-death experience. On the other hand, van Lommel and colleagues  did 
fi nd an association between NDE likelihood and  temporal closeness to physical 
death. Among their patients, those who died soon—within 30 days—aft er their 
cardiac arrests were more likely to have had an NDE (21% versus 9% among 
matched controls). Intriguingly, the dead-soon-aft er proportion rose to more 
than a third—from 21% to 43%—among the patients who had had a “deep” or 
extensive NDE (p. 2041).  

Beyond the Theories 
■ 227
 5.  Does the Typical Near-Death Experience 
Actually Take Place During Near-Death? 
 If near-death perceptions are to some remarkable degree veridical or accurate, expe-
rienced as real, and even highly conscious and clear, then how could they be taking 
place at a time of severe mental and bodily compromise, of proximity to death? One 
answer attributes the experience to special eff ects of a dying or severely compro-
mised brain. Blackmore (1993; cf. Blanke et al., 2002; de Waal, 2013) argued that the 
disinhibited and seizure activity of a dying brain could generate seemingly “real” hal-
lucinations. Sam Parnia and Peter Fenwick (2002) countered that the “disorganized 
and compromised cerebral function” evident during near-death states is unlikely to 
produce the “lucid, well structured thought processes” characteristic of the near-
death experience (p. 8; cf. Greyson, 2010a; Long, 2010; Owens, Cook, & Stevenson, 
1990; cf. Parnia, 2013). In any event, seizures can be ruled out as an explanation at 
least in Pam Reynolds’s case, where the absence of such activity is documented by 
the EEG record (Sabom, personal communication, September 20, 2002). 
 “Compromised” is an understatement as a description of Pam’s brain function. 
By the time Pam was experiencing the transcendental aspects of her experience, 
the EEG record was showing that her brain was not only functionally compromised 
but “dead” by all three of the standard clinical criteria: (a) a “fl at” EEG, indicating 
non-function of the cerebral cortex; (b) absence of auditory evoked potentials, 
indicating non-function of the brain stem; and (c) cessation of blood fl ow to and 
through the brain (Sabom, 1998, p. 49). Yet Pam’s near-death experience contin-
ued during clinical brain death, contradicting the dying-brain hypothesis that the 
experience should “stop when the brain’s activity stops” (Blackmore, 1993, p. 4). 10 
 Another answer challenges the premise of the question. Perhaps the recollec-
tions do not in fact derive from the time of the near-death condition. Perhaps these 
purportedly highly conscious “perceptions” can be accurate because the perceiv-
ers  were  conscious in the ordinary sense. Perhaps their perceptions are actually 
projections constructed from the informational stimuli of a time period mainly 
 prior to or  following the time of the near-death episode, while the person’s mental 
functioning was unimpaired (indeed, perhaps even from the early moments of 
near-death, given that the auditory sense oft en persists even as conscious mental 
functioning fades). Th e person’s ostensibly recollected “experience” might then 
be fabricated from these sources and misattributed to the near-death time period 
(Blackmore, 1993; French, 2001; Hyman, 2001). For example, Pam’s reference to 
having heard a “female” voice could have been fabricated from her prior familiar-
ity with a female member (Dr. Murray) of the surgery team. 
 As Sabom (1998) pointed out, the fabrication hypothesis has diffi  culty in cases 
where the reported details were not initially in view. Most of the details reported 
in Pam Reynolds’s case were of this sort (the pitch and shape of the cranial drill, 
the partial shaving of Pam’s head hair, etc.). Pam’s surgeon, Dr. Robert Spetzler, 
commented: “Th e drill and so on, those things were . . . in their packages. You really 
don’t begin to open until the patient is completely asleep so that you maintain a 
sterile environment” (Broome, 2001). 

228 
■ Moral Development and Reality
 Sabom (1998) was particularly interested in Pam’s auditory recollection of the 
cardiovascular surgeon’s comment that certain blood vessels were too small. Given 
her occluded ear canals (“altogether eliminat[ing] the possibility of physical hear-
ing,” p. 184) as well as the obscuring auditory stimuli of the brain stem monitoring 
devices, Pam could not have  physically heard this comment during the operation. 
As Spetzler commented, “I fi nd it inconceivable that . . . there was any way for her 
to hear . . . through the normal auditory pathways” (Smit, 2008, p. 309; cf. Smit & 
Rivas, 2010; but see also Woerlee, 2011). Yet somehow she did hear a specifi c com-
ment that was corroborated as accurate. Moreover, the comment was reported at 
the appropriate point in her near-death experience:
 Pam stated that she did not hear or perceive anything prior to her out-of-body experi-
ence, and that this experience began with hearing the bone saw. At this point in the 
operation, she had been under anesthesia for about 90 minutes. . . . Th e [use of] the bone 
saw was simultaneous with the conversation about Pam’s small blood vessels—and, as it 
turns out, with her out-of-body experience. Th is correspondence of Pam’s recollections 
from an out-of-body experience with the correct bit of intraoperative conversation dur-
ing a six-hour operative procedure is certainly intriguing evidence. (p. 185) 
 Pam’s sequence of recollected perceptions corresponded, then, with the actual 
sequence of steps in the surgical procedure. 
 Th e post hoc version of the fabrication hypothesis posits that the “experience” 
was retrospectively projected from details mentioned aft erward. For example, Pam 
Reynolds might have heard about the details of her operation from medical staff  
or records (Hyman, 2001). 11  Such a possibility is unlikely, given the idiosyncratic 
character of many of the recounted details in Sabom’s and other studies. Such idio-
syncratic details are “not what would likely be explained to a patient recovering 
from a cardiac arrest” (Sabom, 1982, p. 114). Cardiac patients might be told 
 that their “heart stopped beating” and that an “electrical shock” was used on the chest 
to stabilize cardiac rhythm, but there is no conceivable reason to supply the details 
reported in the typical autoscopic NDE—the insertion of a plastic airway, the checking 
for a carotid pulse or pupillary response in the eye, the drawing of arterial blood from 
the hand or the groin, the movement of the needles on the face of the defi brillator, etc. 
(p. 75; cf. Cook, Greyson, & Stevenson, 1998; Ring, 1980) 
 In general, then, it would appear that the evident accuracy and perceived con-
sciousness of some near-death recollections cannot be interpreted in terms of 
remembered auditory or visual pre- or post-episode stimuli, not only for the rea-
sons given but also because loss of consciousness typically induces anterograde 
and retrograde amnesia (Parnia & Fenwick, 2002). Indeed, from study of his 
online near-death experience database, Long (2010) concluded that 
 the highest level of consciousness and alertness is usually experienced not at the begin-
ning or end of the NDE but somewhere during or throughout the entire NDE. Very few 
NDErs [near-death experiencers] describe their highest level of alertness as occurring 
when they approached or recovered from their time of unconsciousness. (p. 80) 

Beyond the Theories 
■ 229
 It is also diffi  cult for before- or aft er-the-fact fabrication explanations to 
account for correlations between closeness to death and the likelihood or depth of 
the near-death experience.  
 A Deeper Reality? Summary and Conclusion 
 We can reach some tentative closure, then, as to whether the near-death experi-
ence is an imaginal projection or a glimpse of a deeper reality: It is evidently 
some subtle mixture. Perceptions in the experience do seem to entail imaginal 
projections (or assimilations) based on contextual factors such as the experi-
encer’s mental schemas of culture or familiar environment. Experiencers are 
to an extent “participants in creating the specifi c details of their experience” 
(Greyson, in press). In other words, the experiencer does seem to infl uence that 
which is perceived. 12  Nonetheless, the experience may not reduce entirely to 
subjective projection, interpretation, and a particular context. Th e experience 
is in good measure ineff able and typically elicits surprise or baffl  ement. Th e 
autoscopic, comprehensive, and especially transcendental types of near-death 
experience are fairly universally evident across personal, situational, cultural, 
and historical contexts. Experiencers recollect heightened awareness and per-
ceptual clarity and interpret their experience as real; those who can compare 
their near-death experience to dreams or hallucinations typically insist that 
the near-death experience is neither a dream nor a hallucination, but reality. 
Th ere is a remarkable degree of accuracy to autoscopic perceptions, and there 
are reports of indirect empirical confi rmation even for some transcendental 
perceptions. Th e experience is more likely to occur, as well as more extensive 
or profound, for those who are closer to physical death. Th e accuracy and con-
scious, clear qualities of the experience are unlikely to be attributable to fabri-
cations from information gained when mental function was unimpaired (prior 
or subsequent to the near-death event) or from auditory information during 
the event—impossible in Pam Reynolds’s case. Astonishingly, Pam’s deep near-
death experience occurred despite the documented cessation of brain wave 
activity. 
 A defi nitive conclusion regarding the signifi cance of this phenomenon would 
be premature. At the least, the near-death experience overall would seem to be a 
challenging anomaly (e.g., Parnia, 2006; Vaitl et al., 2005). Parnia and Fenwick 
(2002; cf. Greyson, 2010a; Parnia, 2013; van Lommel, 2010) concluded from a 
research review of cases of cardiac arrest that the near-death experience may point 
to the need for a new science of consciousness. Similarly, we conclude, given our 
own review above, that the phenomenon may point to a deeper reality of human 
existence. 
 Although tentative, these conclusions suggest that hypothetical (or not so hypo-
thetical) refl ection on the phenomenon’s possible implications may be worthwhile. 
If the near-death experience does glimpse even partially a deeper reality of human 
existence, what would be the existential and moral implications? Accordingly, we 
move now from ontological to existential and moral questions. 

230 
■ Moral Development and Reality
moral insight, inspiration, and 
 
■
transformation 
 Kohlberg’s cases of existential crisis and “Stage 7” epiphany seem to access a 
deeper reality relevant to the moral life. In these cases, morally mature but exis-
tentially and ontologically anguished thinkers attain (through deep thought, soul-
 searching, meditation) a cosmic perspective deriving from “the whole of nature” 
and thereby lose their  angst. Th ey begin to see human life from that primary van-
tage point, sense an answer to the existential “Why be moral?” question, and are 
endowed with inspiration to embrace life. But is such insight and inspiration from 
a deeper reality the exclusive province of the morally mature? Is the soul-searching 
of existential crises the only way to penetrate this deeper reality with its evident 
potential to inspire faith in the moral and meaningful life? 
 Near-death experiencers diff er in some ways from Kohlberg’s cases. Th e very 
name “ near-death experience” reminds us that the crisis is generally physical 
rather than existential. Also, in contrast to Kohlberg’s cases, near-death experienc-
ers prior to the event—as in the cases of Pam Reynolds and Tom Sawyer—were not 
necessarily deep thinkers, soul-searchers, or idealists. Despite these diff erences, 
the life-changing reality accessed, we suspect, is one and the same. Consider the 
claims of “Stage 7” individuals that they experienced a cosmic perspective with an 
associated sense of “union, love, joy, and grace” (p. 347) and that “love is somehow 
the key which unlocks the door which leads to ultimate reality” (Martin Luther 
King, Jr., quoted in Kohlberg & Power, 1981). Such claims seem indistinguishable 
from what many near-death experiencers say and seem to evidence in their subse-
quent lives. Reminiscent of “Stage 7” experiencers’ identifi cation with “the whole 
of nature,” Pam responded (on Greyson’s [1983] near-death experience scale) that 
her experience included “a sense of harmony or unity with the universe.” 
 Th e life-changing eff ects of a near-death experience give new meaning to 
“growing beyond superfi ciality” in moral or existential human development. 
A high school student said his near-death experience stimulated him to realize that 
“there’s more to life than Friday night movies and the football game” (Moody, 1975, 
p. 89). One of Sabom’s (1998) patients, aft er his near-death experience, “no longer 
had time for . . . little country club things” (p. 88). Furthermore, such an experi-
ence “appears to herald a wide range of pervasive and durable personality trans-
formations, including a decreased interest in materialism and competition and an 
increased interest in altruism and spirituality” (Greyson, 1992–1993, pp. 81–82; cf. 
Flanagan, 2008; Noyes, Fenwick, Holden, & Christian, 2009). Relative to a com-
parison (non–near-death experience) sample of survivors of major cardiac sur-
gery, survivors who had had a near-death experience reported greater post-surgery 
gains in terms of intrinsic faith (e.g., “inner sense of God’s presence”), meaning in 
life, family life involvement, and “capacity for love” (understanding of others or 
insight into their problems; ability to express love and listen to others; compassion, 
tolerance, and acceptance of others; and desire to help them) (Sabom, 1998). In 
a recent prospective and controlled study, “people who had NDEs had a signifi -
cant increase in belief in an aft erlife and decrease in fear of death compared with 

Beyond the Theories 
■ 231
people who had not had this experience” in their near-death events. Furthermore, 
“depth of NDE was linked to . . . showing love and accepting others” (van Lommel 
et al., 2001, p. 2042; cf. van Lommel, 2010). In his earlier study, Sabom (1982) 
observed among his near-death-experience patients behavioral changes such as 
“becoming a hospital volunteer” and a new commitment to “humanitarian con-
cerns,” changes that they “would invariably attribute” to the near-death experi-
ence (p. 157). Pam Reynolds came back to care for her children and contribute 
to “harmony” among people; Tom Sawyer’s new priority was on helping others 
and on certain global dangers (Tom’s moral transformation is explored below). 
Helping others, understanding their needs, focusing on humanitarian concerns—
life changes in this direction are of particular relevance to the “caring” strand of 
moral development and behavior. 
 The Light 
 When present among the features of the near-death experience, the light plays 
an “overwhelmingly positive—and hence benefi cial—role” (Fox, 2003, p. 302). 
Indeed, Melvin Morse (1992) argued that the key feature in the near-death experi-
ence accounting for moral and personality transformations is the encounter with 
the light. In his study, experiencers who met the light—even if not physically near 
death—had signifi cant decreases in death anxiety and increases in zest for life, not 
only relative to non-experience survivors, but even relative to experiencers whose 
out-of-body experiences did not include the light. 
 Two cases from his study illustrate this role of the light in evoking a deeper 
insight, inspiration, and subsequent life changes, including a new earnestness 
about life and other people. One case was that of James, an 18-year-old African-
American teenager living in the housing projects of St. Louis, Missouri. James 
nearly drowned and had a comprehensive near-death experience when he was 
nine years old. Interviewed at age 18 (Morse, 1992), James was actively resisting 
peer pressure to sell drugs or engage in gang violence and was instead applying 
himself academically (at least as of Morse’s writing). He attributed his responsible 
lifestyle to the impact of his near-death experience during the near drowning: 
 [Aft er I stopped struggling to breathe] I just fl oated out of my body into a safe place. It 
was all bright; I felt peaceful. . . . Suddenly, I realized that we are all the same. Th ere ain’t 
no black and there ain’t no white. I saw that bright light and I knew it was all the colors 
there were, everything was in that light. . . .  
 I feel better about myself. I know that I am diff erent. I don’t think about putting 
people down for fun like I used to. . . . I see life the way it really is. It is not meant to be 
played with. (Morse, 1992, pp. 17–18) 
 Whereas James had “put other people down” and was at risk of developing an 
antisocial lifestyle, Ann, another of Morse’s cases, was depressed and self-destruc-
tive (“internalizing” rather than “externalizing” her hurt and anger; see Chapter 7). 
At a party, upon hearing that her boyfriend was leaving her for another girl, she 
decided to commit suicide 

232 
■ Moral Development and Reality
 just the way my mother had. I took a handful of barbiturates and swallowed them with 
vodka, lots of it. . . . It took me a while to realize that I was out of my body and fl oating 
up by the ceiling. . . . I remember feeling love and peace and also feeling as though I had 
escaped from all the tension and frustration in my life. I felt kind of enveloped by light. 
It was a wonderful feeling. . . . I was shown the beauty of my body and of every body. 
I was told that my body was a gift  and I was supposed to take care of it, not kill it. Aft er 
hearing this, I felt very, very ashamed of what I had done and hoped that I would live. 
I began to beg the light for life. Th e feeling that came back was the strongest feeling of 
love I have ever experienced. (Morse, 1992, pp. 152–153) 
 Annie’s near-death experience abruptly transformed her lifestyle. She stopped 
thinking about her mother’s suicide and about committing suicide herself, stopped 
abusing drugs and alcohol, eschewed the old friends and parties, developed more 
responsible friendships, married, and started a family (Morse, 1992). 
 Again, these cases illustrate Morse’s point: Encountering the light seems to play 
the key role in the induction of subsequent major life changes, changes less likely 
to be seen following non-light experiences. Exceptions should be noted, however. 
Peter and Elizabeth Fenwick (1995) noted cases in which the survivors’ near-death 
experiences entailed a sense of transcendent comfort or joy, timeless peace, and 
familiarity or “coming home”—but no light—and who nonetheless attributed to 
their experience their subsequent dramatic declines in fear of death. Also, appar-
ently absent from Morse’s non-light near-death-experience cases were “distressing” 
yet life-changing near-death experiences. In these cases,  not experiencing the light 
induces “loneliness, fear, desolation, alienation, and separation” (Lorimer, 1990, 
p. 86)—the inverse of the feelings experienced by union with the light. Rommer 
(2000) pointed out, based on her sample of such cases, that feelings such as fear in 
the absence of the light can elicit some degree of change as well. Indeed, she con-
cluded that such experiences can be “blessings in disguise” (the title of her book), 
insofar as they can provide a much-needed wake-up call. A drug abuser named 
Del who had a distressing life review described the experience and its eff ect:
 Th e review of my life happened so quick. . . . It was going so fast, I really couldn’t grasp 
everything I was seeing, but I knew it was me. It was like my life was just goin’ away, 
real quick. . . . What was scary was: Th is is it! Th is is the end! . . . So when I didn’t die, 
I thought: “Well, I’d better do something diff erent.” (Rommer, 2000, p. 61) 
 Aft er this “scary” experience of his life as too fl eeting and wasted even to grasp 
or assess, Del stopped abusing drugs and started maintaining stable employ-
ment (Rommer, 2000). Del’s moral and existential insight had been simply to see 
the waste and fl eeting insignifi cance of his life of severe drug abuse. Th at simple 
insight was suffi  ciently frightening to inspire reform. 
 More positive moral insight and inspiration were engendered in Tom’s near-
death experience, which encompassed a beginning hint of a distress experience, 
the light, and a life review. Prior to his accident and experience, Tom’s lifestyle had 
been not only superfi cial but self-centered and arrogant to an extent approach-
ing that of the proactive off ender (see Chapter 7). Tom’s wife Elaine recalled that, 
before the accident, Tom was physically and verbally abusive to her (“stupid” was 

Beyond the Theories 
■ 233
one name he had called her), threw shoes and other nearby objects at her, and 
was very controlling, precipitating a separation at one point. Tom corroborated 
Elaine’s recollection: “I was the head of my family and I would tell them [including 
their two sons] what they could do!” He was “blind to her needs” (Farr, 1993, p. 95) 
and, to some extent, the needs of the family. His Self-Centered cognitive distortion 
and control extended to his having “a fi t” upon learning that Elaine had listened 
to classical music (which Tom at that time did not listen to) on his radio when he 
wasn’t home: “On  my radio, she was only to listen to  my music” (p. 94). 
 Following his near-death experience, Tom was transformed. His self-centered 
attitudes, abusive behavior, and rages were replaced by an attitude of love and a 
priority on helping others. “All of a sudden, he was a diff erent person.  He loved 
everybody! ” (Farr, 1993, p. 99), exclaimed Elaine. Tom’s love and altruism included 
humanitarian concerns: In 1980, several years aft er his experience, he began to 
speak against the planetary dangers of chemical pollution and global warming. 
 The Life Review 
 Although Tom attributed a “good” feeling to the “warmth and love coming from 
the light,” he seemed to derive particular moral insights and inspiration from his 
life review. Speaking to Farr (and to a prospective audience), Sawyer said, 
 I wish I could tell you how it really felt and what the life review is like, but I’ll never 
be able to do it accurately. I’m hoping to give you just a slight inkling. . . . Will you be 
totally devastated by the crap you’ve brought into other people’s lives? Or will you 
be . . . enlightened and uplift ed by the love and joy that you have shared in other people’s 
lives? . . . You will be responsible for yourself, judging and reliving what you have done 
to everything and everybody in very far-reaching ways. (Farr, 1993, pp. 34–35; cf. Long, 
2010; Parnia, 2013) 
 Th e life review clearly merits further study. David Lorimer (1990) suggested 
that Russell Noyes and Roy Kletti’s (1977) term  panoramic memory applies to 
brief visions of one’s life (e.g., the mountain climber who somehow survives a fall 
during which time seems to slow down as he sees his “whole life pass before” him); 
Lorimer applied the term  life review  only to those retrospective experiences that 
evoke “emotional involvement and moral assessment” (p. 10). Apropos of this dis-
tinction, physician Melvin Morse (1992) related the case of a heart patient in the 
Netherlands who experienced fi rst a panoramic memory and then a life review (in 
Lorimer’s sense) as his car rammed into the back of a truck:
 When he realized that collision was imminent, the patient said that time seemed to slow 
down as he hit his brakes and went into an uncontrolled slide. Th en he seemed to pop 
out of his body. While in this state, he had a life review [or panoramic memory episode] 
which consisted of brief pictures—fl ashes—of his life. . . . His car struck the truck and 
the truck bed crashed through the window, causing multiple injuries to his head and 
chest. Medical reports show that he was in a coma and nearly died. Yet he had a vivid 
sensation of leaving his physical body and entering into darkness. . . . He had the feeling 
of moving up through a dark tunnel toward a point of light. Suddenly a being “fi lled with 

234 
■ Moral Development and Reality
love and light” appeared to him. Now he had a  second life review [or life review proper], 
one guided by the being of light. He felt bathed in love and compassion as he reviewed 
the moral choices he had made in his lifetime. He suddenly understood that he was an 
important part of the universe and that his life had a purpose. (pp. 197–198)  
 Among such moral life reviews, a particularly evocative type is what Lorimer 
(1990; cf. Long 2010; van Lommel, 2010) termed “empathetic” (p. 20), “in which 
people relive events through the consciousness of the person with whom they 
were interacting at the time” (pp. 1–2). Lorimer described several cases of initially 
rather self-centered individuals who nearly died, encountered a loving light and 
experienced an empathetic life review (one individual exclaimed, “I was the very 
people I hurt, and I was the very people I helped to feel good,” p. 21), and dra-
matically transformed into persons who loved and attempted to help everyone. In 
another such case (the near-death episode resulted from a severe asthma attack), a 
man named Steve tried to explain:
 I wasn’t just watching the events; I was actually reliving them again, while at the same 
time I was also re-experiencing the actions from other people’s points of view.  I was 
them . . . . . And at the same time (and I don’t know how this works) I was also experienc-
ing it from a higher reality. . . . So what I saw was my own lies and my own self deception 
to myself, which I had used to convince me that doing certain things was okay because 
people had deserved it. Th en I was experiencing the emotional impact it had on other 
people. I felt their pain. I felt the shock on them. . . . I felt like I was a failure as a person 
and I wasn’t the person I thought I was. . . . I felt really dreadful and it was completely 
humbling. . . . Th is being that was with me was . . . . sending me comforting messages—
thank goodness! (Parnia, 2013, p. 133, emphasis added)   
 Following the empathetic life review and once he recovered, Steve reportedly 
became “a caring, truthful, and positive person” (p. 134). So Tom’s empathetic 
experience and transformation were not unique. 
 Such life review experiences of another’s consciousness—indeed, of adopting 
another’s  identity —takes “empathy,” “perspective-taking” and “social decentration” 
beyond the normal ken of Hoff man and Kohlberg! Adam Smith (1759/1965) was 
writing in a subjective, phenomenological vein when he defi ned  empathy as expe-
riencing another’s emotion through “ enter[ing], as it were, into [his] body” and 
becoming “in some measure  the same person  with him” (p. 261, emphases added). 
Tom’s empathetic life review was similar to Steve’s in the passage quoted above. Tom 
not only “had empathy for” or “took the perspective of” his Aunt Gay seeing the 
would-be fl owers chopped down, or of the baggage handler ignorantly  handling 
his bicycle, or of the man in the street slapping him; instead, he  was Aunt Gay, 
 was  the baggage handler,  was  the man in the street! Yet at the same time, he was 
also still his own self at the time, as well as his older self viewing the scene from a 
decentered or third-person perspective (cf. Steve’s reference to a “higher reality”). 
 Th is extraordinary social perspective-taking would seem to imply that in some 
ultimate sense, ideal justice or moral reciprocity is not successfully violated, that the 
“world” in the deepest sense of the word is just aft er all. Furthermore, the extraor-
dinary perspective-taking seemed to lead to moral insight and transformation. In 

Beyond the Theories 
■ 235
comprehensively reliving the fl ower-killing incident, for example, Tom in eff ect 
received the “perfect justice” (Lorimer, 1990, p. 13) of having to be Aunt Gay in her 
distress; in the fi nal analysis, he did not “get away with” his mischief:
 I was in my Aunt Gay’s body. I was in her eyes, I was in her emotions, I was in her unan-
swered questions. I experienced the disappointment, the humiliation. It was very devas-
tating to me. I changed my attitude quite a bit as I experienced it. (Farr, 1993, p. 30)  
 Needless to say, Tom could not retain his “arrogance, . . . snide little thoughts [such 
as Operation Chop-Chop], [and] excitement [Wow, I got away with it]” (Farr, 
1993, pp. 30–31)—what we would call his Self-Centered and other self- serving 
cognitive distortions—in that light. 
 Tom’s depiction of the baggage-handling incident suggests that he may have 
originally Assumed the Worst regarding the handler’s intentions and egocen-
trically personalized them (“Damn the jerk at the airport that broke my bike,” 
p. 31). In Tom’s empathetic life review, he saw that the handler actually “had no 
idea there was a bicycle in there” and “made a mistake through ignorance” but 
was not maliciously intending to sabotage Tom’s plans (“Th ere was, in his life, 
almost no interaction with me, Tom Sawyer”). Accordingly, Tom could under-
stand and forgive. 
 In the street altercation, Tom had Minimized/Mislabeled his near-killing of the 
man as “self-defense” and engaged in Blaming Others (“he started it”) because 
the man had slapped him; that action, he had felt, “instantly gave me license to 
annihilate this man” (Farr, 1993, p. 32). In his self-righteous or “humiliated” rage, 
Tom was merciless: Th e man “went straight back [from Tom’s blows] and hit the 
back of his head on the pavement. And of course I followed him right down; I 
broke his nose and really made a mess of his face” (p. 34). In the empathetic life 
review, however, Tom (like Steve) realized the truth; that is, the inadequacy of self-
serving rationalizations and immature, egoistically motivated, eye-for-an-eye-
and-then-some reciprocity justifi cations (“Okay. He hit me fi rst. Try  that in your 
life review!”). “Th e light,” recalled another life review experiencer, “could see into 
my mind and there was no way I could hide my thoughts” (Parnia, 2013, p. 130). 
As Lorimer (1990) put it, “Th ere is a kind of spiritual nakedness as dimensions of 
life and truth are unfurled. Question-begging rationalizations and petty excuses 
are swept aside” (p. 21). 
 Prior to the light of this revelation, Tom had been benighted by his self-
serving cognitive distortions. Although Tom was not a chronic offender or 
criminal, his moral and cognitive condition was in principle no different in 
this respect. Lorimer (1990) observed that, in the absence of an experience 
with the light, the “hardened criminal is willfully ignorant . . . [of] what he is 
creating” (“willfully” may be apt; McVeigh had to dismiss a moment of moral 
insight into the enormity of what he was about to do). Lorimer asked, “Would 
the terrorist or criminal really go through with an act of violence if they knew 
for certain that they would eventually experience the event through the con-
sciousness of the victim?” (p. 286). (Personally, I must admit that Lorimer’s 
question prompts me to wish near-fatalities upon budding young criminals or 

236 
■ Moral Development and Reality
terrorists! Upon realizing the spiritual near-contradiction in this wish, I return 
to advocacy of the more mundane techniques for inducing social perspective-
taking outlined in Chapter 8.) For severe offenders, the experience of vividly 
reenacting their crime from the perspective of their victim may have a pro-
found significance. Was a glimmer of the transcendent, from darkness to light, 
evident in the sudden insight and sustained contrition of Larry, the adolescent 
child-molester?  
 The Dilemma of Multiple Claimants 
 Astonishingly, when asked what had been the “hardest thing” for her to “deal with” 
in her marriage with Tom, Elaine mentioned not the old Tom but the new one! Her 
response seems counterintuitive. Whereas Tom had previously abused, demeaned, 
and controlled her, aft er his near-death experience, he “was suddenly seeing her in 
a diff erent light” (Farr, 1993, p. 98), loving her as a precious human being, a per-
son in her own right. Recall, however, that now Tom had a humanitarian scale of 
love: In Elaine’s words, “He loved  everybody !”  Everybody  was precious; to some 
extent, Elaine was no longer particularly special. To illustrate the problem, Elaine 
mentioned that when she was ill once and needed Tom to help her, he was not in a 
position to because he was “on the phone helping someone else” (p. 94). 
 Elaine’s complaint pertains to Hoff man’s dilemma of “multiple claimants” to 
one’s love or caring, an issue of positive or distributive justice (Damon, 1977; 
Eisenberg, 1982), of caveats to the ideal of impartiality or equality. It is the issue 
touched upon by C. S. Lewis (1943) in the opening quotation: What is the optimal 
balance of care among the legitimate claimants of family, nation, world? Th ere is 
no easy answer. In fact, the moral exemplars studied by Colby and Damon (1992; 
see Chapter 6) “commonly expressed regret” (p. 68) that they had neglected their 
families. For Tom, it became a critical issue. Piaget or Kohlberg might have said 
that Tom was extending social decentration to a fault; Hoff man might say Tom was 
at risk for empathic over-arousal from a loss of empathic bias (Chapter 5); or we 
might just say that Tom in his universal love and humanitarian compassion was 
spreading himself too thin and neglecting the needs of his own family. 
 Greyson (2000b) noted that experiencers oft en evidence life changes of 
“unconditional [or agape] love” incompatible with “the conditions and limitations 
of human relationships. . . . Th e value incongruities between near-death experi-
encers and their families” can “lead to a relatively high divorce rate” (p. 329; cf. 
Christian & Holden, 2013; Noyes, Fenwick, Holden, Christian, 2009). Fortunately, 
the Sawyer marriage weathered the “pretty hard” times with the new Tom (Farr, 
1993; T. Sawyer, personal communication, March 13, 2003). 
conclusion 
 
■
 We have explored in this chapter the relationship of moral development and 
behavior to a deeper reality—in Penrose’s (1994) term, an  underpinning or foun-
dation. Our exploration is not without precedent; Kohlberg claimed that moral 

Beyond the Theories 
■ 237
inspiration is gained as one sees life from the cosmic perspective of the whole of 
nature. Furthermore, one sees the ethic of love and ideal reciprocity as (in C. S. 
Lewis’s terms) clues to the meaning of the universe and its evolution. Our investi-
gation of the near-death experience in eff ect corroborated such a cosmic insight: 
Near-death experience survivors seem to access a deeper reality wherein the 
“whole of nature” is “an interconnected web of creation” of which we are “inter-
dependent strands” (Lorimer, 1990, p. 20). Although speculative (Blackmore, 
1993), such a view seems indicated by Pam Reynolds’s NDE-inspired suggestion 
that, although “everyone has a diff erent tone,” the “beauty is in the harmony”; the 
St. Louis youth’s experience of seeing “everything”—including the full diversity 
or “colors” of humanity— encompassed within the light; the instantaneous com-
munication in the deeper realm; the social and moral emphasis in the life review, 
especially in “empathetic” life reviews such as Tom’s bizarre participation in the 
consciousnesses and feelings of those whom he had hurt or helped; the dramatic 
shift s, following the experience, from self-centeredness and superfi ciality to ear-
nest lives of other-understanding and humanitarian dedication; and Tom’s conclu-
sion that the choices we make and actions we take have a far-reaching impact. 
 Accordingly, we tentatively conclude with Lorimer (1990) that “human beings 
are connected at a deep level which is occasionally experienced by those who tran-
scend the boundaries and limitations of ordinary perception” (p. 104). Perhaps 
there is a deep signifi cance to the personal impact of our prosocial behavior: “if 
part of the other resides within us, if we feel one with the other, then improv-
ing their life automatically resonates within us” (de Waal, 2009, pp. 116–117). In 
this resonance, “the feedback of loving thoughts and actions is love and joy, while 
hatred and bitterness breed isolation and sorrow” (Lorimer, 1990, p. 267). If life is 
profoundly interrelated, if we are somehow part of each other, then to put oneself 
in another’s place is to experience not only the other but also part of oneself, and 
to help or hurt others is ultimately to help or hurt oneself. Put more ideally, acts of 
love may contribute to the deep fl ow of life, enriching one and all. 

238
 10 
 Conclusion 
   If, as some near-death experience survivors (along with an impressive assortment 
of mystics, poets, religious leaders, moral exemplars, and “Stage 7” thinkers) insist, 
each individual is in some ultimate sense integral with the whole of humanity, 
then we are deeply connected with two fellow human beings named Emroz and 
Bakhtiar: 
 Emroz Khan destroys for a living. He dismantles car engines, slicing them open with 
a sledgehammer and a crooked chisel, prying apart the cylinders, tearing out pistons, 
dislodging screws and bolts and throwing the metal entrails into a pile that will be sold 
for scrap. He is 21 and has been doing this sort of work for 10 years, 12 hours a day, six 
days a week, earning $1.25 a day. 
 His hands and arms are . . . stained a rich black like fresh asphalt and ribboned with 
scars. . . . A bulge on his forearm [contains] a stretch of pipe he drove into his body by 
mistake. He cannot aff ord to pay a doctor to take it out. 
 “I’ve had it for three years,” he says. 
 He opens his left  palm and places two fi ngers alongside what looks like a crease, then 
pulls apart the crease to reveal a two-inch gash that runs an inch deep. . . . Th e raw fl esh 
was covered with grease, like the rest of his palm and arm. Th e wound is two years old. 
 [Not far from the scrap metal shop where Emroz works is] Bakhtiar Khan, [who] 
began working in the pits [making bricks] when he was 10. He is now 25 or 26. He isn’t 
sure, because nobody keeps close track; time passes, that is all. He works from 5:00 in 
the morning until 5:00 in the aft ernoon, making 1,000 bricks a day, six days a week, 
earning a few dollars a week. He is thin, he wears no shirt or shoes. . . .  
 Th e situation is worse than it appears. [Emroz and Bakhtiar] carry an invisible bur-
den. Th ey don’t earn enough to live on, so they must borrow. . . . Th ey have no hope of 
paying back the loans. (Maass, 2001, pp. 48 ff .) 
 Emroz’s and Bakhtiar’s plight exceeds that of Edward, the man whose unfair 
torment at a summer camp introduced us, by way of negative example, to the non-
relative right and good of morality. Emroz and Bakhtiar are “young men for whom 
life is abuse” (Maass, 2001, p. 50). Th ey live not in the relatively affl  uent West but 
in desperate poverty in Peshawar, Pakistan, and they represent all too many among 
the world’s population. Th ey lack adequate food, clothing, and medical care. Th ey 
have no way to emerge from debt. Although worse than Edward’s, their plight, too, 
is one of wrong and harm. 
 Justice and care—and their development—have defi ned the themes of this 
book. We have argued, in fact, that the right and the good, moral reciproc-
ity and empathy, the primarily cognitive and the primarily aff ective, constitute 
the chief strands of moral development. We have emphasized the importance of 
distinguishing moral  development from relativistic views such as that evident in 
Jonathan Haidt’s theoretical and empirical work. We have explored moral develop-
ment, perception, and behavior in terms of justice and care through the theories of 

Conclusion 
■ 239
Lawrence Kohlberg and Martin Hoff man. Especially, we have explored Kohlberg’s 
and Hoff man’s thesis that children grow beyond the superfi cial in moral knowing 
and feeling at least partly by taking into account the perspectives and situations of 
others. We introduced existential development as part of a new view of Kohlberg’s 
theoretical approach and championed “primary” cognitive motivation in our cri-
tique of Hoff man’s theory. Furthermore, we found that both theories needed cer-
tain elaborations in their application to social behavior. In particular, we elaborated 
on moral identity in exemplary prosocial behavior and on self-serving cognitive 
distortion and social skill defi ciencies in chronic antisocial behavior. We identifi ed 
an aff ect-regulating, goal-oriented ability that serves either prosocial or antiso-
cial behavior; namely, ego strength. Finally, we explored the question of a deeper 
reality to the moral life, an exploration that brought new meaning to “taking the 
perspectives of others” and “growing beyond the superfi cial.” 
 Superfi cial levels of perception do contribute to morality. Th ink of the wrong 
and harm endured by Emroz and Bakhtiar. Most observers, young and old, would 
sense a wrong and respond empathically to their highly salient signs of distress: the 
metal-induced bulge in Emroz’s forearm, his scars, his open gash of raw fl esh; and 
Bakhtiar’s gaunt appearance, his lack of shirt or shoes. Such sights would surely 
activate at least the automatic, involuntary modes of empathic arousal described 
by Hoff man. Were Emroz and Bakhtiar still children, young observers’ empathic 
distress for them would be all the more intense, according to the similarity bias 
also described by Hoff man. 
 Young children would be less likely, however, to imagine themselves in the life 
conditions of Emroz and Bakhtiar or to understand the deeper and broader con-
text of their injustice. As Peter Maass (2001) noted, Emroz’s and Bakhtiar’s situ-
ation is even worse than it appears. Th ese men’s plight includes an intangible or 
“invisible”—and deeply unfair—burden of labor abuse, of hopelessly indebted ser-
vitude. Th eir crushing debt is not unlike that of the nations where they and others 
with similar plights were born. 
 With cognitive and language development, expanding social interaction, refl ec-
tion, and moral socialization, children—while still responding to direct or pic-
tured signs of the distress of similar others—tend to grow beyond the superfi cial. 
Th ey grow especially through social perspective-taking, leading at least potentially 
to a deeper understanding of and feeling for others’ plights. And out of that under-
standing and feeling, one hopes, they act. 
 Th e Canadian activist Craig Kielburger is in Colby and Damon’s terms (1992; 
see Chapter 6) a moral exemplar. Kielburger (1998) refl ected on what drove him, 
one morning when he was 12 years old, to found his youth-run, now-international 
anti–child labor organization Free the Children. “Staring back at” Craig that morn-
ing before school was a front-page newspaper headline (“Battled Child Labor, Boy, 
12, Murdered”) and photo of a boy his age who had been murdered in Muridke, 
Pakistan, aft er crusading against child-labor abuses. “It was a jolt.” Craig started 
reading the accompanying article, “hardly believing the words.” Th e murdered cru-
sader had known the problem of child-labor abuse well: His own parents had sold 
him into slavery when he was four years old. Until he was freed and his crusade 
began at age 10, he had been shackled many hours each day to a  carpet-weaving 

240 
■ Moral Development and Reality
loom, “tying tiny knots hour aft er hour.” Craig was shocked. “What kind of parents 
would sell their child into slavery at four years of age? And who would ever chain 
a child to a carpet loom?” he asked himself. 
 Aft er school that day, Craig researched the problem of child-labor abuse at a 
library. Once home, he found that 
 images of child labour had imbedded themselves in my mind: children younger than 
me forced to make carpets for endless hours in dimly lit rooms; others toiling in under-
ground pits, struggling to get coal to the surface; others maimed or killed by explosions 
raging through fi reworks factories. . . . I was angry at the world for letting these things 
happen to children. Why was nothing being done to stop such cruelty? 
 Th at evening I had great diffi  culty concentrating on my homework. . . . For some reason 
these descriptions of child labour had moved me like no other story of injustice. . . . Perhaps 
it was because the stories were of people my own age, and many even younger. Perhaps it 
was because these few words had shattered my ideas of what childhood was all about—
school, friends, time to play. I had work to do around my house—carrying out the garbage, 
cleaning up the backyard—but it all seemed so trivial compared to what these children 
had to do. . . . I thought how I would react if I found myself in their place. . . .  
 As I walked through my middle-class neighborhood, my thoughts were on the other 
side of the world. And my own world seemed a shade darker. . . . Do all children, even the 
poorest of the poor, have the right to go to school? Are all children created equal? If child 
labour is not acceptable for white, middle-class North American kids, then why is it 
acceptable for a girl in Th ailand or a boy in Brazil? (Kielburger, 1998, pp. 7–8, 12, 297) 
 “We never quite know,” Robert Coles (1986) once observed, “how an event will 
connect with ourselves” (p. 29). Craig’s imaginal perspective-taking, empathic 
anger, and sense of global injustice upon his discovery of child-labor abuse con-
nected with his self-perception and motivation to act. Specifi cally, the event con-
nected with what he could and could  not see himself doing. He refl ected, “You 
begin to believe so deeply in a [moral] cause that you can’t  see yourself just standing 
on the sidelines, waiting for other people to act” (Kielburger, 1998, p. 12, empha-
sis added; cf. Kielburger & Kielburger, 2006). Craig’s moral perception and goals 
became so relevant to his self-schema that his identity became, in crucial respects, 
a  moral identity, adding its own power to his moral motivation from the right and 
the good. Kielburger’s and similar activist organizations have done much to fi ght 
against child labor or slavery, promote education and enterprise, and encourage 
debt relief for impoverished nations. 1 
 In this fi nal chapter, we conclude our use of Kohlberg’s and Hoff man’s theories 
to explore the development of moral perception and behavior; we will close with 
some fi nal thoughts on moral development and reality. To conclude our case for 
co-primacy in moral motivation, we relate these theories to the diff ering motiva-
tional properties of fundamentally distinct categories of knowledge. In that light, 
we see that Kohlberg’s and Hoff man’s theories of the right and the good, respec-
tively, are complementary if not integrable. Finally, beyond the theories, we con-
clude our use of the near-death experience to explore a love and deep connection 
that may underlie moral insight and transformation. 

Conclusion 
■ 241
revisiting the issue of moral 
 
■
motivation and knowledge 
 Imagine for a moment that the theoretical vehicles of our exploration are tour 
buses. We are at this moment student tourists, with Kohlberg and Hoff man or 
Haidt as our prospective guides. Each man is off ering an educational tour of 
the land of moral motivation; in particular, the landscape (or mindscape?) of 
Craig Kielburger’s moral moment that morning in Toronto. We are intrigued by 
Haidt’s tour program, but we pass by his bus in favor of Hoff man’s and Kohlberg’s. 
Although Haidt’s guided tour would take us to more sites (we have heard that 
his commentary on evolutionary foundations, social intuitions, and diverse cul-
tures is very stimulating and make a note to take his tour some time), Hoff man’s 
and Kohlberg’s are more central to  moral motivation and more directly relevant 
to Craig’s mindscape that morning. So Hoff man and Kohlberg will be our main 
guides in our moral developmental exploration. 
 Whether we take Hoff man’s or Kohlberg’s tour fi rst does not really matter, as 
long as we eventually take both tours. Which tour we take fi rst  does aff ect which 
site we visit fi rst. Hoff man might take us fi rst to Craig’s involuntary and sudden 
“jolt” of empathic distress at seeing the picture of a boy his age who had been 
murdered. Aft er all, for Hoff man, the empathic predisposition is still the primary 
factor in moral motivation. Kohlberg might take us fi rst to Craig’s shock at the 
headline and article, at the scarcely believable  unfairness of a parent’s or business-
man’s so severely exploiting a child. Aft er all, for Kohlberg, the violation or affi  r-
mation of ideals of justice is primary in moral motivation. 
 Were we but casual students, either tour would suffi  ce. Aft er all, we would 
learn much either way, and each guide would also take us to the (in their view) 
non-primary site. Nor would our wait be long; the two sites are so near each 
other and so functionally interrelated that they are nearly one and the same place. 
But we are in fact not so casual; we seek a fully adequate understanding, and for 
that we shall require the complementary wisdom of our two guides, their collec-
tive expertise. So we take both tours. We learn from Hoff man much of empathic 
motivation and how exploitation or non-reciprocity (or other cognition) trans-
forms and mediates empathic distress. It is mainly from Kohlberg (or his senior 
partner Jean Piaget), however, that we learn how knowledge of a reciprocity viola-
tion can in, its own right,  motivate action. With only Hoff man’s tour (especially 
its earlier version), we would miss what is special, what is irreducible, what is 
dynamic and motivating in their own right about structures of logic, consistency, 
and justice or moral reciprocity. Yet if we take only Kohlberg’s tour, although we 
would learn much of such motivating structures, we would miss learning about 
the empathic predisposition, its development and limitations, and its role in the 
moral internalization of norms of caring. Finally, to learn more about how the 
event led to Craig’s subsequent moral identity—or, more broadly, about moral 
identity and consistency with self (see Chapter 6), another can’t-be-missed site 
in moral motivation 2 —we might seek an extended tour from Anne Colby and 
William Damon. 

242 
■ Moral Development and Reality
 The Good, the Right, and Categories of Knowledge 
 Review our chapters and consider the following statements of knowledge concern-
ing morality, conservation, and mathematics:
 i  Craig Kielburger encountered news of a child crusader’s murder in the 
 Toronto Star. He was jolted in part by reading the headline and seeing from 
the photo that the victim was a boy his own age. 
 i  A White student rescued an African-American student from imminent 
attack by fellow White segregationists in Atlanta, Georgia. The White 
student knew that he had joined in tormenting the student. That knowl-
edge combined with empathic distress for the victim to create a feeling 
of guilt. As the rescuer broke up the imminent attack, he blurted out 
an apology.  
 i  Th e norm of reciprocity, that you should return a kindness, is taught and 
internalized in many societies. 
 i   In a discipline encounter, parents may use other-oriented inductions (pro-
scribing harm to others and prescribing prosocial behavior). Such messages, 
particularly when the victim’s suff ering is salient, can elicit in the child 
empathic distress and guilt. Infused with such empathic distress, the induc-
tive information thereby becomes “hot” enough to prevail against egoistic 
motives and motivate prosocial behavior or inhibit antisocial behavior. Th e 
child may internalize or appropriate the induction, attributing to himself or 
herself its origin. 
 i  Th rough social interaction, children actively construct schemas, which 
encompass aff ectively charged scripts or heuristics of knowledge such as, 
“Acting in that way can harm others.”  
 i  Water is oft en the liquid used to fi ll the containers in the “conservation of 
quantity” task. Th e amounts of water are the same in the fi rst comparison of 
the task but appear to be diff erent in the second comparison. 
 i  Diff erent notations can be used in the addition and subtraction 
of numbers. 
 Much could be said about the above statements, but for our present purposes, 
one question is paramount: What do they have in common? Can they all fi t under 
a common rubric, a basic category of knowledge? Especially, are they all distin-
guishable in some fundamental way from the following statements of knowledge 
concerning morality, conservation, and mathematics? 
 i  It is wrong for one person to exploit another. Seeing or experiencing exploi-
tation tends to motivate an eff ort to right the wrong. 
 i  Bad things should not happen to good people. Th ose who see themselves 
as “good” and whose social perspective-taking is generally veridical may 
feel distress if they do an obviously bad thing to a good person. Also, the 
appreciation of a good person who remains above the level of trading insults 
can promote depth or maturity of moral perception (the White student in 
Atlanta began to see not a “nigger” but a fellow human being). 

Conclusion 
■ 243
 i  Th rough social interaction (social perspective-taking and coordinating), 
children actively construct schemas, including stages of moral judgment 
(especially moral reciprocity). At the core of the mature stages is ideal moral 
reciprocity; namely, that one should take into account others’ perspectives in 
how one treats others. 
 i  A quantity that undergoes neither addition nor subtraction is conserved (or 
better, “ x + 0  − 0 =  x ”). Apparent logical violations, contradictions, or incon-
sistencies can be distressing and can motivate eff orts to resolve, explain, 
or correct. 
 i  Th e combination of two actual quantities is greater than either of the 
original quantities (in one notation, “1 + 1 = 2”). 
 What do these  latter instances of knowledge have in common? Can  they all 
fi t (more or less) under a common rubric, a basic category of knowledge? Are 
they all distinguishable in some fundamental way from the fi rst set of statements 
listed? Obviously, they are more generally formulated than was the fi rst set of 
statements, but is that all that can be said? Piaget (e.g., Piaget, 1967/1971) and 
Kohlberg would have claimed that the two sets of statements represent two fun-
damental and crucially distinct categories of knowledge; namely, “empirical” and 
“logico- mathematical,” respectively. Under the latter rubric fi t not only logic and 
mathematics but also the kindred themes of justice, reciprocity, or equality; bal-
ance or proportion; and consistency, harmony, or non-contradiction. 
 Logical Ideals, Moral Ideals, and Adaptation 
 Piaget (1967/1971) suggested that obligatory ideals of logical or moral consistency 
and necessity suggest the need for a “penetrating analysis”—certainly more pen-
etrating than analyses based entirely on pragmatics, utility, and survival—of evo-
lutionary processes of adaptation:
 A precise application of logic presupposes, among other things, the constant obligation 
not to contradict. . . . Lack of intellectual honesty may be of a certain practical use (it is 
usually more convenient to be able to contradict oneself) . . . [Yet] when scruples about 
truth fi nally triumph, it is certainly not because there has been competition or selection 
in terms of utility alone but rather because of certain choices dictated by the internal 
organization of thought. . . . Th e victory of one idea over another depends, in the fi nal 
analysis, on the [logical] truth contained in it. . . . Factors of utility and survival would 
have led only to intellectual instruments of a crudely approximate kind, loosely suffi  -
cient for the life of the species and its individual members, [but] never [directly] to that 
precision and, above all, that intrinsic necessity which demand a much more penetrat-
ing explanation of adaptation. (Piaget, 1967/1971, p. 274) 
 As we saw, logical-moral ideals such as “intellectual honesty” or “scruples about 
truth” receive short shrift  in Haidt’s (2012) new synthesis (Chapter 2). Haidt’s 
pragmatic perspective champions precisely the sort of evolutionary account that 
Piaget rejected as inadequate to account for the precision, non-contradiction, 
and intrinsic necessity of logico-mathematical knowledge. If Piaget’s critique is 
valid, then Haidt’s theory is seriously limited in this respect. In David Moshman’s 

244 
■ Moral Development and Reality
(2011) terms, Haidt’s perspective reduces reasoning or knowledge to “thinking”: 
“Whereas thinking generally aims at success,  reasoning  serves understanding, 
morality, and truth” (p. 193, emphasis added). 
 Once we affi  rm logical-moral ideals such as intellectual honesty, consistency or 
non-hypocrisy, and scruples about truth, how do we account for their emergence 
in phylogenetic history? How might we have evolved in our mental functioning 
from “convenient” pragmatic thinking to moral, mathematical, and scientifi c rea-
soning—from the empirical to the logico-mathematical category of knowledge as 
well? As physicist Paul Davies (1992) put the question: If “our brains have evolved 
in response to environmental pressures, such as the ability to hunt, avoid preda-
tors, dodge falling objects, etc., what has this got to do with discovering the laws of 
electromagnetism or the structure of the atom?” (p. 149). 
 Beyond humans’ hunting ability, survival skills, and attendant thinking so func-
tional for pragmatic success,  counting ability may have led to reasoning, necessary 
truth, and logico-mathematical vehicles for scientifi c discovery. Singer (1981) sug-
gested an evolutionary pathway whereby counting activity in the context of envi-
ronmental pressures not only conferred survival advantages but also led beyond 
pragmatic utility:
 It is said that if four hunters go into a thicket and only three come out, baboons will 
keep away . . . baboons who can count a little may sometimes survive when less gift ed 
baboons perish. Th e ability to count may have conferred a similar advantage on our 
own ancestors. . . . Long before writing developed, people made permanent records of 
their counting by cutting notches on a stick or stringing shells on twine. Th ey had no 
idea that they had stepped on an escalator of  reasoning  that leads by strictly logical 
steps to square roots, prime numbers, and the diff erential calculus. (Singer, 1981, p. 89; 
emphasis added) 
 Th ereby constructed, then, was a “level of thought removed from the physical 
needs of ordinary people” (p. 90), a level that Piaget described as  formal operations . 
Penrose (1994) argued that such reasoning and experimentation have enabled us 
to discover “a profound mathematical substructure . . . hidden in the very workings 
of the world” (p. 415). 
 As we asked in Chapter 9, might this substructure entail not only logico-
 mathematical but also moral truth? “Everyone is aware of the kinship between 
logical and ethical [ideals],” wrote Piaget (1932/1965). “Logic is the morality of 
thought just as morality is the logic of [social] action” (p. 398). And this logic-
related category of morality is in turn intimately related to the empirical category 
in a way that we have termed, in the context of moral motivation,  co-primacy . 
 Although intimately interrelated, the two categories are distinguishable. We 
cannot adequately address the issue of moral motivation (or, for that matter, the 
issue of whether Kohlberg’s and Hoff man’s theories are integrable) unless we grasp 
this crucial distinction between empirical and logico-mathematical knowledge. So 
let us revisit the issue of moral motivation through this epistemological explora-
tion. Th e two categories of knowledge diff er in at least three major ways: (a) chance 
versus necessity, (b) internalization versus construction in the Piagetian sense, and 
(c) “external” versus “internal” motivation.   

Conclusion 
■ 245
 1.  Chance Versus Necessity 
 Perhaps the most readily evident distinction between the categories pertains to 
chance versus necessity. Whereas empirical knowledge happens by chance to be 
true, logico-mathematical knowledge  must be true; it could not be otherwise. It 
happened to be true that Craig was reading the  Toronto Star  or that the rescue took 
place in Atlanta. For that matter, it is true that the liquid in a conservation task was 
water and that addition can be accomplished in the base 10 system. Th ose truths 
could have been otherwise, however. Although less likely, Craig might have 
been reading the  Columbus Dispatch,  or the rescue might have taken place in 
Birmingham. Th e liquid in the conservation task might have been lemonade, and 
addition can be done in base 2. 
 Consider, in contrast, the truths of the second category. Is it ever right (without 
adding premises) for one person to exploit another or for bad things to happen to 
good people? Or, for that matter, is it even possible for  x plus zero minus zero ever 
to equal something other than  x (cf. conservation), or for one plus one to equal 
something other than two? Th ese latter truths are  necessary ; although they can be 
violated in certain respects, they remain true. Th ey are  necessarily  true (Laupa, 
2000; Miller et al., 2000). Unlike the younger child’s continued perceptual judg-
ments in the conservation tasks, the older child’s logical judgment “appears to have 
a necessity to it that removes it from the sphere of matters requiring empirical 
verifi cation” (Brown, 1965, p. 201). 
 2.  Internalization Versus Construction in the Piagetian Sense 
 Th e happenstance facts of empirical knowledge constitute information abstracted 
from “objects as such . . . that is, the experience of external objects or of whatever 
appertains to them” (Piaget, 1967/1971, p. 266). It is knowledge of the empirical 
world, the world of liquids, containers, and appearances, of photos, newspapers, 
and events—even of cities, cultural norms, and conventions of notations. Haidt’s 
(2012) claim that “cognition  just refers to information processing” (p. 44, emphasis 
added) restricts knowledge to cognition of the empirical world. Surely cognition 
refers as well to knowledge “of numbers and mathematics. Th ey [numbers and 
mathematics] can hardly be said to be derived or abstracted from empirical expe-
rience;” aft er all, “where in experience do we fi nd empirical instances of . . . the 
square root of minus two?” (Carr, 1991, p. 39). Whereas empirical knowledge is 
abstracted or internalized, logico-mathematical knowledge is constructed. 
 Th e epistemological meaning of “construction” is elusive. In a broad sense, the 
abstraction or acquisition of empirical or contingent knowledge can be depicted 
as a process of “construction.” Aft er all, “to construct” means simply “to build.” 
Th e child can be said to build schemas through interaction with the environ-
ment (cf. Neisser, 1976). Th is interaction might even be described  à  la Piaget as 
an assimilation-accommodation interplay, involving the activation of schemas 
that are then refi ned or built up by accommodation of new information from 
the environment. For example, over the course of moral socialization, the child’s 
causal schemas build in a moral dimension to become something like, “My actions 

246 
■ Moral Development and Reality
can harm others” (Hoff man, 2000). Th at such schemas can be called “scripts” of 
generic events, however, connotes their empirical character. Such knowledge has 
been inductively abstracted from the given empirical world of social interaction, 
perhaps from among the norms of a particular culture. Although construction 
even in the broad sense is helpful to remind us of the active child (whose acqui-
sitions do not purely copy environmental events or elements), one would not 
lose much accuracy in stating rather that the child  acquires or  internalizes scripts 
(or, for that matter, inductive teaching) from patterns in the prior givens of the 
empirical world. Hoff man (1983) wrote that the problem of moral socialization 
is that of how an “initially external” prescriptive norm becomes internalized or 
 self-attributed (p. 236). Moral reciprocity is interesting in that it is  both a norm 
that is in many societies taught and internalized  and  an ideal that is constructed 
(in Piaget’s more specifi c sense of the term) through social interaction. 
 Let us elaborate on this Piagetian sense of “construction.” As we discussed in 
Chapter 3, “construction,” as in the construction of an  ideal , can have a special 
meaning. In a classic series of experiments with dyads of preconservational chil-
dren, for example, two confl icting “wrongs” (a quantity is now greater vs. a quantity 
is now less) in eff ect made a “right” (a quantity is conserved). Although the epis-
temology of conservation knowledge is a major topic in its own right, one thing is 
certain in these experiments: Th e children did not acquire the right answer from 
each other (they both started with wrong answers), from the experimenter (who 
refrained from modeling an answer), or from some other source of information 
in the environment. Nor was the knowledge inborn or innate (Moshman, 2011). 
Rather, they  constructed the knowledge through a dialectic of thesis and antith-
esis, a mental coordination or equilibration of opposing centrations on partial 
features. Analogously, although justice (in the form of ideal reciprocity) can and 
should be socialized as a cultural norm, it also tends naturally to be constructed 
as an “ideal [and necessary] equilibrium . . . born of the actions and reactions of 
individuals upon each other” (Piaget, 1932/1965, p. 318; again, see Chapter 3). 
Piaget (1965/1971) argued that logico-mathematical and related knowledge is 
neither invented, nor internalized, nor discovered, but rather  constructed (follow-
ing the “bursting” of instinctual programming and the emergence of “complete 
rather than approximate reversibility” in humans) from the “general coordinations 
of action” of the living system (pp. 366–367). Construction in this special sense is 
not reducible to internalization. 
 3.  External Versus Internal Motivation 
 Whether empirical or logical or whether pertaining to the good or the right, knowl-
edge can imply obligation. We may experience an obligation (or, more loosely, a 
moral motivation) to help others, just as we may experience such a motivation to 
right a wrong. And of course, moral motivation in either case may or may not pre-
vail against egoistic motives in a particular individual in a particular situation. 
 Yet there is a crucial epistemological diff erence in moral motivation between 
 the good  and  the right . In the former case, knowledge concerning benefi cence 
per se is inert; the cognition per se entails no inherent property of motivation. 

Conclusion 
■ 247
Such information (an inductive message, causal attribution, script, heuristic, etc.) 
motivates only insofar as it is infused, charged, or rendered hot by an aff ect such 
as empathic distress (cf. classical conditioning). Accordingly, Hoff man’s theory 
champions the empathic predisposition as the basic “infuser” of knowledge with 
moral motivation (aff ective primacy). As discussed in Chapters 1 and 2, Haidt’s 
aff ective primacy theory posits other such “infusers” (purity, loyalty, authority, 
even justice). 
 In contrast, in the case of the right, the motivation is in some sense inherent 
or internal to the exploratory or “eff ectance” motive, which eventually leads, with 
expanding working memory and experience, to the coordination of perspectives 
or relations and the construction of “necessary” logico-mathematical knowledge. 
Decades ago, Leon Festinger (1957) argued that “the existence of nonfi tting rela-
tions among cognitions [or cognitive dissonance] is a motivating factor in its 
own right” (p. 143); inconsistency or dissonance  intrinsically  motivates eff orts to 
reduce inconsistency. “Cognitive primacy in motivation” means that “the  recogni-
tion of inconsistency  comes fi rst , and the feeling that this [inconsistency] should 
be avoided [or reduced]  follows from it” (Singer, 1981, p. 142, emphases added). In 
other words, the feeling to avoid or correct an inconsistency partly “ derives [in the 
fi rst place] from our capacity . . . to recognize [the] inconsistency” (p. 142, emphasis 
added) or logical contradiction. As we saw in Chapter 3, violations of necessity—of 
reciprocity, logical consistency, condition of reversibility—tend to generate in their 
own right an aff ect of distress and a motivation to explain, resolve, or correct. 
 Th ere need be no delay in action from primary cognition of this category. Th at 
the motivation to right a wrong or correct a logical violation can spur action  quickly 
is suggested by the Atlanta youth’s sudden intervention or the promptness with 
which a conservation-judging child typically justifi es a conservation evaluation 
(Brown, 1965). Th us, the emphases of Haidt and other non-developmental theo-
rists (e.g., Krebs & Denton, 2005) notwithstanding, established rational judgments 
of logic or justice can and do participate in the “quick” or “hot” response system. 
 We have labeled these positions, respectively,  aff ective primacy and  cognitive 
primacy in moral motivation. In philosophical terms, the issue is in general terms 
that of deontology versus utilitarianism, and, in particular, that of whether moti-
vation is  external or  internal to obligatory knowledge (Frankena, 1958; Straughan, 
1983; see Wren, 1991). Th e external associationism of aff ective primacy means 
that knowledge is secondary in the sense that it is motivationally dependent on 
some prior force. In contrast, the internal pull of cognitive primacy means the 
 aff ect  is secondary in the sense that it owes its very existence to the knowledge that 
a “necessary” truth or ideal has been violated. Hoff man (2000) pointed out that 
the latter motivation can be de-confounded from the former when a  good thing 
happens to a  bad person: Empathy is generally not generated in such a case, 3 yet 
we still feel some moral motivation (to correct the violation). 
 “External” or extrinsic (primarily aff ective) and “internal” or intrinsic (primar-
ily cognitive) sources of moral motivation typically cohere and jointly motivate. 
Indeed, in the usual ecology of the moral life, they are diffi  cult to disentangle. 
Some confl uence of empathic and violation-of-fairness distresses seemed to moti-
vate Craig as well as the Atlanta rescuer, for example. Moreover, the guilt that 

248 
■ Moral Development and Reality
prompted the Atlanta rescuer to blurt out an apology was attributed in our view 
not only to the aff ective charge of his self-attribution (he had joined in the tor-
menting), but also to a consistency violation (his prior behavior contradicted not 
only fairness but also his putative self-schema as one who does not unjustifi ably 
harm others). Our epistemological analysis has led to support, then, for co-pri-
macy in moral motivation. 
 So Are Kohlberg’s and Hoffman’s Theories Integrable? 
 Th e logical and the empirical are intimately interrelated. For example, the logic 
of  imaginary numbers is “at the very foundational structure of the  actual physi-
cal world in which we live” (Penrose, 1994, p. 256; emphasis added). And in the 
other direction, empirical statements refer to the logical sooner or later. (I found 
it diffi  cult to craft  the fi rst set of statements above without making even implicit 
reference to fairness, logic, or consistency.) Yet as noted, for all their intimacy, the 
two categories of knowledge remain fundamentally distinct. Th e categories are not 
integrable (at least not in the sense that happenstance could acquire an intrinsic 
necessity or that necessity could ever reduce to happenstance). 
 Th is point corresponds to the mutual irreducibility of the right and the good 
(as discussed in Chapter 1) and bears a major implication for the corresponding 
theories of moral development. Are Kohlberg’s and Hoff man’s theories integrable? 
Well, no. Th ey are as mutually irreducible as are the right and the good, the logi-
cal and the empirical. Do the theories complement one another? We hope that 
the answer to that question is at this point clear: Yes, they intimately interrelate 
and complement each other quite nicely. Like the right and the good for morality, 
Kohlberg’s and Hoff man’s theories need to be taken together for a comprehensive 
understanding of basic moral development. Furthermore, despite its limitations, 
Haidt’s theory can play a role in a comprehensive understanding of the develop-
ment, socialization across cultures, and behavioral expression of moral (as well as 
“moralized”) evaluations and feelings. 
 We end this study of morality and epistemology with a section regarding its 
implications for moral  ontology ; that is, moral development and  reality. Our con-
cluding section will clearly take us beyond skeptical views that see “no reason to 
think that our current sense of right and wrong would refl ect any deeper under-
standing about the nature of reality” (Harris, 2010, p. 50). Haidt (2012) doubted 
that moral truths “actually exist, like mathematical truths, sitting on a cosmic shelf 
next to the Pythagorean theorem just waiting to be discovered by Platonic rea-
soners” (p. 32). Pinker (2011), too, doubted (less playfully) the claim “that moral 
truths are out there somewhere for us to discover, just as we discover the truths of 
science and mathematics” (p. 694). Yet Pinker also suggested that “the principle 
behind the Golden Rule and its equivalents”—namely, “the interchangeability of 
perspectives”—has “been re discovered in so many moral traditions.” Th e repeated 
discovery pertains to an  
 aspect of reality that informs our conceptions of morality and purpose. . . . Our cogni-
tive processes have been struggling with these  aspects of reality over the course of our 

Conclusion 
■ 249
history,  just as they have struggled with the laws of logic and geometry.” (pp. 694–695, 
emphases added) 
 Relatedly, Roger Brown (1965) suggested that to infer conservation is to “tran-
scend immediate perception”  and “ discover a deeper reality ” (p. 222, empha-
sis added). Piaget’s emphasis on construction notwithstanding, discovery may 
indeed also be involved in the inference of necessary, internally motivating 
knowledge. Did the sudden  moral perception and action of Craig Kielburger or 
the Atlanta youth also represent, in eff ect, the discovery of a deeper reality? Might 
we discover or resonate with a deeper reality that pertains not only to logic and 
mathematics but also to the interchangeability of perspectives—indeed, to love 
and connection?  
moral perception and reality  
 
■
 Our phenomenally local world is in actuality supported by an invisible reality [of non-
local connection] which is unmediated, unmitigated, and faster than light. (Herbert, 
1985, p. 227) 
 Reality involves a paradox. Although the objects of this world interrelate, their con-
nections are “local” (i.e., mediated, mitigated, and temporal). Electromagnetism 
and other forces that connect the parts of this world are mediated (through fi eld 
waves or particles). Th ey mitigate (i.e., weaken with distance from one another) 
and take time (albeit oft en infi nitesimal). Yet one implication of mathematical 
and experimental work deriving in part from certain predictions of quantum 
mechanics (Aspect & Grangier, 1986; Bell, 1966; Bouwmeester et al., 1997) is 
that our world of “local” events and connections that mitigate across time and 
space—the train whistle’s sound waves take time to reach our ears, growing faint 
as the waves travel—is somehow supported by a totally diff erent,  non -local reality. 
Th is supportive reality is one of immediate connections or relations, a realm that 
mathematical physicist Roger Penrose calls “profound, timeless, and universal” 
(Penrose, 1994, p. 413). Is it not surprising 4 and even paradoxical that this pro-
found reality of  non- local connection supports—even though it contradicts—our 
phenomenally  local  world of mediated connections? Th e parts of our underlying, 
subatomic reality are interconnected, even interpenetrative: “Th e mechanism for 
this instant connectedness is not some invisible [classical] fi eld that stretches from 
one part to the next, but the fact that a bit of each part’s ‘being’ is lodged in the 
other” (Herbert, 1985, p. 223). 
 Physical reality’s ontological paradox—mediated connections between 
separate parts of the phenomenal world somehow supported by immediate 
 connectedness—perhaps pertains as well to human social and moral reality. Are 
we humans—despite our individuality—deeply connected? It would certainly 
seem nonsensical to say that a bit of each human being is somehow lodged in 
others, that an affl  uent Westerner is somehow deeply connected with an Emroz 
or a Bakhtiar, living in crushing poverty in Pakistan halfway around the world. 
Even in largely collectivist cultures such as Pakistan’s, each individual is  separate : 
Although we socially decenter and feel emotionally close to others or integral 

250 
■ Moral Development and Reality
with the group (socialization or enculturation, resulting in group solidarity 
and identity), we do also diff erentiate ourselves as separate and independent 
individuals:
 It seems obvious and fundamental that the human brain and its associated cognitive 
structures guarantee at the very least that all humans are aware of the continuous kines-
thetic sensations from their own bodies. Th is continuing kinesthetic awareness not only 
provides infants with an early sense of  separation  of self from other . . . but also continues 
past infancy to ensure a certain minimum of  separation of self from others through a 
person’s life. . . . It should therefore be  impossible  for an adult with a normal brain to feel 
that his or her self is merged with others. (Hoff man, 2000, p. 276, emphases added)   
 Moreover, throughout life we remain egocentrically biased at least to some 
extent and engage to varying degrees in self-centered and self-serving cognitive 
distortions. Hence the importance of self-corrective and social skills (as discussed 
in Chapter 8), as well as cultural support for social perspective-taking and mature 
moral judgment (as discussed in Chapter 3). 
 And is not our world of separate individuals one of mediated interactions, 
processes, and eff ects? Whether the emphasis is on justice or empathy, the point 
remains: Moral development, perception, and behavior normally take place over 
 time  through  mediating processes (neural, maturational, social perspective-tak-
ing). Even sudden moral acts take place in time and are oft en “primed” by earlier 
real-time attributions, inferences, and other empirical and logical schemas (as we 
saw in the Atlanta rescue). And empathic distress generally  mitigates or weakens 
where the distressed other is diff erent, a stranger, or distant in location or history 
(empathic bias, gradient of caring). 
 It would appear that the locality of this phenomenal world does impose some 
practical moral constraints. Although Hoff man stresses the need to reduce egoistic 
motives and empathic bias through socialization and education, he also notes a 
“virtue” of empathic bias: It does aff ord a kind of protection. Were we to empathize 
equally with everyone, with no gradient of caring, we might aff ectively overload 
(empathic over-arousal) and would chronically experience the paralysis and agony 
of not knowing whom to help fi rst. We would be victims of the so-called multiple-
claimants dilemma. 
 Common-sense observations and practical constraints notwithstanding, let us 
consider the possibility that our ostensible human state of individual separation 
and local eff ects belies a deeper interconnectedness. Does not our phenomenally 
local world sometimes hint of something deeper? Consider, for example, that 
“the way our bodies—including voice, mood, posture, and so on—are infl uenced 
by surrounding bodies is one of the mysteries of our existence” (de Waal, 2009, 
p. 63). Perhaps such infl uence serves “infants’ fundamental motive for connected-
ness” (Davidov, Zahn-Waxler, Roth-Hanania, & Kjnafo, 2013, p. 128). Perhaps, 
just as justice presupposes caring (Frankena, 1973), individuality presupposes 
relatedness.Is morality ultimately love and connection? Although Kohlberg’s and 
Hoff man’s generally are local theories, Kohlberg did go beyond his own six-stage 
theory to claim that some reach a holistic perspective (his metaphorical “Stage 7”). 
In that ultimate “stage” of moral development, as we have seen, the existentially 

Conclusion 
■ 251
anguished soul-searcher morally revives aft er seeing human life from the perspec-
tive of the cosmos or the “whole of nature.” 
 Relevant to a realm that supports yet contradicts ordinary human experience 
is the near-death experience (Chapter 9). Th is remarkable phenomenon may 
have enormous implications for our understanding of “the relationship between 
the mind and the brain, the possible nature of consciousness, and even the nature 
of reality itself” (Parnia, 2006, p. 97). Th e experience oft en has a major impact 
upon the experiencer. Cherie Sutherland (1992) suggested that “the experiencer 
has undergone an ontological shift ” (p. 193), having encountered to some extent 
in an anomalous deeper reality. Certainly, the near-death experience is rife with 
(for the local realm) bizarre anomalies: seeing despite closed eyelids, observing 
one’s own three-dimensional body, moving through a tunnel that’s not actually 
a tunnel, seeing a blinding light that does not blind, encountering love beyond 
earthly description, meeting dead-yet-alive loved ones, speaking without audi-
bly speaking, hearing without audibly hearing, communicating instantaneously, 
experiencing oneself as another, and so forth. Near-death experiencers’ continu-
ing surprise, puzzlement, and diffi  culties in conveying their experience stem in 
part from such violations in their ordinary anticipations of, or schemas for, reality 
(Gibbs, 1997). 
 Like anyone, these persons can only process and describe their experience 
through the personal and cultural schemas they bring to the encounter. Yet to 
adapt, they must not experience only what they can anticipate, make ready sense of, 
or control (highly controlling individuals may have frightening near-death expe-
riences). Beyond assimilating, they must somehow accommodate to the bizarre 
anomalies—even if the resulting disequilibration is severe. Finally, they must resist 
the temptation either to  over- assimilate (i.e., to misperceive or minimize as ordi-
nary the ontological challenges of their experience) or to  over- accommodate (i.e., 
to change so radically as to lose any sense of continuity with their erstwhile iden-
tity and life contexts). 
 One can scarcely assimilate and accommodate to these anomalies adaptively 
without some disequilibration and reequilibration, some transformation of life 
and worldview. Somehow, “meaning has to be re-created, renegotiated within the 
context of this changed worldview” (Sutherland, 1992, p. 193). Sutherland dis-
cussed the social and personal aspects of typical renegotiations of meaning in this 
disequilibration–reequilibration process. 
 Certain anomalies of the near-death experience especially suggest that we phe-
nomenally separate humans can nonetheless partake of non-local (instantaneous, 
unmediated, unmitigated) connection and perception under certain extraordinary 
conditions or circumstances. Pam Reynolds reported that, in her comprehensive 
near-death experience, she felt “a sense of harmony or unity with the universe” 
(cf. Kohlberg’s Stage 7 “cosmic perspective”) and that “everything seemed to be 
happening all at once” (unpublished data, Sabom, November 3, 2001). In Th omas 
Sawyer’s transcendent near-death experience, the light 
  instantly began communicating with me . . . emanating to me, thought-pattern to 
thought-pattern. . . . It was pure communicating that was complete in every respect. . . . As 

252 
■ Moral Development and Reality
I thought of and formulated a desire or a question, it would already have been recog-
nized, acknowledged, and therefore answered. . . . Th e dialogue . . . took place  in no time. 
(Farr, 1993, p. 28) 
 By “pure” communicating, Tom seems to refer to an interaction that is neither 
mediated nor sequential in time (at the point of asking or even intending to ask, 
questions have already been answered)—and yet, by defi nition, communicating 
entails causal signals propagated in time. Th at Tom must in eff ect reduce non-local 
phenomena to local language (e.g., “communicating”) perhaps accounts for his 
expressive frustrations. In any event, Tom not only engaged in this “pure” interac-
tion but even “became” other interactors in his empathetic life review. Relatedly, 
another experiencer recollected: “I not only saw everything from my own point 
of view, but I also knew the thoughts of everybody who’d been involved in these 
events, as if their thoughts were lodged inside me” (van Lommel, 2010, p. 36). 
Th anks perhaps to such bizarre convergences, Tom saw his self-serving or “local” 
excuses for acts such as assault to be benighted and utterly futile: “OK. He hit me 
fi rst. Try  that  in your life review!” (see Chapter 9). 
 So perhaps, in some ultimate sense, some aspect of each of us  is lodged in others. 
Perhaps, on some fundamental level, we are not so separate and independent aft er 
all. Consider that “the very atoms of our bodies are woven out of a common super-
luminal fabric” (Herbert, 1985, p. 250). By extension, then, could our phenomenally 
local world of individual persons be supported by a reality of connection and com-
monality? Could not such an insight foster existential and spiritual growth beyond 
the superfi cial? In Tom’s empathetic life review, as noted, he deeply connected with, 
even “became” others: the drunk man he assaulted and nearly killed, the shocked 
and bewildered Aunt Gay, the well-meaning airport baggage-handler he had hated 
but had never actually met, and so forth. Connection and commonality were also 
evident in the life-transforming experience of James, the St. Louis youth who saw 
racial distinctions of color as superfi cial and contained within the loving light he 
encountered. Connection and commonality certainly characterized the experience 
of Pam Reynolds, for whom fi gures of loved ones formed in the light, and who saw 
in the diff erent “tones” of human individuality the potential for social harmony. 
 What about social harmony not only for diff erent individuals but for diverse 
cultures? Haidt (2012) may be correct in his suspicion that a world without bor-
ders “would quickly descend into hell” (p. 307). We need not attempt to eliminate 
borders and diverse cultures, however, to promote a broad awareness of intercon-
nected spirituality—and thereby to encourage “cross-cultural understanding and 
dialogue” (Long, 2010, pp. 3, 150–151; cf. Parnia, 2013). Would not such an aware-
ness, understanding, and dialogue help us “to move beyond moral parochialism,” 
to “expand morality’s reach” (de Waal, 2013, p. 235)? Indeed, the implications 
of modern physics, the near-death experience, and commonalities of mystical 
experience could be used as the “empirical soil” for a new ethic of connection—
specifi cally, of profound love and universalized ideal reciprocity (Lorimer, 1990, 
p. 1). Such an ethic would encourage cultivation of what Robert Enright has called 
“the forgiving life” (Enright, 2012). Supporting a new ethic of connection, physi-
cist Henry P. Stapp (2006) suggested that “non-local connectedness . . . opens the 

Conclusion 
■ 253
way to the construction of science-based ethical theories” that emphasize each 
person’s “deep connectedness to the community of human beings, and to nature 
itself” (pp. 619–620). David Fontana (2004) urged the replacement of our mate-
rialist “philosophy of separation” with a “recognition of the interconnectedness of 
all things” (p. 158). Arguing for a non-materialist view of mind, consciousness, 
and self, Mario Beauregard and Denyse O’Leary (2007) proposed “a new scien-
tifi c frame of reference” that could “signifi cantly contribute to the emergence of a 
planetary type of consciousness. Th e development of this type of consciousness is 
absolutely essential if humanity is to successfully solve the global crises that con-
front us” (pp. 294–295). 
 But how could consciousness, mind, or self ever function apart from the medi-
ating processes of biology? Has not “modern neuroscience” established that suf-
fi ciently complex coordinations of neural circuitry give “rise to consciousness—to 
the mind, the soul, to the spirit, to whatever you choose to call that invisible, intan-
gible part of us that truly makes us who we are” (Alexander, 2012, p. 34)? Did not 
Hoff man and others identify certain  prerequisites  in the structures and pathways 
of the brain for moral and other experiences of consciousness? Are not our bodies 
and even our minds adequately “understandable as a collection of cells, blood ves-
sels, hormones, proteins, and fl uids—all following the basic laws of chemistry and 
physics” (Eagleman, 2011, p. 223)? Indeed, is not consciousness merely “the small-
est bit-player in the brain” (p. 99)? Materialist philosophers have even asserted that 
consciousness is nothing but a “successful illusion” generated in the “humming” of 
neural “machinery” (Dennett, 2005, p. 23). 
 If so, exactly  how does our humming neural machinery generate conscious 
perception and thought? Aft er all, “neurons are not themselves thinking” 
(Eagleman, 2011, p. 218). We must ask in earnest: “How can the electrical activ-
ity of a few pounds of grey goo produce the blue of the sky and the song of the 
dove?” (Gopnik, 2009, p. 107). “Where in the midst of all this electrical activity 
and chemical processes”—evident in those few pounds of grey goo (the brain)—
“do thoughts lie?” (p. 106). Th is question pertains to what David Chalmers (1996) 
called “the hard problem” of consciousness. Although hard, the problem is worth 
studying—considering that its solution could “profoundly aff ect our conception of 
the universe and of ourselves” (p. xii). 
 Th e problem gets even harder as we take seriously the anomaly implied by 
the near-death experience: conscious awareness even  without biochemical and 
electrical activity; that is, continued mental perception and identity even when 
the neural machinery is  not humming—“when the brain circuits that modu-
late consciousness are down” (Parnia, 2013, p. 225). How could Pam Reynolds 
Lowery—with no detectable brain waves, little blood in the brain, not even any 
brain stem response—have been “the most aware” of her “entire life”? How could 
she have seen and heard details of her operation despite the unavailability of sen-
sory organs (eyes blindfolded, ear canals totally occluded)? Moreover, how could 
individuals blind since birth nonetheless accurately see during their near-death 
experience (Ring & Cooper, 1997, 1999; cf. Fox, 2003)? It would appear that brain 
activity is  not aft er all an absolute prerequisite for consciousness. Although brain 

254 
■ Moral Development and Reality
activity ordinarily modulates consciousness, perhaps consciousness “can itself 
independently modulate brain activity” (Parnia, 2013, p. 282). 
 Th at the conscious mind and identity can somehow function apart from brain 
activity is suggested by a psychiatric patient’s having been “mentally clear” while 
out of his body even as he knew that his brain was still projecting hallucinatory 
images (Chapter 9)! Perhaps Penrose (1989) is correct that “there must always 
be something missing” from the notion of the mind as merely an epiphenom-
enon of “extraordinarily complicated” computational activity of the brain (p. 447; 
cf. Neisser, 1992; Penrose, 1994). Mind–body and other issues stimulated by the 
near-death experience may even go to “the very heart” of our “understanding of 
what it is to be human, and what it is for human beings to die” (Fox, 2003, p. 5; see 
Gibbs, 2010c). 
 At the very least, the anomaly—however disequilibrating it may be—must be 
faced. Pam’s chief neurosurgeon, Robert Spetzler, declared, 
 It struck me that this [Pam’s near-death experience] was incredibly perplexing and not 
understandable with what we know about the brain. Without any brain wave activity, it 
is inconceivable to me that the brain can receive, internalize, and maintain a memory. 
But at the same time, I think it is the height of egocentrism to say something can’t hap-
pen just because we can’t explain it. (Benz, 2001) 
 Ultimately incompatible with local morality is the profound sense of love oft en 
seen in the aft ermath of a “deep” near-death experience. Th e urgently needed 
“planetary consciousness” notwithstanding, we are back to the multiple-claimants 
dilemma. Shouldn’t a balance be struck between a global morality and caring for 
one’s local loved ones? Bruce Greyson and Barbara Harris (1987) suggested that 
it is not always easy for the experiencer to fi nd “a way to actualize in daily life the 
love he or she received in the NDE [near-death experience]” (p. 51; cf. Christian 
& Holden, 2012; Noyes, Fenwick, Holden, & Christian, 2009). As described in 
Chapter 9, Th omas Sawyer’s empathy for years aft er his return was non-local. His 
caring for others lost all similarity-familiarity bias; that is, was unmitigated with 
distance: Tom wanted to help  any needy person he encountered, whether friend 
or stranger, and did—even when that meant at one point his unavailability to his 
wife who was ill and also needed his care. Reestablishing  some  gradient of care, 
 some empathic bias as Hoff man calls it, was part of Tom’s reequilibration process 
back into our local world of separate selves (Sawyer, personal communication, 
March 13, 2003). 
 Let us fi nally suggest, however, a less than total divorce in this paradoxical state 
of aff airs between our local world and its non-local underpinnings. Although Tom 
was “back” and had to adjust to some extent, his inspiration and deeper under-
standing of life endured. Indeed, perhaps “a unity with the workings of Nature is 
potentially present within each of us,” our insights and sensitivities resonant with 
those workings (Penrose, 1994, p. 420). Th e inference through misleading super-
fi cial appearances to discover an underlying necessity of conservation-related 
logic is a humble example in non-social cognitive development. Plato declared, 
and Penrose suspects, that ultimate reality encompasses the moral (and aesthetic) 
along with the mathematical. We have had occasion to cite numerous epiphanies 

Conclusion 
■ 255
of profound moral insight in our exploration of the right and the good strands of 
moral development and behavior. Some veridical insights and feelings have been 
heartbreakingly sabotaged by self-serving cognitive distortion, as in the case of the 
17-year-old burglar who recollected, “If I started to feel bad [for one or another 
of my victims], I’d say tough rocks for him, he should have had his house locked 
better and the alarm on” (Samenow, 1984, p. 115). Presumably, Timothy McVeigh 
summoned some such dark externalization of blame to sabotage what we might 
call his moment of light, of insight into the enormity of what he was about to do. 
 Other moments of profound moral perception were more successful, some-
times resulting in total, life-changing moral transformations. Short of a near-
death or even a meditative “Stage 7” experience, perhaps ordinary local processes 
can inspire insights that resonate with the non-local underpinnings of the moral 
life. Th e moment may be powerful and even “strange” (to use the Atlanta res-
cuer’s word), as one fi nds oneself changed. Larry, the severe sex off ender studied 
in Chapter 8, seemed to experience a shift  abruptly out of darkness and into a 
transforming epiphany through group processes we can understand: He vividly 
role-played his crime in his adult-led peer group and, through connecting with 
human revulsion, decentered from self and felt with intense remorse the deep 
harm of his crime. Other cases of deep and transformative perception through 
local processes have included not only those of the Atlanta rescuer but also those 
of Mark Mathabane (the South African whose appreciation of a past kindness 
enabled him to see humanity within the individuals of an oppressive out-group), 
the Yanomamo villager (who discovered and excitedly begged for legal institutions 
so his people could grow beyond the mentality of blood vengeances), 15-year-old 
Mac (who began to regret his verbal assault as he saw its roots in self-serving 
distortions), a reminiscing former ideologue (who, stripped of his old distortions, 
reexperienced empathic distress and felt guilt over having starved to death count-
less innocent women and children), and a girl who gained in moral identity as she 
refl ected on how her stealing had disappointed her parents’ expectations. Featured 
in this chapter has been the transformation of Craig Kielburger, whose life as a 
moral exemplar started with a jolt and shock at the news of brutal exploitation 
and murder in Pakistan, the land of our fellow human beings Emroz and Bakhtiar. 
Perhaps every deep moral perception off ers at least a glimmer of insight into the 
deeper reality of human connection. 

This page intentionally left blank 

257
■ a p p e n d i x  
 Moral Development and Reality  explores the nature of morality, moral development, 
social behavior, and human connection. By comparing, contrasting, and going 
beyond the prominent theories mainly of Lawrence Kohlberg, Martin Hoff man, 
and Jonathan Haidt, the author addresses fundamental questions: What is moral-
ity, and how broad is the moral domain? Can we speak of moral  development 
(Kohlberg, Hoff man), or is morality entirely relative to diverse cultures (Haidt)? 
What are the sources of moral motivation? What factors account for prosocial 
behavior? What are the typical social perspective-taking limitations of antisocial 
youths, and how can those limitations be remedied? Does moral development, 
including moments of moral inspiration, refl ect a deeper reality? Exploring these 
questions elucidates the full range of moral development, from superfi cial percep-
tion to a deeper understanding and feeling. Included are: foundations of morality 
and moral motivation; biology, social intuitions, and culture; social perspective-
taking and development; the stage construct and developmental delay; moral 
exemplars and moral identity; cognitive distortions, social skills defi ciencies, and 
cognitive behavioral interventions or moral education; and, fi nally, near-death 
experiences and the underpinnings of our social and moral world. 
 Below is a chapter summary followed by study questions for each chapter. 
chapter 1. introduction 
 
■
 Th is chapter introduces not only the social perspective-taking central to morality, 
but also our theory-based exploration of moral development, behavior, and reality. 
Perspective-taking relates to both “the right” (justice, reciprocity, equality; Kohlberg’s 
theory) and “the good” (welfare, benefi cence, empathy; Hoff man’s theory) of morality. 
Th e right (condition of reversibility; cf. Pinker’s “interchangeability of perspectives”) 
provides an objective basis for morality not recognized in relativistic moral theories 
such as Haidt’s (Chapter 2). Th e good may provide the broad moral referent for dif-
ferentiated intuitions (e.g., loyalty, authority, purity) specifi ed by Haidt. Chapters 3 
and 4 address “the right” or the cognitive strand of moral motivation and develop-
ment, whereas Chapter 5 addresses “the good” or the aff ective strand. Subsequent 
chapters (6 through 10) relate the theories of moral development to social behavior 
(prosocial, antisocial) as well as to a deeper reality of human connection.  
 •  In what sense can morality be objective? How does this conception diff er from 
other views of morality? 
 •  What are the foundations of the moral domain, according to Gibbs? What is 
their relationship? What should one do when the foundations confl ict? 
 •  Illustrate (in terms of Edward’s victimization) the two main strands or motiva-
tional “primacies” of moral development as “growing beyond the superfi cial.” 

258 
■ Appendix
 •  Antisocial behavior is evidenced even among those who may not be delayed in 
moral judgment development. What are three possible explanations in terms 
of the camp incident? 
chapter 2. beyond haidt’s new synthesis 
 
■
 Th is chapter reviews—and moves beyond—Haidt’s new synthesis of trends in dis-
ciplines (such as social psychology, neuroscience, and evolutionary psychology) 
pertinent to morality and enculturation. Reviewed are his major themes: in-group 
solidarity, intuitive primacy, and social persuasion (rather than truth or objec-
tivity as the function of moral reasoning). His work reminds us of our preten-
sions and the role of innately prepared, fast, preconscious intuitions in morality. 
He discusses the phylogenetic history and neurology of those intuitions and their 
refi nement through culture. We are also reminded of the values of phylogenetic 
humility, scientifi c description, and cultural diversity. In the fi nal analysis, how-
ever, three serious limitations of Haidt’s theory—a negative skew or inadequacy in 
descriptive work; an unwarranted exclusion of the prescriptive implications of the 
higher reaches in morality; and moral relativism—overshadow its contributions. 
 •  In what sense does Haidt present his new synthesis as a “dose of reality”? What 
are its three themes? 
 •  How does Gibbs evaluate (valuable aspects, limitations of) Haidt’s theory? 
Why does Gibbs suggest a need to “move beyond” it? 
chapter 3. “the right” and moral 
 
■
development: fundamental themes of 
kohlberg’s cognitive developmental 
approach 
 Th is chapter explicates cognitive developmental themes in moral development. 
Th e attention of young children is readily captured by or  centered  on that which is 
immediate and salient in their sociomoral and non-social worlds. Just as centra-
tions and superfi ciality characterize early childhood moral judgment, “decentra-
tion” and depth can be said to characterize the moral competence constructed in 
the school years and beyond. We relate morality to logic (cf. Piaget); explain that 
the ideals of justice or moral reciprocity are constructed, not merely encultur-
ated, socialized, or internalized; explicate the role of peer interaction and social 
perspective-taking opportunities in this moral constructive process across diverse 
cultures; argue that justice can be a moral motive in its own right; and ponder 
issues in the concept and assessment of “stages” in the development of moral 
judgment. 
 •  What accounts for early child superfi ciality (including egocentric bias)? 
Illustrate in terms of social cognition. 
 •  What, in Piagetian terms, accounts for the young child’s pre-conservation 
responses? How might pre-conservation responses relate to the “caprice” of 
early childhood? 

Appendix 
■ 259
 •  How have experiments using the conservation task helped to distinguish con-
struction from internalization? 
 •  What is the “crucial diff erence” between pre-conservation and conservation 
responses? 
 •  What conditions promote the likelihood that peer interaction will “work as a 
constructive process”?? 
 •  Are logical necessity and cognitive primacy discernible in social cognitive 
development and behavior? Explain. 
 •  Is moral reciprocity a uniquely human phenomenon? What stage-related dis-
tinction is important in this connection? What role might “refl ective abstrac-
tion” play? 
 •  What diff erence does ideal moral reciprocity make in moral motivation? Does 
Hoff man specifi cally identify ideal reciprocity? How does ideal reciprocity help 
us evaluate norms of blood vengeance? 
 •  How does moral judgment develop beyond Stage 3 in the Gibbs et al. view? Can 
Stage 3 represent suffi  cient moral judgment maturity? What social perspective-
taking opportunities seem to be important for advanced development? 
 •  Briefl y describe immature and mature moral judgment stages in the Gibbs typol-
ogy. How are they assessed by the Sociomoral Refl ection Measure–Short Form 
(SRM-SF)? How must “stage sequence” be understood in moral development? 
 •  Briefl y describe processes of development in terms of Piagetian theory. What is 
“important to note”? 
chapter 4. kohlberg’s theory: a critique 
 
■
and new view 
 Given the cognitive-developmental concern with superfi ciality-to-depth in moral 
judgment or understanding, Kohlberg was particularly concerned to discover 
and articulate an age trend and possible sequence of qualitative developmental 
advances or stages that may be universal. Our critique of Kohlberg’s theory notes 
that, although his specifi c stage typology was misguided, he almost single-hand-
edly put cognitive moral development on the map of American psychology. He 
encouraged attention to the continued development of moral judgment beyond the 
childhood years. Finally, he speculated from case studies of mature moral thinkers 
in existential crisis that there may be a deeper reality (“cosmic perspective”), one 
that underlies profound moral perception and can support the moral life. Building 
from Kohlberg’s and others’ contributions, we propose in this chapter a new view 
of lifespan sociomoral development.  
 •  In what sense were Kohlberg’s claims regarding age trends in moral judgment 
“bolder” than Piaget’s? 
 •  How did the Deweyan infl uence “distort” moral judgment development in 
Kohlberg’s overhaul of Piaget’s moral judgment phases or stages? What was 
“lost” as a result? What “irony” was evident? 
 •  Violations of invariant-sequence expectations were discovered in the course 
of Kohlberg’s longitudinal research. In Kohlberg’s stage revisions to restore 

260 
■ Appendix
invariant sequence, what two new problems for Kohlberg’s stage typology 
were created? Th ese problems both refl ect what generic problem, according to 
Gibbs? 
 •  Regarding adult moral development in Kohlberg’s theory, what is Gibbs’s 
critique? 
 •  What is Gibbs’s “two-phase” view of lifespan moral judgment development? 
What is the role of formal operations in this view? 
chapter 5. “the good” and moral 
 
■
development: hoffman’s theory 
 Social perspective-taking and development beyond the superfi cial also entail car-
ing or feeling. Accordingly, we shift  from the right to the good, from justice to 
empathy, from the primarily cognitive to the primarily aff ective strand of moral 
motivation and development. We draw heavily in this chapter on Hoff man’s 
theory, even as we also consider recent refi nements, expansions, and issues (de 
Waal, Decety, Zahn-Waxler). Much more than did Haidt, Hoff man has focused 
our attention on the role of empathy in moral development. Th anks to cognitive 
development, language development, and moral socialization, empathy evolves 
from biologically based responses to surface cues to a more complex and veridi-
cal emotional responsiveness to the joys, suff erings, and life situations of others. 
Attributions and inferences infl uence whether empathy eventuates in prosocial 
behavior. Within moral socialization, Hoff man focuses on parental practices of 
discipline (especially, “inductions” that make salient the perspectives of others 
hurt by the child’s transgression). Th e chapter concludes by arguing for  co- primacy 
( both empathy and justice) in moral motivation. 
 •  What is the functional importance of the empathic predisposition for human 
society? 
 •  Is empathy unique to the human species? In your answer, refer to modes 
of empathic arousal and the complexity of the “full-fl edged” empathic 
predisposition. 
 •  What is Hoff man’s conception of “fully mature” perspective-taking? 
 •  What is the meaning of “growing beyond the superfi cial” in Hoff man’s (espe-
cially vis  à  vis Kohlberg’s) theory? 
 •  Briefl y describe Hoff man’s immature stages of empathic development (refer to 
the pertinent empathic arousal modes). 
 •  What are Hoff man’s mature stages of empathic development (refer to the perti-
nent empathic arousal modes)? 
 •  Ι s self-awareness crucial for advanced prosocial behavior? To what fundamen-
tal issue does this question pertain? 
 •  What cognitive processes “complicate” the relationship between the empathic 
predisposition and social behavior? Can these processes undermine the empa-
thy–prosocial behavior relationship? If so, give an illustration. 
 •  What are two factors that limit empathy’s status as the “bedrock” of prosocial 
morality? How can these limitations be remedied? 

Appendix 
■ 261
 •  Socialization (in particular, moral internalization) is crucial if the empathic 
predisposition is to eventuate in prosocial behavior. Regarding discipline and 
moral internalization, how does the parent give eff ective inductions? 
 •  Regarding two empirical studies of Hoff man’s moral socialization theory, in 
what ways were the results supportive? What might parents’ expression of dis-
appointment/higher expectations foster in the adolescent? 
 •  What is the role of nurturance in moral socialization, according to Hoff man? 
 •  What is Gibbs’s critique of Hoff man’s theory (pay particular attention to the 
issue of moral motivation)? 
chapter 6: moral development, moral 
 
■
identity, and prosocial behavior 
 Th is chapter focuses on some of the variables accounting for individual diff erences 
in the likelihood of prosocial behavior. “Prosocial behavior” can range from a par-
ticular intervention to a lifetime dedicated to just and good causes. Highly proso-
cial individuals (moral exemplars) tend to be morally mature and highly empathic 
but fi eld-independent (Moral Type B, internal locus of control, high self-effi  cacy) 
persons who perceive morality as central to their sense of self (high moral iden-
tity). Moral identity can join the main primary (aff ective and cognitive) sources of 
moral motivation. Finally, to take eff ective sustained action, even highly prosocial 
individuals need  ego strength , defi ned in terms of aff ect-regulating goal attainment 
skills. Distinguishing features of genuine (versus spurious) moral exemplars are 
considered at the end of the chapter.  
 •  Briefl y depict the issue regarding the motivation of prosocial behavior in terms 
of the presented case study of a rescue. How has Hoff man’s position on moral 
motivation diff ered from that of Gibbs? 
 •  What variables help account for individual diff erences in the likelihood of 
prosocial behavior? What factors are involved in clear or accurate moral 
perception? 
 •  How may the self and morality relate in human development? 
 •  What are strengths and weaknesses of information-processing models of social 
behavior? Can such models account for quick behavioral responses? 
 •  How is “ego strength” defi ned, and how does it relate to honesty and prosocial 
behavior? 
 •  What three points regarding prosocial behavior are highlighted by considering 
a spurious “moral exemplar”? 
chapter 7: understanding 
 
■
antisocial behavior 
 Th e referent for social behavior shift s in this chapter to  anti social behavior and 
how to account for it. Most off enders, from petty pranksters to ideological ter-
rorists, fail (except for self-serving purposes) to take the perspectives of their vic-
tims. Social perspective-taking limitations pervade the “three Ds” of antisocial 

262 
■ Appendix
youth: moral developmental  delay , self-serving cognitive  distortions , and social 
skills  defi ciencies . Th e latter two variables are needed to supplement Kohlberg’s 
and Hoff man’s emphasis on developmental delay if we are to adequately account 
for antisocial behavior. Th e chapter concludes with the powerful illustrative case 
of Timothy McVeigh. Th is case makes particularly clear how cognitive distortions 
can insulate a self-centered worldview (itself a primary distortion, linked to feel-
ing superior or inadequately respected); that is, can preempt or neutralize social 
perspective-taking, moral understanding, and veridical empathy. 
 •  Briefl y describe the limitation of moral judgment developmental delay among 
antisocial youths. 
 •  Regarding the limitation of self-serving cognitive distortions among antisocial 
youths, what are the four categories of distortion? What is the relationship 
of the primary distortion to proactive versus reactive aggression? What is the 
function of the other three categories? 
 •  Briefl y describe the limitation of social skill defi ciencies among antisocial youths.  
 •  How does the case study (Timothy McVeigh) illustrate the three main limita-
tions of antisocial youths? How does the case relate to Kohlberg’s and Hoff man’s 
theories? 
chapter 8: treating antisocial behavior 
 
■
 If multiple limitations contribute to antisocial behavior, then an adequate treat-
ment program must be correspondingly multi-componential. Adequate social 
perspective-taking—in particular, perspective-taking that is profound or mature; 
rationalization-busting, adequately informed, and hence discerning; recipro-
cally ideal and balanced; and socially expansive or inclusive—should pervade  
the components of any eff ective treatment program. Th is chapter focuses on a 
multi-component treatment program that incorporates a wide variety of social 
perspective-taking opportunities pertaining to the remediation of moral devel-
opmental delay, social cognitive distortions, and social skill defi ciencies; namely, 
the EQUIP program. High-fi delity implementations of EQUIP can stimulate 
a positive synergy through EQUIP’s integration of mutual help and cognitive 
behavioral approaches. Chapter 8 concludes with a discussion of adaptations and 
outcome evaluations, and illustrates social perspective-taking treatments avail-
able for severe off enders.  
 •  What is the aim of the mutual-help (in particular, Positive Peer Culture) 
approach to treating antisocial behavior? How does it provide social perspective-
taking opportunities? Why has it had only mixed success, according to Gibbs?   
 •  How does EQUIP integrate the mutual-help with the cognitive-behavioral 
approach to treating antisocial behavior? What does each approach contribute 
to the other? 
 •  What opportunities are entailed in the EQUIP curriculum? Illustrate how its 
three components are designed to remedy, respectively, the three main limita-
tions of antisocial youth. 

Appendix 
■ 263
 •  Briefl y describe some adaptations of the EQUIP program. Under what condi-
tions is the program eff ective? 
 •  Illustrate social perspective-taking for the severe off ender. 
chapter 9. beyond the theories: 
 
■
a deeper reality? 
 This chapter goes beyond Kohlberg’s, Hoffman’s, and Haidt’s theories to con-
sider the question of a deeper reality. As noted, Kohlberg argued that exis-
tential thinkers in their soul-searching sometimes come to see their earthly 
moral life from an inspiring “cosmic perspective.” Perhaps such a reality can 
be glimpsed not only through existential crises but also through physically 
life-threatening ones. Accordingly, we study in this chapter cases of per-
sons who have had a so-called near-death experience, or a set of “profound 
psychological events with transcendental and mystical elements, typically 
occurring to individuals close to death or in situations of intense physical or 
emotional danger” (Greyson). A review of the literature—especially, recent 
medical research literature—suggests that the experience entails a transcen-
dent significance congruent with Kohlberg’s cosmic perspective. In this light, 
“growing beyond the superficial” and “taking the perspectives of others” take 
on radical new meaning.  
 •  How does the chapter go “beyond” Kohlberg with respect to moral development 
and reality? 
 •  Briefl y describe the near-death experience, its three types, and whether it per-
tains to a deeper reality. What does Gibbs conclude, in terms of what fi ve onto-
logically relevant questions? 
 •  What feature or features of the near-death experience might be especially 
important for moral transformation? What moral issue is oft en raised by one 
of the experience’s typical aft er-eff ects? 
chapter 10. conclusion 
 
■
 Th e fi nal chapter concludes our use of Kohlberg’s, Hoff man’s, and Haidt’s theories 
to ponder the moral domain and explore growth beyond the superfi cial in morality. 
We recap our critique of Haidt’s theory. We culminate our argument for a co-pri-
macy in moral motivation by relating Kohlberg’s and Hoff man’s theories to moti-
vationally and qualitatively distinct categories of knowledge (logico-mathematical, 
empirical). We relate logical-moral ideals to an analysis of adaptation and evolu-
tion (Piaget, Singer) that is less reductionist than the pragmatic version off ered by 
Haidt and others. Completing this concluding chapter are some fi nal refl ections on 
moral development, perception, and behavior vis- à -vis a deeper reality of human 
connection.  
 •  How do Hoff man’s and Kohlberg’s theories diff er with respect to the main 
sources of moral motivation? Describe the respective categories of knowledge to 

264 
■ Appendix
which the theories refer. How does this epistemological diff erence relate to the 
issue of moral motivation? 
 •  Are Kohlberg’s and Hoff man’s theories integrable? What is Gibbs’s view? 
 •  Regarding moral perception and the question of a deeper reality, what paradox 
seems to be involved? 

265
■ n o t e s  
 ■ Chapter 1 
 1 .  In the physical sciences, post-modernist or subjectivist critiques of objectiv-
ity and rationality have lost considerable credibility (Gross & Leavitt, 1994; Sokol & 
Bricmont, 1999).  
 2 .  Applying the condition of reversibility by taking another’s perspective means, accord-
ing to Baier (1965), that one should refl ect on whether one would like it if one’s act were 
done to oneself; i.e., that one should imagine oneself in the place of the other person(s). But 
such reversibility, taken at fi rst blush, would work “only if all people are of the same age, sex, 
and health status with identical preferences and aversions” (de Waal, 2013, p. 182). Myers 
(1986) pointed out that adequate application of the condition or principle generally requires 
not only a projection of self into the other’s situation, but also “some understanding of the 
thoughts and feelings of the other person” (p. 21) as well as situational context (see Batson, 
2011, pp. 188–189). Hoff man (2000) termed these two versions of social perspective-taking 
“self-focused” and “other-focused.”  Both versions may be needed for optimal application of 
the condition of reversibility (see Chapter 5). 
 Myers (1986) identifi ed a problem with other-focused perspective-taking: namely, that 
in some cases, for various reasons, it may be “impossible for you to imagine what it is like 
to be the other” (p. 21) and thereby appreciate their thoughts and feelings. Nonetheless, 
“though we could not possibly  be the horse whom we are whipping, or the trapped and 
starved animal whose fur we are wearing, we can imagine such things well enough for 
moral purposes” (Parfi t, 2011, p. 329). 
 3 .  Impartiality, consistency, or equal treatment is sometimes criticized as a problem-
atic principle or unfeasible ideal, especially given what Hoff man (2000) called the “mul-
tiple claimants dilemma.” For example, an impartiality-minded, universalizing parent of a 
college-bound child might ask: “‘If I pay my child’s tuition, [must I also] pay every other’s 
child’s tuition?’” Does impartiality or equality, then, “ask too much of us”? (Frankena, 1973, 
p. 53). Frankena’s answer is: Not necessarily. In the example, perhaps other parents can “do 
likewise [pay tuition] for their children” (p. 54). If not, impartiality does oblige one to make 
a good-faith eff ort “to help other children, too, either directly, or by seeking to improve the 
system”; i.e., to render society more equitable for all legitimate claimants (Frankena, 1973, 
p. 54). Th e multiple-claimants dilemma is further considered in later chapters. 
 4 .  Moral objectivity (as a criterion of moral as distinct from social conventional events) is 
linked instead to the good; that is, to “intrinsic eff ects [of an act] for others’ rights and welfare” 
(Smetana, 2006, p. 121). Insofar as social conventions (and their violation) also have welfare 
eff ects, social domain theorists may have overstated the independence of social conventions 
from the moral domain (see critiques by Fowler, 2007; Gibbs, 2010a; and Royzman, Leeman, & 
Baron, 2009). Turiel (2008) is correct that unjust or oppressive (and, we would add, harmful) 
social conventions and power structures must be clearly identifi ed and resisted.  
 5 .  Haidt (personal communication, July 30, 2012) commented that this relativistic 
statement, meant “fully descriptively,” was “ill-considered” and “not representative” of his 

266 
■ Notes
“whole approach” as explicated in his more recent works. Haidt also characterized, however, 
as “gingerly” (delicate? cautious?) his transition toward the end of his recent work  Righteous 
Mind from descriptively relativistic to normative or prescriptive considerations (specifi cally, 
his advocacy of a Durkheimian version of utilitarianism). Steven Pinker (personal com-
munication, April 22, 2012) commented that Haidt does not “distinguish carefully enough 
between descriptive [or] psychological . . . and normative characterizations of morality.” In 
any event, Haidt’s normative considerations notwithstanding, the quoted passage would 
appear to be consistent with his main approach to morality (see Chapter 2). 
 6 .  Moral judgment or evaluation must be distinguished from moral reform. Although 
moral judgment can be valid, eff ective moral reform does not necessarily follow. Well-
intentioned initiatives may only provoke hostility. For example, a doctor in Italy who served 
Somali immigrants was reluctant (having treated serious medical complications from the 
procedure) to mutilate the genitalia of their daughters. He proposed to parents that he use a 
pin-prick procedure as a harmless symbolic alternative. Th e proposal outraged both cultur-
ally embedded immigrants as a travesty of their tradition, and reformist immigrants as an 
implicit approval of their culture’s subjugation and brutalization of women (Bruni, 2004). 
Th e pin-prick (“ritual nick”) proposal by the American Academy of Pediatricians provoked 
similar outrage (Belluck, May 6, 2010; see Benatar, 2012). Unfortunately, then, attempts at 
moral reform may, at least for a while, only make things worse. (Interestingly, if we seek to 
specify “worse,” we fi nd ourselves back at the  right and the  good .) Kwame Appiah (2010) 
suggested strategies for eff ective moral reform (reviewed by Gibbs, 2011). 
 7 .  Practitioners may appeal to various demonstrably erroneous cultural beliefs concern-
ing harm, such as that clitorises left  intact grow hideously long or sprout branches that 
prevent conception, consigning an un-excised female to a childless future (Ali, 2008; Lacey, 
2002; see also Kopelman, 2001; Nussbaum, 1999). Prospective victims who have been taught 
to accept such erroneous ideas are not in a position to give informed consent (James, 1994; 
Kopelman, 2001). Taking the perspective of “the victim” presupposes that the actual victim 
is adequately informed. As for victimizers, Cecilia Wainryb (2000) called for research on 
the conditions under which appeals to erroneous beliefs are seen as legitimate excuses. 
 8 .  Note the contradiction between the relativistic premise and the non-relative appeal: 
 Relativists who say it is wrong to eliminate rituals that give meaning to other cultures 
[or] . . . make [other] intercultural judgments about tolerance, group benefi t, intersoci-
etal respect, or cultural diversity . . . are . . . inconsistent in making a judgment that pre-
sumes to have genuine cross-cultural moral authority. (Kopelman, 2001, pp. 319–320)  
 Similarly inconsistent are “students who reject the language of morality [yet] have no 
qualms about expressing their disapproval of sexual harassment, child labor in sweatshops, 
and unfair treatment of graduate teaching assistants” (Bloom, 2004, p. 130). Colby (2008) 
also noted that college students’ overall ethical nihilism or relativism does not appear to 
deter their willingness to take “normative positions on specifi c ethical questions” (p. 399). 
 9  .   Along with justice, “respect for the person” is oft en deemed to be integral to intrin-
sic, right-or-wrong-in-itself considerations in morality. Intrinsic moral considerations are 
typically termed  deontological and qualitatively distinguished from approaches that posit 
morality to reside, not in the right or wrong of the act itself, but instead in its human social 
utility or consequences. Joshua Greene (2008a) has argued against this distinction, sug-
gesting instead an empathy–reasoning distinction in which “respect for the person” (and 

Notes 
■ 267
deontology generally) reduces to “up close and personal” (p. 70); i.e., pertains to primary 
“emotional moral intuitions” (Greene, 2008b, p. 105). Deontology only seems “rational” 
given post hoc cognitive reconstructions of these emotional intuitions (p. 105). Whereas 
“deontological judgment is aff ective at its core” (Greene, 2008a, p. 65), utilitarian cal-
culations of greatest-good consequences for the group are seen as “grounded in moral 
 reasoning ” (p. 36). 
 Greene’s claims are questionable. Is deontology primarily aff ective and utilitarianism 
primarily cognitive? More specifi cally: Is the deontological wrong of harming an innocent 
individual  primarily a matter of the “up close and personal” emotion of empathic distress 
for the imagined victim? Is the motive to consider consequences for others or identify the 
greatest good of the group  primarily a matter of (“grounded in”) moral reasoning, fun-
damentally distinct from “up close and personal” empathy for the individual? Greene’s 
distinction relates to the observation that “our feelings of benevolence and sympathy are 
more easily aroused by specifi c human beings than by a large group in which no individu-
als stand out” (Singer, 1981, p. 157; Slovic, 2007; see Chapter 5). Regarding group welfare, 
computing what is collectively more benefi cial presumably does entail some low-aff ect util-
itarian calculations, as evidenced in greater working-memory than emotion-related brain-
neuronal activation (e.g., Greene, Morelli, Lowenberg, Nystrom, & Cohen, 2008; Greene, 
Sommerville, Nystrom, Darley, & Cohen, 2001; but see Miller, 2008; Sauer, 2012). 
 Th e distinction between less and more “easily aroused,” however, is merely quantitative. 
Although less intense than for the individual, empathy (aff ective primacy) can also ground 
concern for the group (see Chapter 5). As Vivek Viswanathan (2008) put the point: “It is 
not a lack of empathy that brings about utilitarianism. It is full empathy” (Viswanathan, 
February/March, 2008, p. 35). Jeremy Bentham’s cold temperament (Haidt, 2012) not-
withstanding, “even the ‘rational’ utilitarian wants to make people happy” (Gopnik, 2009, 
p. 215). Michael Gill and Shaun Nichols (2008) considered it “likely that compassion played 
a critical causal role in the cultural success of . . . the utilitarian rule to minimize suff ering” 
(p. 159). Indeed, empathy or the “‘feeling of unity’ with others” may constitute the very basis 
of utilitarian morality (Hoff man, 1982, p. 88). 
 Greene and colleagues’ argument may be characterized as a “dual process” model (e.g., 
Valdesolo & DeSteno, 2008; Evans & Stanovich, 2013), but it is one that clearly diff ers from 
ours. We will argue in this book for a formulation of “dual process” (we prefer the term  co-
primacy ) that takes seriously the traditional deontological-consequentialist distinction in 
ethics. In these terms, we have posited a distinction between the right (fairness, consistency, 
impartiality, equality, respect for the person in his or her own right) and the good (empa-
thy, benevolence, welfare, caring for the individual or group). Although oft en coextensive 
with “up close and personal” caring, respect for the person does have a place along with 
justice under “the right” rubric. Th is placement is justifi ed given that  dis respect is logically 
inconsistent and unfair; i.e., fails the condition of reversibility: Treating another person 
as a means to one’s own selfi sh ends is morally wrong insofar as it contradicts how the 
emotionally healthy person expects to be treated by other persons. Hence, both justice and 
respect for the person may be considered to be deontological or rational (cf. Beauchamp 
& Childress, 2009). Greene does not consider the referent for “deontological” used in this 
book and elsewhere; namely, the condition of reversibility or interchangeability of perspec-
tives (e.g., Pinker, 2011). Insofar as it relates to the condition of reversibility (and rationality 
generally), deontology per se is not empathic but  cognitive “at its core” or foundation. 

268 
■ Notes
  10 .  Actually, Beauchamp and Childress (2009) keep these concepts distinct on the 
grounds that confl ating non-malefi cence and benefi cence into a single principle obscures 
important distinctions. Obligations not to harm others (e.g., those prohibiting theft , dis-
ablement, and killing) are distinct from obligations to help others (e.g., those prescribing 
the provision of benefi ts, protection of interests, and promotion of welfare) (p. 150). 
 11 .  Like the right and the good, cognition and aff ect “always remain indissociable although 
distinct” (Piaget, 1973/1972, p. 47; cf. Cowan, 1982). Th is thesis relates to motivational co-
primacy (see Chapter 6) and represents an intermediate position in the literature. Some argue 
that cognition and aff ect (and, for that matter, overt behavior) are so intimately interrelated 
in so many diverse ways that the very distinction, even for heuristic purposes, is spurious, 
and therefore that human functioning should be conceptualized anew using distinctions and 
constructs that may be more tenable (e.g., Damon, 1977; Haidt, 2012; Rest, 1983). For exam-
ple, Haidt (2012) suggested that we conceptualize human functioning in terms of “kinds of 
cognition” (p. 45); specifi cally, automatic versus deliberate information-processing or “intu-
ition versus reasoning” (p. 46). (Th is cognitive emphasis does not represent the thrust of 
Haidt’s theory; see Chapter 2.) Others (e.g., Metcalfe & Mischel, 1999; Zajonc, 1984) argue 
that aff ect is a separate system that can function prior to and independently of cognition. 
Again, we retain aff ect-cognition as validly capturing motivational aspects of human psycho-
logical functioning that are distinguishable yet intimately interrelated.  
 ■ Chapter 2 
 1 .  Th ese three themes represent the three “principles that have emerged as unifying 
ideas” described in Haidt and Kesebir (2010, p. 798). Haidt (personal communication, 
August 26, 2012) suggested that I “take [his] principles verbatim.” Th is I have done with 
respect to “intuitive primacy” (although I also refer to this theme as that of “aff ective pri-
macy,” a characterization that I explain elsewhere). My reference to Durkheimian in-group 
solidarity is adapted from, but, I believe, captures the spirit of Haidt’s “morality binds and 
builds” (Haidt & Kesebir, 2010, p. 814; cf. “morality binds and blinds,” Haidt, 2012, p. 187); 
as does “social persuasion” for “moral thinking is for social doing” (“moral thinking is done 
in order to help the social agent succeed in the social order”; Haidt & Kesebir, 2010, p. 808). 
I address Haidt’s (2012) broad descriptivist view of morality (“there’s more to morality than 
harm and fairness”) in Chapter 1. 
 2 .  Haidt (personal communication, July 30, 2012) objected that “internalization” of 
cultural norms does not capture the prior role of modules, which “develop . . . in variable 
ways depending on cultural and individual experience.” Haidt and Bjorklund (2008a) even 
suggested that moral development is a matter of “assisted externalization,” whereby cul-
tural guidance and examples enable a child’s innate morality to emerge and “confi gure itself 
properly” (p. 206). A more cautious formulation is that biologically prepared predispo-
sitions (especially empathy) are recruited to foster the child’s internalization of prosocial 
norms (see Damon, 1988; Hoff man, 2000; see also Chapter 5). 
 3 .  Th e intuitions may number more than fi ve (Haidt & Kesebir, 2010) or six (Haidt, 
2012). Haidt (2012) suggested the possibility of “additional innate modules that give rise to 
additional moral intuitions” (p. 150). Contested is whether such additions refl ect a process 
of scientifi c discovery or of ad hoc invention (see Suhler & Churchland, 2011; versus Haidt 
& Joseph, 2011). As of late 2012, Haidt (personal communication, November 9, 2012) and 
colleagues were preparing a set of formal criteria for identifying moral modules. 

Notes 
■ 269
 4 .  Haidt’s preference (personal communication, July 30, 2012) is for the term  intuitive pri-
macy. Th e preference is understandable. Yet the more generic term  aff ective primacy would 
seem to capture more aptly Haidt’s (2012) endorsement of David Hume’s characterization 
of reason as serving “the passions” or sentiments. Although Haidt has sought to conceptual-
ize intuition as a kind of cognition, his experimental work has been more Humean (aff ec-
tive) in intent, “meant to  erode  [the] assumption [of] many intuitionists [such as] Aristotle 
and Hutcheson and Whewell and Ross and Moore . . . that your intuitions have given you 
some kind of knowledge” (Appiah, 2008, p. 149, emphasis added). Nor does Haidt’s work 
comprehensively represent “intuition” as “a wide-ranging phenomenon, incorporating both 
snap visual judgments and mathematical insights” (Lynch, 2012, p. 26). 
 5 .  Piaget’s (1972/1973) explicit discussion of the infl uential role of “the cognitive 
unconscious,” as well as his discussion of implicit social cognitive modes evident in 
game-playing behavior (Piaget, 1932/1965), discredits claims that Piaget “failed to con-
sider the possibility that the knowledge driving . . . behavior is unconscious” (Hauser, 
2006, p. 170). Haidt referred “to Kohlberg, Piaget, and Turiel as rationalists to highlight 
their contrast with intuitionism” (p. 324); yet “rationalist,” with its conscious-deliberation 
connotation, belies Piaget’s thoughtful articulation of unconscious cognitive processes 
and structures. Haidt did acknowledge that Kohlberg described himself as a constructiv-
ist, not as a rationalist.  
 6 .  Th e “legacy of moral reasoning that had taken place beforehand” refers not only to 
benefi ts of prior private and mature moral refl ection such as the rescuer’s, but to the collec-
tive heritage of moral achievements in human history as well. Our “intuitions” today, for 
example, that we should not “burn heretics, keep slaves, whip children, or break criminals 
on the wheel” owe much to “ferocious” moral reasoning debates and eventual moral revolu-
tions that took place centuries ago (Pinker, 2011, p. 644; cf. Appiah, 2010). 
 7 .  In Chapter 1, we identifi ed social perspective-taking and reversibility as central to 
morality, and thereby distinguished sociomoral development from Haidt’s relativistic pro-
cesses of enculturation (see also Gibbs, 2013). 
 ■ Chapter 3 
 1 .  Kohlberg and colleagues’ Moral Judgment Interview (MJI; Colby et al., 1987) and 
related measures (e.g., the Sociomoral Refl ection Measure–Short Form; Gibbs, Basinger, & 
Fuller, 1992) emphasize moral values (e.g., contract, truth, and property) that tend to “pull” 
for justifi cations of right and wrong. Benefi cent moral values (e.g., helping others and sav-
ing another’s life) are also addressed, however, in these measures (cf. Eisenberg, 1982). 
Th ese moral values of the right and the good have generally been rated as “important” 
or “very important” in diverse cultures (see Gibbs et al., 2007). In these measures and the 
cognitive developmental approach,  moral judgment refers to a reasoned or justifi ed and 
prescriptive social evaluation or decision. It should be noted that “moral judgment” is used 
interchangeably with “moral evaluation” in the social intuitionist approach (e.g., Haidt, 
2012; Haidt & Bjorklund, 2008a, 2008b). Augusto Blasi observed (personal communica-
tion, September 12, 2012) that (prior or current) “reasoning is essential for Kohlberg’s and 
Piaget’s [conceptualization of] moral judgment, but not for Haidt’s.” 
 2 .  Piaget generally took a strong domain-general view, depicting cognitive development 
as one and the same phenomenon whether viewed socially or non-socially. In technical 
terms, inter-individual mental operations of a certain stage were seen as isomorphic to 

270 
■ Notes
intra-individual operations of that stage (Piaget, 1967/1971). Kohlberg was initially sympa-
thetic to Piaget’s broad or domain-general view. In fact, he (Kohlberg, 1964) initially exam-
ined moral judgment trends that seemed to refl ect cognitive development. Subsequently, 
however, Kohlberg (1984) came to stress temporal orders of parallel construction across 
subdomains (with each latter construction emerging contemporaneously or later in time, 
if at all): A given non-social cognitive stage is seen as necessary but not suffi  cient for the 
attainment of a parallel social perspective-taking stage, which in turn is necessary but not 
suffi  cient for the attainment of a parallel moral judgment stage. William Damon (1977) pro-
posed an intermediate position: Although a certain logical operational construction may 
be necessary but not suffi  cient for a certain social cognitive construction, the logical con-
struction may emerge in the social subdomain  before it does in the non-social subdomain 
(which could happen if a child has, for example, “some kind of block against mathematical 
problems,” p. 322). Damon’s may be the most defensible position, given the problem of stage 
mixture discussed later in the chapter.  
 3 .  Although mature moral judgment is primarily governed by intentions rather than 
consequences, consequences of course remain relevant to some extent—especially insofar 
as they may refl ect negligence (in eff ect, an inadequate intentionality). Decades ago, Roger 
Brown (1965) observed that moral judgments acknowledge 
 something that might be called the seriousness or importance of what happens. . . . If 
a pedestrian is killed by a motorist, that is more serious than if a pedestrian is only 
knocked down. . . . Th e law . . . oft en punishes in terms of the objective event rather than 
the intention. . . . It gives people a reason [or incentive] to acquire knowledge and control 
their intentions [or negligent behavior]. (pp. 239–240)    
 4 .  Seemingly contradictory to Flavell et al.’s description is Alison Gopnik’s (2009) sug-
gestion that babies and young children have a “lantern consciousness” such that they “are 
vividly aware of everything without being focused on any one thing in particular” (p. 129). 
Flavell’s suggestion may be closer to the mark, given its consistency with the considerable 
evidence (partially reviewed in this chapter) concerning the unidimensional cognitive ten-
dency and limited working memory of young children. Th eir quickly fl uctuating shift s of 
attention to various salient or interesting features in their surroundings (hence their greater 
tendency to pick up peripheral or incidental information) may mean, however, that their 
awareness is  in eff ect lantern-like. 
 5 .   Social construction in the Piagetian sense diff ers almost diametrically from some 
other usages. For example, in the 1960s, Foucault, Derrida, and other post-modernists used 
 social construction or  social constructivism  to characterize the scientifi c process as having 
more to do with social convention, contingency, and political power than with rational-
ity, logical necessity, or an objective knowledge of nature (these critiques lost considerable 
credibility in subsequent years; see Gross & Leavitt, 1994; Sokol & Bricmont, 1999). Social 
psychologists such as Haidt have similarly critiqued moral development, equating “social 
construction” with relativistic enculturation processes and expressing skepticism regard-
ing rationality, objectivity, and moral knowledge (e.g., Haidt, 2012; Haidt & Bjorklund, 
2008a, 2008b). 
 6 .  Although this condition is fascinating for its elucidation of construction as de-
confounded from internalization, experimental conditions in which one disputant in the 
dyad is at a slightly more advanced level oft en stimulate greater gains in both logical and 

Notes 
■ 271
moral judgment (e.g., Kuhn, 1972; Murray, 1982; L. J. Walker, 1983). In Vygotsky’s (1930–
1935/1978) terms, optimal growth typically takes place within the child’s “zone of proximal 
development.” 
 7 .  Although qualitative and crucial, the diff erence depicted by Brown (1965) does not 
refl ect abrupt change. Th rough the child and adolescent years, understanding and apprecia-
tion of the logical–empirical distinction gradually becomes “more stable, more generaliz-
able, and more imbued with feelings of necessity” (Flavell et al., 2002, p. 146; cf. Miller 
et al., 2000; Morris & Sloutsky, 2001; Winer & McGlone, 1993; Winer, Craig, & Weinbaum, 
1992). Th e epistemological and ontological signifi cance of the logical–empirical distinction 
is explored in Chapter 10. 
 8 .  Although one can violate logical or moral necessity in thought or speech, the ideal 
remains: “Th inking or saying that one plus one equals three or that it is right to gratu-
itously harm someone does not make it so.” Th e logical–moral parallel stops there, however: 
“Although a moral rule violation may be wrong, it is nonetheless possible to commit it (to 
gratuitously harm someone); but in some sense [despite tricks] it is not actually possible to 
violate logic (to add one plus one and actually produce three)” (Laupa, 2000, p. 30). 
 9 .  Retributive justice can have a more mature aim than that of mere retaliation or “get-
ting even.” If mixed with ideal reciprocity, revenge seeks to educate the off ender, or shatter 
his or her self-centeredness and other self-serving cognitive distortions, as when the pro-
spective avenger wonders “how he’d [the off ender would] like it if the same thing were done 
to him” (Lewis, 1962, p. 94; cf. Gollwitzer & Denzler, 2009). Moral education and the cor-
recting of self-serving cognitive distortions are discussed in Chapter 8.  
 10 .  Appeals to the futility of cycles of vengeance and to forgiveness do not necessarily 
imply unqualifi ed tolerance or pacifi sm. Some situations are accurately perceived as requir-
ing defense of self or others.  
 11 .  In contrast to this tribesman’s enthusiasm for social institutions of law and con-
fl ict-mediation, a New Guinea Highlands tribesman who worked for a multinational cor-
poration was more ambivalent (Diamond, April 21, 2008). Th e New Guinea tribesman 
acknowledged that “Letting the government settle disputes by means of the legal system 
[is] better [than being] trapped in our endless cycles of revenge killings” (p. 84). Yet the 
New Guinea tribesman also expressed euphoria, pride, relief, and a sense of satisfaction 
in having accomplished a revenge killing, and regretted that he would not be allowed to 
continue such activity. 
 Particularly thoughtful was a former boy soldier’s conclusion that  
 revenge is not good. We are all brothers and sisters. I joined the army to avenge the 
deaths of my family and to survive, but I’ve come to learn that if I am going to take 
revenge, in that process I will kill another person whose family will want revenge, then 
revenge and revenge and revenge will never come to an end. (Beah, 2007, p. 199) 
 12 .  Such lead-in statements were as eff ective as moral dilemmas, a fi nding (see Basinger, 
Gibbs, & Fuller, 1995; Gibbs et al., 2007) that obviated various criticisms of Kohlberg’s the-
ory that were based on his use of dilemmas in stage assessment. For example, referring to 
the cognitive demands of dilemmas, Haidt (2012) attributed resulting age trends to increas-
ing verbal sophistication: “If you force kids to explain complex notions, such as how to 
balance competing concerns about rights and justice, you’re guaranteed to fi nd age trends 
because kids get so much more articulate with each passing year” (p. 9). Identifi cation 

272 
■ Notes
of the common age trend across dilemma and  non -dilemma methods undermines this 
argument and supports a cognitive developmental interpretation of the age trend (Gibbs 
et al., 2007).  
 13 .  Th e active and intrinsic-motivation character of the child’s “exercise” of schemas in 
transactions with the environment was aptly described decades ago by Robert White (1959) 
as an “eff ectance” motive. Th e child 
 selects for continuous treatment those aspects of his environment which he fi nds it 
possible to aff ect in some way. His behavior is selective, directed, persistent—in short, 
motivated. . . . Th e [intrinsically motivated] behavior exhibits a little of everything [e.g., 
play, curiosity, exploration, boredom relief, stimulus hunger or sensation-seeking, and 
mastery or competence motivation] . . . [In] playful exploration [the child is] constantly 
circling from stimulus to perception to action to eff ect to stimulus to perception, and so 
on around [cf. Neisser, 1976]. . . . Satisfaction [or a “feeling of effi  cacy”] has to be seen as 
lying in a considerable  series of transactions, in a  trend of behavior  rather than  [in drive 
or tension reduction or in] a goal that is achieved. (pp. 320–322, emphases added) 
 Eff ectance activity or the playful exercise of schemas makes at least two important 
theoretical contributions. First, this championing of human curiosity helps counter overly 
pragmatic or instrumental accounts of human reason (e.g., Haidt; see ; s Chapter 2; Krebs 
& Denton, 2005) and evolution (see Chapter 10). Second, the point that eff ectance-moti-
vated schemas can in their own right generate aff ect (satisfaction, feeling of effi  cacy, dis-
tress over logic violation) introduces an important motivational distinction into Cowan’s 
(1982) suggestion that schemas “vary on a continuum from those which appear as primar-
ily aff ective [cf. aff ective primacy] to [those] which appear highly cognitive [cf. cognitive 
primacy]” (p. 59). Although Haidt (2006) did not note these contributions, he did note 
that eff ectance and mastery opportunities foster human fl ourishing in personal and cul-
tural contexts.  
 14 .   Despite criticism (e.g., Klahr, 1982), Piaget’s concept of adaptation as entailing a 
dynamic balance of assimilatory and accommodative aspects—and in particular, of  mal -
adaptation in terms of  over- assimilation or  over- accommodation, stimulating, in some 
cases, disequilibration and reequilibration—has continued to fi nd valuable application in 
identity development (e.g., Whitbourne & Connolly, 1999), ego development (Rathunde & 
Czikszentmahlyi, 2006), parenting interventions with disturbed children (Cowan, Powell, 
& Cowan, 1998), and other areas of developmental psychology. Siegler and Svetina (2006) 
found some cases of instability (interpretable as disequilibration) in their cognitive devel-
opmental facilitation study. 
 ■ Chapter 4 
 1 .  Roger Bergman (2006) correctly pointed out that the three-level typology was a minor 
element in Dewey’s overall constructivist philosophy of development, and that Kohlberg 
was also inspired by Dewey’s constructivism. Th e fact remains, however, that Kohlberg 
(1991/1985) did explicitly attribute his preconventional-conventional-postconventional 
scheme to Dewey (Gibbs, 2006a). 
 2 .  Despite his own caveat regarding variability in usage, Piaget (1932/1965) did at 
numerous points refer to his overlapping phases as “stages.” 
 3 .  Colby (2008) urged college educators to move beyond a laissez-faire attitude: 

Notes 
■ 273
 College students’ moral relativism ought to be cause for concern among educators, 
because beliefs such as “everyone is entitled to his own opinion and there is no way to eval-
uate the validity of those opinions,” prevent students from engaging fully in discussions 
of ethical issues, learning to articulate and eff ectively justify their views, and adopting 
new perspectives when presented with high quality evidence and arguments. (p. 399) 
 4 .  As indicated later in the chapter, Moral Type B also entails some moral independence 
vis- à -vis “customary morality.”  
 5 .  Stage 6’s suspension was only temporary. Despite its empirical rarity, Stage 6 was sub-
sequently revised further and reintroduced as the philosophical end state of moral judg-
ment development (Reed, 1997; see Kohlberg, Boyd, & Levine, 1990). 
 6 .   Haidt (2006) doubted the value of such existential questioning. He suggested instead 
an emphasis on fulfi lling social relationships and cultural contexts: “I don’t believe there is 
an inspiring answer to the question, ‘What is the purpose of life?’ Yet by drawing on ancient 
wisdom and modern science, we can fi nd compelling answers to the question of purpose 
 within life” (p. 238). 
 7 .  Although our reconceptualization off ers a new view of lifespan moral judgment 
and refl ection, the view derives from an initial formulation in the late 1970s (see Gibbs, 
1977, 1979). 
 ■ Chapter 5 
 1 .  Th e more widely noted of Gilligan’s (1982) claims, that female respondents are arti-
factually downscored in Kohlberg’s stage system, has been generally disconfi rmed (Walker, 
1995). In fact, females are oft en found to be more advanced than males in moral judg-
ment during early adolescence (e.g., Garmon, Basinger, Gregg, & Gibbs, 1996; Gibbs et al., 
2007; Silberman & Snarey, 1993). Gilligan also claimed that males favor justice and rights in 
their moral judgment, whereas females favor care-related concerns. Th ere is some support 
especially for the latter part of this claim: Care-related concerns are more prevalent in the 
moral judgments of females than males, especially when open-ended assessment methods 
are used (Garmon et al., 1996; Gibbs, Arnold, & Burkhart, 1984; Gielen, Comunian, & 
Antoni, 1994; Jaff ee & Hyde, 2000; cf. Hoff man, 1975b, 1976, 1977, 2008). Th is gender dif-
ference disappears when participants are asked to recollect “personal” (care-related) moral 
dilemmas and make moral judgments in that context (Walker, 1995), indicating that males 
 can , but tend not to, use prominent levels of care-related concerns in their moral judgment 
(cf. Moshman, 2011). Th e reference to moral  judgment  more than moral  feeling renders 
Gilligan’s work a less suitable vehicle than Hoff man’s for exploring the aff ective-primacy 
strand of moral development. 
 2 .  Prosocial behavior refers to benefi cence, or acts intended to benefi t another. In our 
usage of  prosocial behavior, we imply further that the acts are  altruistic ; that is, motivated 
by a justice- and/or welfare-based concerns for others despite personal costs. Th is further 
implication is oft en diffi  cult to establish in practice, however (Eisenberg, Fabes, & Spinrad, 
2006).  Exemplary prosocial behavior appears, at least from the outside, to entail substantial 
personal cost (see Chapter 6).  
  3  .   Particularly suggestive of such a biological substratum are case studies of the behavior 
of patients with brain damage in these areas. Patients who had sustained damage to the 
ventromedial prefrontal region of their brains no longer showed empathy or other feelings, 

274 
■ Notes
rendering their emotions shallow and their “decision-making landscape hopelessly fl at” 
(Damasio, 1999, p. 51). Th ey could formulate plans but not implement them and could 
not maintain gainful employment (in our Chapter 6 terminology, they had lost all “ego 
strength”). One patient’s lack of moral enactment was evident despite his mature level of 
moral judgment, as measured by Kohlberg et al.’s Moral Judgment Interview (Colby et al., 
1987). Haidt (2012; and see Chapter 2 herein) interpreted Damasio’s fi ndings as support for 
his Hume-inspired aff ective-primacy (rather than cognitive-primacy or co-primacy) view 
of moral motivation: 
 Here were people in whom brain damage had essentially shut down communication 
between the rational soul and the seething passions of the body. . . . Yet the result of the 
separation was not the liberation of reason from the thrall of the passions. It was the 
shocking revelation that reasoning  requires  the passions. . . . Th e collapse of decision-
making, even in purely analytic and organizational tasks, was pervasive. Th e head can’t 
even do head stuff  without the heart. (p. 34) 
  Besides “the passions,” what else has “shut down” in Damasio’s brain-lesion patients? 
Elsewhere (see Chapter 3 notes) we describe an intrinsic motivation to explore (“eff ectance 
motive”). Th is basic exploratory tendency accords to reasoning a more fundamental moti-
vational status (cognitive primacy) than that of servant to “the thrall of the passions” (aff ec-
tive primacy). Th e patients’ brain lesions may have been so severe as to extinguish even 
the neural prerequisites for exploratory behavior, reasoning, concern for consistency or 
rationality, and other “head stuff ” (executive function, decision-making, etc.). Instead of 
support for exclusively aff ective primacy in morality, the more cautious conclusion from 
Damasio’s fi ndings is simply that certain brain lesions can shut down both aff ective and 
cognitive sources of motivation needed for sociomoral and goal-directed behavior. 
 4 .  Although their underlying emotions are more complex, even “decentered” adults can 
be captured for a while by the salience of familiar cues. One of Hoff man’s close friends, who 
had cancer, 
  just wanted to talk as usual about sports and the stock market, and with the usual gusto—
about anything but his condition. Had I been openly empathic it could have disrupted 
his denial, so I went along,  got lost in conversation and enjoyed myself; empathic distress 
was kept under control in the back of my mind, but it returned aft erward. (Hoff man, 
2000, p. 81, emphasis added)    
 5 .  Perspective-taking is the more general term (“children may be able to understand 
another’s perspective without knowing anything about the person’s role [in a social struc-
ture]”; Maccoby, 1980, p. 317). Hence, Hoff man (personal communication, September 19, 
2002), since the publication of his book (Hoff man, 2000) has dropped the  role-taking term 
and uses  perspective-taking exclusively (e.g., Hoff man, 2008).  
 6 .  Batson (2011) argued that “valuing the other’s welfare” is “a more fundamental source 
of empathic concern,” partly because perspective-taking spontaneously fl ows from other-
valuing (p. 228). A fundamental valuing of another’s welfare relates to the basic arousal 
modes in Hoff man’s theory. 
 7 .  An interesting question pertains to the degree of eff ectiveness of blaming the vic-
tim and other cognitive distortions in preempting or neutralizing empathy and guilt. 
Maintaining self-serving cognitive distortions may require the expenditure of cognitive 

Notes 
■ 275
resources (see Chapter 7). Th at the success of such rationalizations is less than complete for 
many antisocial individuals off ers some hope for intervention (see Chapter 8). 
 8 .  Hoff man derived this now-widely used discipline typology (induction, power asser-
tion, love withdrawal) from his (and others’) extensive socialization research fi ndings (e.g., 
Hoff man, 1960, 1963, 1970; Hoff man & Saltzstein, 1967). Krevans, Patrick, and I (in consul-
tation with Hoff man) updated and revised Hoff man’s original parental discipline question-
naire. Th e result, termed the Perceived Parental Discipline (PPD) questionnaire, is available 
from Patrick or me. 
 9 .  Intense confl icts involving a recalcitrant child are sometimes handled with the con-
sistent, sustained application of a “time-out” technique whereby the child is sequestered 
(e.g., placed in a “naughty corner,” or, for older children, “refl ection chair”) for a period of 
time. As a popular television show  Supernanny (Powell, 2008) demonstrated, the time-out 
consequence works best when it is framed in moral or social perspective-taking terms (the 
sequestered child is reminded in clear, simple terms of why their act was wrong or harm-
ful, and a “sorry” is elicited and accepted; older children may progress from the “refl ection 
chair” to the “communication couch” eventuating in [one hopes] an apology and parent–
child reconciliation). 
 10 .  Krevans and I fi rst presented our work as a conference paper in 1991 (Krevans & 
Gibbs, 1991) and subsequently published it in 1996. We were unaware of Janssens’s and 
Gerris’s (1992) research report, nor were they aware of ours (Janssens, personal commu-
nication, December 5, 2002). Th at two independent studies using diff erent methods found 
such similar results bolsters confi dence in the validity of the support for Hoff man’s induc-
tive discipline theory. 
 11 .  Where power assertion is less harsh, corporal punishment is culturally normative, 
and the physical punishment is not interpreted as rejection by the child, the negative rela-
tionship between power assertion and children’s empathy or prosocial behavior may not 
hold (Dodge, McLoyd, & Lansford, 2005). 
 12 .  It is even possible that other-oriented inductions can be counterproductive by pre-
adolescence. Some mothers commented to researcher Julia Krevans that their early-adoles-
cent children were oft en already aware of how a transgression of theirs had harmed another 
and would have felt hurt, scolded, or “talked down to” by an explicit description (Krevans, 
personal communication, December 30, 2002). Perhaps expressing disappointed expecta-
tions and confi dence in the prospect of better future conduct is more eff ective once children 
reach adolescence, as a recent study (Patrick & Gibbs, 2012) suggests. 
 ■ Chapter 6 
 1 .  Interestingly, Hoff man (2000) suggested that not only the basic but even the advanced 
arousal modes (verbally mediated association, perspective-taking) can contribute to sud-
den responding: “If one is paying attention to the victim, they too can be fast-acting, invol-
untary, and triggered immediately on witnessing the victim’s situation” (p. 61). Th is point 
challenges relegations of complex cognitive processes to “slow” and “cool” mental systems 
(e.g., Haidt & Bjorklund, 2008a; cf. Metcalfe & Mischel, 1999). 
 2 .  Marta Laupa (2000) suggested that “2 plus 2 equals 4” involves symbolic notation 
and hence does not illustrate numerical or logical necessity as well as do propositions 
such as “the combination of two actual quantities is greater than either of the original 
quantities” (p. 22). 

276 
■ Notes
 3 .  Anthropologist Robert Edgerton (1992) provided a poignant example of profound 
moral perception of common humanity (and moral courage): 
 Some time in the early nineteenth century, Knife Chief, the political leader of the Skidi 
Pawnee and a greatly respected man, decided that human sacrifi ce was cruel and unnec-
essary. . . . He began to speak against the practice, and in 1817 he attempted to halt the 
sacrifi ce of a captive girl. Just before the torture of the young victim was about to begin, 
Knife Chief’s son, by all accounts the most honored warrior among the Skidi Pawnee, 
stepped in front of the girl and declared that it was his father’s wish that she be set free. 
As the Pawnee audience looked on in amazement he freed the girl, threw her on his 
horse, and delivered her safely to her own people. A year later, father and son again pre-
vented a sacrifi ce—this time of a ten-year-old Spanish boy—by ransoming the captive 
from a warrior who was determined to off er the child for sacrifi ce. 
 As courageous, determined, and infl uential as Knife Chief and his son were, their 
eff orts to put an end to the practice of human sacrifi ce failed. Led by their priests, the 
Skidi Pawnee continued to propitiate the Morning Star by sacrifi cing human captives at 
least until 1834 and perhaps much longer. Knife Chief and his son had failed, but they 
stand as striking examples of individuals who did everything in their power to change a 
custom that they found abhorrent, even though that custom was held sacred by the rest 
of their society. (p. 143) 
 4 .  We posit moral identity as a major motivational primacy mainly in individuals for 
whom personal and moral goals are highly integrated (although salient wrong and harm 
to others can pose a problem of inconsistency and guilt for those with even modest moral 
self-relevance; see Chapter 7). In contrast, Damon (1996) saw a more widespread impact on 
motivation: “Toward the end of childhood, . . . children . . . begin thinking about themselves 
in terms of how kind, just, and responsible they are. . . . Th is [closer link between their moral 
interests and their self-concept or identity] leads to a bit more predictability between chil-
dren’s moral judgment and their conduct” (p. 221; cf. Patrick & Gibbs, 2012). 
 5 .  Perhaps not totally realistic or veridical. Some studies suggest that seeing one’s self 
and capabilities or prospects for success as “ slightly better than they are” may be adaptive 
and mentally healthy (Baumeister, 1989, p. 182, emphasis added; cf. Haaga & Beck, 1994; 
Taylor & Brown, 1994). 
 ■ Chapter 7 
 1 .  Self-Centered on the group level is termed  in-group or  ethnocentric bias (cf.  empathic 
bias ). Although in-group bias or favoritism does not necessarily lead to out-group deroga-
tion or hostility (Brewer, 2007; Haidt, 2012; and see Chapter 2), it oft en does. As Edgerton 
(1992) noted, “People in many [tribal] societies refer to themselves as ‘the people’ and 
regard all others as alien and repellent, if not downright subhuman. . . . Many people believe 
that their way of life is the only one” (p. 148). Where the group’s beliefs are perceived to be 
uniquely pure and superior (as in ideological extremist groups), group members may even 
consider it a “duty” to kill outsiders. Aft er all, the very existence of these impure inferiors—
especially if they seem to be fl ourishing—is in eff ect an aff ront to the superior group and its 
rightful domination (Husain, 2007). 
 Interestingly, Edgerton noted the dangers to a group that does not even try to rationalize 
or ennoble its ethnocentric aggression as a religious or ceremonial duty: 

Notes 
■ 277
 Unlike most of the North American Indian societies that practiced cannibalism, the 
Tonkawa ate people without religious justifi cation or ceremonial purpose. Th e open 
gusto with which they consumed human fl esh was off ensive to neighboring tribes, and 
the frequent Tonkawa raids in search of more captives were so threatening that in 1862 a 
coalition of six disparate tribes, united only by their detestation of the Tonkawa, attacked 
them and killed half the people in the tribe. (p. 100) 
 2 .  Th e dynamics of harm and self-protective distortion do not always start with Self-
Centered presumptions (whether proactive or reactive). Rather, the start may be the 
ensnarement of an ordinary person in a self-centered (exploitative, corrupt, coercive) 
 culture —evident all too oft en across fi nancial (Toffl  er, 2003), competitive-sport, corporate, 
military, and other institutional contexts. David Moshman (2004, 2007) described such 
dynamics among soldiers indoctrinated and pressured to commit atrocities. Many crimes 
of obedience are accomplished by “otherwise considerate people” (Bandura, 1999, p. 205; 
Kelman & Hamilton, 1989) who ignore or rationalize the harmfulness of their compliant 
actions. To Edmund Burke’s famous statement that “the only thing necessary for the tri-
umph of evil is for good men to do nothing,” Bandura added: “Th e triumph of evil requires 
a lot of good people doing a bit of it in a morally disengaged way with indiff erence to the 
human suff ering they collectively cause” (p. 206).  
  3  .   Edgerton (1992) evaluated as maladaptive the cultural belief among the Ojibwa and 
North American Indian tribes that serious “acts committed while drunk were not intended” 
and hence were excusable. Such cultural extenuations, Edgerton argued, can jeopardize 
group survival: 
 By excusing drunken acts such as murder, rape, incest, and child abuse, the Ojibwa can 
only have encouraged such acts to take place. . . . When a society adopts a belief that . . . no 
one is to be blamed for anything done while drunk, it has adopted a fully warranted pre-
scription for self-destruction. (p. 185)    
  4  .   Interestingly, individuals with pronounced self-debasing cognitive distortions and 
internalizing disorders evidence higher levels of ego development than do individuals with 
pronounced self-serving cognitive distortions and externalizing disorder (reviewed by 
Noam, 1998). 
 ■ Chapter 8 
 1 .  Although social perspective-taking ordinarily promotes empathic concern and 
inhibits aggression (Chapter 5), this link cannot be presumed among antisocial indi-
viduals. Youths high in callous and unemotional traits (a risk factor for, or precursor 
to, psychopathy), for example, may learn merely to “talk the talk” of adequate social 
perspective-taking without actually experiencing empathy for others’ feelings (Dadds, 
Hawes, Frost, et al., 2009). Hope of genuine change in these individuals is not base-
less, however. Given brain neural plasticity (especially at younger ages), it is possible 
that even among children with callous and unemotional traits, some weak “capacity 
for empathy [may] exist” and be strengthened by appropriate social perspective-taking 
intervention (Kahn, 2012, p. 35). In any event, Max’s gains in empathy and perspective-
taking seemed genuine, as evidenced by his subsequent prosocial behavior even when 
not under surveillance.  

278 
■ Notes
 2 .  Although Haidt (2012) has generally been reluctant to transition into normative 
considerations, he does prescribe Durkheimian cultural solidarity toward the end of his 
 Righteous Mind. Th e mutual-help approach in EQUIP is consistent with Haidt’s Durkheimian 
emphasis on the importance of a traditional holistic culture or community for human fl our-
ishing. A key caveat for genuine fl ourishing is that the culture cultivated must be morally 
mature and responsible. (Hence the  just  community emphasis in Kohlberg’s embrace of 
Durkheimian group solidarity; Snarey, 2011.) Furthermore, a cognitive-behavioral curricu-
lum emphasizing cognitive restructuring is typically needed if the just (fair, balanced, legiti-
mate) community or positive mutual-help group is to become an eff ective helping vehicle 
for its (behaviorally at-risk) members. 
 3 .  Th e provision of faith-building opportunities in Positive Peer Culture adds crucially 
to the cognitive-behavioral approach in EQUIP, addressing James Garbarino’s (1999) 
concern that 
 cognitive behavioral programs [by themselves] are not enough to initiate and sustain 
the deep changes necessary for rehabilitation in the long run. Conventional programs 
may succeed in providing some of the needed psychological and social anchors, but they 
are unlikely to provide the spiritual anchors that are required for success with the most 
traumatized, troubled, and violent boys. (pp. 216–217)    
 4 .  Cultivating a positive or receptive group “culture” for caring and change is impor-
tant even for younger or more mainstream groups that are merely at risk. Fortunately, 
such groups may be less recalcitrant and hence may require less group-building work (see 
DiBiase et al., 2012).  
 5 .  Because a cycle of lethal revenge continues indefi nitely, the ultimate consequence is 
death to all or most of the disputants. To make this point with a gang member who was plot-
ting revenge at the funeral of his murdered brother, a youth worker asked: “Look around, do 
you see any old guys here?” (many of the older youths had already been murdered in cycles 
of revenge; Kotlowitz, May 4, 2008, p. 54). Fortunately, in this case, the appeal to ultimate 
consequences was successful and cycles of retaliatory killings thereby preempted. 
  6  .   Where self-centered orientations in the group have  not  declined, introducing this ses-
sion may be counter-productive. One still Self-Centered youth remarked with respect to a 
victim-awareness program: “What about me, man? What about what I have gone through? 
I mean, I want to talk about what hurts me, and all they want to talk about is the people I 
hurt. I won’t do it. Th e whole program stinks” (Garbarino, 1999, p. 139). 
 7 .  A personal note: I experience some pride or satisfaction (and relief from guilt) as I 
refl ect that—so many years aft er I failed to intervene against the victimization of Edward 
(see Chapter 1)—I have spearheaded an intervention program that colleagues have adapted 
both to reduce victimizations and to facilitate the social competence of (otherwise) vulner-
able individuals such as Edward. 
 8 .  Although “disgust” intensifi es the negative moral evaluation of the act, its immorality 
stems from its violation of the condition of reversibility (see Chapter 1). 
 ■ Chapter 9 
 1 .  Also suggestive of an atemporal reality or realm of necessary logico-mathematical 
truths are: (a) the cumulative, non-contradictory character of the history of mathemati-
cal ideas (Piaget, 1967/1971); (b) independent, contemporaneous publications of the same 
mathematical advance; (c) sudden mathematical inspiration or revelation; and (d) the 

Notes 
■ 279
astonishing, eff ortless abilities of mathematical savants (see Davies, 1992). Just as knowl-
edge is not only “necessary” but also contingent or empirical (see Chapter 10), however, 
primary reality is not only timeless or eternal but also dynamic and evolving. Paul Davies 
(1992) noted “the paradoxical conjunction of the temporal and atemporal, of being and 
becoming” in the nature of ultimate reality (p. 38). 
 2 .  Th is question of  objective or  deeply true morality is controversial (see Chapters 1, 
10). Haidt and Bjorklund (2008b) explicitly discounted any notion of objective morality: 
“Moral facts are facts only with respect to a community of human beings that have cre-
ated them. . . . [Th ere are no] objective [moral] facts which would be true for any rational 
creature anywhere in the universe” (p. 214). Piaget (1932/1965) suggested that ideal moral 
necessities of reciprocity and equality are akin to their counterparts in logic or mathematics. 
Penrose (1994) accorded ontologically real (Platonic) foundational status to mathematical 
(and possibly moral) truths “discovered” by the human mind. 
 3 .  Whether some cultures lack these ideals altogether is debated. Even blood-ven-
geance cultures, insofar as positive social exchanges are normatively prescribed in some 
circumstances, can be said to partake of moral ideals to some extent. Genuine exceptions 
are not known. In the famous case of the Ik tribe of East Africa, selfi shness and cruelty 
were not only common but, according to Turnbull (1972), normative. Th e Ik “culture” was 
viewed as having degenerated as a result of severe food shortages, however (de Waal, 1996; 
Edgerton, 1992). Other degenerative cases are discussed by Robert Edgerton (1992). No 
such degenerative conditions were attributed to the Sawi, a tribe of headhunting cannibals 
in New Guinea known for their idealization and practice of treachery and deceit (specifi -
cally, “fattening with friendship” a prospective victim before slaughtering him). Yet even 
the Sawi prescribed genuine intergroup friendship, trust, and peace under certain condi-
tions (following an exchange of babies for rearing in one another’s villages and a joint 
celebration featuring an interweaving non-cannibalistic “you-in-me-I-in-you” dance) 
(Richardson, 2005, p. 174).  
 4 .  Of 37 patients not reporting a near-death experience one to three days aft er the near-
death event, four reported at Time 2 (2 years later) that they  did have a near-death experi-
ence; such cases raise the question of susceptibility to false memories (French, 2001). 
 5 .  Administration of certain drugs also contributed to the cessation of brain wave activ-
ity (Robert Spetzler, personal communication, June 2, 2002). 
 6 .  Two possible exceptions have been reported. Greyson (2000a, in press) found elevated 
but subclinical levels of dissociation among near-death experiencers. Because the study was 
correlational, however, the direction (or directions) of causation between near-death experi-
ences and dissociative tendencies (daydreaming, etc.) could not be determined. Fenwick and 
Fenwick (1995) pointed out that the aff ectless and dreamlike qualities of dissociated states 
contrast with the intense emotions and vividly perceived reality of the near-death experience. 
A second possible exception: Near-death experiences may be more likely if the near-death 
condition occurs at younger ages (studies reviewed by van Lommel, 2001; cf. Long, 2010).  
 7 .  Intriguingly, although judgment and penitence are much more prominent in medi-
eval narratives, 
 in accounts of the light, contemporary testimony bears a striking resemblance to medi-
eval narratives. Both medieval and modern descriptions of otherworld light blend visual 
qualities such as splendor, clarity, and transparency with sensory/emotional eff ects such 
as warmth and energy. . . . Th is mixture of imagery suggests a convergence of knowledge 

280 
■ Notes
and love. . . . Th e visionary may behold a light that is at once all-knowing and all-loving. 
(Zaleski, 1987, p. 125) 
 8 .  A particularly dramatic instance of returning from an NDE to care for others was 
reported by Sabom (2008). During a devastating fi re aboard an airplane (the accident 
occurred on December 17, 1973), a fl ight attendant, struggling for breath, “crawled onto” 
the two remaining seats not yet on fi re. She recounted: 
 Th at’s when I had my experience. It was just all light. It was just incredible happi-
ness and joy! It was indescribable. I saw myself. I was lying there in my uniform. I 
could see myself clearly through the smoke and I thought, “Why aren’t I moving?” 
Th ere was fi re everywhere. . . . But I really didn’t care because I was so happy where 
I was. . . .  
 And I am looking at myself and I’m lying there with my eyes closed because I couldn’t 
breathe. All of a sudden a passenger screamed “Open the window. Somebody open the 
window. Help me!” I thought “I have to help that lady.” Th e next thing I knew, I was back 
in my body. (p. 106) 
 9 .  Noteworthy are the comments of the operating cardiovascular surgeon at Hartford 
Hospital, Hiroyoshi Takata, and his colleagues. Dr. Takata commented: “I cannot explain 
how he [Al Sullivan, the patient] saw these things under the complete sleep of anesthesia.” 
Dr. Takata’s colleague, Dr. Anthony F. Lasala, commented: “Al Sullivan would not know 
of this peculiar behavior of Dr. Takata. I did not tell him [Al] that. . . . Even if he was con-
scious, it would be impossible for Al to see Dr. Takata’s stance or arm movement because Al 
[was] behind the drape that blocks the vision of the patient and his eyes [were] taped shut.” 
Another colleague, Dr. Kathy E. Maliato, Director of Women’s Cardiac Services at Saint 
John’s Health Center, exclaimed almost in exasperation: “So explain that to me. Explain 
that, through chemicals or some other scientifi c explanation. Please explain to me why that 
man knows that” (Ling, 2008). 
 10 .  Since Pam was not yet clinically dead and may have still had some residual (if unde-
tected) brain activity during the autoscopic portion of her experience, perhaps brain activ-
ity somehow generated these aspects. Yet the “how” is problematic: She had “no sight (eyes 
taped shut), no hearing (ear canals plugged), no touch (arms secured under drapes), no 
taste (endotracheal tube in mouth . . . ), no seizure activity, and was under anesthesia deep 
enough to allow for the painless removal of the top of her skull” (Sabom, personal com-
munication, September 20, 2002). Parnia (2006) pointed out that thought processes are 
normally mediated by interacting neural regions in the brain, and that any such “minute” 
residual activity “would be unlikely to lead to adequate electricity being generated for the 
brain cells to communicate with each other” (p. 94). 
 11 .   Ray Hyman (2001) suggested that Pam Reynolds had “the complete report of the 
proceedings” of her operation, from which she could have reconstructed her “experience.” 
In fact, however, Pam had only a fi ve-page summary of the operation, which made no men-
tion of the idiosyncratic details that she accurately reported (concerning the appearance 
of the cranial saw and instrument case, surgery team conversation, etc.; Sabom, personal 
communication, September 20, 2002).  
 12 .  One is reminded of the infl uence of the observer on what is observed at the atomic 
and subatomic levels. Th e infl uence is not totally determinative, however. Th e restriction 
of observational or measurement infl uence to certain ranges within a subatomic “wave” of 

Notes 
■ 281
probability (Lindley, 1996, 1998), refl ecting the “precise . . . mathematical laws that govern 
the quantum world” (of probability of wave collapse or particle manifestation at a given 
location), suggests that subatomic reality is not  totally a function of the subjective observer 
(Penrose, 1994, p. 313; see Chapter 10). 
 ■ Chapter 10 
 1 .  Kielburger (1998) found that, to be taken seriously as a social activist, he had to deal 
with issues such as whether eliminating child labor would “send local currencies plummet-
ing, causing unemployment and economic chaos” in those countries, and whether children 
freed from child labor might end up in even worse circumstances (p. 22). David Brooks 
(April, 2012) commented that “it’s hard not to feel inspired” by such “refreshingly uncyni-
cal” young idealists seeking to do good in underdeveloped countries. Nonetheless, “there’s 
only so much good you can do unless you are willing to confront corruption, venality, 
and disorder head-on” (p. A31). Brooks’s complaint is reminiscent of Inhelder and Piaget’s 
(1958) reference to early formal operational thinkers’ disinclination to accommodate their 
ideals to the constraints of practical reality; only aft er such accommodation is the vision-
ary formal operational thinker “transformed from an idealistic reformer into an achiever” 
(p. 346). Fortunately, decades aft er his early-adolescent idealism—and perhaps precisely 
because of his willingness to deal with stubborn constraints (Streeter & Manning, 2012)—
Kielburger’s work has achieved lasting results.  
 2 .  Although drawing on cognitive and aff ective primacies, moral identity may be best 
seen as constituting in its own right a source—a “meta-“ primacy, if you will—of moral 
motivation. 
 3 .   Empathic distress may be activated even in this case if one thinks of others who may 
be left  out and hurt because of the undeserving individual’s benefi ts (Hoff man, 2000). 
 4 .  Physicist John Polkinghorne (1984) suggested that this “unexpected degree of [sub-
atomic] togetherness” is “particularly surprising for so reductionist a subject as physics, 
[which] is always trying to split things up into smaller and smaller constituents with a view 
of treating them independently of each other” (p. 76). As Dean Radin (2006) put the point: 
“One of the most surprising discoveries of modern physics is that objects aren’t as separate 
as they seem. When you drill down into the core of even the most solid-looking material, 
separateness dissolves” (p. 1). Surprising though this discovery may be, the evidence for 
basic non-local interconnectedness (at least of electrons or photons whose waveforms have 
been entangled) is compelling. “Until a measurement has actually been performed, it is 
wrong to think of the two [elementary particles] as having a completely independent exis-
tence” (Lindley, 1996, p. 146). Although counterintuitive, this “unexpected togetherness” 
as well as other properties of subatomic non-locality support “the transistor (the heart of 
our electronics industry), lasers, magnetic resonance imaging, diodes, and the memory in 
USB fl ash drives—and may soon deliver the revolutions of quantum computing, tunneling, 
and teleportation” (Eagleman, 2011, p. 196). Subatomic togetherness may even characterize 
the ultimate reality of the cosmos: “born of a single quantum event, the Universe is at some 
basic level a single interconnected quantum system” (Lindley, 1998, p. 60; cf. Laszlo, 2003). 

This page intentionally left blank 

283
■ r e f e r e n c e s  
 Abelson, R. P., Aronson, E., McGuire, W. J., Newcomb, T. M., Rosenberg, M. J., & 
Tannenbaum, P. H. (Eds.). (1968).  Th eories of cognitive consistency: A sourcebook. 
 Chicago :  Rand McNally. 
 Abramovitch, H. (1988).  An Israeli account of a near-death experience: A case study of 
cultural dissonance.   Journal of Near-Death Studies,  6,  175–184 . 
 Ackerman, P., & Duvall, J. (2000).  A force more powerful: A century of nonviolent confl ict. 
 New York :  St. Martin’s. 
 Adelson, J., Green, B., & O’Neil, R. P. (1969).  Growth of the idea of law in adolescence. 
 Developmental Psychology,  1,  327–332 . 
 Agee, V. L. (1979).  Treatment of the violent incorrigible adolescent.  Lexington, MA : 
 Lexington Books. 
 Agee, V. L., & McWilliams, B. (1984).  Th e role of group therapy and the therapeutic com-
munity in treating the violent juvenile off ender. In R. Mathias (Ed.),  Violent juvenile 
off enders (pp.  283–296 ).  San Francisco :  National Council on Crime and Delinquency. 
 Al-Krenawi, A., Slonim-Nevo, V., Maymon, Y., & Al-Krenawi, S. (2001).  Psychological 
responses to blood vengeance among Arab adolescents.   Child Abuse and Neglect, 
 25,  457–472 . 
 Alexander, E. (2012).  Proof of heaven: A neurosurgeon’s journey into the aft erlife .  New York : 
 Simon & Schuster.  
 Alexander, R. D. (1987).  Th e biology of moral systems.  New York :  Aldine de Gruyter. 
 Ali, A. H. (2008).  Infi del .  New York :  Free Press. 
 Aloniz, V. (April 27, 1997).  Fort Worth man charged in wife’s slaying.  Dallas Morning 
News, p.  5A . 
 Alvarez-Saunders, C., & Reyes, L. S. (1994).  Capital off ender group program.  Giddings, TX : 
 Giddings State Home and School of the Texas Youth Commission. 
 American Psychiatric Association (1994).  Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disor-
ders  (4th ed.).  Washington, DC :  APA. 
 Ames, G., & Murray, F. B. (1982).  When two wrongs make a right: Promoting cognitive 
changes by social confl ict.  Developmental Psychology,  18,  894–898 . 
 Anderson, R., & Morgan, C. (Producers). (2007).  Exposing the truth: Anderson Cooper 
interviews Joe Darby.  New York :  CBS  60 Minutes . 
 Anderson, S. (December 26, 1999).  Th e curse of blood and vengeance.  New York Times 
Magazine , pp.  29–34, 44, 54–57, 149 . 
 Andrews, E. L. (December 3, 2006).  Blowing the whistle on big oil.  New York Times Sunday 
Edition Business Section , pp.  1, 8–9 . 
 Appiah, K. A. (2008).  Experiments in ethics.  Cambridge, MA :  Harvard University Press. 
 Appiah, K. A. (2010).  Th e honor code: How moral revolutions happen.  New York :  W. W. 
Norton & Co. 
 Aquino, K., & Reed, A., II. (2002).  Th e self-importance of moral identity.  Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology ,  83,  1423–1440 . 

284 
■ References
 Aquino, K., Reed, A., Th au, S., & Freeman, D. (2007).  A grotesque and dark beauty: How 
moral identity and mechanisms of moral disengagement infl uence cognitive and emo-
tional reactions to war.  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology ,  43,  385–392 . 
 Arbuthnot, J., & Gordon, D. (1986).  Behavioral and cognitive eff ects of a moral reason-
ing development intervention for high-risk behavior-disordered adolescents.   Journal of 
Consulting and Clinical Psychology,  85,  1275–1301 . 
 Arnold, M. L. (1993).  Th e place of morality in the adolescent self. Unpublished doctoral dis-
sertation. Harvard University, Cambridge, MA. 
 Aronson, E. (1992). Th e theory of cognitive dissonance: Th e evolution and vicissitudes 
of an idea. In C. McGarty and S. A. Haslam (Eds.), Th e message of social psychology: 
Perspectives on mind and society (pp. 20–35). Cambridge, MA: Blackwell. 
 Arsenio, W. F. (2010).  Integrating emotion attributions, morality, and aggression: Research 
and theoretical foundations. In W. F. Arsenio & E. A. Lemerise (Eds.),  Emotions, aggres-
sion, and morality in children: Bridging development and psychopathology (pp.  75–94 ). 
 Washington, DC :  American Psychological Association. 
 Arsenio, W. F., Gold, J., & Adams, E. (2006).  Children’s conceptions and displays of moral 
emotions. In M. Killen & J. G. Smetana (Eds.),  Handbook of moral development (pp. 
 581–610 ).  Mahwah, NJ :  Erlbaum. 
 Aspect, A., & Grangier, P. (1986).  Experiments on Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen–type correla-
tions with pairs of visible photons.  In R. Penrose & C. J. Isham (Eds.),  Quantum concepts 
in space and time (pp.  1–15 ).  Oxford, UK :  Oxford University Press. 
 Ayal, S., & Gino, F. (2012).  Honest rationales for dishonest behavior.  In M. Mikulincer & 
P. R. Shaver (Eds.),  Th e social psychology of morality: Exploring the causes of good and evil 
(pp.  149–166 ) .  Washington, DC :  American Psychological Association.  
 Ayer, A. J. (1952).  Language, truth, and logic.   New York :  Dover Publications.  
 Baier, K. (1965).  Th e moral point of view: A rational basis of ethics.  New York :  Random House. 
 Baldwin, M. W. (1992).  Relational schemas and the processing of social information.  
 Psychological Review,  112,  462–484 . 
 Bandura, A. (1977).  Self-effi  cacy theory: Toward a unifying theory of behavioral change. 
 Psychological Review,  84,  191–215 . 
 Bandura, A. (1999).  Moral disengagement in the perpetration of inhumanities.   Personality 
and Social Psychology Review ,  3,  193–209 . 
 Bandura, A., Barbaranelli, C., Caprara, G. V., & Pastorelli, C. (1996).  Mechanisms of 
moral disengagement in the exercise of moral agency.  Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology,  71,  364–371 . 
 Bargh, J. A. (1996).  Automaticity in social psychology. In E. T. Higgins & A. W. Kruglanski 
(Eds.),  Social psychology: Hand book of basic principles (pp.  169–183 ).  New York : 
 Guilford. 
 Bargh, J. A., & Chartrand, T. L. (1999).  Th e unbearable automaticity of being.   American 
Psychologist ,  54,  462–479 . 
 Baron, R. A. (1997).  Th e sweet smell of . . . helping: Eff ects of pleasant ambient fragrance 
on prosocial behavior in shopping malls.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 
 23,  498–503 . 
 Barrett, L. F., Tugade, M. M., & Engle, R. W. (2004). Individual diff erences in working 
memory capacity and dual-process theories of the mind. Psychological Bulletin, 130, 
553–573.

References 
■ 285
 Barriga, A. Q., & Gibbs, J. C. (1996).  Measuring cognitive distortion in antisocial youth: 
Development and preliminary evaluation of the  How I Th ink  questionnaire.  Aggressive 
Behavior,  22,  333–343 . 
 Barriga, A. Q., Gibbs, J. C., Potter, G. B., Konopisos, M., & Barriga, K. T. (2008).  How I Th ink 
about Drugs and Alcohol (HIT D & A) Questionnaire .  Champaign, IL :  Research Press. 
 Barriga, A. Q., Gibbs, J. C., Potter, G. B., & Liau, A. K. (2001).  How I Th ink (HIT) question-
naire manual.  Champaign, IL :  Research Press. 
 Barriga, A. Q., Hawkins, M. A., & Camelia, C. R. T. (2008).  Specifi city of cognitive distor-
tions to antisocial behaviors.  Criminal Behaviour and Mental Health ,  18,  104–116 . 
 Barriga, A. Q., Landau, J. R., Stinson, B. L., Liau, A. K., & Gibbs, J. C. (2000).  Cognitive distor-
tion and problem behaviors in adolescents.   Criminal Justice and Behavior,  27,  333–343 . 
 Barriga, A. Q., Morrison, E. M., Liau, A. K., & Gibbs, J. C. (2001).  Moral cognition: Explaining 
the gender diff erence in antisocial behavior.  Merrill-Palmer Quarterly,  47,  532–562 . 
 Barry, B. (1995).  Justice as impartiality.  Oxford, UK :  Clarendon. 
 Basinger, K. S., & Gibbs, J. C. (1987).  Validation of the Sociomoral Refl ection Objective 
Measure–Short Form.  Psychological Reports,  61,  139–146 . 
 Basinger, K. S., Gibbs, J. C., & Fuller, D. (1995).  Context and the measurement of moral 
judgment.  International Journal of Behavioral Development,  18,  537–556 . 
 Batson, C. D. (2009).  Th ese things called empathy. In J. Decety & W. Icker (Eds.),  Th e social 
neuroscience of empathy (pp.  3–15 ).  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press. 
 Batson, C. D. (2011).  Altruism in humans.  New York :  Oxford University Press. 
 Batson, C. D. (2012).  Th e empathy-altruism hypothesis: Issues and implications.  In J. Decety 
(Ed.),  Empathy: From bench to bedside (pp.  41–54 ).  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press. 
 Batson, C. D., Batson, J. G., Todd, R. M., Brummeth, B. H., Shaw, L. L., & Aldeguer, C. M. 
(1995).  Empathy and the collective good: Caring for one of the others in a social 
dilemma.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,  68,  619–631 . 
 Baumeister, R. F. (1989).  Th e optimal margin of illusion.   Journal of Social and Clinical 
Psychology ,  8,  176–189 . 
 Baumeister, R. F. (1991).  Escaping the self: Alcoholism, spirituality, masochism, and other 
fl ights from the burden of selfh ood .  New York :  Basic Books.  
 Baumeister, R. F. (1997).  Evil: Inside human violence and cruelty.  New York : 
 W. H. Freeman. 
 Baumeister, R. F. (2002).  Ego depletion and self-control failure: An energy model of the 
self’s executive function.  Self and identity ,  1,  129–136 . 
 Baumeister, R. F. (2012).  Human evil: Th e myth of pure evil and the true causes of violence. In 
M. Mikulincer & P. R. Shaver (Eds.),  Th e social psychology of morality: Exploring the causes 
of good and evil  (pp.  367–380 ).  Washington, DC :  American Psychological Association.  
 Baumeister, R. F., & Tierny, J. (2011).  Willpower: Rediscovering the greatest human strength . 
 New York :  Th e Penguin Press. 
 Baumrind, D. (1971).  Current patterns of parental authority.  Developmental Psychology 
Monograph,  4 (1, Pt. 2). 
 Baumrind, D. (1989).  Rearing competent children. In W. Damon (Ed.),  Child development 
today and tomorrow (pp.  349–379 ).  San Francisco :  Jossey-Bass. 
 Bavelas, J. B., Black, A., Chovil, N., Lemery, C. R., & Mullett, J. (1988).  Form and function in 
motor mimicry: Topographical evidence that the primary function is communication.  
 Human Communication Research,  14,  275–299 . 

286 
■ References
 Beah, I. (2007).  A long way gone: Memoirs of a boy soldier .  New York :  Farrar, Straus 
and Giroux. 
 Beauchamp, T. L., & Childress, J. F. (2009).  Principles of biomedical ethics (6th ed.).  New 
York :  Oxford University Press. 
 Beauregard, M., & O’Leary, D. (2007).  Th e spiritual brain: A neuroscientist’s case for the 
existence of the soul .  New York :  HarperOne. 
 Beck, A. T. (1999).  Prisoners of hate: Th e cognitive basis of anger, hostility, and violence.  New 
York :  HarperCollins. 
 Beck, R., & Fernandez, E. (1998).  Cognitive-behavioral therapy in the treatment of anger: A 
meta-analysis.  Cognitive Th erapy and Research,  22,  63–74 . 
 Beilin, H. (1992).  Piaget’s enduring contribution to developmental psychology. 
 Developmental Psychology,  28,  191–204 . 
 Bell, J. S. (1966).  On the problem of hidden variables in quantum theory.  Research in Modern 
Physics,  38,  447–452 . 
 Bell, R., & Buchner, A. (2012).  How adaptive is memory for cheaters?  Current Directions in 
Psychological Science ,  2,  403–408 . 
 Belluck, P. (May 6, 2010).  Group backs ritual “nick” as female circumcision option.  New 
York Times, p.  16 . 
 Bem, D. J., Palmer, J., & Broughton, R. S. (2001).  Updating the Ganzfeld database: A victim 
of its own success?  Journal of Parapsychology ,  65,  207–218 . 
 Benatar, D. (2012).  Th e second sexism: Discrimination against men and boys.  New York : 
 Wiley Blackwell. 
 Benz, G. R. (Producer). (May 28, 2001).  Beyond human limits [Television broadcast].   New 
York :  Discovery Channel. 
 Bergman, R. (2004).  Identity as motivation: Toward a theory of the moral self. In 
D. K. Lapsley & D. Narvaez (Eds.),  Morality, self, and identity (pp.  21–46 ) .  Mahwah, NJ : 
 Lawrence Erlbaum. 
 Bergman, R. (2006).  Gibbs on Kohlberg on Dewey: An essay review of John C. Gibbs’  Moral 
Development and Reality .  European Journal of Developmental Psychology ,  3,  300–311 . 
 Bering, J. M., & Bjorklund, D. F. (2004).  Th e natural emergence of reasoning about the aft er-
life as a developmental regularity.  Developmental Psychology ,  40,  217–233 . 
 Berk, L. (2013).  Child development (9th ed.).  Boston :  Pearson. 
 Berkowitz, M. W., & Gibbs, J. C. (1983).  Measuring the developmental features of moral 
discussion.  Merrill-Palmer Quarterly,  29,  399–410 . 
 Berkowitz, M. W., & Gibbs, J. C. (1985).  Th e process of moral confl ict resolution and moral 
development. In M. W. Berkowitz (Ed.),  Peer confl ict and psychological growth: New 
directions for child development (No. 29; pp.  71–82 ).  San Francisco :  Jossey-Bass. 
 Bierman, D. J. (2001).  On the nature of anomalous phenomena: Another reality between the 
world of subjective consciousness and the objective world of physics? In P. Van Loocke 
(Ed.),  Th e physical nature of consciousness (pp.  269–292 ).  Amsterdam :  John Benjamins. 
 Birch, S. A. J., & Bloom, P. (2004).  Understanding children’s and adults’ limitations in men-
tal state reasoning.  Trends in Cognitive Science ,  8,  255–260 . 
 Bjorklund, D. F., & Pellegrini, A. D. (2002).  Th e origins of human nature: Evolutionary devel-
opmental psychology.   Washington, DC :  American Psychological Association. 
 Blackmore, S. (1985).  Susan Blackmore replies. [Letter to the editor].  Journal of Near-Death 
Studies ,  5,  79–82 . 

References 
■ 287
 Blackmore, S. (1993).  Dying to live: Near–death experiences.  New York :  Prometheus. 
 Blair, R. J. R. (2006).  Th e psychopath: Emotion and the brain .  Oxford, UK :  Blackwell 
Publishing. 
 Blanke, O., Ortigue, S., Landis, T., & Seeck, M. (2002).  Stimulating illusory own-body per-
ceptions.  Nature,  419,  269 . 
 Blasi, A. (1980).  Bridging moral cognition and moral action: A critical review of literature. 
 Psychological Bulletin,  88,  1–45 . 
 Blasi, A. (1995).  Moral understanding and the moral personality: Th e process of moral 
integration. In W. Kurtines & J. L. Gewirtz (Eds.),  Moral development: An introduction 
(pp.  229–253 ).  Boston :  Allyn & Bacon. 
 Blasi, A. (2005).  Moral character: A psychological approach. In D. F. Lapsley & F. C. Power 
(Eds.),  Character psychology and character education (pp.  67–100 ).  Notre Dame, IN :  
 University of Notre Dame Press. 
 Blasi, A. (2009).  Th e moral functioning of mature adults and the possibility of fair moral 
reasoning. In D. Narvaez & D. K. Lapsley (Eds.),  Personality, identity, and character: 
Explorations in moral psychology (pp.  396–448 ).  New York :  Cambridge University Press. 
 Bloom, P. (2004).  Descartes’ baby: How the science of child development explains what makes 
us human .  New York :  Basic Books. 
 Bloom, P. (2010).  How do morals change?   Nature ,  464,  490 . 
 Bloom, P. (2012).  Moral nativism and moral psychology. In M. Mikulincer and P. R. Shaver 
(Eds.),  Th e social psychology of morality: Exploring the causes of good and evil (pp.  71–89 ). 
 Washington, DC :  American Psychological Association. 
 Bloom, P. (May 20, 2013). Th e baby in the well: Th e case against empathy. Th e New Yorker, 
pp. 118–121.
 Bogestad, A. J., Kettler, R. J., & Hagan, M. P. (2010).  Evaluation of a cognitive interven-
tion program for juvenile off enders.  International Journal of Off ender Th erapy and 
Comparative Criminology ,  54,  552–565 . 
 Boom, J., Brugman, D., & van der Heijden, P. G. M. (2001).  Hierarchical structure of moral 
stages assessed by a sorting task.  Child Development ,  72,  535–548 . 
 Bouwmeester, D., Pan, J. W., Mattle, K., Eibl, M., Weinfurther, H., & Zeilinger, A. (1997). 
 Experimental quantum teleportation.  Nature,  390,  575–579 . 
 Bowlby, J. (1980).  Attachment and loss: Vol. 1. Attachment.  New York :  Basic Books. 
 Boyes, M. C., & Chandler, M. (1992).  Cognitive development, epistemic doubt, and identity 
formation in adolescence.   Journal of Youth and Adolescence,  21,  277–304 . 
 Boysen, S. T. (1993).  Counting in chimpanzees: Nonhuman principles and emergent prop-
erties of number.  In S. T. Boysen & E. J. Capaldi (Eds.),  Th e development of numerical 
competence (pp.  39–59 ).  Hillsdale, NJ :  Lawrence Erlbaum. 
 Boysen, S. T., Berntson, G., Shreyer, T. A., & Quigley, K. S. (1993).  Processing of ordinality 
and transitivity by chimpanzees  (Pan troglodytes) .  Journal of Comparative Psychology, 
 107,  208–215 . 
 Brabeck, M. (1984).  Ethical characteristics of whistle blowers.  Journal of Research in 
Personality,  18,  41–53 . 
 Brandt, R. B. (1959).  Ethical theory: Th e problems of normative and critical ethics.  Englewood 
Cliff s, NJ :  Prentice Hall. 
 Brendtro, L. K., Mitchell, M. L., & McCall, H. J. (2009). Deep brain learning: Pathways to 
potential with challenging youth. Albion, MI: Starr Commonwealth.

288 
■ References
 Brendtro, L. K., & Ness, A. E. (1982).  Perspectives on peer group treatment: Th e use and 
abuse of Guided Group Interaction/Positive Peer Culture.  Children and Youth Services 
Review,  4,  307–324 . 
 Brendtro, L. K., & Wasmund, W. C. (1989).  Th e Positive Peer Culture model. In R. Lyman, S. 
Prentice-Dunn, & S. Gabel (Eds.),  Residential treatment of emotionally disturbed children 
(pp.  81–93 ).  New York :  Plenum. 
 Brewer, M. B. (2007).  Th e importance of being we: Human nature and intergroup relations. 
 American Psychologist ,  62,  728–738 . 
 Bronfenbrenner, U., & Morris, P. A. (2006).  Th e bioecological model of human develop-
ment. In W. Damon & R. M. Lerner (Series Eds.) & R. M. Lerner (Vol. Ed.),  Handbook of 
child psychology: Vol. 1. Th eoretical models of human development (6th ed.; pp.  793–828 ). 
 New York :  John Wiley. 
 Brooks, D. (April 13, 2012).  Sam Spade at Starbucks.  New York Times, p.  31 . 
 Broome, K. (Producer) (2001).  Th e day I died [Televised broadcast].  London :  British 
Broadcasting Corporation (BBC). 
 Brosnan, S. F. (2006).  Nonhuman species’ reactions to inequity and their implications for 
fairness. Nonhuman species’ reactions to inequity and their implications for fairness. 
 Social Justice Research ,  19,  153–185 . 
 Brosnan, S. F., & De Waal, F. (2003).  Monkeys reject unequal pay.  Nature ,  425,  297–299 . 
 Brown, P. M., Corrigan, M. W., & Higgins-D’Alessandro (Eds.) (2012).  Handbook of proso-
cial education.  Lanham, MD :  Rowman & Littlefi eld. 
 Brothers, L. (1989).  A biological perspective on empathy.   American Journal of Psychiatry, 
 146,  10–19 . 
 Brown, R. (1965).  Social psychology.  New York :  Free Press. 
 Brown, R., & Herrnstein, R. J. (1975).  Psychology.  Boston :  Little, Brown. 
 Brownrigg, S. (March 25, 2012).  Why won’t they listen? [review of the book  Th e righteous 
mind: Why good people are divided by politics and religion.   New York: Pantheon Books]. 
 New York Times Book Review, pp.  12–13 . 
 Brugman, D., & Aleva, A. E. (2004).  Developmental delay or regression in moral reasoning 
by juvenile delinquents?   Journal of Moral Education ,  33,  321–338 . 
 Bruni, P. (February 1, 2004).  Doctor in Italy tries to ease pain of an African tradition.  New 
York Times , p.  3 . 
 Bugental, D. B., & Grusec, J. E. (2006).  Socialization processes.  In W. Damon & R. M. Lerner 
(Series Ed.) & N. Eisenberg (Vol. Ed.),  Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 3. Social, emo-
tional, and personality development (6th ed.; pp.  366–428 ).  New York :  John Wiley. 
 Burger, J. M., Girgis, Z. M., & Manning, C. C. (2011).  In their own words: Explaining obedi-
ence to authority through an examination of participants’ comments.  Social Psychological 
and Personality Science ,  2,  460–461 . 
 Burgess, R. L., & Huston, T. L. (1979).  Social exchange in developing relationships.  New York : 
 Academic Press. 
 Bush, N. (2002).  Aft erward: Making meaning aft er a frightening near-death experience.  
 Journal of Near-Death Studies,  21,  99–133 . 
 Bushman, B. J., & Anderson, C. A. (2001).  Is it time to pull the plug on the hostile versus 
instrumental aggression dichotomy?  Psychological Review,  108,  273–279 . 
 Bussey, K. (1992).  Lying and truthfulness: Children’s defi nitions, standards, and evaluative 
reactions.  Child Development,  63,  1236–1250 . 

References 
■ 289
 California Department of the Youth Authority. (1994).  Victim awareness/community safety: 
Student and teacher’s manuals (rev. version).  Sacramento, CA :   Department of the Youth 
Authority. 
 Callanan, M., & Kelley, P. (1992).  Final gift s: Understanding the special awarenesses, needs, 
and communications of the dying.  New York :  Bantam Books. 
 Campbell, D. T. (1972).  On the genetics of altruism and the counter-hedonic components 
in human culture.  Journal of Social Issues,  28,  21–37 . 
 Campbell, R. L., & Christopher, J. C. (1996).  Moral development theory: A critique of its 
Kantian presuppositions.   Developmental Review,  16,  1–47 . 
 Carducci, D. J. (1980).  Positive Peer Culture and assertiveness training: Complementary 
modalities for dealing with disturbed and disturbing adolescents in the classroom. 
 Behavioral Disorders,  5,  156–162 . 
 Carducci, D. J., & Carducci, J. B. (1984).  Th e caring classroom: A guide for teachers troubled 
by the diffi  cult student and classroom disruption.  New York :  Bull. 
 Carlson, R. (1982).  Studies in script theory: II. Altruistic nuclear scripts.  Perceptual and 
Motor Skills,  55,  595–610 . 
 Carpendale, J., & Lewis, J. (2006).  How children develop social understanding.  Malden, MA : 
 Blackwell. 
 Carpendale, J., Sokol, B. W., & Muller, U. (2010).  Is a neuroscience of morality possible? In 
P. D. Zelazo, M. Chandler, & E. Crone (Eds.),  Developmental social cognitive neurosci-
ence (pp.  289–311 ).  New York :  Psychology Press. 
 Carr, D. (1991).  Educating the virtues: An essay on the philosophical psychology of moral 
development and education.  London and New York :  Routledge. 
 Carr, M. B., & Lutjemeier, J. A. (2005).  Th e relation of facial aff ect recognition and empathy 
to delinquency in youth.   Adolescence ,  40,  601–620 . 
 Case, R. (1998).  Th e development of conceptual structures. In W. Damon (Series Ed.) & D. 
Kuhn & R. S. Siegler (Vol. Eds.),  Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 2. Cognition, percep-
tion, and language (5th ed.; pp.  745–800 ).  New York :  John Wiley . 
 Cason, D. R., Resick, P. A., & Weaver, T. L. (2002).  Schematic integration of traumatic 
events.  Clinical Psychology Review,  22,  131–153 . 
 Castiello, U., Becchio, C., Zola, S., Nelini, C., Sartori, L., Blason, L., et al. (2010).  Wired to be 
social: Th e ontogeny of human interaction.  PLoS ONE ,  5,  1–10 . 
 Chabrol, J., van Leeuwen, N., Rodgers, R. F., & Gibbs, J. C. (2011).  Relations between self-
serving cognitive distortions, psychopathic traits, and antisocial behavior in a non-
clinical sample of adolescents.   Personality and Individual Diff erences ,  51,  887–892 . 
 Chagnon, N. A. (1988).  Life histories, blood revenge, and warfare in a tribal population. 
 Science,  239,  985–992 . 
 Chaiken, S., & Trope, Y. (Eds.).  (1999).  Dual process theories in social psychology .  New York : 
 Guilford. 
 Chalmers, D. (1996).  Th e conscious mind: In search of a fundamental theory.  Oxford :  Oxford 
University Press. 
 Chandler, M., & Carpendale, J. I. M. (1998).  Inching toward a mature theory of mind. In M. 
Ferrari & R. Sternberg (Eds.),  Self-awareness: Its nature and development (pp.  148–190 ). 
 New York :  Guilford Press. 
 Chapman, M., & Lindenburger, U. (1989).  Concrete operations and attentional capacity. 
 Journal of Experimental Child Psychology,  47,  236–258 . 

290 
■ References
 Chase, K. A., O’Leary, D., & Heyman, R. E. (2001).  Categorizing partner-violent men within 
the reactive-proactive typology model.   Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 
 69,  567–572 . 
 Chatham, C. H., Frank, M. J., & Munakata, Y. (2009).  Pupillometric and behavioral mark-
ers of a developmental shift  in the temporal dynamics of cognitive control.  PNAS ,  106, 
 5529–5533 . 
 Christian, S. R., & Holden, J. M. (2012).  “Til death do us part”: Th e eff ects on marriage of 
a near-death experience of one of the marital partners.  Journal of Near-Death Studies , 
 30,  207–231 . 
 Cikara, M., Bruneau, E. G., & Saxe, R. R. (2011). Us and them: Intergroup failures of empa-
thy. Current directions in Psychological Science, 20, 149–153.
 Colby, A. (1978).  Evolution of a moral developmental theory. In W. Damon (Ed.),  New 
directions for child development (No. 2; pp.  89–104 ).  San Francisco :  Jossey-Bass. 
 Colby, A. (2000).  Th e place of moral interpretation and habit in moral development.   Human 
Development,  43,  161–164 . 
 Colby, A. (2002).  Moral understanding, motivation, and identity [Commentary].  Human 
Development,  45,  130–135 . 
 Colby, A. (2008).  Fostering the moral and civic development of college students. In L. P. 
Nucci & D. Narvaez (Eds.),  Handbook of moral and character education (pp.  391–413 ). 
 New York :  Routledge. 
 Colby, A., & Damon, W. (1992).  Some do care: Contemporary lives of moral commitment. 
 New York :  Free Press. 
 Colby, A., & Kohlberg, L. (1987).  Th e measurement of moral judgment: Vol. 1. Th eoretical 
foundations and research validation.  Cambridge, UK :  Cambridge University Press. 
 Colby, A., Kohlberg, L., Gibbs, J. C., & Lieberman, M. (1983).  A longitudinal study of moral judg-
ment.  Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development,  48 (1–2, Serial No. 200). 
 Colby, A., Kohlberg, L., Speicher, B., Hewer, A., Candee, D., Gibbs, J., et al. (1987).  Th e mea-
surement of moral judgment (Vol. 2).  Cambridge, UK :  Cambridge University Press. 
 Coles, R. (1986).  Th e moral life of children.  Boston :  Houghton Miffl  in. 
 Collins, W. A., Maccoby, E. E., Steinberg, L., Hetherington, E. M., & Bornstein, M. H. 
(2000).  Contemporary research on parenting: Th e case of nature and nurture.  American 
Psychologist,  55,  218–232 . 
 Comunian, A. L., & Gielen, U. P. (1995).  A study of moral reasoning and prosocial action in 
Italian culture.   Journal of Social Psychology,  135,  699–706 . 
 Comunian, A. L., & Gielen, U. P. (2000).  Sociomoral refl ection and prosocial and antisocial 
behavior: Two Italian studies.  Psychological Reports,  87,  161–175 . 
 Comunian, A. L., & Gielen, U. P. (2006).  Promotion of moral judgement maturity through 
stimulation of social role-taking and social refl ection: An Italian intervention study. 
 Journal of Moral Education ,  35,  51–69 . 
 Conquest, R. (1986).  Th e harvest of sorrow: Soviet collectivization and the terror-famine. 
 New York :  Oxford University Press. 
 Cook, E. W., Greyson, B., & Stevenson, I. (1998).  Do any near-death experiences provide 
evidence for the survival of human personality aft er death? Relevant features and illus-
trative case reports.  Journal of Scientifi c Exploration,  12,  377–406 . 
 Cowan, P. A. (1982).  Th e relationship between emotional and cognitive development.  New 
Directions in Child and Adolescent Development ,  16,  49–81, 

References 
■ 291
 Cowan, P. A., Powell, D., & Cowan, C. P. (1998).  Parenting interventions: A family sys-
tems perspective. In W. Damon (Series Ed.) & I. E. Sigel & K. A. Renninger (Vol. Eds.), 
 Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 4. Child psychology in practice (5th ed.; pp.  3–72 ). 
 New York :  John Wiley. 
 Cox-Chapman, M. (1995).  Th e case for heaven.  New York :  Berkley. 
 Crick, N. R., & Dodge, K. A. (1994).  A review and reformulation of social informa-
tion processing mechanisms in children’s social adjustment.   Psychological Bulletin, 
 115,  74–101 . 
 Cullen, D. (2009).  Columbine.  New York :  Twelve. 
 Cunningham, M. R. (1979).  Weather, mood, and helping behavior: Quasi experiments with 
the sunshine Samaritan.   Journal of Personality and Social Psychology ,  37,  1947–1956 . 
 Dadds, M. R., Hawes, D. J., Frost, A. D. J., Vassallo, S., Bunn, P. Hunter, K, et al. (2009). 
 Learning to “talk the talk”: Th e relationship of psychopathic traits to defi cits in empathy 
across childhood.   Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry ,  50,  599–606 . 
 Dahlen, E. R., & Deff enbacher, J. L. (2000).  A partial component analysis of Beck’s 
cognitive therapy for the treatment of general anger.   Journal of Cognitive Th erapy, 
 14,  77–95 . 
 Damasio, A. (1994).  Descartes’ error: Emotion, reason, and the human brain.  New York : 
 Grosset/Putnam. 
 Damasio, A. (1999).  Th e feeling of what happens: Body and emotion in the making of con-
sciousness.  New York :  Harcourt Brace. 
 Damon, W. (1977).  Th e social world of the child.  San Francisco :  Jossey-Bass. 
 Damon, W. (1980).  Patterns of change in children’s social reasoning: A two-year longitudi-
nal study.   Child Development,  51,  1010–1017 . 
 Damon, W. (1981).  Exploring children’s social cognition on two fronts. In J. H. Flavell & L. 
Ross (Eds.),  Social cognitive development: Frontiers and possible futures (pp.  154–175 ). 
 Cambridge, UK :  Cambridge University Press. 
 Damon, W. (1984).  Peer education: Th e untapped potential.  Journal of Applied  Developmental 
Psychology,  5,  331–343 . 
 Damon, W. (1988).  Th e moral child: Nurturing children’s natural moral growth.  New York : 
 Free Press. 
 Damon, W. (1995).  Greater expectations: Overcoming the culture of indulgence in America’s 
homes and schools.  New York :  Free Press. 
 Damon, W. (1996).  Th e lifelong transformation of moral goals through social infl uence. In P. 
B. Baltes & U. M. Staudinger (Eds.),  Interactive minds: Lifespan perspectives on the social 
foundation of cognition (pp.  198–220 ).  Cambridge, UK :  Cambridge University Press. 
 Damon, W. (1997).  Th e youth charter: How communities can work together to raise standards 
for all our children.  New York :  Free Press. 
 Damon, W. (2006).  Preface to  Handbook of child psychology, sixth edition. In W. Damon 
& R. M. Lerner (Series Ed.) & W. R. M. Lerner (Vol. Ed.),  Handbook of child psychol-
ogy: Vol. 1. Th eoretical models of human development (6th ed.; pp.  ix–xvi .  New York : 
 John Wiley.  
 Damon, W. (2008).  Th e path to purpose: Helping our children fi nd their calling in life.  New 
York :  Free Press. 
 Damon, W., & Hart, D. (1988).  Self-understanding in childhood and adolescence.  New York : 
 Cambridge University Press. 

292 
■ References
 Damon, W., & Killen, M. (1982).  Peer interaction and the process of change in children’s 
moral reasoning.   Merrill-Palmer Quarterly,  28,  347–367 . 
 Darling, N., & Steinberg, L. (1993).  Parenting style as context: An integrative model. 
 Psychological Bulletin,  113,  487–496 . 
 Davidov, M., Zahn-Waxler, C., Roth-Hanania, R., & Knafo, A. (2013).  Concern for others 
in the fi rst year of life: Th eory, evidence, and avenues for research.  Child Development 
Perspectives , 7, 126–131. 
 Davies, P. (1992).  Th e mind of God: Th e scientifi c basis for a rational world .  New York :  Simon 
& Schuster. 
 Davis, M. H. (2005).  A “constituent” approach to the study of perspective-taking. In 
B. F. Malle & S. D. Hodges (Eds.),  Other minds: How humans bridge the divide between 
self and others (pp.  44–55 ).  New York :  Guilford Press. 
 Day, J. M., & Tappan, M. B. (1996).  Th e narrative approach to moral development: From the 
epistemic subject to dialogical selves.  Human Development,  39,  67–82 . 
 Decety, J. M. (2007).  A social cognitive neuroscience model of human empathy. In 
E. Harmon-Jones & P. Winkielman (Eds.),  Social neuroscience: Integrating bio-
logical and psychological explanations of social behavior (pp.  246–270 ).  New York : 
 Guilford Press.  
 Decety, J. M., & Batson, C. D. (2009).  Empathy and morality: Integrating social and neu-
roscience approaches.  In D. J. Braeckman, J. Verplaetse and J. De Schrijver (Eds.),  Th e 
Moral Brain (pp.  109–127 ).  Berlin :  Springer Verlag. 
 Decety, J. M., & Howard, L. H. (2013).  Th e role of aff ect in the neuro-development of moral-
ity.  Child Development Perspectives ,  7,  49–54 . 
 Decety, J. M., & Jackson, P. L. (2004).  Th e functional architecture of human empathy.  
 Behavioral and Cognitive Neuroscience Reviews ,  3,  71–100 . 
 Decety, J., & Michalska, K. J. (2012).  How children develop empathy: Th e contribution of 
developmental aff ective neuroscience. In J. Decety (Ed.),  Empathy: From bench to bed-
side (pp.  167–190 ).  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press. 
 Decety, J., & Svetlova, M. (2012).  Putting together phylogenetic and ontogenetic perspec-
tives on empathy.  Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience ,  2,  1–24 . 
 DeLoache, J., Miller, K. F., & Pierroutsakos, S. L. (1998).  Reasoning and problem solving. 
In W. Damon (Series Ed.) & D. Kuhn & R. S. Siegler (Vol. Eds.),  Handbook of child psy-
chology: Vol. 2. Cognition, perception, and language (5th ed.; pp.  801–850 ).  New York : 
 John Wiley. 
 Deluty, R. H. (1979).  Children’s Action Tendency Scale: A self-report measure of aggressive-
ness, assertiveness, and submissiveness in children.  Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology,  47,  1061–1071 . 
 Dennett, D. (2005).  Sweet dreams: Philosophical obstacles to a science of consciousness. 
 Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press. 
 Devlin, R., & Gibbs, J. C. (2010).  Responsible Adult Culture (RAC): Cognitive and behav-
ioral changes at a community-based correctional facility.  Journal of Research in Character 
Development ,  8,  1–20 . 
 de Waal, F. B. M. (1996).  Good natured: Th e origins of right and wrong in humans and other 
animals.   Cambridge, MA and London, England :  Harvard University Press. 
 de Waal, F. B. M. (2008).  Putting the altruism back into altruism: Th e evolution of empathy. 
 Annual Review of Psychology ,  59,  279–300 . 

References 
■ 293
 de Waal, F. B. M. (2009).  Th e age of empathy: Nature’s lessons for a kinder society.  New 
York :  Harmony. 
 de Waal, F. B. M. (2012).  Empathy in primates and other mammals. In J. Decety (Ed.), 
 Empathy: From bench to bedside (pp.  87–106 ).  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press. 
 de Waal, F. B. M. (2013).  Th e bonobo and the atheist: In search of humanism among the pri-
mates .  New York and London :  W. W. Norton & Co. 
 Dewey, J., & Tuft s, J. H. (1908).  Ethics.  New York :  Holt. 
 Diamond, J. (April 21, 2008).  Annals of anthropology: Vengeance is ours. What can tribal 
societies tell us about our need to get even?  Th e New Yorker ,  74, 76–78, 80–82, 84–87 . 
 DiBiase, A.-M., Gibbs, J. C., Potter, G. B., & Blount, M. R. (2012).  Teaching adolescents to 
think and act responsibly: Th e EQUIP approach .  Champaign, IL :  Research Press. 
 Dishion, T. J., Loeber, R., Stouthamer-Loeber, M., & Patterson, G. R. (1984).  Skill defi cits 
and male adolescent delinquency.  Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology,  12,  37–54 . 
 Dishion, T. J., McCord, J., & Poulin, F. (1999).  When interventions harm: Peer groups and 
problem behavior.  American Psychologist,  54,  755–764 . 
 Dodge, K. A. (1986).  A social informational processing model of social competence in chil-
dren. In M. Perlmutter (Ed.),  Minnesota symposia on child psychology: Vol. 18. Cognitive 
perspectives on children’s social and behavioral development (pp.  77–125 ).  Hillsdale, NJ : 
 Lawrence Erlbaum. 
 Dodge, K. A. (1993).  Social-cognitive mechanisms in the development of conduct disorder 
and depression.  Annual Review of Psychology,  44,  559–584 . 
 Dodge, K. A., Bates, J. E., & Pettit, G. S. (1990).  Mechanisms in the cycle of violence.  Science , 
 250,  1678–1685 . 
 Dodge, K. A., & Coie, J. D. (1987).  Social information-processing factors in reactive and pro-
active aggression in children’s playgroups.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
 53,  1146–1158 . 
 Dodge, K. A., Coie, J. D., & Lynam, D. (2006).  Aggression and antisocial behavior in youth.  
In W. Damon & R. M. Lerner (Series Eds.) & N. Eisenberg (Vol. Ed.),  Handbook of child 
psychology: Vol. 3. Social, emotional, and personality development  (6th ed.; pp.  719–788 ). 
 New York :  John Wiley. 
 Dodge, K. A., McLoyd, V. C., & Lansford, J. E. (2005).  Th e cultural context of disciplining 
children. In V. C. McLoyd, N. E. Hill, & K. A. Dodge (Eds.),  African American family life: 
Ecological and cultural diversity (pp.  245–263 ).  New York :  Guilford Press. 
 Dodge, K. A., Pettit, G. S, & Bates, J. E. (1997).  How the experience of early physical abuse 
leads children to become chronically aggressive.  In D. Cicchetti & S. L. Toth (Eds.), 
 Development perspectives on trauma: Th eory, research, and intervention (pp.  263–288 ). 
 Rochester, NY :  University of Rochester Press. 
 Dodge, K. A., Price, J. M., Bachorowski, J. A., & Newman, J. P. (1990).  Hostile attributional 
biases in severely aggressive adolescents.  Journal of Abnormal Psychology,  99,  385–392 . 
 Dodge, K. A., & Schwartz, D. (1998).  Social information processing mechanisms in aggres-
sive behavior. In D. M. Stoff , J. Breiling, & J. D. Maser (Eds.),  Handbook of antisocial 
behavior (pp.  171–180 ).  New York :  John Wiley. 
 Doherty, M. J. (2009).  Th eory of mind: How children understand others’ thoughts and feelings. 
 Hove and New York :  Psychology Press. 
 Doise, W., & Mugny, G. (1984).  Th e social development of the intellect (A. St. James-Emler & 
N. Emler, Trans.).  Oxford, UK :  Pergamon. (Original work published 1979.) 

294 
■ References
 Dondi, M., Simion, F., & Caltran, G. (1999).  Can newborns discriminate between their own 
cry and the cry of another newborn infant?  Developmental Psychology,  35,  418–426 . 
 Dovidio, J. F., Gaertner, S. I., Shnabel, N., Saguy, T., & Johnson, J. (2010).  Recategorization 
and prosocial behavior: Common identity and a dual identity.  In S. Sturmer & M. 
Snyder (Eds.),  Th e psychology of prosocial behavior: Group processes, intergroup relations, 
and helping (pp.  191–207 ).  MA :  Wiley-Blackwell. 
 Duckworth, A. L., Peterson, C., Matthews, M. D., & Kelly, D. R. (2007).  Grit: Perseverance 
and passion for long-terms goals.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology ,  92, 
 1087–1101 . 
 Dunfi eld, K., Kuhmeier, V. A., O’Connell, L., & Kelley, E. (2011).  Examining the diversity of 
prosocial behavior: Helping, sharing, and comforting in infancy.  Infancy ,  16,  227–247 . 
 Dunn, J., & Hughes, C. (2001).  “I got some swords and you’re dead!” Violent fantasy, anti-
social behavior, friendship, and moral sensibility in young children.  Child Development , 
 72,  491–505 . 
 Dunn, J., & Munn, P. (1987).  Development of justifi cation in disputes with mother and 
sibling.  Developmental Psychology ,  23,  791–798 . 
 Durkheim, E. (1973).  Moral education (E. Wilson & H. Schnurer, Trans.)  New York :  Th e 
Free Press. (Original work published in 1925.) 
 Eagleman, D. M. (2011).  Incognito: Th e secret lives of the brain.   New York :  Pantheon Books.  
 Echols, S., & Correll, J. (2012).  It’s more than skin deep: Empathy and helping behavior 
across social groups. In J. Decety (Ed.),  Empathy: From bench to bedside (pp.  55–71 ). 
 Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press. 
 Edgerton, R. B. (1992).  Sick societies: Challenging the myth of primitive harmony.  New York : 
 Free Press. 
 Edwards, C. P. (1975).  Social complexity and moral development: A Kenyan study.  Ethos, 
 3,  505–527 . 
 Edwards, C. P. (1978).  Social experience and moral judgment in East African young adults. 
 Journal of Genetic Psychology ,  133,  19–29 . 
 Edwards, C. P. (1982).  Moral development in comparative cultural perspective.  In D. A. 
Wagner & H. Stevenson (Eds.),  Cultural perspectives on child development (pp.  248–279 ). 
 San Francisco :  W. H. Freeman. 
 Edwards, C. P. (1985).  Rationality, culture, and the construction of “ethical discourse”: A 
comparative perspective.  Ethos: Th e Journal of Psychological Anthropology ,  13,  318–339 . 
 Edwards, C. P. (1986).  Cross-cultural research on Kohlberg’s stages: Th e basis for consensus. 
In S. Modgil & C. Modgil (Eds.),  Lawrence Kohlberg: Consensus and controversy (pp. 
 419–430 ).  Sussex, England :  Falmer Press Ltd. 
 Eisenberg, N. (1982).  Th e development of reasoning regarding prosocial behavior. In 
N. Eisenberg (Ed.),  Th e development of prosocial behavior (pp.  219–249 ).  New York : 
 Academic Press. 
 Eisenberg, N. (1996).  In search of the good heart. In M. R. Merrens & G. G. Brannigan 
(Eds.),  Th e developmental psychologists: Research adventures across the lifespan 
(pp.  89–104 ).  New York :  McGraw-Hill. 
 Eisenberg, N., Fabes, R. A., & Spinrad, T. L. (2006).  Prosocial development. In W. Damon 
& R. M. Lerner (Series Eds.) & N. Eisenberg (Vol. Ed.),  Handbook of child psychology: 
Vol. 3. Social, emotional, and personality development (6th ed.; pp.  646–718 ).  New York : 
 John Wiley. 

References 
■ 295
 Eisenberg, N., Huerta, S., & Edwards, A. (2012).  Relations of empathy-related respond-
ing to children’s and adolescents’ social competence.  In J. Decety (Ed.),  Empathy: From 
bench to bedside (pp.  147–163 ).  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press. 
 Eisenberg, N., & Spinrad, T. L. (2004).  Emotional-related regulation: Sharpening the defi ni-
tion.  Child Development ,  2,  334–339 . 
 Ellis, A. (1977).  Rational-emotive therapy: Research data that support the clinical and per-
sonality hypotheses of RET and other modes of cognitive-behavioral therapy.  Counseling 
Psychologist,  7,  2–42 . 
 Enright, R. D. (2012).  Th e forgiving life: A pathway to overcoming resentment and creating a 
legacy of love.  Washington, DC :  American Psychological Association. 
 Epstein, S. (1991).  Cognitive-experiential self theory: Implications for developmental 
psychology. In M. R. Gunnar & L. A. Sroufe (Eds.),  Self processes and development: 
Th e Minnesota symposia on child development (Vol.  23 ; pp.  79–124 ).  Hillsdale, NJ : 
 Lawrence Erlbaum. 
 Epstein, S., & Morling, B. (1995).  Is the self motivated to do more than enhance and/or 
verify itself? In M. H. Kernis (Ed.),  Effi  cacy, agency, and self-esteem (pp.  9–29 ).  New 
York :  Plenum. 
 Evans, J. St. B. T., & Stanovich, K. E. (2013). Th eory and metatheory in the study of dual 
processing: Reply to comments. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 8, 263–271.
 Fabes, R. A., Eisenberg, N., Nyman, M., & Michealieu, Q. (1991).  Young children’s apprais-
als of others’ spontaneous emotional reactions.  Developmental Psychology,  27,  858–866 . 
 Farr, S. S. (1993).  What Tom Sawyer learned from dying.  Norfolk, VA :  Hampton Roads. 
 Fazio, R. H., Sanbonmatsu, D. M., Powell, M. C., & Kardes, F. R. (1986).  On the automatic 
evaluation of attitudes.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology ,  50,  229–238 . 
 Feff er, M. (1970).  Developmental analysis of interpersonal behavior.   Psychological Review, 
 77,  197–214 . 
 Fehr, E., Bernhard, H., & Rockenbach, B. (2008).  Egalitarianism in young children.  Nature , 
 454,  1079–1083 . 
 Fehr, E., & Gachter, S. (2002).  Altruistic punishment in humans.  Nature ,  415,  137–140 . 
 Feindler, E. L., & Ecton, R. R. (1986).  Adolescent anger control: Cognitive-behavioral tech-
niques.  New York :  Pergamon. 
 Fenwick, P., & Fenwick, E. (1995).  Th e truth in the light.  New York :  Berkley. 
 Ferrari, M., & Sternberg, R. J. (1998).  Th e development of mental abilities and styles. In 
W. Damon (Series Ed.) & D. Kuhn & R. S. Siegler (Vol. Eds.),  Handbook of child psy-
chology: Vol. 2. Cognition, perception, and language (5th ed.; pp.  899–946 ).  New York : 
 John Wiley. 
 Festinger, L. (1957).  A theory of cognitive dissonance .  Stanford :  Stanford University Press. 
 Figley, C. R. (2012).  Th e empathic response in clinical practice: Antecedents and conse-
quences. In J. Decety (Ed.),  Empathy: From bench to bedside (pp.  263–273 ).  Cambridge, 
MA :  MIT Press. 
 Fischer, K. W., & Bidell, T. R. (2006).  Dynamic development of action and thought. In 
W. Damon & R. M. Lerner (Series Ed.) & R. M. Lerner (Vol. Ed.),  Handbook of child 
psychology: Vol. 1. Th eoretical models of human development (6th ed.; pp.  313–399 ).  New 
York :  John Wiley. 
 Flanagan, C. E. (2008).  Th e aft ereff ects of near-death experiences. Unpublished doctoral 
dissertation.  New York :  State University of New York at Buff alo. 

296 
■ References
 Flavell, J. H. (1996).  Piaget’s legacy.   Psychological Science,  7,  200–203 . 
 Flavell, J. H., & Miller, P. H. (1998).  Social cognition. In W. Damon (Series Ed.) & D. Kuhn 
& R. S. Siegler (Vol. Eds.),  Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 2. Cognition, perception, 
and language (5th ed.; pp.  851–898 ).  New York :  John Wiley. 
 Flavell, J. H., Miller, P. H., & Miller, S. A. (2002).  Cognitive development (4th ed.).  Upper 
Saddle River, NJ :  Prentice Hall. 
 Fontana, D. (2004).  Science, religion, and psychology: Th e case for the transpersonal. In 
D. Lorimer (Ed.),  Science, consciousness, and ultimate reality (pp.  145–160 ).  Exeter, UK : 
 Imprint Academic. 
 Fowers, B. J., & Richardson, F. C. (1996).  Why is multiculturalism good?   American 
Psychologist,  51,  609–621 . 
 Fowler, R. C. (2007).  Reestablishing the limits: A response to Turiel and Smetana’s com-
mentary. Unpublished manuscript, Salem State College, MA. 
 Fox, M. (2003).  Religion, spirituality, and the near-death experience .  New York : 
 Routledge.  
 Frankena, W. K. (1958).  Obligation and motivation in recent moral philosophy. In 
A. I. Melden (Ed.),  Essays in moral philosophy (pp.  40–81 ).  Seattle :   University of 
Washington Press. 
 Frankena, W. K. (1973).  Ethics (2nd ed.).  Englewood Cliff s, NJ :  Prentice Hall. 
 Frankena, W. K. (1980).  Th inking about morality.  Ann Arbor :  University of 
Michigan Press. 
 Freedman, B. J., Rosenthal, L., Donahoe, C. P., Schlundt, D. G., & McFall, R. M. (1978).  A 
social behavioral analysis of skills defi cits in delinquent and nondelinquent adolescent 
boys.  Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,  46,  1148–1462 . 
 French, C. C. (2001).  Commentary.  Th e Lancet,  358,  2010–2011 . 
 Fried, R., & Berkowitz, L. (1979).  Music hath charms . . . and can infl uence helpfulness. 
 Journal of Applied Social Psychology ,  9,  199 . 
 Frimer, J. A., & Walker, L. J. (2009).  Reconciling the self and morality: An empirical model 
of moral centrality development.  Developmental Review ,  45,  1269–1681 . 
 Fujita, K. (2008).  Seeing the forest beyond the trees: A construal-level approach to self-
control.  Social and Personality Psychology Compass ,  2/3,  1475–1496 . 
 Fujita, K., & Carnevale, J. J. (2012).  Transcending temptation through abstraction: Th e 
role of construal level in self control.  Current Directions in Psychological Science , 
 21,  246–252 . 
 Fujita, K., & Roberts, J. C. (2010).  Promoting prospective self-control through abstraction.  
 Journal of Experimental Social Psychology ,  46,  1049–1054 . 
 Fromm, E. (1955).  Th e sane society.  New York :  Holt, Rinehart, & Winston. 
 Gannon, T. A., Polaschek, D. L. L., & Ward, T. (2005).  Social cognition and sex off enders. 
In M. McMurran & J. McGuire (Eds.),  Social problem solving and off ending: Evidence, 
evaluation, and evolution (pp.  223–247 ).  New York :  John Wiley & Sons. 
 Garbarino, J. (1999).  Lost boys: Why our sons turn violent and how we can save them . 
 New York :  Th e Free Press. 
 Garmon, L. C., Basinger, K. S., Gregg, V. R., & Gibbs, J. C. (1996).  Gender diff erences in 
stage and expression of moral judgment.  Merrill-Palmer Quarterly,  42,  418–437 . 
 Gentner, D., & Christie, S. (2010).  Mutual bootstrapping between language and analogical 
processing.  Language and Cognition ,  2,  261–283 . 

References 
■ 297
 Geraci, A., & Surian, L. (2011). Th e developmental roots of fairness: Infants’ reactions to 
equal and unequal distributions of resources. Developmental Science, 14, 1012–1020. 
 Gergen, K. J. (2001).  Psychological science in a postmodern context.  American Psychologist, 
 56,  803–813 . 
 Gershoff , E. T., Grogan-Kaylor, A., Lansford, J. E., Chang, L., Zelli, A., Deater-Deckard, K., et 
al. (2010).  Parent discipline practices in an international sample: Associations with child 
behaviors and moderation by perceived normativeness.   Child Development ,  81,  480–495 . 
 Gibbs, J. C. (1972).  Opinion change aft er mild and strong prohibitions . Unpublished doctoral 
dissertation, Harvard University. 
 Gibbs, J. C. (1977).  Kohlberg’s stages of moral judgment: A constructive critique.  Harvard 
Educational Review,  47,  43–61 . 
 Gibbs, J. C. (1979).  Kohlberg’s moral stage theory: A Piagetian revision.  Human Development, 
 22,  89–112 . 
 Gibbs, J. C. (1985).  Moody’s versus Siegel’s interpretation of the near-death experience: An 
evaluation based on recent research.  Anabiosis,  5,  67–81 . 
 Gibbs, J. C. (1991a).  Sociomoral developmental delay and cognitive distortion: Implications 
for the treatment of antisocial youth. In W. M. Kurtines & J. L. Gewirtz (Eds.),  Handbook of 
moral behavior and development (Vol.  3 ; pp.  95–110 ).  Hillsdale, NJ :  Lawrence Erlbaum. 
 Gibbs, J. C. (1991b).  Toward an integration of Kohlberg’s and Hoff man’s moral development 
theories.  Human Development,  34,  88–104 . 
 Gibbs, J. C. (1994a).  Fairness and empathy as the foundation for universal moral education.  
 Comenius,  14, 12–23 . 
 Gibbs, J. C. (1994b).  Moral reasoning training: Th e values component. In A. P. Goldstein, 
R. Nensen, M. Kalt, & B. Dalefl od (Eds.),  New perspectives on Aggression Replacement 
Training (pp.  51–72 ).  Chichester, UK :  Wiley. 
 Gibbs, J. C. (1997).  Surprise—and discovery?—in the near-death experience.  Journal of 
Near-Death Studies,  15,  259–278 . 
 Gibbs, J. C. (1999).  God, tragedy, and the near-death experience: Evaluating Kushner’s per-
spectives on theodicy.  Journal of Near-Death Studies,  17,  223–259 . 
 Gibbs, J. C. (2003).  Moral development and reality: Beyond the theories of Kohlberg and 
Hoff man (1st ed.).  Th ousand Oaks, CA :  Sage. 
 Gibbs, J. C. (2005).  Reply to Michael Sabom’s commentary.  Journal of Near-Death Studies , 
 24,  105–107 . 
 Gibbs, J. C. (2006a).  Reply [to R. Bergman’s “Gibbs on Kohlberg on Dewey: An essay review 
of John C. Gibbs’  Moral Development and Reality ”].  European Journal of Developmental 
Psychology ,  3,  312–315 . 
 Gibbs, J. C. (2006b).  Should Kohlberg’s cognitive developmental approach be replaced 
with a pragmatic approach? Comment on Krebs and Denton.  Psychological Review , 
 113,  666–671 . 
 Gibbs, J. C. (2010a).  Beyond the conventionally moral [review of   Nice is not enough ].  Journal 
of Applied Developmental Psychology ,  31,  106–108 . 
 Gibbs, J. C. (2010b).  Moral development and reality: Beyond the theories of Kohlberg and 
Hoff man (2nd ed.).  Boston :  Pearson. 
 Gibbs, J. C. (2010c).  Near-death experiences, deathbed visions, and past-life memories: 
A convergence in support of van Lommel’s  Consciousness beyond life.  Journal of Near-
Death Studies ,  29,  303–341 . 

298 
■ References
 Gibbs, J. C. (2011).  Honor, morality, and moral revolutions [review of  Th e honor code: How 
moral revolutions happen ].  Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology,  33,  77–78 . 
 Gibbs, J. C. (2013).  Entertaining, brilliant, and troubling [review of  Th e righteous mind: Why good 
people are divided by politics and religion ].  Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 34, 
161–162.  
 Gibbs, J. C., Arnold, K. D., Ahlborn, H. H., & Cheesman, F. L. (1984).  Facilitation of 
sociomoral reasoning in delinquents.  Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 
 52,  37–45 . 
 Gibbs, J. C., Arnold, K. D., & Burkhart, J. E. (1984).  Sex diff erences in the expression of 
moral judgment.  Child Development,  55,  1040–1043 . 
 Gibbs, J. C., Barriga, A. Q., & Potter, G. (1992).  Th e How I Th ink questionnaire. Unpublished 
manuscript, Th e Ohio State University. 
 Gibbs, J. C., Barriga, A. Q., & Potter, G. B. (2001).  How I Th ink (HIT) questionnaire. 
 Champaign, IL :  Research Press. 
 Gibbs, J. C., Basinger, K. S., & Fuller, D. (1992).  Moral maturity: Measuring the development 
of sociomoral refl ection.  Hillsdale, NJ :  Lawrence Erlbaum. 
 Gibbs, J. C., Basinger, K. S., & Grime, R. L. (2003).  Moral judgment maturity: From clini-
cal to standard measures. In S. J. Lopez & C. R. Snyder (Eds.),  Handbook of positive 
psychological assessment (pp.  361–373 ) .  Washington, DC :  American Psychological 
Association Books.  
 Gibbs, J. C., Basinger, K. S., Grime, R. L., & Snarey, J. R. (2007).  Moral judgment develop-
ment across cultures: Revisiting Kohlberg’s universality claims.  Developmental Review , 
 27,  443–500 . 
 Gibbs, J. C., Clark, P. M., Joseph, J. A., Green, J. L., Goodrick, T. S., & Makowski, D. G. 
(1986).  Relations between moral judgment, moral courage, and fi eld independence. 
 Child Development,  57,  185–191 . 
 Gibbs, J. C., Kohlberg, L., Colby, A., & Speicher-Dubin, B. (1976).  Th e domain and devel-
opment of moral judgment: A theory and a method of assessment.  In J. R. Meyer 
(Ed.),  Refl ections on values education (pp.  19–46 ).  Waterloo, Ontario :  Wilfrid Laurier 
University Press. 
 Gibbs, J. C., Moshman, D., Berkowitz, M. W., Basinger, K. S., & Grime, R. L. (2009).  Taking 
development seriously.   Journal of Moral Education ,  38,  271–282 . 
 Gibbs, J. C., Potter, G. B., Barriga, A. Q., & Liau, A. K. (1996).  Developing the helping skills 
and prosocial motivation of aggressive adolescents in peer group programs.  Aggression 
and Violent Behavior,  1,  285–305 . 
 Gibbs, J. C., Potter, G. B., & DiBiase, A.-M. (2013).  Sociomoral development for behav-
iorally at-risk youth: Mac’s group meeting. In C. Proctor & A. Linley (Eds.),  Positive 
psychology: Research, applications, and interventions for children and adolescents 
(pp. 225–245).  Dordrecht, Th e Netherlands :  Springer. 
 Gibbs, J. C., Potter, G. B., DiBiase, A.-M., & Devlin, R. (2009).  Th e EQUIP program: Social 
perspective-taking for responsible thought and behavior. In B. Glick (Ed.),  Cognitive 
behavioral interventions for at-risk youth (pp.  9–1 to 9–42 ) (vol. 2).  Kingston, NJ  :   Civic 
Research Institute.  
 Gibbs, J. C., Potter, G., & Goldstein, A. P. (1995).  Th e EQUIP program: Teaching youth 
to think and act responsibly through a peer-helping approach.  Champaign, IL : 
 Research Press.  

References 
■ 299
 Gibbs, J. C., & Schnell, S. V. (1984).  Moral development “versus” socialization: A critique. 
 American Psychologist,  40,  1071–1080 . 
 Gibbs, J. C., & Schnell, S. V. (1986).  Th e Opportunities for Role-Taking (ORT) questionnaire. 
(Available from John C. Gibbs, Psychology Department, Th e Ohio State University, 1835 
Neil Avenue, Columbus, OH 43210.) 
 Gibbs, J. C., Swillinger, A., Leeman, L. W., Simonian, S. S., Rowland, S., & Jaycox, C. (1995). 
 Inventory of Adolescent Problems–Short Form (IAP-SF).  Appendix B in J. C. Gibbs, G. 
B. Potter, & A. P. Goldstein,  Th e EQUIP program: Teaching youth to think and act respon-
sibly through a peer-helping approach .  Champaign, IL :  Research Press. 
 Gibbs, J. C., & Whiteford (Mason), M. G. (1989).  Th e Post-Childhood Opportunities for Role-
Taking measure. (Available from John C. Gibbs, Psychology Department, Th e Ohio State 
University, 1835 Neil Avenue, Columbus, OH 43210.) 
 Gibbs, J. C., Widaman, K. F., & Colby, A. (1982).  Construction and validation of a simplifi ed, 
group-administrable equivalent to the Moral Judgment Interview.  Child Development, 
 53,  895–910 . 
 Gielen, U. P., Comunian, A. L., & Antoni, G. (1994).  An Italian cross-sectional study of 
Gibbs’s Sociomoral Refl ection Measure–Short Form.  In A. L. Comunian & U. P. Gielen 
(Eds.),  Advancing psychology and its applications: International perspectives (pp.  125–
134 ).  Milan, Italy :  FrancoArneli. 
 Giesbrecht, N., & Walker, L. (2000).  Ego development and the construction of a moral self. 
 Journal of College Student Development,  41,  157–171 . 
 Gill, M. B., & Nichols, S. (2008).  Sentimentalist pluralism: Moral psychology and philo-
sophical ethics.   Philosophical Issues ,  18,  143–163 . 
 Gilligan, C. (1982).  In a diff erent voice: Psychological theory and women’s development. 
 Cambridge, UK :  Cambridge University Press. 
 Gintis, H., Henrich, J., Bowles, S., Boyd, R., & Fehr, E. (2008).  Strong reciprocity and the 
roots of human morality.   Social Justice Research ,  21,  241–253 . 
 Glachan, P., & Light, M. (1982).  Peer interaction and learning: Can two wrongs make a 
right? In G. Butterworth & P. Light (Eds.),  Social cognition: Studies of the development of 
understanding (pp.  238–262 ).  Sussex, UK :  Harvester. 
 Glazer, M. P. (2002).  Ten whistleblowers: What they did and how they fared. In 
M. D. Erman & R. J. Lundman (Eds.),  Corporate and governmental deviance: Problems 
of organizational behavior in contemporary society (6th ed.; pp.  229–249 ).  New York : 
 Oxford University Press.  
 Gleichgerrcht, E., & Decety, J. (2012).  Th e costs of empathy among health professionals. In J. 
Decety (Ed.),  Empathy: From bench to bedside (pp.  245–261 ).  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press. 
 Glick, B. (Ed.) (2009).).  Cognitive behavioral interventions for at-risk youth (Vol. 2).  Kingston, 
NJ :  Civic Research Institute. 
 Glick, B., & Gibbs, J. C. (2011).  Aggression Replacement Training: A comprehensive interven-
tion for aggressive youth (3rd ed.).  Champaign, IL :  Research Press. 
 Gnepp, J. (1983).  Children’s social sensitivity: Inferring emotions from confl icting cues. 
 Developmental Psychology,  19,  805–814 . 
 Golding, W. (1962).  Lord of the fl ies.  New York :  Coward-McCann. (Original work 
published 1954.) 
 Goldstein, A. P. (1999).  Th e Prepare curriculum: Teaching prosocial competencies (rev. ed.). 
 Champaign, IL :  Research Press. 

300 
■ References
 Goldstein, A. P., Glick, B., & Gibbs, J. C. (1998).  Aggression Replacement Training: A compre-
hensive intervention for aggressive youth (2nd ed.).  Champaign, IL :  Research Press. 
 Goldstein, A. P., Glick, B., Irwin, M. J., Pask-McCartney, C., & Rubama, I. (1989).  Reducing 
delinquency: Intervention in the community.  New York :  Pergamon. 
 Goldstein, A. P., & McGinnis, E. (1997).  Skillstreaming the adolescent: New strategies and 
perspectives for teaching prosocial skills (rev. ed.).  Champaign, IL :  Research Press. 
 Goleman, D. (1995).  Emotional intelligence.  New York :  Bantam Books. 
 Gollwitzer, M., & Denzler, M. (2009).  What makes revenge sweet: Seeing the off ender suff er 
or delivering a message?  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology ,  45,  840–844 . 
 Goodall, J. (1990).  Th rough a window: My thirty years with the chimpanzees of Gombe. 
 Boston :  Houghton Miffl  in. 
 Gopnik, A. (2009).  Th e philosophical baby: What children’s minds tell us about truth, love, 
and the meaning of life.  New York :  Farrar, Straus, & Giroux. 
 Gopnik, A., & Wellman, H. M. (1994).  Th e “theory” theory. In L. A. Hirschfeld & 
S. A. Gelman (Eds.),  Mapping the mind: Domain specifi city in cognition and culture 
(pp.  257–293 ).  Cambridge, UK :  Cambridge University Press. 
 Gottman, J. M., Jacobson, N. S., Rushe, R. H., Shortt, J. W., Babcock, J., La Taillade, J. J., et al. 
(1995).  Th e relationship between heart rate reactivity, emotionally aggressive behavior, 
and general violence in batterers.   Journal of Family Psychology,  9,  227–248 . 
 Gottschling, V. (2009).  Modularity. In J. Symons & P. Calvo (Eds.),  Th e Routledge compan-
ion to philosophy (pp.  296–321 ).  London, UK :  Routledge. 
 Gouldner, A. (1960).  Th e norm of reciprocity: A preliminary statement.  American 
Sociological Review,  25,  161–179 . 
 Graham, J., & Haidt, J. (2012).  Sacred values and evil adversaries: A moral foundations 
approach. In M. Mikulincer & P. R. Shaver (Eds.),  Th e social psychology of moral-
ity: Exploring the causes of good and evil (pp. 11–32 ).  Washington, DC :  American 
Psychological Association. 
 Greene, J. D. (2008a).  Th e secret joke of Kant’s soul.  In W. Sinnott-Armstrong (Ed.),  Moral 
psychology: Vol. 3. Th e neuroscience of morality: Emotion, brain disorders, and develop-
ment (pp.  35–79 ).  Cambridge, MA :  Th e MIT Press. 
 Greene, J. D. (2008b).  Reply to Mikhail and Timmons.  In W. Sinnott-Armstrong (Ed.), 
 Moral psychology: Vol. 3. Th e neuroscience of morality: Emotion, brain disorders, and 
development (pp.  105–117 ).  Cambridge, MA :  Th e MIT Press. 
 Greene, J. D., Morelli, S. A., Lowenberg, K., Nystrom, L. E., & Cohen, J. D. (2008).  Cognitive 
load selectively interferes with utilitarian moral judgment.  Cognition ,  107,  1144–1154 . 
 Greene, J. D., Sommerville, R. B., Nystrom, L. E., Darley, J. M., & Cohen, J. D. (2001). 
 An fMRI investigation of emotional engagement in moral judgment.  Science,  293, 
 2105–2108 . 
 Greenwald, A. G., Nosek, B. A., & Banaji, M. R. (2003).  Understanding and using the 
Implicit Association Test.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology ,  85,  197–216 . 
 Gregg, V. R., Gibbs, J. C., & Basinger, K. S. (1994).  Patterns of developmental delay in moral 
judgment by male and female delinquents.  Merrill-Palmer Quarterly,  40,  538–553 . 
 Greyson, B. (1983).  Th e Near-Death Experience Scale: Construction, reliability, and valid-
ity.  Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease,  171,  369–375 . 
 Greyson, B. ( 1992–1993 ).  Near-death experiences and antisuicidal attitudes.  Omega, 
 26,  81–89 . 

References 
■ 301
 Greyson, B. (1998).  Th e incidence of near-death experiences.  Medicine and Psychiatry, 
 1,  92–99 . 
 Greyson, B. (2000a).  Dissociation in people who have near-death experiences: Out of their 
bodies or out of their minds?  Th e Lancet,  355,  460–463 . 
 Greyson, B. (2000b).  Near-death experiences.  In E. Cardena, S. J. Lynn, & S. Krippner 
(Eds.),  Varieties of anomalous experience: Examining the scientifi c evidence (pp.  315–
352 ).  Washington, DC :  American Psychological Association.  
 Greyson, B. (August, 2001).  Are NDErs out of their bodies or out of their minds? Paper pre-
sented at the meeting of the International Association of Near-Death Studies, West 
Hartford, CT. 
 Greyson, B. (2007).  Consistency of near-death experience accounts over two decades: Are 
reports embellished over time?  Resuscitation ,  73,  407–411 . 
 Greyson, B. (2010a).  Implications of near-death experiences for a postmaterialist psychol-
ogy.  Psychology of Religion and Spirituality ,  2,  37–45 . 
 Greyson, B. (2010b).  Seeing dead people not known to have died: “Peak in Darien” experi-
ences.  Anthropology and Humanism ,  35,  159–171 . 
 Greyson, B. (in press).  Near-death experiences.  In E. Cardena, S. J. Lynn, and S. Krippner 
(Eds.),  Varieties of anomalous experience: Examining the scientifi c evidence (2nd ed.). 
 Washington, DC :  American Psychological Association. 
 Greyson, B., & Bush, N. E. (1992).  Distressing near-death experiences.  Psychiatry, 
 55,  95–110 . 
 Greyson, B., & Harris, B. (1987).  Clinical approaches to the near-death experiencer.  Journal 
of Near-Death Studies,  6,  41–52 . 
 Greyson, B., Kelly, E. W., & Kelly, E. F. (2009).  Explanatory models for near-death experi-
ences. In J. M. Holden, B. Greyson, & D. James (Eds.),  Th e handbook of near-death experi-
ences: Th irty years of investigation (pp.  213–234 ).  Santa Barbara, CA :  Praeger Publishers. 
 Grim, P., White, S., & Kohlberg, L. (1968).  Some relationships between conscience and 
attentional processes.   Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,  8,  239–253 . 
 Gross, P., & Leavitt, N. (1994).  Higher superstition: Th e academic left  and its quarrels with 
science .  Baltimore :  Johns Hopkins University Press.  
 Grossman, D. L. (1995).  On killing: Th e psychological cost of learning to kill in war and soci-
ety.  Boston :  Little, Brown. 
 Groth, A. N., & Birnsbaum, J. J. (1979).  Men who rape.  New York :  Plenum. 
 Guisinger, S., & Blatt, S. J. (1994).  Individuality and relatedness: Evolution of a fundamental 
dialectic.  American Psychologist,  49,  104–111 . 
 Haaga, D. A., & Beck, A. T. (1994).  Perspectives on depressive realism: Implications for 
cognitive theory of depression.   Behaviour Research and Th erapy ,  33,  41–48 . 
 Habermas, J. (1991).  Moral consciousness and communicative action .  Cambridge, MA : 
 MIT Press. 
 Hafer, C. L., & Begue, L. (2005).  Experimental research on Just-World theory: Problems, 
developments, and future challenges.  Psychological Review ,  131,  128–167 . 
 Haggbloom, S. J., Warnick, R., Warnick, J. E., Jones, V. K., Yarbrough, G. L., Russell, T. M., 
et al. (2000).  Th e 100 most eminent psychologists of the twentieth century.  Review of 
General Psychology,  6,  139–152 . 
 Haidt, J. (2001).  Th e emotional dog and its rational tail: A social intuitionist approach to 
moral judgment.  Psychological Review ,  108,  814–834 . 

302 
■ References
 Haidt, J. (2003).  Th e moral emotions. In R. J. Davidson, K. R. Scherer, & 
H. H. Goldsmith (Eds.),  Handbook of aff ective sciences (pp.  852–870 ).  Oxford, UK : 
 Oxford University Press.  
 Haidt, J. (2004).  Th e emotional dog gets mistaken for a possum.   Review of General 
Psychology ,  8,  281–290 . 
 Haidt, J. (2006).  Th e happiness hypothesis: Finding modern truth in ancient wisdom.  New 
York :  Basic Books. 
 Haidt, J. (2007).  Th e new synthesis in moral psychology.  Science ,  316,  998–1002 . 
 Haidt, J. (May 7, 2011).  Why we celebrate a killing.   New York Times , p.  10 . 
 Haidt, J. (2012).  Righteous mind: Why good people are divided by politics and religion.  New 
York :  Knopf Doubleday. 
 Haidt, J., & Bjorklund, F. (2008a).  Social intuitionists answer six questions about moral psy-
chology. In W. Sinnott-Armstrong (Ed.),  Moral psychology: Vol. 2. Th e cognitive science 
of morality: Intuition and diversity (pp.  181–218 ).  Cambridge, MA :  Th e MIT Press. 
 Haidt, J., & Bjorklund, F. (2008b).  Social intuitionists reason, in conversation. ( 241–254 ). In 
W. Sinnott-Armstrong (Ed.),  Moral psychology: Vol. 2. Th e cognitive science of morality: 
Intuition and diversity (pp.  241–254 ).  Cambridge, MA :  Th e MIT Press. 
 Haidt, J., & Hersh, M. A. (2001).  Sexual morality: Th e cultures and reasons of liberals and 
conservatives.  Journal of Applied Social Psychology ,  31,  191–221 . 
 Haidt, J., & Joseph, C. (2004).  Intuitive ethics: How innately prepared intuitions generate 
culturally variable virtues.  Daedalus ,  133,  55–66 . 
 Haidt, J., & Joseph, C. (2007).  Th e moral mind: How fi ve sets of innate moral intuitions 
guides the development of many culture-specifi c virtues, and perhaps even modules. 
In P. Carruthers, S. Laurence, & S. Stick (Eds.),  Th e innate mind: Foundations and 
the future 
 Haidt, J., & Joseph, C. (2011).  How moral foundations theory succeeded in building on sand: 
A response to Suhler and Churchland.   Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience ,  23,  2117–2122 . 
 Haidt, J., & Kesebir, S. (2010).  Morality.  In S. T. Fiske, D. P. Gilbert, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), 
 Handbook of social psychology: Vol. 2 (5th ed.; pp.  797–832 ).  New York :  Wiley. 
 Haidt, J., Koller, S., & Dias, M. (1993).  Aff ect, culture, and morality, or is it wrong to eat your 
dog?  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology ,  63,  613–628 . 
 Halford, G. S., & Andrews, G. (2006).  Reasoning and problem-solving. In W. Damon & R. 
M. Lerner (Series Ed.) & D. Kuhn & R. S. Siegler (Vol. Ed.),  Handbook of child psychol-
ogy, Volume 2: Cognition, perception, and language (6th ed.; pp.  557–608 ).  New York : 
 John Wiley & Sons. 
 Hamilton, W. D. (1971).  Selection of selfi sh and altruistic behavior in some extreme mod-
els. In J. F. Eisenberg & W. S. Dillon (Eds.),  Man and beast: Comparative social behavior  
(pp.  57–91 ).  Washington, DC :  Smithsonian Institute Press. 
 Hamlin, J. K., Mahajan, N., Liberman, Z., & Wynn, K. (2013).  Not like me = bad: Infants 
prefer those who harm dissimilar others.   Psychological Science, 24, 589–594 . 
 Hamlin, J. K., Wynn, K., & Bloom, P. (2007).  Social evaluation by preverbal infants.  Nature , 
 450,  557–560 . 
 Hamlin, J. K., Wynn, K., & Bloom, P. (2012).  Th e case of social evaluation in infants.   PLOS 
ONE , August 9, 2012. 
 Hammock, G. S., Rosen, S., Richardson, D. R., & Bernstein, S. (1989).  Aggression as equity 
restoration.  Journal of Research in Personality,  23,  398–409 . 

References 
■ 303
 Hardy, S. A., & Carlo, G. (2005).  Identity as a source of moral motivation.   Human 
Development ,  48,  232–256 . 
 Hardy, S. A., & Carlo, G. (2011).  Moral identity: What is it, how does it develop, and how is 
it linked to moral action?  Child Development Perspectives ,  5,  212–218 . 
 Haritos-Fatouros, M. (2003).  Th e psychological origins of institutionalized torture .  New York : 
 Routledge. 
 Harkness, S., Edwards, C. P., & Super, C. (1981).  Social roles and moral reasoning: A case 
study in a rural African community.  Developmental Psychology ,  17,  595–603 . 
 Harris, P. L., & Koenig, M. A. (2006).  Trust in testimony: How children learn about science 
and religion.  Child Development ,  77,  505–524 . 
 Harris, S. (2010).  Th e moral landscape: How science can determine human values.  New York : 
 Free Press. 
 Hart, D., Atkins, R., & Donnelly, T. M. (2006).  Community service and moral development. 
In M. Killen & J. G. Smetana (Eds.),  Handbook of moral development (pp.  933–656 ). 
 Mahwah, NJ :  Erlbaum. 
 Harter, S. (2006).  Th e self. In W. Damon & R. M. Lerner (Series Eds.) & N. Eisenberg (Vol. 
Ed.),  Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 3. Social, emotional, and personality develop-
ment (6th ed.; pp.  505–570 ).  New York :  John Wiley. 
 Harter, S. (2012).  Th e construction of self: Developmental and sociocultural foundations (2nd 
ed.).  New York :  Guilford Press. 
 Hassin, R. R. (2013). Yes It Can: On the functional abilities of the human unconscious. 
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 8, 195–207.
 Hastings, P. D., Utendale, W. T., & Sullivan, C. (2007).  Th e socialization of prosocial devel-
opment. In J. E. Grusec & P. D. Hastings (Eds.),  Handbook of socialization: Th eory and 
research (pp.  638–664 ).  New York :  Guilford Press. 
 Hauser, M. D. (2006).  Moral minds: How nature designed our universal sense of right and 
wrong .  New York :  HarperCollins. 
 Havighurst, H. J., & Taba, H. (1949).  Adolescent character and personality.   New York : 
 John Wiley. 
 Hay, D. F., Nash, A., & Pederson, J. (1981).  Responses of six-months-olds to the distress of 
their peers.  Child Development ,  52,  1071–1075 
 Heide, K. M. (2003).  Youth homicide: A review of the literature and a blueprint for action. 
 International Journal of Off ender Th erapy and Comparative Criminology ,  47,  6–36 . 
 Heider, F. (1958).  Th e psychology of interpersonal relations.  New York :  John Wiley. 
 Helmond, P., Overbeek, G., & Brugman, D. (2012).  Program integrity and eff ectiveness 
of a cognitive behavioral intervention for incarcerated youth on cognitive distor-
tions, social skills, and moral development.   Children and Youth Services Review ,  34, 
 1720–1728 . 
 Helmond, P., Overbeek, G., Brugman, D., & Gibbs, J. C. (2012).  A meta-analysis of 
cognitive distortions and externalizing problem behavior: Association, moderators, 
and treatment eff ectiveness. Manuscript under review, University of Utrecht, Th e 
Netherlands. 
 Helwig, C. C., & Prencipe, A. (1999).  Children’s judgments of fl ags and fl ag-burning.  Child 
Development,  70,  132–143 . 
 Helwig, C. C., Turiel, E., & Nucci, L. P. (1996).  Th e virtues and vices of developmental theo-
rists.  Developmental Review,  16,  69–107 . 

304 
■ References
 Henggeler, S. W., Schoenwald, S. K., Borduin, C. M., Rowland, M. D., & Cunningham, P. B. 
(1998).  Multisystemic treatment of antisocial behavior in children and adolescents.  New 
York :  Guilford. 
 Henrich, J., Boyd, R., Bowles, S., Camerer, C., Fehr, E., Gintis, H., et al. (2005).  “Economic 
man” in cross-cultural perspective: Behavioral experiments in 15 small-scale societies. 
 Behavioral and Brain Sciences ,  28,  795–855 . 
 Herbert, N. (1985).  Quantum reality: Beyond the new physics.  New York :  Anchor. 
 Heyert, M. (1976).  Th e new kid. In R. C. Pooley, E. Daniel, E. J. Farrell, A. H. Grommon, & 
O. S. Niles (Eds.),  Projection in literature (pp.  216–226 ).  New York :  Scott Foresman. 
 Hickling, A. K., & Wellman, H. M. (2001).  Emergence of children’s causal explana-
tions and theories: Evidence from everyday conversation.  Developmental Psychology , 
 37,  668–683 . 
 Hildebran, D., & Pithers, W. D. (1989).  Enhancing off ender empathy for sexual-abuse vic-
tims. In D. R. Laws (Ed.),  Relapse prevention with sex off enders (pp.  236–243 ).  New York : 
 Guilford. 
 Hill, T. E., Jr. (1996).  Moral dilemmas, gaps, and residues: A Kantian perspective. In 
H. E. Mason (Ed.),  Moral dilemmas and moral theory (pp.  167–188 ).  New York :  Oxford 
University Press. 
 Hilton, N. Z. (1993).  Childhood sexual victimization and lack of empathy in child molest-
ers: Explanation or excuse?   International Journal of Off ender Th erapy and Comparative 
Criminology ,  27,  287–296 . 
 Hoff man, M. L. (1960).  Power assertion by the parent and its impact on the child.  Child 
Development,  31,  129–143 . 
 Hoff man, M. L. (1963).  Parent discipline and the child’s consideration for others.  Child 
Development,  13,  90–126 . 
 Hoff man, M. L. (1970).  Moral development.  In P. H. Mussen (Ed.),  Carmichael’s manual of 
child psychology (Vol. 2, 3rd ed.; pp.  261–359 ).  New York :  John Wiley. 
 Hoff man, M. L. (1975a).  Altruistic behavior and the parent-child relationship.  Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology ,  31,  937–943 . 
 Hoff man, M. L. (1975b).  Sex diff erences in moral internalization and values.  Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology ,  32,  720–729 . 
 Hoff man, M. L. (1976).  Early sex diff erences in empathy.  Developmental Psychology , 
 12,  557–558 . 
 Hoff man, M. L. (1977).  Sex diff erences in empathy and related behaviors.  Psychological 
Bulletin ,  84,  712–722, 
 Hoff man, M. L. (1978).  Empathy, its development and prosocial implications.  In 
C. B. Keasey (Ed.),  Nebraska Symposium on Motivation ,  25,  169–218 . 
 Hoff man, M. L. (1981a).  Is altruism part of human nature?   Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology,  40,  121–137 . 
 Hoff man, M. L. (1981b).  Perspectives on the diff erence between understanding people and 
understanding things: Th e role of aff ect. In J. H. Flavell & L. Ross (Eds.),  Social cogni-
tive development: Frontiers and possible futures (pp.  67–81 ).  Cambridge, UK :  Cambridge 
University Press. 
 Hoff man, M. L. (1982).  Aff ect and moral development. In D. Cicchetti & P. Hesse (Eds.), 
 Emotional development , no. 16 (pp.  83–103 ).  San Francisco :  Jossey-Bass. 

References 
■ 305
 Hoff man, M. L. (1983).  Aff ective and cognitive processes in moral internalization: An 
information processing approach. In E. T. Higgins, D. Ruble, & W. Hartup (Eds.),  Social 
cognition and social development: A socio-cultural perspective (pp.  236–274 ).  New York : 
 John Wiley. 
 Hoff man, M. L. (1984).  Empathy, its limitations, and its role in a comprehensive moral 
theory. In J. Gewirtz & W. Kurtines (Eds.),  Morality, moral behavior, and moral develop-
ment (pp.  283–302 ).  New York :  Wiley. 
 Hoff man, M. L. (1986).  Aff ect, cognition, and motivation. In R. M. Sorrentino & 
E. T. Higgins (Eds.),  Handbook of motivation and personality: Foundations of social 
behavior (pp.  244–280 ).  New York :  Guilford. 
 Hoff man, M. L. (1987).  Th e contribution of empathy to justice and moral judgment. In 
N. Eisenberg & J. Strayer (Eds.),  Empathy and its development (pp.  47–80 ).  Cambridge, 
UK :  Cambridge University Press. 
 Hoff man, M. L. (1988).  Moral development. In M. H. Bornstein & M. E. Lamb (Eds.), 
 Developmental psychology: An advanced textbook (2nd ed.; pp.  497–548 ).  Hillsdale, NJ : 
 Lawrence Erlbaum. 
 Hoff man, M. L. (1991).  Toward an integration: Commentary.  Human Development, 
 34,  105–110 . 
 Hoff man, M. L. (1994).  Discipline and internalization.   Developmental Psychology , 
 30,  26–28 . 
 Hoff man, M. L. (2000).  Empathy and moral development: Implications for caring and justice. 
 Cambridge, UK :  Cambridge University Press. 
 Hoff man, M. L. (2002).  Empathy and vicarious traumatization in clinicians. Unpublished 
manuscript. 
 Hoff man, M. L. (2008).  Empathy and prosocial behavior. In M. Lewis, J. Haviland-Jones, 
& Lisa F. Barrett (Eds.),  Handbook of emotions (3rd ed.; pp.  440–455 ).  New York : 
 Guilford Press. 
 Hoff man, M. L. (2011).  Empathy, justice, and the law. In A. Coplan & P. Goldie (Eds.), 
 Empathy: Philosophical and psychological perspectives (pp.  230–254 ).  New York :  Oxford 
University Press. 
 Hoff man, M. L., & Saltzstein, H. D. (1967).  Parent discipline and the child’s moral develop-
ment.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,  5,  45–57 . 
 Hoff ner, C., & Badzinski, D. M. (1989).  Children’s integration of facial and situational cues 
to emotion.  Child Development ,  60,  411–422 . 
 Hoff ner, C., Cantor, J., & Th orson, E. (1989).  Children’s responses to confl icting auditory and 
visual features of a televised narrative.  Human Communication Research ,  16,  256–278 . 
 Holden, J. M. (2009).  Veridical perception in near-death experiences. In J. M. Holden, B. 
Greyson, & D. James (Eds.),  Th e handbook of near-death experiences: Th irty years of 
investigation (pp.  185–211 ).  Santa Barbara, CA :  Praeger Publishers. 
 Hollander, P. (1995).  Revisiting the banality of evil: Political violence: Political violence in 
communist systems.  Partisan Review ,  64,  56 . 
 Horn, M., Shively, R., & Gibbs, J. C. (2007).  EQUIPPED for Life (3rd ed.; therapeutic board 
game).  Champaign, IL :  Research Press. 
 Hudson, J. A., & Nelson, K. (1983).  Eff ects of script structure on children’s story recall. 
 Developmental Psychology,  19,  625–635 . 

306 
■ References
 Hunter, N., & Kelly, C. K. (1986).  Examination of the validity of the Adolescent Problems 
Inventory among incarcerated juvenile delinquents.  Journal of Consulting Clinical 
Psychology,  54,  301–302 . 
 Hurley, D. (January, 1988).  Getting help from helping.  Psychology Today, pp.  63 ff . 
 Husain, E. (2007).  Th e Islamist: Why I joined radical Islam in Britain, what I saw inside, and 
why I left  .  New York :  Penguin Books. 
 Hyman, R. (2001).  Anomalous experience in a mundane world [Review of the book  Varieties 
of anomalous experience: Examining the scientifi c evidence ].  Contemporary Psychology 
APA Review of Books,  46,  453–456 . 
 Inhelder, B., & Piaget, J. (1958).  Th e growth of logical thinking from childhood to adolescence: 
An essay on the construction of formal operational structures (A. Parsons & S. Milram, 
Trans.).  London :  Routledge & Kegan Paul.  (Original work published 1958.) 
 Inzlicht, M., & Schmeichel, B. J. (2012). What is ego depletion? Toward a mechanistic revision 
of the resource model of self-control. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 7, 450–463.
 Isen, A. M., & Levin, P. F. (1972).  Eff ect of feeling good on helping: Cookies and kindness. 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology ,  21,  384–388 . 
 Jacobson, D. (2008).  Does intuitionism fl atter morality or challenge it?  In W. Sinnott-
Armstrong (Ed.),  Moral Psychology: Vol. 2. Th e cognitive science of morality: Intuition 
and diversity (pp.  219–232 ).  Cambridge, MA :  Th e MIT Press. 
 Jaff ee, S., & Hyde, J. S. (2000).  Gender diff erences in moral orientation: A meta-analysis.  
 Psychological Bulletin,  126,  703–726 . 
 Jakubowski, P., & Lange, A. J. (1978).  Th e assertive option: Your rights and responsibilities. 
 Champaign, IL :  Research Press. 
 James, S. A. (1994).  Reconciling international human rights and cultural relativism: Th e 
case of female circumcision.   Bioethics,  8,  1–26 . 
 James, W. (1958).  Th e varieties of religious experiences: A study in human nature.  New York : 
 Mentor Books. (Original work published 1903.) 
 Janssens, J. M. A. M., & Gerris, J. R. M. (1992).  Childrearing, empathy, and prosocial devel-
opment. In J. M. A. M. Janssens & J. R. M. Gerris (Eds.),  Child rearing: Infl uence on 
prosocial and moral development (pp.  57–75 ).  Amsterdam :   Swets & Qeitlinger. 
 Jensen, L. A. (2008).  Th rough two lenses: A cultural-developmental approach to moral psy-
chology.  Developmental Review ,  28,  289–315 . 
 Jones, M. (1953).  Th e therapeutic community.  New York :  Basic Books. 
 Kahn, J. (May 13, 2012).  Trouble, age 9.   New York Times Sunday Magazine , pp.  32–37 ff . 
 Kahn, T., & Chambers, H. J. (1991).  Assessing recidivism risk with juvenile sex off enders. 
 Child Welfare,  70,  333–345 . 
 Kane, R. (1994).  Th rough the moral maze: Searching for absolute values in a pluralistic world. 
 New York :  Paragon House. 
 Kahneman, D., & Frederick, S. (2002).  Representativeness revisited: Attribute substitution 
in intuitive judgment. In T. Gilovich, D. Griffi  n, & D. Kahneman (Eds.),  Heuristics and 
biases (pp.  49–81 ).  New York :  Cambridge University Press. 
 Kartner, J., Keller, H., & Chaudhary, N. (2010).  Cognitive and social infl uences on early proso-
cial behavior in two sociocultural contexts.  Developmental Psychology ,  46,  905–914 . 
 Kartner, J., Keller, H., Chaudhary, N. , & Yovsi, R. D. (2012).  Th e development of mirror self-
recognition in diff erent sociocultural contexts.  Monographs of the Society for Research in 
Child Development,  77 (4, Serial no. 305). 

References 
■ 307
 Kazdin, A. (1995).  Conduct disorders in childhood and adolescence (2nd ed.).  Th ousand 
Oaks, CA :  Sage. 
 Keasy, C. B. (1971).  Social participation as a factor in the moral development of preadoles-
cents.  Developmental Psychology,  5,  216–230 . 
 Keenan, T., & Ward, T. (2003).  Developmental antecedents of sexual off ending. In T. Ward, 
D. R. Laws, & S. M. Hudson (Eds.),  Sexual deviance: Issues and controversies (pp.  119–
153 ).  Th ousand Oaks, CA :  Sage. 
 Kegan, R. (1982).  Th e evolving self: Problem and process in human development.  Cambridge, 
MA :  Harvard University Press. 
 Kellehear, A. (1996).  Experiences near death: Beyond medicine and religion.  New York : 
 Oxford University Press.  
 Kellehear, A. (2009).  Census of non-Western near-death experiences to 2005: Observations 
and critical refl ections. In J. M. Holden, B. Greyson, & D. James (Eds.),  Th e handbook of 
near-death experiences: Th irty years of investigation (pp.  135–158 ).  Santa Barbara, CA : 
 Praeger Publishers. 
 Kelly, E. W., Greyson, B., & Kelly, E., F. (2007).  Unusual experiences near death and related 
phenomena.  In E. F. Kelly, E. W. Kelly, A. C. Crabtree, A. Gauld, M. Grosso, & B. Greyson 
(Eds.).  Irreducible mind: Toward a psychology for the 21st century (pp.  367–421 ).  Lanham, 
MD  :  Rowman & Littlefi eld. 
 Kelly, G. (1963).  A theory of personality: Th e psychology of personal constructs.  Oxford, UK : 
 W. W. Norton. 
 Kelman, H. C. (1958).  Compliance, identifi cation, and internalization: Th ree processes of 
attitude change.  Journal of Confl ict Resolution,  2,  51–60 . 
 Kelman, H. C. (1973).  Violence without restraint: Refl ections on the dehumanization of 
victims and victimizers.   Journal of Social Issues,  29,  25–61 . 
 Kelman, H. C., & Baron, R. M. (1968).  Inconsistency as a psychological signal.  In 
R. P. Abelson, E. Aronson, W. J. McGuire, T. M. Newcomb, M. J. Rosenberg, & 
P. H. Tannenbaum, (Eds.),  Th eories of cognitive consistency: A sourcebook (pp.  331–336 ). 
 Chicago :  Rand McNally. 
 Kelman, H. C., & Hamilton, V. L. (1989).  Crimes of obedience: Toward a social psychology of 
authority and responsibility.  New Haven, CT :  Yale University Press. 
 Kenwood, B., & Dahl, M. (2011).  Preschoolers distribute scarce resources according to the 
moral valence of recipients’ previous actions.  Developmental Psychology ,  47,  1054–1064 . 
 Kerr, D. C. R., Lopez, N. L., Olson, S. L., & Sameroff , A. J. (2004).  Parental discipline and 
externalizing behavior problems in early childhood: Th e roles of moral regulation and 
child gender.  Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology ,  32,  369–383 . 
 Kielburger, C. (1998).  Free the children: A young man fi ghts against child labor and proves 
that children can change the world.  New York :  HarperCollins. 
 Kielburger, C., & Kielburger, M. (2006).  Me to we: Finding meaning in a material world .  New 
York :  Simon & Schuster.  
 Kinzler, K. D., Corriveau, K. H., & Harris, P. L. (2011).  Children’s selective trust in native-
accent speakers.  Developmental Science ,  14,  106–111 . 
 Kinzler, K. D., Dupoux, E., & Spelke, E. S. (2012).  Th e native language of social cognition. 
 Journal of Cognition and Development ,  13,  67–81 . 
 Kinzler, K. D., Shutts, K., & Spelke, E. S. (2012).  Language-based social preferences among 
children in South Africa.  Language, learning, and development ,  8,  215–232 

308 
■ References
 Klahr, D. (1982).  Non-monotone assessment of monotone development: An information 
processing analysis. In S. Strauss (Ed.),  U-shaped behavioral growth (pp.  63–86 ).  New 
York :  Academic Press. 
 Kochanska, G. (1995).  Children’s temperament, mother’s discipline, and security of 
attachment: Multiple pathways to emerging internalization.  Child Development, 
 66,  597–615 . 
 Kohlberg, L. (1958).  Th e development of modes of moral thinking and choice in the years 
ten to sixteen. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Chicago. 
 Kohlberg, L. (1963).  Th e development of children’s orientation toward a moral order: 
1. Sequence in the development of moral thought.   Vita Humana,  6,  11–33 . 
 Kohlberg, L. (1964).  Th e development of moral character and ideology. In M. L. Hoff man 
(Ed.),  Review of child development research (Vol. 1; pp.  383–431 ).  New York :  Russell Sage 
Foundation. 
 Kohlberg, L. (1971).  From   is  to  ought:   How to commit the naturalistic fallacy and get away 
with it in the study of moral development. In T. Mischel (Ed.),  Cognitive development 
and epistemology (pp.  151–235 ).  New York :  Academic Press. 
 Kohlberg, L. (1973a).  Th e claim to moral adequacy of a highest stage of moral judgment. 
 Journal of Philosophy,  70,  630–646 . 
 Kohlberg, L. (1973b).  Continuities in childhood and adult moral development revisited.  
In P. B. Baltes & K. W. Schaie (Eds.),  Lifespan developmental psychology: Personality and 
socialization (pp.  179–204 ).  New York :  Academic Press. 
 Kohlberg, L. (1976).  Moral stages and moralization: Th e cognitive-developmental approach. 
In T. Lickona (Ed.),  Moral development and behavior (pp.  31–53 ).  New York :  Holt, 
Rinehart, & Winston. 
 Kohlberg, L. (1984).  Essays on moral development: Vol. 2. Th e psychology of moral develop-
ment.  San Francisco :  Harper & Row. 
 Kohlberg, L. (1991).  My personal search for universal morality. In L. Kuhmerker 
(Ed.),  Th e Kohlberg legacy for the helping professions (pp.  11–17 ).  Birmingham, AL : 
 R. E. P. Books.  
 Kohlberg, L., Boyd, D. R., & Levine, C. (1990).  Th e return of Stage 6: Its principle 
and moral point of view. In T. Wren (Ed.),  Th e moral domain: Essays in the ongo-
ing discussion between philosophy and the social sciences (pp.  151–181 ).  Cambridge : 
 MIT Press.  
 Kohlberg, L., & Candee, D. (1984).  Th e relationship of moral judgment to moral action.  In 
L. Kohlberg (Ed.),  Essays on moral development: Vol. 2. Th e psychology of moral develop-
ment (pp.  498–581 ).  New York :  Harper & Row. 
 Kohlberg, L., Colby, A., Gibbs, J. C., & Lieberman, M. (1983).  A longitudinal study of moral 
judgment.  Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development,  48 (1–2, Serial 
no. 200). 
 Kohlberg, L., & Higgins, A. (1987).  School democracy and social interaction.  In 
W. M. Kurtines & J. L. Gewirtz (Eds.),  Moral development through social interaction 
(pp.  102–108 ).  New York :  Wiley-Interscience 
 Kohlberg, L., & Kramer, R. (1969).  Continuities and discontinuities in childhood and adult 
moral development.  Human Development,  12,  93–120 . 
 Kohlberg, L., & Power, C. (1981).  Moral development, religious development, and the ques-
tion of a seventh stage.   Zygon,  16,  203–259 . 

References 
■ 309
 Kohlberg, L., & Ryncarz, R. A. (1990).  Beyond justice reasoning: Moral development and 
consideration of a seventh stage. In C. N. Alexander & E. J. Langer (Eds.),  Higher stages 
of human development: Perspectives on adult growth (pp.  191–207 ).  New York :  Oxford 
University Press. 
 Kopelman, L. M. (2001).  Female circumcision/genital mutilation and ethical relativism. In 
P. K. Moser & T. L. Carson (Eds.),  Moral relativism: A reader (pp.  307–326 ).  New York : 
 Oxford University Press.  
 Kotlowitz, A. (May 4, 2008).  If gang shootings and revenge killing were an infectious dis-
ease, how would you stop it? A Chicago epidemiologist thinks he has the answer.  New 
York Times Sunday Magazine , pp.  52– 59,  100–102 . 
 Krebs, D. L. (2008).  Morality: An evolutionary account.  Perspectives on Psychological 
Science ,  3,  149–172 . 
 Krebs, D. L., & Denton, K. (2005).  Toward a more pragmatic approach to morality: A criti-
cal evaluation of Kohlberg’s model.  Psychological Review ,  112,  629–649 . 
 Krebs, D. L., & Denton, K. (2006).  Explanatory limitations of cognitive developmental 
approaches to morality.  Psychological Review ,  113,  672–675 . 
 Krebs, D., Vermuelen, S. C. A., Carpendale, J. I., & Denton, K. (1991).  Structural and situ-
ational infl uences on moral judgment: An interaction between stage and dilemma. In W. 
M. Kurtines & J. L. Gewirtz (Eds.),  Handbook of moral behavior and development: Vol. 2. 
Research (pp.  139–170 ).  Hillsdale, NJ :  Lawrence Erlbaum. 
 Krettenauer, T. (in press-a).  Moral motivation, responsibility, and the development of the 
moral self. In K. Heinrichs, F. Oser, & T. Lovat (Eds.),  Handbook of moral motivation: 
Th eories, models, applications .  Rotterdam, Th e Netherlands :  Sense Publishers. 
 Krettenauer, T. (in press-b).  Revisiting the moral self construct: Developmental perspec-
tives on moral selfh ood.  In B. Sokol, U. F. Grouzet, & U. Muller (Eds.),  Self-regulation 
and autonomy.  Cambridge, UK :  Cambridge University Press. 
 Krettenauer, T., & Edelstein, W. (1999).  From substages to moral types and beyond: An 
analysis of core criteria for morally autonomous judgments.  International Journal of 
Behavioral Development,  23,  899–920 . 
 Krettenauer, T., Malti, T., & Sokol, B. W. (2008).  Development of moral emotion expectan-
cies and the happy victimizer phenomenon: A critical review of theory and application. 
 European Journal of Developmental Science ,  2,  221–235 . 
 Krevans, J. A., & Gibbs, J. C. (April, 1991).  Relations between inductive discipline, empathy, 
and prosocial behavior. Paper presented at the meeting of the Society for Research in 
Child Development, Seattle, WA. 
 Krevans, J., & Gibbs, J. C. (1996).  Children’s use of inductive discipline: Relations to chil-
dren’s empathy and prosocial behavior.  Child Development,  67,  3264–3277 . 
 Kruger, A. (1992).  Th e eff ects of peer and adult–child transactive discussions on moral 
reasoning.  Merrill-Palmer Quarterly,  38,  191–211 . 
 Kruger, A. C., & Tomasello, M. (1986).  Transactive discussions with peers and adults. 
 Developmental Psychology,  22,  681–685 . 
 Kuhn, D. (1972).  Mechanisms of change in the development of cognitive structures.  Child 
Development,  43,  833–844 . 
 Kuhn, D. (1997).  Th e view from giants’ shoulders. In L. Smith, J. Dockrell, & P. Tomlinson 
(Eds.),  Piaget, Vygotsky, and beyond: Future issues for developmental psychology and edu-
cation (pp.  246–259 ).  New York :  Routledge. 

310 
■ References
 Kuhn, D., & Franklin, S. (2006).  Th e second decade: What develops (and how). In W. 
Damon & R. M. Lerner (Series Ed.) & D. Kuhn & R. S. Siegler (Vol. Eds.),  Handbook of 
child psychology: Vol. 2. Cognition, perception, and language (6th ed.; pp.  953–993 ).  New 
York :  John Wiley & Sons. 
 Kunda, Z. (1990).  Th e case for motivated reasoning.  Psychological Bulletin ,  108,  480–498 . 
 Kushner, H. (1986).  When all you’ve ever wanted isn’t enough: Th e search for a life that mat-
ters .  New York :  Simon & Schuster. 
 LaBerge, S., & Gackenbach, J. (2000).  Lucid dreaming. In E. Cardena, S. J. Lynn, & 
S. Krippner (Eds.),  Varieties of anomalous experience: Examining the scientifi c evidence 
(pp.  151–182 ).  Washington, DC :  American Psychological Association. 
 Lacayo, R. (April 6, 1998).  Toward the root of evil.  Time, pp.  34–35 . 
 Lacayo, R., & Ripley, A. (December 30, 2002).  Persons of the year.  Time, pp.  32–33 . 
 Lacey, M. (January 6, 2002).  Kenya’s ban on female ritual divides a family.  New York Times 
International Section, p.  4 . 
 Lamm, C., Batson, C. D., & Decety, J. (2007).  A neural substrate of emotional empathy: 
Eff ects of perspective-taking and cognitive appraisal.   Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience , 
 19,  42–58 . 
 Landenberger, N., & Lipsey, M. (2005).  Th e positive eff ects of cognitive-behavioral pro-
grams for off enders: A meta-analysis of factors associated with eff ective treatment. 
 Journal of Experimental Criminology ,  1,  451–476 . 
 Langdon, P. E., Murphy, G. H., Clare, I. C. H., & Palmer, E. J. (2010).  Th e psychometric 
properties of the Socio-Moral Refl ection Measure–Short Form and the Moral Th eme 
Inventory for men with and without intellectual disabilities.  Research in Developmental 
Disabilities ,  31,  1204–1215 . 
 Langdon, P. E., Murphy, G. H., Clare, I. C. H., Palmer, E. J., & Rees, J. (2013).  An evalu-
ation of the EQUIP treatment programme with men who have intellectual or other 
developmental disabilities.  Journal of Applied Development in Intellectual Disabilities , 
 26,  167–180 . 
 Lapsley, D. R., & Narvaez, D. (2006).  Character education.  In W. Damon & R. M. Lerner 
(Series Eds.) & K. A. Renninger & I. E. Sigel (Vol. Eds.),  Handbook of child psychology: 
Vol. 4. Child psychology in practice (6th ed.; pp.  248–296 ).  New York :  John Wiley. 
 Larden, M., Melin, L., Holst, U. & Langstrom, N. (2006).  Moral judgment, cognitive dis-
tortions, and empathy in incarcerated delinquent and community control adolescents.  
 Psychology, Crime, and Law ,  12,  453–462 . 
 Laszlo, E. (2003).  Th e connectivity hypothesis: Foundations of an integral science of quantum, 
cosmos, life, and consciousness .  Albany :  State University of New York Press.  
 Latane, B., & Darley, J. J. (1970).  Th e unresponsive bystander: Why doesn’t he help?  New York : 
 Appleton. 
 Laupa, M. (2000).  Similarities and diff erences in children’s reasoning about morality and 
mathematics. In M. Laupa (Ed.),  Rights and wrongs: How children and young adults eval-
uate the world (pp.  19–32 ).  San Francisco :  Jossey-Bass/Pfeiff er. 
 Lawrence, J. A., & Valsiner, J. (1993).  Conceptual roots of internalization: From transmis-
sion to transformation.  Human Development,  36,  150–167 . 
 Lazarus, R. S. (1984).  On the primacy of cognition.  American Psychologist ,  39,  124–129 . 
 Leeman, L. W., Gibbs, J. C., & Fuller, D. (1993).  Evaluation of a multi-component group 
treatment program for juvenile delinquents.  Aggressive Behavior,  19,  281–292 . 

References 
■ 311
 Lepage, J.-F., & Th eoret, H. (2007).  Th e mirror neuron system: Grasping others’ actions 
from birth?  Developmental Science ,  10,  513–529 . 
 Lerner, M. J. (1980).  Belief in a just world: A fundamental delusion.  New York :  Plenum. 
 Levitt, M. J., Weber, R. A., Clark, M. C., & McDonnell, P. (1985).  Reciprocity of exchange in 
toddler sharing behavior.  Developmental Psychology,  21,  122–123 . 
 Lewis, C. S. (1943).  Mere Christianity.  New York :  Macmillan. 
 Lewis, C. S. (1962).  Th e problem of pain.  New York :  Macmillan. 
 Liau, A. K., Barriga, A., & Gibbs, J. C. (1998).  Relations between self-serving cognitive 
distortions and overt vs. covert antisocial behavior in adolescents.   Aggressive Behavior, 
 24,  335–346 . 
 Liau, A. K., Shively, R., Horn, M., Landau, J., Barriga, A. Q., & Gibbs, J. C. (2004).  Eff ects 
of psychoeducation for off enders in a community correctional facility.  Journal of 
Community Psychology ,  32,  543–553 . 
 Lickona, T. (1983).  Raising good children.  New York :  Bantam. 
 Lift on, R. J. (1967).  Death in life: Survivors of Hiroshima.  New York :  Random House. 
 Light, S., & Zahn-Waxler, C. (2012).  Th e nature and forms of empathy in the fi rst years of life. In J. 
Decety (Ed.),  Empathy: From bench to bedside (pp.  109–130 ).  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press.  
 Lillard, A. S., & Flavell, J. H. (1990).  Young children’s preference for mental state versus 
behavioral descriptions of human action.  Child Development,  61,  731–741 . 
 Lindley, D. (1996).  Where does the weirdness go? Why quantum physics is strange, but not as 
strange as you think.  New York :  Basic Books. 
 Lindley, D. (1998).  Th e quantum world.  London :  Reed Business Information Ltd. 
 Ling, L. (Host).  (2008). Th e moment of death [television series episode]. In K. Gahagan 
(Coordinating Producer),  Explorer.  Washington, DC :  National Geographic Television 
& Film News Corporation.  
 Lipsey, M. W., Chapman, G. L., & Landenberger, N. A. (2001).  Cognitive-behavioral pro-
grams for off enders.  Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Sciences , 
 578,  144–157 . 
 Litwack, S. E. (1976).  Th e use of the helper therapy principle to increase therapeutic eff ec-
tiveness and reduce therapeutic resistance: Structured learning therapy with resistant 
adolescents. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Syracuse University, NY. 
 Livesley, W. J., & Bromley, D. B. (1973).  Person perception in childhood and adolescence. 
 London :  Wiley. 
 LoBue, V., Nishida, T., Chiong, C., DeLoache, J. S., & Haidt, J. (2011).  When getting 
something good is bad: Even three-year-olds react to inequality.  Social Development , 
 20,  154–170 . 
 Lochman, J. E., & Dodge, K. A. (1998).  Distorted perceptions in dyadic interactions of 
aggressive and nonaggressive boys: Eff ects of prior expectations, context, and peer age. 
 Development and Psychopathology,  10,  495–512 . 
 Long, J. (2010).  Evidence of the aft erlife: Th e science of near-death experiences.  New York : 
 HarperCollins. 
 Lorimer, D. (1990).  Whole in one: Th e near-death experience and the ethic of interconnected-
ness.  London :  Penguin. 
 Lourenco, O. (2000).  Th e aretaic domain and its relation to the deontic domain in moral 
reasoning. In M. Laupa (Ed.),  Rights and wrongs: How children and young adults evaluate 
the world (pp.  47–62 ).  San Francisco :  Jossey-Bass/Pfeiff er. 

312 
■ References
 Lourenco, O., & Machado, A. (1996).  In defense of Piaget’s theory: A reply to 10 common 
criticisms.  Psychological Review,  103,  143–154 . 
 Lykken, D. T. (1995).  Th e antisocial personalities.  Hillsdale, NJ :  Lawrence Erlbaum. 
 Lynch, M. P. (2012).  In praise of reason.  Cambridge, MA :  Th e MIT Press. 
 Maass, P. (October 21, 2001).  Emroz Khan is having a bad day.  New York Times Magazine, 
pp.  48–51 . 
 Maccoby, E. E. (1980).  Social development: Psychological growth and the parent–child rela-
tionship.  New York :  Harcourt Brace. 
 Maccoby, E. E. (1983).  Let’s not overattribute to the attribution process: Comments on 
social cognition and behavior.  In E. T. Higgins, D. N. Ruble, & W. W. Hartup (Eds.), 
 Social cognition and social development: A sociocultural perspective (pp.  356–370 ).  New 
York :  Cambridge University Press. 
 MacIntyre, A. (1981).  Aft er virtue.  Notre Dame, IN :  University of Notre Dame Press. 
 MacIntyre, A. (1988).  Whose justice, which rationality?   Notre Dame, IN :  University of Notre 
Dame Press. 
 Maclean, P. B. (1990).  Th e triune brain in evolution: Role in paleocerebral functions.  New 
York :  Plenum Press. 
 Malti, T., & Krettenauer, T. (2013).  Th e relation of moral emotion attributions to prosocial 
and antisocial behavior: A meta-analysis.  Child Development ,  84,  397–412 . 
 Markus, H., & Wurf, E. (1987).  Th e dynamic self-concept: A social psychological perspec-
tive.   Annual Review of Psychology,  38,  299–337 . 
 Marshall, W. L., Anderson, D., & Fernandez, Y. (Eds.). (1999) .   Cognitive behavioral treat-
ment of sexual off enders.  Chichester, UK :  Wiley. 
 Martin, C. L. (2000).  Cognitive theories of gender development.  In T. Eckes & 
H. M. Trautner (Eds.),  Th e developmental social psychology of gender (pp.  91–122 ). 
 Mahwah, NJ :  Lawrence Erlbaum. 
 Martin, G. B., & Clark, R. D. (1982).  Distress crying in infants: Species and peer specifi city. 
 Developmental Psychology,  18,  3–9 . 
 Mason, M. G., & Gibbs, J. C. (1993a).  Role-taking opportunities and the transition to 
advanced moral judgment.  Moral Education Forum,  18,  1–12 . 
 Mason, M. G., & Gibbs, J. C. (1993b).  Social perspective-taking and moral judgment among 
college students.  Journal of Adolescent Research,  8,  109–123 . 
 Mathabane, M. (July 5, 2002).  Th e cycle of revenge can be broken.  New York Times,  p.  A21 . 
 McCabe, D. P., Roediger, H. L., McDaniel, M. A., Balota, D. A., & Hambrick, D. Z. (2010). 
 Th e relationship between working memory capacity and executive functioning: Evidence 
for a common executive attention construct.  Neuropsychology ,  24,  222–243 . 
 McCorkle, L. W., Elias, A., & Bixby, F. L. (1958).  Th e Highfi elds story: An experimental treat-
ment project for youthful off enders.  New York :  Holt. 
 McCrady, F., Kaufman, K., Vasey, M. W., Barriga, A. Q., Devlin, R. S., & Gibbs, J. C. (2008). 
 It’s all about me: A brief report of incarcerated adolescent sex off enders’ generic and 
sex-specifi c cognitive distortions.  Sexual Abuse: A Journal of Research and Treatment , 
 20,  261–271 . 
 McDougall, W. (1926).  An introduction to social psychology (rev. ed.).  Boston :  John W. Luce 
& Co. Original work published in 1908.) 
 McGinnis, E., & Goldstein, A. P. (1997).  Skillstreaming the elementary school child: New strate-
gies and perspectives for teaching prosocial skills (rev. ed.).  Champaign, IL :  Research Press.  

References 
■ 313
 Meichenbaum, D. H. (1990).  Paying homage: Providing challenges.   Psychological Inquiry, 
 1,  96–99 . 
 Melis, A. P., Hare, B., & Tomasello, M. (2006).  Chimpanzees recruit the best collaborators. 
 Science ,  311,  1297–3000 . 
 Mendelson, E. F., Quinn, M., Dutton, S., & Seewonarain, K. (1988).  A community treat-
ment service for sex off enders: An account at two years.  Bulletin of the Royal College of 
Psychiatrists,  12,  416–421 . 
 Menon, M. [Madhavi], Tobin, D. D., Corby, B. C., Menon, M., Hodges, E. V. E., & Perry, 
D. G. (2007).  Th e developmental costs of high self-esteem for antisocial children.  Child 
Development ,  78,  1627–1639 . 
 Metcalfe, J., & Mischel, W. (1999).  A hot/cool-system analysis of delay of gratifi cation: 
Dynamics of willpower.  Psychological Review,  106,  3–19 . 
 Michel, L., & Herbeck, D. (2001).  American terrorist: Timothy McVeigh and the Oklahoma 
City bombing.  New York :  HarperCollins. 
 Miller, G. (2008).  Growing pains for fMRI.  Science ,  320,  1412–1414 . 
 Miller, J. G. (1986).  Early cross-cultural commonalities in social explanation.   Developmental 
Psychology,  22,  514–520 . 
 Miller, M. (1987).  Argumentation and cognition.  In M. Hickman (Ed.),  Social and func-
tional approaches to language and thought (pp.  225–250 ).  London :  Academic Press. 
 Miller, P. H., & Aloise, P. A. (1989).  Young children’s understanding of the psychological 
causes of behavior: A review.  Children Development,  60,  257–285 . 
 Miller, S. A. (2007).  Developmental research methods (3rd ed.).  Th ousand Oaks, 
CA :  Sage.  
 Miller, S. A., Custer, W. L., & Nassau, G. (2000).  Children’s understanding of the necessity 
of logically necessary truths.  Cognitive Development,  15,  383–403 . 
 Mischel, H. N., & Mischel, W. (1983).  Th e development of children’s knowledge of self-
control strategies.   Child Development,  54,  603–619 . 
 Monin, B., & Merritt, A. (2012).  Moral hypocrisy, moral inconsistency, and the struggle for 
moral integrity. In M. Mikulincer & P. R. Shaver (Eds.),  Th e social psychology of moral-
ity: Exploring the causes of good and evil (pp.  167–184 ) .  Washington, DC :  American 
Psychological Association. 
 Moody, R. A. (1975).  Life aft er life.  New York :  Bantam. 
 Morris, B. J., & Sloutsky, V. (2001).  Children’s solutions of logical versus empirical problems: 
What’s missing and what develops?  Cognitive Development,  16,  907–928 . 
 Morse, M. (1990).  Closer to the light: Learning from children’s near-death experiences.  New 
York :  Villard. 
 Morse, M. (1992).  Transformed by the light: Th e powerful eff ect of near-death experiences on 
people’s lives.  New York :  Villard. 
 Moshman, D. (1998).  Cognitive development beyond childhood. In W. Damon (Series Ed.) 
& D. Kuhn & R. S. Siegler (Vol. Eds.),  Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 2. Cognition, 
perception, and language (5th ed.; pp.  947–978 ).  New York  :  John Wiley. 
 Moshman, D. (2004).  False moral identity: Self-serving denial in the maintenance of 
moral self-conceptions. In D. Lapsley & M. Narvaez (Eds.),  Morality, self, and identity  
(pp.  83–110 ).  Mahwah, NJ :  Lawrence Erlbaum. 
 Moshman, D. (2007).  Us and them: Identity and genocide.  Identity: An International Journal 
of Th eory and Research ,  7,  115–135 . 

314 
■ References
 Moshman, D. (2011a).  Adolescent rationality and development: Cognition, morality, and 
identity (3rd ed.) .  New York :  Psychology Press. 
 Moshman, D. (2011b).  A kinder, gentler nativism? [review of   Th e philosophical baby: What chil-
dren’s minds tell us about truth  ].   Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology ,  32,  44–45 . 
 Moskowitz, G. B., Gollwitzer, P. M., Wasel, W., & Schaal, B. (1999).  Preconscious control of 
stereotype activation through chronic egalitarian goals.   Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology,  77,  167–184 . 
 Mueller, E., & Brenner, J. (1977).  Th e origins and social skill and interaction among play-
group toddlers.  Child Development,  48,  854–861 . 
 Murphy, W. D. (1990).  Assessment and modifi cation of cognitive distortions in sex off end-
ers. In W. L. Marshall, D. R. Laws, & H. E. Barbaree (Eds.),  Handbook of sexual assault: 
Issues, theories, and treatment of the off ender (pp.  331–342 ).  New York :  Plenum. 
 Murray, F. B. (1982).  Teaching through social confl ict.  Contemporary Educational Psychology, 
 7,  257–271 . 
 Mustakova-Possardt, E. (2000).  Critical consciousness and its ontogeny in the lifespan.  In 
M. E. Miller & A. N. Weiss (Eds.),  Spirituality, ethics, and relationship—Adult clinical and 
theoretical explorations (pp.  85–109 ).  Madison, CT :  Psychosocial Press. 
 Myers, D. B. (1986).  Th e principle of reversibility: Some problems of interpretation.   Th e 
Journal of Value Inquiry ,  20,  19–28 . 
 Narvaez, D. (2008).  Triune ethics: Th e neurobiological roots of our multiple moralities.  New 
Ideas in Psychology ,  26,  95–119 . 
 Narvaez, D., & Lapsley, D. K. (2009).  Moral personality: Th emes, questions, futures.  In 
D. Narvaez & D. K. Lapsley (Eds.),  Personality, identity, and character: Explorations in 
moral psychology (pp.  441–448 ).  Cambridge, UK :  Cambridge University Press. 
 Narvaez, D., & Rest, J. (1995).  Th e four components of acting morally.  In W. M. Kurtines 
& J. L. Gewirtz (Eds.),  Moral development: An introduction (pp.  385–400 ).  Needham 
Heights, MA :  Allyn & Bacon. 
 Nas, C., Brugman, D., & Koops, W. (2005).  Eff ects of a multicomponent peer intervention 
program for juvenile delinquents on moral judgment, cognitive distortions, social skills, 
and recidivism.  Psychology, Crime, and Law ,  11,  1–14 . 
 National Institute on Drug Abuse. (1993).  Recovery training and self-help: Relapse preven-
tion and aft ercare for drug addicts  (NIDA Publication No. 93–3521).  Rockville, MD  :  
 National Institute on Drug Abuse. 
 Neisser, U. (1976).  Cognition and reality: Principles and implications of cognitive psychology. 
 San Francisco :  W. H. Freeman.  
 Neisser, U. (1992).  Computers can’t think. In B. Slife & J. Rubinstein (Eds.),  Taking sides: Clashing 
views on controversial psychological issues (7th. ed.; pp.  135–142 ).  Guilford, CT :  Dushkin.  
 Nelson, E. E. (2013).  Th e neurobiological basis of empathy and its development in the con-
text of our evolutionary heritage. In D. Narvaez, J. Panksepp, A. N. Schore, & T. R. 
Gleason (Eds.),  Evolution, early experience, and human development: From research to 
practice and policy (pp.  179–198 ).  New York :  Oxford University Press. 
 Nelson, J. R., Smith, D. J., & Dodd, J. (1990).  Th e moral reasoning of juvenile delinquents: A 
meta analysis.  Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology,  18,  231–239 . 
 Nelson, K. (1981).  Social cognition in a script framework. In J. H. Flavell & L. Ross (Eds.), 
 Social cognitive development: Frontiers and possible futures (pp.  97–118 ).  Cambridge, 
UK :  Cambridge University Press. 

References 
■ 315
 Newcombe, N. S. (2011).  What is neoconstructivism?  Child Development Perspectives , 
 5,  157–160 . 
 Nickerson, R. S. (1998).  Confi rmation bias: A ubiquitous phenomenon in many guises. 
 Review of General Psychology,  2,  175–200 . 
 Niles, W. J. (1986).  Eff ects of a moral development discussion group on delinquent and 
predelinquent boys.  Journal of Counseling Psychology,  33,  45–51 . 
 Noam, G. G. (1998).  Clinical-developmental psychology: Toward developmentally dif-
ferentiated interventions.  In W. Damon (Series Ed.) & I. E. Sigel & K. A. Renninger 
(Vol. Eds.),  Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 4. Child psychology in practice (5th ed.; 
pp.  585–634 ).  New York :  John Wiley. 
 Noddings, N. (1984).  Caring: A feminine approach to ethics and moral education.  Berkeley : 
 University of California Press. 
 North, A. C., Tarrant, M., & Hargreaves. D. J. (2004).  Th e eff ects of music on helping behav-
ior: A fi eld study.  Environment and Behavior,  36,  206 . 
 Novaco, R. W. (1975).  Anger control: Th e development and evaluation of an experimental 
treatment.  Lexington, MA :  Lexington Books. 
 Noyes, R., Fenwick, P., Holden, J. M., & Christian, S. R. (2009).  Pleasurable Western adult 
near-death experience. In J. M. Holden, B. Greyson, & D. James (Eds.),  Th e handbook 
of near-death experiences: Th irty years of investigation (pp.  41–62 ).  Santa Barbara, CA : 
 Praeger Publishers. 
 Noyes, R., & Kletti, R. (1977).  Panoramic memory: A response to the threat of death.  
 Omega,  8,  181–194 . 
 Nucci, L. (2004).  Refl ections on the moral self construct. In D. K. Lapsley & D. 
Narvaez (Eds.),  Moral development, self, and identity (pp.  209–233 ).  Mahwah, NJ : 
 Lawrence Erlbaum.  
 Nussbaum, M. C. (1999).  Judging other cultures: Th e case of genital mutilation. In M. C. 
Nussbaum (Ed.),  Sex and social justice (pp.  118–129 ).  New York :  Oxford University Press. 
 Oliner, S., & Oliner, P. (1988).  Th e altruistic personality.  New York :  Free Press. 
 Orobio de Castro, B., Veerman, J. W., Koops, W., Bosch, J. D., & Monshouwer, J. J. 
(2002).  Hostile attribution of intent and aggressive behavior: A meta-analysis.  Child 
Development ,  73,  916–934 
 Osgood, D. W., Gruber, E., Archer, M. A., & Newcomb, T. M. (1985).  Autonomy for inmates: 
Counterculture or cooptation?  Criminal Justice and Behavior,  12,  71–89 . 
 Owens, J. E., Cook, E. W., & Stevenson, I. (1990).  Features of “near-death experience” in 
relation to whether or not patients were near death.  Lancet,  336,  1175–1177 . 
 Paciello, M., Fida, R., Tramontano, Lupinetti, C., & Caprara, G. V. (2008).  Stability and 
change of moral disengagement and its impact on aggression and violence in late ado-
lescence.   Child Development ,  79,  1288–1309 . 
 Palmer, E. J. (2003).  Off ending behavior: Moral reasoning, criminal content, and the rehabili-
tation of off enders .  Devon, UK :  Willan Publishing. 
 Palmer, E. J., & Hollin, C. R. (1998).  A comparison of patterns of moral development in 
young off enders and non-off enders.  Legal and Criminological Psychology ,  3,  225–235 . 
 Parfi t, D. (2011; S. Scheffl  er, Ed.).  On what matters (Vol. 1).  Oxford, UK :  Oxford 
University Press. 
 Paris, S., & Upton, L. (1976).  Children’s memory for inferential relationships in prose.  Child 
Development,  47,  660–668 . 

316 
■ References
 Parke, R. D., & Buriel, R. (2006).  Socialization in the family: Ethnic and ecological perspec-
tives. In W. Damon & R. M. Lerner (Series Eds.) & N. Eisenberg (Vol. Ed.),  Handbook 
of child psychology: Vol. 3. Cognition, perception, and language (6th ed.; pp.  429–504 ). 
 New York :  John Wiley. 
 Parnia, S. (2006).  What happens when we die: A groundbreaking study into the nature of life 
and death .  Carlsbad, CA :  Hay House. 
 Parnia, S. (2013).  Erasing death: Th e science that is rewriting the boundaries between life and 
death.  New York :  HarperCollins. 
 Parnia, S., & Fenwick, P. (2002).  Near death experiences in cardiac arrest: Visions of a dying 
brain or visions of a new science of consciousness?  Resuscitation,  52,  5–11 . 
 Parnia, S., Waller, D. G., Yeates, R., & Fenwick, P. (2001).  A qualitative and quantitative 
study of the incidence, features and aetiology of near death experiences in cardiac arrest 
survivors.  Resuscitation,  48,  149–156 . 
 Patrick, R. B., & Gibbs, J. C. (2007).  Parental expression of disappointment: Should it 
be a factor in Hoff man’s model of parental discipline?   Journal of Genetic Psychology , 
 168,  131–145 . 
 Patrick, R. B., & Gibbs, J. C. (2011).  Inductive discipline, parental expression of disappointed 
expectations, and moral identity among adolescents.   Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 
 41,  973–983 . 
 Penrose, R. (1989).  Th e emperor’s new mind: Concerning computers, minds, and the laws of 
physics.  New York :  Oxford University Press. 
 Penrose, R. (1994).  Shadows of the mind: A search for the missing science of consciousness. 
 New York :  Oxford University Press. 
 Peterson, C. C., Peterson, J. L., & Seeto, D. (1983).  Developmental changes in ideas about 
lying.  Child Development,  54,  1529–1535 . 
 Phon, Y. P. L. (2008).  Th e eff ects of violent video games on aggressive beliefs and behavior.  
Master’s thesis, Nanyang Technological University. 
 Piaget, J. (1962).  Comments on Vygotsky’s critical remarks concerning Th e language and 
thought of the child and Judgment and reasoning in the child  (A. Parons, E. Hanfman, 
& G. Vakar, Trans.).  Cambridge  :   MIT Press.  
 Piaget, J. (1965).  Moral judgment of the child (M. Gabain, Trans.).  New York :  Free Press. 
(Original work published 1932.) 
 Piaget, J. (1969).  Judgment and reasoning in the child (M. Warden, Trans.).  Totowa, NJ : 
 Littlefi eld, Adams.  (Original work published 1928.) 
 Piaget, J. (1970).  Piaget’s theory (G. Gellerier & J. Langer, Trans.). In P. H. Mussen 
(Ed.),  Carmichael’s manual of child psychology (3rd ed.; pp.  703–732 ).  New York : 
 John Wiley.  
 Piaget, J. (1971).  Biology and knowledge: An essay on the relations between organic regula-
tions and cognitive processes (B. Walsh, Trans.).  Chicago :  University of Chicago Press. 
(Original work published 1967.) 
 Piaget, J. (1972).  Intellectual evolution from adolescence to adulthood.  Human Development, 
 15,  1–12 . 
 Piaget, J. (1973; A. Rosen, Trans.).  Th e child and reality: Problems of genetic psychology .  New 
York :  Grossman. (Originally published 1972.) 
 Pinker, S. (January 13, 2008).  Th e moral instinct: Evolution has endowed us with ethical impulses. 
Do we know what to do with them?  New York Times Magazine , pp.  32, 34–37, 52, 55–56 . 

References 
■ 317
 Pinker, S. (2011).  Th e better angels of our nature: Why violence has declined .  New York : 
 Viking Penguin. 
 Pithers, W. D. (1999).  Empathy: Defi nition, measurement, enhancement, and relevance to 
the treatment of sexual abusers.  Journal of Interpersonal Violence,  14,  257–284 . 
 Pizarro, D. A., & Bloom, P. (2003).  Th e intelligence of the moral intuitions: Comment on 
Haidt (2001).  Psychological Review,  110,  193–196 . 
 Pizarro, D. A., & Tannenbaum, D. (2012).  Bring character back: How the motiva-
tion to evaluate character infl uences judgments of moral blame. In M. Mikulincer & 
P. R. Shaver (Eds.),  Th e social psychology of morality: Exploring the causes of good and evil 
(pp.  91–108 ).  Washington, DC :  American Psychological Association.  
 Plante, N., Daigle, M. S., Gaumont, C., Charbonneau, L., Gibbs, J. C., & Barriga, A. 
(2012).  Validation of the ‘How I Th ink Questionnaire’ in a population of French-
speaking adolescents with externalizing behaviors.  Behavioral Science and the Law , 
 30,  196–210 . 
 Polkinghorne, J. C. (1984).  Th e quantum world.  Princeton, NJ :  Princeton University Press. 
 Potter, G. B., Gibbs, J. C., & Goldstein, A. P. (2001).  Th e EQUIP implementation guide. 
 Champaign, IL :  Research Press. 
 Potter, G. B., Gibbs, J. C., Robbins, M., & Langdon, P. (2013).  Responsible Adult Culture: 
A comprehensive cognitive-behavioral program for adult off enders . Manuscript in 
preparation. 
 Potts, M. (2002).  Th e evidential value of near-death experiences for belief in life aft er death. 
 Journal of Near-Death Studies,  20,  233–264 . 
 Powell, N. (Producer).  (2008).  SuperNanny .  New York :  WABC. 
 Power, F. C., & Higgins-D’Alessandro, A. (2008).  Th e Just Community approach to moral 
education and the moral atmosphere of the school. In L. P. Nucci & D. Narvaez (Eds.), 
 Handbook of moral and character education (pp.  230–247 ).  New York :  Routledge. 
 Premack, D., & Premack, A. J. (1983).  Th e mind of an ape.  New York :  Norton. 
 Quiggle, N., Garber, J., Panak, W., & Dodge, K. A. (1992).  Social information processing in 
aggressive and depressed children.   Child Development,  63,  1305–1320 . 
 Radin, D. (2006).  Entangled minds: Extrasensory experiences in a quantum reality .  New 
York :  Paraview Pocket Book. 
 Rai, T. S., & Fiske, A. P. (2011).  Moral psychology is relationship regulation: Moral 
motives for unity, hierarchy, equality, and proportionality.  Psychological Review , 
 118,  57–75 . 
 Rathunde, K., & Czikszentmahlyi (2006).  Th e developing person: An experiential perspec-
tive.  In W. Damon & R. M. Lerner (Series Eds.) & R. M. Lerner (Vol. Ed.),  Handbook of 
child psychology: Vol. 1. Th eoretical models of human development (6th ed.; pp.  465–515 ). 
 New York :  John Wiley. 
 Rawls, J. (1971).  A theory of justice.  Cambridge, MA :  Harvard University Press. 
 Redl, F., & Wineman, D. (1957).  Th e aggressive child.  New York :  Free Press. 
 Reed, R. R. C. (1997).  Following Kohlberg: Liberalism and the practice of democratic com-
munity.  Notre Dame, IN :  University of Notre Dame Press.  
 Repacholi, B. M., & Gopnik, A. (1997).  Early reasoning about desires: Evidence from 14–18-
month-olds.  Developmental Psychology ,  33,  12–21 . 
 Rest, J. R. (1979).  Development in judging moral issues.  Minneapolis :  University of 
Minnesota Press. 

318 
■ References
 Rest, J. R. (1983).  Morality. In P. H. Mussen (Series Ed.) & J. H. Flavell & E. M. Markman 
(Vol. Eds.),  Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 3. Cognitive development (pp.  556–629 ). 
 New York :  John Wiley. 
 Rest, J. R., Narvaez, D., Bebeau, M. J., & Th oma, S. J. (1999).  Postconventional moral think-
ing: A neo-Kohlbergian approach.  Hillsdale, NJ :  Lawrence Erlbaum. 
 Rest, J., Turiel, E., & Kohlberg, L. (1969).  Level of moral development as a determinant 
of preference and comprehension of moral judgments made by others.  Journal of 
Personality ,  37,  225–232 . 
 Richardson, D. (2005).  Peace child (4th ed.).  Ventura, CA :  Regal. 
 Riessman, F. (1990).  Restructuring help: A human services paradigm for the 1990s. 
 American Journal of Community Psychology,  18,  221–230 . 
 Ring, K. (1980).  Life at death: A scientifi c investigation of the near-death experience.  New 
York :  Morrow. 
 Ring, K. (1984).  Heading toward Omega: In search of the meaning of the near-death experi-
ence.  New York :  Morrow. 
 Ring, K., & Lawrence, M. (1993).  Further evidence for veridical perception during near-
death experiences.  Journal of Near-Death Studies,  11,  223–229 . 
 Ring, K., & Cooper, S. (1997).  Near-death and out-of-body experiences in the blind: 
A study of apparent eyeless vision.  Journal of Near-Death Studies,  16,  101–147 . 
 Ring, K., & Cooper, S. (1999).  Mindsight: Near-death and out-of-body experiences in the 
blind.  Palo Alto, CA :  William James Center/Institute of Transpersonal Psychology. 
 Robinson, R., Roberts, W. L., Strayer, J., & Koopman, R. (2007).  Empathy and emotional respon-
siveness in delinquent and non-delinquent adolescents.  Social Development ,  16,  555–579 . 
 Rogoff , B. (1998).  Cognition as a collaborative process. In W. Damon (Series Ed.) & D. 
Kuhn & R. S. Siegler (Vol. Eds.),  Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 2. Cognition, percep-
tion, and language (5th ed.; pp.  679–744 ).  New York :  John Wiley. 
 Rommer, B. R. (2000).  Blessing in disguise.  St. Paul, MN :  Llewellyn. 
 Rosen, H. (1980).  Th e development of sociomoral knowledge: A cognitive-structural approach. 
 New York :  Columbia University Press. 
 Rosenhan, D. L., Underwood, B., & Moore, B. (1974).  Th e origins of shared intuitions of 
justice.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology ,  30,  546–552 . 
 Rotenberg, K. J., & Eisenberg, N. (1997).  Developmental diff erences in the understanding 
of and reaction to others’ inhibition of emotional expression.  Developmental Psychology, 
 33,  526–537 . 
 Roth-Hanania, R., Davidov, M., & Zahn-Waxler, C. (2011).  Empathy development from 
8 to 16 months: Early signs of concern for others.   Infant Behavior and Development , 
 34,  447–458 . 
 Royzman, E. B., Leeman, R. F., Baron, R. (2009).  Unsentimental ethics: Towards a content-
specifi c account of the moral–conventional distinction.  Cognition ,  112,  159–174 . 
 Rubin, K. H., Bukowski, W., & Parker, J. G. (2006).  Peer interactions, relationships, and 
groups. In W. Damon & R. M. Lerner (Series Eds.) & N. Eisenberg (Vol. Ed.),  Handbook 
of child psychology: Vol. 3. Social, emotional, and personality development  (6th ed.; 
pp.  571–645 ).  New York :  John Wiley. 
 Rutland, A., Killen, M., & Abrams, D. (2010).  A new social-cognitive developmental per-
spective on prejudice: Th e interplay between morality and group identity.  Perspectives 
on Psychological Science ,  5,  279–291 . 

References 
■ 319
 Rutter, M. L. (1997).  Nature-nurture integration: Th e example of antisocial behavior.  
 American Psychologist,  52,  390–398 . 
 Saarni, C., Campos, J. J., Camras, L. A., & Witherington, D. (2006).  Emotional devel-
opment: Action, communication, and understanding. In W. Damon & R. M. 
Lerner (Series Eds.) & N. Eisenberg (Vol. Ed.),  Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 
3. Social, emotional, and personality development (6th ed.; pp.  226–299 ).  New York : 
 John Wiley.  
 Sabom, M. B. (1982).  Recollections of death: A medical investigation.  New York : 
 Harper & Row. 
 Sabom, M. B. (1998).  Light and death: One doctor’s fascinating account of near-death experi-
ences.  Grand Rapids, MI :  Zondervan. 
 Sabom, M. B. (2008).  Th e acute dying experience.   Journal of Near-Death Studies , 
 26,  181–218 . 
 Sagi, A., & Hoff man, M. L. (1976).  Empathic distress in the newborn.  Developmental 
Psychology,  12,  175–176 . 
 Saltzstein, H. D., & Kasachkoff , T. (2004).  Haidt’s moral intuitionist theory: A psychology 
and philosophical critique.  Review of General Psychology ,  8,  273–282 . 
 Samenow, S. E. (1984).  Inside the criminal mind.  New York :  Random House. 
 Samenow, S. E. (2004).  Inside the criminal mind (rev. ed.).  New York :  Random House. 
 Sandel, M. J. (2009).  Justice: What’s the right thing to do?  New York :  Farrar, Straus, & Giroux.  
 Sartori, P. (2008).  Th e near-death experiences of hospitalized intensive care patients: A fi ve-
year clinical study.  Lewiston, England :  Edward Mellen Press. 
 Sauer, H. (2012).  Morally irrelevant factors: What’s left  of the dual process model of moral 
cognition?  Philosophical Psychology ,  25,  783–811 . 
 Scarf, D., Imuta, K, Colombo, M., & Hayne, H. (2012).  Social evaluation or simple associa-
tion? Simple associations may explain moral reasoning in infants.  Plosone ,  7,  e42698 . 
 Schneider, S. L. (2001).  In search of realistic optimism: Meaning, knowledge, and warm 
fuzziness.  American Psychologist,  56,  250–263 . 
 Schnell, S. V. (1986).  Delinquents with mature moral reasoning: A comparison with delayed 
delinquents and mature nondelinquents. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Th e Ohio 
State University, Columbus. 
 Schonert-Reichl, K. A. (1999).  Relations of peer acceptance, friendship adjustment, and 
social behavior to moral reasoning during early adolescence.  Journal of Early Adolescence, 
 19,  249–279 . 
 Schwaninger, J., Eisenberg, P. R., Schechtman, K. B., & Weiss, A. N. (2002).  A prospec-
tive analysis of near-death experiences in cardiac arrest patients.  Journal of Near-Death 
Studies,  20,  215–232 . 
 Sedikides, A. (1989).  Relations between role-taking opportunities and moral judg-
ment development. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Th e Ohio State University, 
Columbus. 
 Seider, S. (2009).  Overwhelmed and immobilized: Raising the consciousness of privi-
leged young adults about world hunger and poverty.  International Studies Perspectives , 
 10,  60–76 . 
 Selman, R. L. (1976).  Social-cognitive understanding: A guide to educational and clinical 
practice. In T. Lickona (Ed.),  Moral development and behavior: Th eory, research, and 
social issues (pp.  299–316 ).  New York :  Holt, Rinehart, & Winston. 

320 
■ References
 Selman, R. L. (1980).  Th e growth of interpersonal understanding.  New York : 
 Academic Press. 
 Selman, R. L. (2003).  Th e promotion of social awareness: Powerful lessons from the partnership 
of developmental theory and classroom practice .  New York :  Russell Sage Foundation.  
 Selman, R. L. (2008).  Th rough thick and thin: Commentary on Martin, Sokol, & Eff ers. 
 Human Development ,  51,  318–325 . 
 Selman, R. L., & Feigenberg, L. F. (2010).  Between neurons and neighborhoods: Innovative 
methods to assess the development and depth of adolescent social awareness. In 
P. D. Zelazo, M. Chandler, & E. Crone (Eds.),  Developmental social cognitive neurosci-
ence (pp.  227–247 ).  New York :  Psychology Press. 
 Selman, R. L., & Shultz, L. H. (1990).  Making a friend in youth: Developmental theory and 
pair therapy.  Chicago :  University of Chicago Press.  
 Shalvi, S., Eldar, O. & Bereby-Meyer, Y. (2012).  Honesty requites time (and lack of justifi ca-
tions).  Psychological Science ,  10,  1264–1270 . 
 Shaver, P. R., Collins, N., & Clark, C. L. (1996).  Attachment styles and internal work-
ing models of self and relationship partners. In J. O. G. Fletcher & J. Fitness (Eds.), 
 Knowledge structures in close relationships: A social psychological approach (pp.  25–61 ). 
 Mahwah, NJ :  Lawrence Erlbaum. 
 Sherif, M., Harvey, O. J., White, B. J., Hood, W. R., & Sherif, C. W. (1961).  Intergroup confl ict 
and cooperation: Th e Robbers Cave experiment.  Norman :  University of Oklahoma. 
 Shulman, E. P., Cauff man, E., Piquero, A. R., & Fagan, J. (2011).  Moral disengagement 
among serious juvenile off enders: A longitudinal study of the relations between morally 
disengaged attitudes and off ending.  Developmental Psychology ,  47,  1619–1632 . 
 Shultz, T. R., Dover, A., & Amsel, E. (1979).  Th e logical and empirical bases of conservation 
judgments.  Cognition,  7,  99–123 . 
 Shweder, R. A. (1990).  Ethical relativism: Is there a defensible version?  Ethos,  18,  205–218 . 
 Shweder, R. A. (2000).  Th e astonishment of anthropology. In C. W. Gowans (Ed.),  Moral 
disagreements: Classical and contemporary readings (pp.  102–112 ).  London :  Routledge 
Kegan Paul.  
 Shweder, R. A., Goodnow, J. J., Hatano, G., LeVine, R. A., Markus, H. R., & Miller, P. J. 
(2006).  Th e cultural psychology of development: One mind, many mentalities.  In W. 
Damon & R. M. Lerner (Series Eds.) & R. M. Lerner (Vol. Ed.),  Handbook of child 
psychology: Vol. 1. Th eoretical models of human development (6th ed.; pp.  716–792 ). 
 New York :  John Wiley. 
 Shweder, R. A., & Haidt, J. (1993).  Th e future of moral psychology: Truth, intuition, and the 
pluralist way.  Psychological Science ,  4,  360–364 . 
 Shweder, R. A., Much, N. C., Mahapatra, M., & Park, L. (1997).  Th e “big three” of moral-
ity (autonomy, community, and divinity), and the “big three” explanations of suff er-
ing. In A. Brandt & P. Rozin (Eds.),  Morality and health (pp.  119–169 ).  New York : 
 Routledge.  
 Siegler, R. S. (1996a).  Emerging minds: Th e process of change in children’s thinking.  New York : 
 Oxford University Press.  
 Siegler, R. S. (1996b).  Unidimensional thinking, multidimensional thinking, and char-
acteristic tendencies of thought. In A. J. Sameroff  & M. M. Haith (Eds.),  Th e fi ve to 
seven shift : Th e age of reason and responsibility (pp.  63–84 ).  Chicago :  University of 
Chicago Press.  

References 
■ 321
 Siegler, R. S., & Alibali, M. W. (2005).  Children’s thinking (4th ed.).  Upper Saddle River, NJ : 
 Prentice Hall. 
 Siegler, R. S., & Svetina, M. (2006).  What leads children to adopt new strategies? A microge-
netic/cross-sectional study of class inclusion.  Child Development ,  77,  997–1015 . 
 Sigelman, C. K., & Waitzman, K. A. (1991).  Th e development of distributive justice orienta-
tions: Contextual infl uences on children’s resource allocations.   Child Development,  62, 
 1367–1378 . 
 Signorella, M. L., Bigler, R. S., & Liben, L. S. (1993).  Developmental diff erences in chil-
dren’s gender schemata about others: A meta-analytic review.  Developmental Review, 
 13,  147–183 . 
 Silberman, M. A., & Snarey, J. (1993).  Gender diff erences in moral development during 
early adolescence: Th e contribution of sex-related variation in maturation.  Current 
Psychology: Developmental, Learning, Personality and Social,  12,  163–171 . 
 Simmel, G. (1902).  Th e number of members as determining the sociological form of the 
group.  American Journal of Sociology,  8,  1–46 . 
 Simner, M. L. (1971).  Newborn’s response to the cry of another infant.  Developmental 
Psychology,  5,  136–150 . 
 Simonian, S. J., Tarnowski, K. J., & Gibbs, J. C. (1991).  Social skills and antisocial conduct of 
delinquents.  Child Psychiatry and Human Development,  22,  17–22 . 
 Sinclair, S. (January 20, 2008).  A cutting tradition: Inside a female circumcision ceremony 
for young Muslim girls.  New York Times Magazine ,  46–50 . 
 Singer, P. (1981).  Th e expanding circle: Ethics and sociobiology .  New York :  Farrar, Straus, 
& Giroux. 
 Skitka, L. J. (2012).  Moral convictions and moral courage: Common denominators of 
good and evil. In M. Mikulincer & P. R. Shaver (Eds.),  Th e social psychology of moral-
ity: Exploring the causes of good and evil (pp.  349–365 ) .  Washington, DC :  American 
Psychological Association. 
 Slaby, R. G., & Guerra, N. G. (1988).  Cognitive mediators of aggression in adolescent 
off enders: 1. Assessment.  Developmental Psychology,  24,  580–588 . 
 Sloane, S., Baillargeon, R., & Premack, D. (2012).  Do infants have a sense of fairness? 
 Psychological Science ,  23,  196–204 . 
 Slovic, P. (2007).  “If I look at the mass I will never act”: Psychic numbing and genocide. 
 Judgment and Decision Making ,  2,  79–95 . 
 Smedslund, J. (1961).  Th e acquisition of conservation of substance and weight in children: 
III. Extinction of conservation of weight acquired “normally” and by means of empirical 
controls on a balance scale.  Scandinavian Journal of Psychology,  2,  85–87 . 
 Smetana, J. G. (2006).  Social-cognitive domain theory: Consistencies and variations in chil-
dren’s moral and social judgments.  In M. Killen & J. G. Smetana (Eds.),  Handbook of 
moral development (pp.  119–153 ).  Mahwah, NJ :  Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
 Smit, R. H. (2008).  Further commentary on Pam Reynolds’s NDE.  Journal of Near-Death 
Studies ,  24,  308–310 . 
 Smit, R. H., & Rivas, T. (2010).  Rejoinder to “Response to ‘Corroboration of the dentures 
anecdote involving perception in a near-death experience. ’”  Journal of Near-Death 
Studies ,  28,  308–310 . 
 Smith, A. (1965).  Th e theory of moral sentiments.  Oxford, UK :  Clarendon. (Original work 
published 1759.) 

322 
■ References
 Snarey, J. R. (1985).  Th e cross-cultural universality of social-moral development: A critical 
review of Kohlbergian research.   Psychological Bulletin,  97,  202–232 . 
 Snarey, J. R. (2011).  Lawrence Kohlberg: His moral biography, moral psychology, and moral 
pedagogy. In W. Pickren, D. Dewsbury, & M. Wertheimer (Eds.),  Portrains of pioneers in 
developmental psychology (Vol. 7; pp.  277–296 ).  New York  :  Psychology Press. 
 Sokol, A., & Bricmont, J. (1999).  Fashionable nonsense: Postmodern intellectuals’ abuse of 
science .  New York :  MacMillan. 
 Spivack, G., & Shure, M. B. (1989).  Interpersonal Cognitive Problem-Solving (ICPS): 
A competence-building primary prevention program.  Prevention in Human Services, 
 6,  151–178 . 
 Stams, G. J., Brugman, D., Dekovic, M., van Rosmalen, L., van der Laan, P., & Gibbs, 
J. C. (2006).  Th e moral judgment of juvenile delinquents: A meta-analysis.  Journal of 
Abnormal Child Psychology ,  34,  697–713 . 
 Stapp, H. P. (2006).  Science’s conception of human beings as a basis for moral theory.  Zygon , 
 41,  617–621 . 
 Staub, E. (1974).  Helping a distressed person: Social, personality, and stimulus deter-
minants. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.),  Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 7; 
pp.  293–341 ).  New York :  Academic Press. 
 Sternberg, R. J., & Sternberg, K.. (2011).  Cognitive Psychology (6th ed.).  Belmont, CA : 
 Wadsworth. 
 Stevenson, I., & Cook, E. W. (1995).  Involuntary memories during severe physical illness or 
injury.  Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease,  183, 452. 
 Straughan, R. (1983).  From moral judgment to moral action. In H. Weinreich-Haste & 
D. Locke (Eds.),  Morality in the making: Th ought, action, and the social context  (pp.  125–
140 ).  Chichester, UK :  Wiley. 
 Streeter, R., & Manning, T. (Producers) (November 25, 2012).  Children helping children 
[televised episode of 60 Minutes] .  New York :  CBS. 
 Suhler, C. L., & Churchland, P. (2011).  Can innate, modular “foundations” explain moral-
ity? Challenges to Haidt’s moral foundations theory.  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience , 
 23,  2103–2116 . 
 Sutherland, C. (1992).  Reborn in the light: Life aft er near-death experiences.  New 
York :  Bantam.  
 Swann, W. B. Jr., Griffi  n, J. J. Jr., Fredmore, S. C., & Gaines, B. (1999).  Th e cognitive-aff ective 
cross-fi re: When self-consistency confronts self-enhancement. In R. F. Baumeister (Ed.), 
 Th e self in social psychology (pp.  191–401 ).  Philadelphia :  Psychology Press. 
 Sykes, G. M., & Matza, D. (1957).  Techniques of neutralization: A theory of delinquency. 
 American Sociological Review,  22,  664–670 . 
 Tajfel, H., & Turner, J. C. (1979).  An integrative theory of intergroup relations. In 
W. G. Austin & S. Worchel (Eds.),  Th e social psychology of intergroup relations 
(pp.  33–47 ).  Monterey, CA :  Brooks-Cole. 
 Tappan, M. (2006).  Mediated moralities: Sociocultural approaches to moral development. In 
M. Killen & J. Smetana (Eds.),  Handbook of moral development (pp.  351–374 ).  Mahwah, 
NJ :  Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
 Targ, E., Schlitz, M., & Irwin, H. J. (2000).  Psi-related experiences. In E. Cardena, S. J. Lynn, 
& S. Krippner (Eds.),  Varieties of anomalous experience: Examining the scientifi c evidence 
(pp.  219–252 ).  Washington, DC :  American Psychological Association. 

References 
■ 323
 Tarrant, M., Calitri, R., & Weston, D. (2012).  Social identifi cation structures the eff ects of 
social perspective-taking.   Psychological Science ,  9,  973–978 . 
 Tart, C. T. (2009).  Th e end of materialism: How evidence of the paranormal is bringing science 
and spirit together.  Oakland, CA :  New Harbinger Publications. 
 Taylor, J., & Walker, L. (1997).  Moral climate and the development of moral reasoning: 
Th e eff ects of dyadic discussions between young off enders.  Journal of Moral Education, 
 26,  21–43 . 
 Taylor, S. E., & Brown, J. D. (1994).  Positive illusions and well-being revisited: Separating 
fact from fi ction.  Psychological Bulletin ,  116,  21–27 . 
 Texas Youth Commission (2011).  Annual review of treatment eff ectiveness .  Austin, TX : 
 Texas Youth Commission.  
 Th omaes, S., Brummelman, E., Reijntjes , A., & Bushman, B. J. (2013).  When narcissus was 
a boy: Origins, nature, and consequences of childhood narcissism.  Child Development 
Perspectives ,  1,  22–26 . 
 Th omaes, S., Stegge, H., Olthof, T., Bushman, B. J., & Neziek, J. B. (2011).  Turning shame 
inside-out: “Humiliated fury” in young adolescents.   Emotion ,  11,  786–793 . 
 Th ompson, R. A. (2010).  Emotion in early conscience. In W. Arsenio & E. Lemerise 
(Eds.),  Emotions, aggression, and morality: Bridging development and psychopathology 
(pp.  6–32 ).  Washington, DC :  American Psychological Association. 
 Th ompson, R. A. (2012).  Whither the preconventional child? Toward a life span moral 
development theory.   Child Development Perspectives ,  4,  423–429 . 
 Th ompson, R. A., & Newton, E. K. (2010).  Emotion in early conscience.  In W. Arsenio & 
E. Lemerise (Eds.),  Emotions, aggression, and morality: Bridging development and psy-
chopathology (pp.  6–32 )  Washington, DC :  American Psychological Association. 
 Toffl  er, B. L. (2003).  Final accounting: Ambition, greed, and the fall of Arthur Anderson.  
New York :  Broadway Books. 
 Tomasello, M. M. (May 25, 2008).  Are humans unique?  New York Times Sunday 
Magazine , p.  15 . 
 Tomasello, M. M., Carpenter, J., Call, T., Behne, T., & Moll, H. (2005).  Understanding and 
sharing intentions: Th e origins of cultural cognition.   Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 
 28,  675–691 . 
 Tomasello, M. M., Kruger, A. C., & Ratner, H. H. (1996).  Cultural learning.   Behavioral and 
Brain Sciences,  16,  495–552 . 
 Tooby, J., & Cosmides, L. (1996).  Friendship and the banker’s paradox: Other path-
ways to the evolution of adaptations for altruism. In J. M. Smith, W. G. Runciman, & 
R. I. M. Dunbar (Eds.),  Evolution of social behavior patterns in primates and man (Vol. 88; 
pp.  119–143 ).  London :  British Academy. 
 Trivers, R. L. (1971).  Th e evolution of reciprocal altruism.  Quarterly Review of Biology, 
 46,  35–57 . 
 Trzebinski, J. (1985).  Action-oriented representations of implicit personality theories. 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,  48,  1266–1278 . 
 Turiel, E. (1974).  Confl ict and transition in adolescent moral development.  Child 
Development,  45,  14–29 . 
 Turiel, E. (1977).  Confl ict and transition in adolescent moral development: II. Th e res-
olution of disequilibrium through structural reorganization.   Child Development, 
 48,  634–637 . 

324 
■ References
 Turiel, E. (2006a).  Th e development of morality.  In W. Damon & R. M. Lerner (Series Eds.) 
& N. Eisenberg (Vol. Ed.),  Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 3. Social, emotional, and 
personality development (6th ed.; pp.  789–857 ).  New York :  John Wiley. 
 Turiel, E. (2006b).  Th oughts, emotions, and social interactional processes in moral develop-
ment. In M. Killen & J. G. Smetana (Eds.),  Handbook of moral development (pp.  7–36 ). 
 Mahwah, NJ :  Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
 Turiel, E. (2008).  Th e trouble with the ways morality is used and how they impede social equal-
ity and social justice. In C. Wainryb, J. G. Smetana, & E. Turiel (Eds.),  Social development, 
social inequalities, and social justice (pp.  1–26 ).  New York :  Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.  
 Turiel, E. (2010).  Th e relevance of moral epistemology and psychology for neuroscience.  In 
P. D. Zelazo, M. Chandler, & E. Crone (Eds.),  Developmental social cognitive neurosci-
ence (pp.  313–331 ).  New York :  Psychology Press. 
 Turnbull, C. M. (1972).  Th e mountain people.  New York :  Touchstone. 
 Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1973).  Availability: A heuristic for judging frequency and 
probability.  Cognitive Psychology,  5,  207–232 . 
 Vaish, A., & Warneken, F. (2012).  Social-cognitive contributors to young children’s empathic 
and prosocial behavior. In J. Decety (Ed.),  Empathy: From bench to bedside (pp.  131–
146 ).  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press. 
 Vaitl, D., Birbaumer, N., Gruselier, J., Jamieson, G. A., Kotchoubey, B., Kubler, A., et al. 
(2005).  Psychobiology of altered states of consciousness.  Psychological Bulletin , 
 131,  98–127 . 
 Valdesolo, P., & DeSteno, D. (2008).  Th e duality of virtue: Deconstructing the moral hypo-
crite.  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,  44,  1334–1338 . 
 Vandivier, K. (2002).  Why should my conscience bother me?  In M. D. Erman & R. J. Lundman 
(Eds.),  Corporate and governmental deviance: Problems of organizational behavior in 
contemporary society  (6th ed.; pp.  146–166 ).  New York :  Oxford University Press.  
 van Lommel, P. (2006).  Near-death experience, consciousness, and the brain: A new con-
cept based on recent scientifi c research on near-death experience in survivors of cardiac 
arrest.  World Futures ,  62,  134–151 . 
 van Lommel, P. (2010).  Consciousness beyond life: Th e science of the near-death experience 
(L. Vroomen, Trans.).  New York :  HarperCollins.  (Original work published 2007.) 
 van Lommel, P., van Wees, R., Meyers, V., & Elff erich, I. (2001).  Near-death experience 
in survivors of cardiac arrest: A prospective study in the Netherlands.  Lancet,  358, 
 2039–2045 . 
 Varshney, A. (2002).  Ethnic confl ict and civic life: Hindus and Muslims in India.  New Haven, 
CT :  Yale University Press. 
 Vasudev, J., & Hummel, R. C. (1987).  Moral stage sequence and principled reasoning in an 
Indian sample.   Human Development,  30,  105–118 . 
 Verplaetse, J., Braeckman, J., & De Schrijver, J. (2009).  Introduction. In J. Verplaetse, 
J. Schrijver, S. Vanneste, & J. Braeckman (Eds.).  Th e moral brain: Essays on the evolution-
ary and neuroscientifi c aspects of morality (pp.  1–43 ).  Dordrecht, NL :  Springer. 
 Viswanathan, V. (February/March, 2008).  [Comment.]  Scientifi c American Mind , p.  35 . 
 Vorrath, H. H., & Brendtro, L. K. (1985).  Positive Peer Culture  (2nd ed.).  New York  :   Aldine.  
 Vygotsky, L. S. (1978).  Mind in society: Th e development of higher mental processes. 
 Cambridge, MA :  Harvard University Press. (Original works published 1930, 1933, 
and 1935.) 

References 
■ 325
 Vygotsky, L. S. (1986).  Th ought and language (A. Kozulin, Trans.).  Cambridge :  MIT Press. 
(Original work published 1934.) 
 Wainryb, C. (2000).  Values and truths: Th e making and judging of moral decisions.  In 
M. Laupa (Ed.),  Rights and wrongs: How children and adults evaluate the world (pp. 
 33–47 ).  San Francisco :  Jossey-Bass. 
 Wainryb, C., Brehl, B. A., & Matwin, S. (2005).  Being hurt and hurting others: Children’s nar-
rative accounts and moral judgments of their own interpersonal confl icts.  Monographs 
of the Society for Research in Child Development ,  70  (3, Serial No. 281). 
 Wainryb, C., Komolova, M., & Florsheim, P. (2010).  How violent youth off enders and typi-
cally developing adolescents construct moral agency in narratives about doing harm.  
In K. C. McLean & M. Pasupathi (Eds.),  Narrative development in adolescence (pp.  185–
206 ).  New York :  Springer. 
 Walker, L. J. (1983).  Sources of cognitive confl ict for stage transition in moral development. 
 Developmental Psychology,  19,  103–110 . 
 Walker, L. J. (1988).  A longitudinal study of moral reasoning.  Child Development, 
 60,  157–166 . 
 Walker, L. J. (1995).  Sexism in Kohlberg’s moral psychology? In W. M. Kurtines & 
J. L. Gewirtz (Eds.),  Moral development: An introduction (pp.  83–108 ).  Needham Heights, 
MA  :  Allyn & Bacon. 
 Walker, L. J. (in press).  Moral personality, motivation, and identity.  In M. Killen & 
J. G. Smetana (Eds.),  Handbook of moral development (2nd ed.).  New York  :   Taylor 
& Francis. 
 Walker, L. J., Frimer, J. A., & Dunlop, W. L. (2012).  Paradigm assumptions about moral 
behavior: An empirical battle royal.  In M. Mikulincer & P. R. Shaver (Eds.),  Th e social 
psychology of morality: Exploring the causes of good and evil (pp.  275–292 ).  Washington, 
DC :  American Psychological Association. 
 Walker, L. J., Gustafson, P., & Hennig, K. H. (2001).  Th e consolidation/transition model in 
moral reasoning development.  Developmental Psychology,  37,  187–197 . 
 Walker, L. J., & Hennig, K. H. (2004).  Diff ering conceptions of moral exemplarity: Just, 
brave, and caring.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology ,  86,  629–647 . 
 Walker, L. J., Hennig, K. H., & Krettenauer, T. (2000).  Parent and peer contexts for children’s 
moral reasoning.   Child Development,  71,  1033–1048 . 
 Wallinius, M., Johansson, P., Larden, M., & Dernevik, M. (2011).  Self-serving cognitive 
distortions and antisocial behavior among adults and adolescents.  Criminal Justice and 
Behavior ,  38,  286–2011 . 
 Walsh, M. W. (November  18, 2007).  Blowing the whistle, many times.   New York Times 
Sunday Business Section , pp.  1, 10 . 
 Walton, G. E., & Bower, T. G. R. (1993).  Newborns form “prototypes” in less than 1 minute. 
 Psychological Science,  4,  203–205 . 
 Ward, T., Hudson, S. M., & Marshall, W. L. (1995).  Cognitive distortion in sex off enders: An 
integrative review.  Clinical Psychology Review ,  17,  470–507 . 
 Warneken, F., & Tomasello, M. (2010).  Helping and cooperation at 14 months of age. 
 Infancy ,  11,  455–471 . 
 Wegner, D. M., & Bargh, J. A. (1998).  Control and automaticity in social life. In D. Gilbert, 
S. Fiske, & G. Lindzey (Eds.),  Th e handbook of social psychology (pp.  446–496 ).  New 
York :  McGraw-Hill. 

326 
■ References
 Weiner, B. (1985).  “Spontaneous” causal thinking.  Psychological Bulletin,  8,  226–232 . 
 Weiss, B. L. (2000).  Messages from the masters: Tapping into the power of love. 
 New York :  Warner. 
 Weiss, B. L. (2004).  Same soul, many bodies: Discover the healing power of future lives through 
progression therapy.  New York :  Free Press. 
 Wheatley, T., & Haidt, J. (2005).  Hypnotic disgust makes moral judgments more severe.  
 Psychological Science ,  16,  780–784 . 
 Whitbourne, S. K., & Connolly, L. A. (1999).  Th e developing self at midlife. In S. L. Willis 
(Eds.),  Life in the middle: Psychological and social development in middle age (pp.  25–45 ). 
 San Diego :  Academic Press. 
 White, R. W. (1959).  Motivation reconsidered: Th e concept of competence.   Psychological 
Review ,  66,  297–333 . 
 Wilson, D. (August, 1995). [Personal testimony.] Panel of near-death experiencers. 
Presented at the meeting of the International Association of Near-Death Studies, West 
Hartford, CT. 
 Wilson, E. O. (1975).  Sociobiology.  Cambridge, MA :  Harvard University Press. 
 Wilson, E. O. (2012).  Th e social conquest of earth.   New York :  W. W. Norton & Co. 
 Wilson, J. Q. (1993).  Th e moral sense .  New York :  Th e Free Press. 
 Wilson, J. Q., & Herrnstein, R. J. (1985).  Crime and human nature.  New York :  Simon & 
Schuster. 
 Wilson, T. D. (2002).  Strangers to ourselves: Discovering the adaptive unconscious.  Cambridge, 
MA :  Harvard University Press. 
 Winer, G., Craig, R. K., & Weinbaum, E. (1992).  Adults’ failure on misleading weight-
 conservation tests: A developmental analysis.  Developmental Psychology,  28,  109–120 . 
 Winer, G. R., & McGlone, D. (1993).  On the uncertainty of conservation: Responses to 
misleading questions.   Developmental Psychology,  29,  760–769 . 
 Witkin, H. A., & Goodenough, D. R. (1977).  Field independence and interpersonal behav-
ior.  Psychological Bulletin,  84,  661–689 . 
 Woerlee, G. M. (2011).  Rejoinder to responses to “Could Pam Reynolds hear?”  Journal of 
Near-Death Studies ,  30,  54–61 . 
 Woodbury, R. (October 11, 1993).  Taming the killers.  Time, pp.  58–59 . 
 Wren, T. E. (1991).  Caring about morality.  London :  Routledge & Kegan Paul. 
 Wright, R. (1994).  Th e moral animal: Why we are the way we are .  New York :  Pantheon. 
 Wuthnow, R. (1994).  Sharing the journey: Support groups and America’s new quest for com-
munity.  New York :  Free Press. 
 Wynne, C. D. L., (2004).  Animal behavior: Fair refusal by capuchin monkeys.  Nature , 
 428,  140 . 
 Yochelson, S., & Samenow, S. E. (1976).  Th e criminal personality: Vol. 1. A profi le for change. 
 New York :  Jason Aronson. 
 Yochelson, S., & Samenow, S. E. (1977).  Th e criminal personality: Vol. 2. Th e change process. 
 New York :  Jason Aronson. 
 Yochelson, S., & Samenow, S. E. (1986).  Th e criminal personality: Vol. 3. Th e drug user. 
 Northvale, NJ :  Jason Aronson. 
 Youniss, J., & Damon, W. (1992).  Social construction in Piaget’s theory. In H. Beilin & 
P. B. Pufall (Eds.),  Piaget’s theory: Prospects and possibilities (pp.  267–286 ).  Hillsdale, NJ : 
 Lawrence Erlbaum. 

References 
■ 327
 Zahn-Waxler, C., & Robinson, J. L. (1995).  Empathy and guilt: Early origins of feelings of 
responsibility. In K. Fischer & J. Tangney (Eds.),  Self-conscious emotions: Shame, guilt, 
embarrassment, and pride (pp.  143–173 ).  New York :  Guilford. 
 Zahn-Waxler, C., Robinson, J. L., Emde, R. N., & Plomin, R. (1992).  Th e development of 
empathy in twins.  Developmental Psychology,  28,  1038–1047 . 
 Zajonc, R. B. (1968).  Attitudinal eff ects of mere exposure.  Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology Supplement,  9 (2, Pt. 2),  1–27 . 
 Zajonc, R. B. (1984).  On the primacy of aff ect.   American Psychologist,  39,  117–123 . 
 Zaleski, C. (1987).  Otherworld journeys: Accounts of near-death experience in medieval and 
modern times.  New York :  Oxford University Press. 
 Zhou, Q., Eisenberg, N., Losoya, S. H., Fabes, R. A., Reiser, M., Guthrie, I. K., et al. (2002). 
 Th e relations of parental warmth and positive expressiveness to children’s empathy-
related responding and social functioning: A longitudinal study.  Child Development, 
 73,  893–915 . 
 Zingrone, N. L., & Alvarado, C. S. (2009).  Pleasurable Eastern adult near-death experiences: 
Features, circumstances, and incidence. In J. M. Holden, B. Greyson, & D. James (Eds.), 
 Th irty years of investigation (pp.  17–40 ).  Santa Barbara, CA :   Praeger/ABC-CLIO. 

This page intentionally left blank 

329
■ a u t h o r  i n d e x
A
Abelson, R. P., 56, 141
Abramovitch, H., 220
Abrams, D., 119
Ackerman, P., 133, 135
Adams, E., 44–46, 58, 61
Adelson, J., 70
Agee, V. L., 177–178, 183–184, 204
Ahlborn, H. H., 190
Aldeguer, C. M., 116
Aleva, A. E., 154
Alexander, E., 253
Alexander, R. D., 67
Ali, A. H., 5, 266
Alibali, M. W., 40
Al-Krenawi, A., 69
Al-Krenawi, S., 69
Aloise, P. A., 43
Aloniz, V., 161
Alvarado, C. S., 217
Alvarez-Saunders, C., 203
Ames, G., 52–53, 78
Amsel, E., 54
Anderson, C. A., 146, 171
Anderson, D., 203
Anderson, R., 140
Anderson, S., 69
Andrews, E. L., 140
Andrews, G., 53
Antoni, G., 273
Appiah, K. A., 5, 7, 28, 30, 34, 165, 
266, 269
Aquino, K., 141, 159–160
Arbuthnot, J., 190–191
Archer, M. A., 177
Arnold, K. D., 72, 190, 273
Arnold, M. L., 142
Aronson, E., 56, 141, 159
Arsenio, W. F., 44–46, 58, 61, 158
Aspect, A., 249
Atkins, R., 141, 178, 190
Ayal, S., 142, 165, 207
Ayer, A. J., 26
B
Babcock, J., 159
Bachorowski, J. A., 163
Badzinski, D. M., 45
Baier, K., 2–3, 95, 265
Baillargeon, R., 24
Baldwin, M. W., 77, 142
Balota, D. A., 53
Banaji, M. R., 26
Bandura, A., 118, 144, 160, 166, 277
Barbaranelli, C., 166
Bargh, J. A., 22, 145–146
Baron, R., 265
Baron, R. M., 160
Baron, R. A., 25
Barrett, 53, 145, 284
Barriga, A. Q., 141, 153, 156–157, 159–160, 
163–167, 183, 203
Barriga, K. T., 159
Barry, B., 8, 64
Basinger, K. S., 39, 72–73, 75–76, 95, 116, 
154–155, 271, 273
Bates, J. E., 152, 163
Batson, C. D., 9, 34, 98–99, 102, 112, 114, 
116, 136, 165, 265, 274
Batson, J. G., 116
Baumeister, R. F., 9, 142, 146, 158, 166, 270
Baumrind, D., 126, 127
Bavelas, J. B., 103
Beah, I., 271
Beauchamp, T. L., 4, 8, 9, 117, 268
Beauregard, M., 253
Bebeau, M. J., 5, 70, 72, 77, 84, 146
Becchio, C., 110
Beck, A. T., 148
Beck, R., 194
Begue, L., 114
Behne, T., 21
Beilin, H., 40
Bell, J. S., 249
Bell, R., 24
Belluck, P., 266
Bem, D. J., 222

330 
■ Author Index
Benatar, D., 266
Benz, G. R., 211, 212, 254
Bereby-Meyer, Y., 159
Bergman, R., 142, 272
Bering, J. M., 42
Berk, L., 44, 60, 111, 128
Berkowitz, L., 25
Berkowitz, M. W., 39, 58
Bernhard, H., 23
Bernstein, S., 60
Berntson, G., 62
Bidell, T. R., 76, 78, 83
Bierman, D. J., 222
Bigler, R. S., 42
Birbaumer, N., 229
Birch, S. A. J., 46, 48
Birnsbaum, J. J., 162
Bixby, F. L., 177
Bjorklund, D. F., 3–5, 20, 22, 42, 62, 65, 
134, 208, 268, 269–270, 275, 279
Black, A., 103
Blackmore, S., 215, 219–220, 222–223, 
227, 237
Blair, R. J. R., 101
Blanke, O., 215, 227
Blasi, A., 32–35, 141–143, 146–147, 154, 
160, 269
Blason, L., 110
Blatt, S. J., 68–69
Bloom, P., 7, 19, 24, 30, 33–34, 44, 46, 48, 
116, 119, 136, 145–145, 266
Blount, M. R., 157, 176, 183, 189, 192–193, 
198, 202, 278
Bogestad, A. J., 167
Boom, J., 63, 79
Borduin, C. M., 190
Bornstein, M. H., 68, 128, 152
Bosch, J. D., 163
Bouwmeester, D., 249
Bower, T. G. R., 107
Bowlby, J., 77
Bowles, S., 34, 67
Boyd, D. R., 273
Boyd, R., 34, 67
Boyes, M. C., 87–88
Boysen, S. T., 62
Brabeck, M., 143
Braeckman, J., 67
Brandt, R. B, 97
Brehl, B. A., 42, 58, 61
Brendtro, L. K., 161, 176–178, 183–184, 
186, 198
Brenner, J., 62
Brewer, M. B., 6, 18, 276
Bricmont, J., 265, 270
Bromley, D. B., 42, 45
Bronfenbrenner, U., 139, 152
Brooks, D., 281
Broome, K., 227
Brosnan, S. F., 24
Brothers, L., 101
Broughton, R. S., 222
Brown, J. D., 276
Brown, P. M., 190
Brown, R., 32–33, 37, 48, 53–54, 81, 116, 
245, 247, 249, 270, 271
Brownrigg, S., 36
Brugman, D., 63, 79, 153–154, 167, 203
Brummelman, E., 158
Brummeth, B. H., 116
Bruneau, E. G., 16
Bruni, P., 266
Buchner, A., 24
Bugental, D. B., 126
Bukowski, W., 59
Burger, J. M., 140, 143–144
Burgess, R. L., 67
Buriel, R., 124
Burkhart, J. E., 273
Bush, N., 218
Bush, N. E., 218
Bushman, B. J., 146, 158, 162, 171
Bussey, K., 41
C
Calitri, R., 137
Call, T., 21
Callanan, M., 225
Caltran, G., 107
Camelia, C. R. T., 164, 167
Camerer, C., 34
Campbell, D. T., 99
Campbell, R. L., 3
Candee, D., 141–142, 144, 146
Cantor, J., 45
Caprara, G. V., 157,166
Carducci, D. J., 152–153, 155, 160, 
167–168, 183–184, 186
Carducci, J. B., 186
Carlo, G., 143

Author Index 
■ 331
Carlson, R., 137
Carnevale, J. J., 147
Carpendale, J., 34, 45, 47
Carpendale, J. I. M., 45
Carpendale, J. I., 76
Carpenter, J., 20
Carr, D., 245
Carr, M. B., 157
Case, R., 44, 50, 53
Cason, D. R., 77
Castiello, U., 110
Cauff  man, E., 157
Chabrol, J., 167
Chagnon, N. A., 69
Chaiken, S., 24
Chalmers, D., 253
Chambers, H. J., 162, 166
Chandler, M., 45, 87, 88
Chang, L., 128
Chapman, G. L., 202
Chapman, M., 53, 216
Charbonneau, L., 167
Chartrand, T. L., 22
Chase, K. A., 158
Chatham, C. H, 43, 48, 50
Chaudhary, N., 111, 208, 215, 221
Cheesman, F. L., 190
Childress, J. F., 4, 8–9, 117, 267–268
Chiong, C., 23–24
Chovil, N., 103
Christian, S. R., 230, 236, 254
Christie, S., 47
Christopher, J. C., 3
Churchland, P., 8, 136, 268
Cikara, M., 116
Clare, I. C. H., 75, 202
Clark, C. L., 77
Clark, M. C., 61
Clark, P. M., 13, 137–138, 143
Clark, R. D., 107, 110
Cohen, J. D., 101, 267
Coie, J. D., 127, 158, 163
Colby, A., 13, 70, 76, 78, 85–87, 89, 95, 133, 
136, 138, 138–142, 144–146, 148–150, 
236, 239, 241, 266, 269, 272, 274
Coles, R., 17–18, 21, 29, 21, 133, 137–138, 
140, 142, 148, 240
Collins, N., 77
Collins, W. A., 68, 128, 152
Colombo, M., 24
Comunian, A. L., 71, 139, 143, 273
Conquest, R., 166
Cook, E. W, 218, 224, 227–228
Cooper, S., 224, 253
Corby, B. C., 160
Correll, J., 119
Corrigan, M. W., 190
Corriveau, K. H., 19
Cosmides, L., 61
Cowan, C. P., 272
Cowan, P. A., 49, 135, 268, 272
Cox-Chapman, M., 216, 220
Craig, R. K., 271
Crick, N. R., 145
Cullen, D., 159
Cunningham, M. R., 25
Cunningham, P. B., 190
Custer, W. L., 54–55, 245, 271
Czikszentmahlyi, 272
D
Dadds, M. R., 277
Dahl, M., 24
Dahlen, E. R., 194
Daigle, M. S., 167
Damasio, A., 25, 122, 274
Damon, W, 1, 4, 7, 13, 23–24, 40, 42–44, 
46–47, 52, 54, 56, 58–59, 61–62, 64, 
69, 76, 94, 124, 126, 128, 133, 136, 
138–142, 144–146, 148–150, 155, 190, 
236, 239, 241, 268, 270, 276
Darley, J. J., 100, 144
Darley, J. M., 101, 267
Darling, N., 130
Davidov, M., 108, 110–111, 250
Davies, P., 206–207, 244, 279
Davis, M. H., 2
Day, J. M., 3
De Schrijver, J., 67
de Waal, F. B. M., 3, 6, 12, 19, 20, 24, 26, 
34–36, 38, 50, 61–63, 67, 69, 98, 106, 
109–110, 122, 157, 159
Deater-Deckard, K., 128
Decety, J. M., 9, 12, 38, 46, 98–99, 101–103, 
105–108, 110, 112, 114, 116, 118, 136, 
260
Deff  enbacher, J. L., 194
Dekovic, M., 153–154
DeLoache, J., 23–24, 50
Deluty, R. H., 167

332 
■ Author Index
Dennett, D., 253
Denton, K., 3, 20, 27, 29, 63, 67, 76, 247, 272
Denzler, M., 271
Dernevik, M., 157, 167
DeSteno, D., 47, 150, 160–161, 267
Devlin, R. S., 157, 159–160, 165, 167
Devlin, R., 176, 202
Dewey, J., 81–86, 90–91, 97, 259, 272
Diamond, J., 69, 271
Dias, M., 26
DiBiase, A. M., 16, 157, 176, 183, 189, 
192–193, 198, 202, 278
Dishion, T. J., 168, 177, 183
Dodd, J., 154
Dodge, K. A., 126–127, 144, 148, 152, 158, 
163–164, 171, 244–275
Doherty, M. J., 45
Doise, W., 52
Donahoe, C. P., 168
Donnelly, T. M., 141, 178, 190
Dover, A., 54
Dovidio, J. F., 119
Duckworth, A. L., 146
Dunfi  eld, K., 99
Dunlop, W. L., 136
Dunn, J., 23, 58, 153
Dupoux, E., 19
Durkheim, E., 5, 21, 32, 36, 37, 85, 266, 
268, 278
Dutton, S., 203
Duvall, J., 133, 135
E
Eagleman, D. M., 25, 253, 281
Ecton, R. R., 195–196
Edelstein, W., 143
Edgerton, R. B., 5, 69, 276–277, 279
Edwards, A., 143
Edwards, C. P., 70
Eibl, M., 249
Eisenberg, N., 45, 95, 98, 108, 112, 121, 
130, 143, 159, 236, 269, 273
Eisenberg, P. R., 216–217
Eldar, O., 159
Elff  erich, I., 209, 226, 231
Ellis, A., 156, 218–219
Engle, 53, 145, 284
Enright, R. D., 252–253
Epstein, S., 77, 159
Evans, J. St. B. T., 267
F
Fabes, R. A., 45, 95, 121, 130, 159, 273
Fagan, J., 157
Farr, S. S., 209, 213–215, 219, 222, 233, 
235–236, 252
Fazio, R. H., 26
Feff er, M., 44, 77
Fehr, E., 21, 23, 34, 67
Feigenberg, L. F., 30
Feindler, E. L., 195–196
Fenwick, E., 279
Fenwick, P., 215, 217, 227–230, 232, 
236, 254
Fernandez, E., 194
Fernandez, Y., 203
Ferrari, M., 139
Festinger, L., 247
Fida, R., 157, 160, 166
Figley, C. R., 116
Fischer, K. W., 76, 78, 83
Fiske, A. P., 63
Flanagan, C. E., 230
Flavell, J. H., 40–43, 45–48, 50–51, 53–54, 
76, 91, 94, 206, 270–271
Florsheim, P., 153, 157
Fontana, D., 253
Fowers, B. J., 5
Fowler, R. C., 265
Fox, M., 215, 219, 231, 253–254
Frank, M. J., 43, 49–50, 52
Franken, W. K., 8–9, 247, 250, 265
Franklin, S., 93, 202
Frederick, S., 30
Fredmore, S. C., 160
Freedman, B. J., 168
Freeman, D., 141, 159–160
French, C. C., 227, 279
Fried, R., 25
Frimer, J. A., 136, 141
Fromm, E., 69, 91, 94
Frost, A. D. J., 277
Fujita, K., 147
Fuller, D., 72, 73, 76, 95, 153, 168, 190, 203, 
269, 271
G
Gachter, S., 21
Gackenbach, J., 222
Gaertner, S. I., 119
Gaines, B., 160

Author Index 
■ 333
Gannon, T. A., 163
Garbarino, J., 165, 205, 278
Garber, J., 164
Garmon, L. C., 273
Gaumont, C., 167
Gentner, D., 47, 49
Geraci, 24
Gergen, K. J., 3
Gerris, J. R. M., 127, 129, 275
Gershoff , E. T., 128
Gibbs, J. C., 3, 8, 12–13, 16, 39, 58, 64, 67, 
70–76, 87, 89, 95, 127–129, 137–138, 
141, 143, 153–157, 159–161, 163–168, 
176, 183, 186, 189–191, 193, 197, 
199–203, 215, 221, 251, 254, 257–266, 
269, 271–273, 275–276, 278
Gielen, U. P., 71, 139, 143, 273
Giesbrecht, N., 141
Gill, M. B., 267
Gilligan, C., 98, 273
Gino, F., 165
Gintis, H., 34, 67
Girgis, Z. M., 140, 143–144
Glachan, P., 52
Glazer, M. P., 140
Gleichgerrcht, E., 116, 118
Glick, B., 176, 184, 186, 193
Gnepp, J., 45
Gold, J., 44–46, 58
Golding, W., 59
Goldstein, A. P., 157, 161, 165, 168, 176, 
186, 191, 193, 195, 197, 199, 200–202
Goleman, D., 159
Gollwitzer, M., 30, 145, 271
Gollwitzer, P. M., 30, 145, 271
Goodall, J., 100
Goodenough, D. R., 139
Goodrick, T. S., 13, 137–138, 143
Gopnik, A., 33, 45, 50, 64, 77, 112, 117, 
253, 267, 270
Gordon, D., 145, 190–191
Gottman, J. M., 159
Gottschling, V., 17
Gouldner, A., 55–56, 62
Graham, J., 18–19
Grangier, P., 249
Green, B., 94
Green, J. L., 13, 70, 137–138, 143
Green, J. D., 101, 266–267
Greenwald, A. G., 26
Gregg, V. R., 154–155, 273
Greyson, B., 16, 208–209, 215–219, 221, 
224–230, 236, 254, 263, 279
Griffi   n, J. J. Jr., 160
Grim, P., 147
Grime, R. L., 13, 39, 72–73, 75, 95, 154, 
271, 272
Grogan-Kaylor, A., 128
Gross, P., 265, 270
Grossman, D. L., 166
Groth, A. N., 162
Gruber, E., 177
Grusec, J. E., 126
Gruselier, J., 229
Guerra, N. G., 164–165
Guisinger, S., 68–69
Gustafson, P., 77
Guthrie, I. K., 130
H
Haaga, D. A., 276
Habermas, 3
Hafer, C. L., 114
Hagan, M. P., 167
Haggbloom, S. J., 81
Haidt, J., 2–8, 10, 12, 14–39, 47, 54, 56, 
58, 62–63, 65, 67, 73, 79, 81, 89, 92, 
98, 111, 117, 119, 130, 132–135, 139, 
145, 152, 159, 208, 238, 241, 243–245, 
247–248, 252, 257–258, 260, 263, 
266–270, 272–276, 278–279
Halford, G. S., 53
Hambrick, D. Z., 53
Hamilton, V. L., 161, 165–166, 277
Hamilton, W. D., 100
Hamlin, J. K., 19, 24
Hammock, G. S., 60
Hardy, S. A., 143
Hare, B., 63
Hargreaves, D. J., 25
Haritos-Fatouros, M., 165
Harkness, S., 70
Hassin, R. R., 30, 34
Harris, B., 254
Harris, P. L., 19, 50
Harris, S., 8, 15, 21, 32, 34–35, 79, 248
Hart, D., 42, 141, 178, 190
Harter, S., 18, 33, 42, 44, 46, 58, 77, 139, 
141, 158, 190
Harvey, O. J., 20, 69

334 
■ Author Index
Hassin, R. R., 30, 34
Hastings, P. D., 127, 130
Hauser, M. D., 7, 67, 99, 269
Havighurst, H. J., 137
Hawes, D. J., 277
Hawkins, M. A., 164, 167
Hay, D. F., 108
Hayne, H., 24
Heide, K. M., 203
Heider, F., 56
Helmond, P., 167, 203
Helwig, C. C., 3, 41–42
Henggeler, S. W., 190
Hennig, K. H., 77, 125
Henrich, J., 34, 67
Herbeck, D., 148–151, 169–178, 178
Herbert, N., 67, 249, 252
Herrnstein, R. J., 32–33, 37, 81, 162
Hersh, M. A., 26
Hetherington, E. M., 68, 128, 152
Heyert, M., 66
Heyman, R. E., 158
Hickling, A. K., 114
Higgins, A., 177
Higgins-D’Alessandro, A., 190
Hildebran, D., 203
Hill, T. E. Jr., 10
Hilton, N. Z., 203
Hodges, E. V. E., 160
Hoff  man, M. L., 1–2, 8–10, 12–17, 19, 22, 
25, 30, 36–38, 40, 59, 67–68, 78, 85, 
93, 95, 98–135, 142, 149, 151–152, 
157, 159, 161, 173–175, 192, 198, 
205–206, 208, 234, 236, 239–41, 244, 
246–248, 250, 253–254, 257, 259–265, 
267–268, 273–275, 281
Hoff  ner, C., 45
Holden, J. M., 217, 223, 230, 236, 254
Hollander, P., 166
Hollin, C. R., 154–155
Holst, U., 153, 160
Hood, W. R., 20, 69
Horn, M., 176, 186, 203
Howard, L. H., 101
Hudson, J. A., 123
Hudson, S. M., 166
Huerta, S., 143
Hughes, C., 58, 153
Hummel, R. C., 90
Hunter, N., 168
Hurley, D., 176
Husain, E., 276
Huston, T. L., 67
Hyde, J. S., 273
Hyman, R., 227
I
Imuta, K., 24
Inhelder, B., 281
Inzlicht, M., 146
Irwin, H. J., 222
Irwin, M. J., 186
Isen, A. M, 25
J
Jackson, P. L., 102–103, 105, 107
Jacobson, D., 5–6, 36
Jacobson, N. S., 159
Jaff  ee, S., 273
Jakubowski, P., 167
James, S. A., 266
James, W., 221
Jamieson, G. A., 229
Janssens, J. M. A. M., 127, 129, 275
Jaycox, C., 168
Jensen, L. A., 67
Johansson, P., 157, 167
Johnson, J., 119
Jones, M., 177
Jones, V. K., 81
Joseph, C., 8, 24, 268
Joseph, J. A., 13, 137–138, 143
K
Kahn, J., 159, 277
Kahn, T., 162
Kahneman, D., 30, 46
Kane, R., 2, 4, 14, 120
Kardes, F. R., 26
Kartner, J., 111
Kasachkoff , T., 35
Kaufman, K., 157, 159–160, 165, 167
Kazdin, A., 152–153, 155, 168, 176
Keasy, C. B., 71
Keenan, T., 77
Kegan, R., 66, 91
Kellehear, A., 216–217
Keller, H., 111, 208, 215, 221
Kelley, E., 99
Kelley, P., 225

Author Index 
■ 335
Kelly, C. K., 168
Kelly, D. R., 146
Kelly, E. F., 208, 215, 221
Kelly, E. W., 208, 215, 221
Kelly, G., 141
Kelman, H. C., 139, 160–161, 165–166, 277
Kenwood, B., 24
Kerr, D. C. R., 127
Kesebir, S, 3, 6, 17–20, 24–27, 32, 34, 268
Kettler, R. J., 137
Kielburger, C., 239, 241–242, 249, 255, 281
Kielburger, M., 240
Killen, M., 59, 119
Kinzler, K. D., 19
Klahr, D., 272
Kletti, R., 233
Knafo, A., 110, 111
Kochanska, G., 126
Koenig, M. A., 50
Kohlberg, L., 1–2, 10, 12, 13–14, 16–17, 
35, 37, 39–41, 59–61, 63–64, 68–71, 
73, 73–76, 78, 80–95, 97–98, 107, 113, 
120, 130–133, 135, 138, 141–142, 144, 
146–147, 151–152, 154, 169, 173–175, 
177, 186, 205–208, 216, 230, 234, 236, 
239–241, 243–244, 248, 250–251, 
257–260, 262–264, 269–274, 278
Koller, S., 26
Komolova, M., 153, 157
Konopisos, M., 166
Koopman, R., 155
Koops, W., 163, 203
Kopelman, L. M., 5, 266
Kotchoubey, B., 229
Kotlowitz, A., 278
Kramer, R., 86–87
Krebs, D. L., 3, 20, 27, 29, 63, 67, 76, 247, 272
Krettenauer, T., 58, 125, 141, 143, 153
Krevans, J. A., 12, 127–128, 143, 275
Kruger, A., 58, 70
Kruger, A. C., 52, 57–58, 62, 91
Kubler, A., 229
Kuhmeier, V. A., 99
Kuhn, D., 65, 93, 271
Kunda, Z., 26
Kushner, H., 94
L
La Taillade, J. J., 159
LaBerge, S., 222
Lacayo, R., 140, 162
Lacey, M., 5, 266
Lamm, C., 114
Landau, J. R., 157, 164
Landau, J., 203
Landenberger, N. A., 202
Landenberger, N., 202
Landis, T., 215, 227
Langdon, P., 75, 201
Langdon, P. E., 75, 201–202
Lange, A. J., 167
Langstrom, N., 153, 160
Lansford, J. E., 126, 128, 275
Lapsley, D. K., 3
Lapsley, D. R., 141
Larden, M., 153, 157, 160, 167
Laszlo, E., 281
Latane, B., 100, 144
Laupa, M., 245, 271, 275
Lawrence, J. A., 125, 221
Lazarus, R. S., 26
Leavitt, N., 265, 270
Leeman, L. W., 153, 168, 190, 203
Leeman, R. F., 265
Lemery, C. R., 103
Lepage, J.-F., 110
Lerner, M. J., 114
Levin, P. F., 25
Levine, C., 273
Levitt, M. J., 61
Lewis, C. S., 60, 207, 236–237, 271
Lewis, J., 45, 47
Liau, A. K., 141, 153, 156–157, 159, 
163–164, 166, 183, 203
Liben, L. S., 42
Liberman, Z., 19
Lickona, T., 63,129,138,155
Lieberman, M., 76, 87, 89
Lift  on, R. J., 119
Light, M., 52
Light, S., 99,107,110
Lillard, A. S., 43
Lindenburger, U., 53
Lindley, D., 281
Ling, L., 280
Lipsey, M., 202–203
Lipsey, M. W., 202–203
Litwack, S. E., 185
Livesley, W. J., 42, 45
LoBue, V., 23–24

336 
■ Author Index
Lochman, J. E., 171
Loeber, R., 168
Long, J., 209, 215, 219, 221–223, 225, 227, 
233, 252, 274, 279
Lopez, N. L., 127
Lorimer, D., 95–96, 232–235, 237, 252
Losoya, S. H., 130
Lourenco, O., 7, 40
Lowenberg, K., 267
Lupinetti, C., 157, 160, 166
Lutjemeier, J. A., 157
Lykken, D. T., 142
Lynam, D., 127, 158
Lynch, M. P., 26, 30, 34, 269
M
Maass, P., 238–239
Maccoby, E. E., 68, 119, 128, 130, 152, 200
Machado, A., 40
MacIntyre, A., 3
Maclean, P. B., 24, 101
Mahajan, N., 19
Mahapatra, M., 63
Makowski, D. G., 13, 137–138, 143
Malti, T., 58
Manning, C. C., 140, 143–144
Manning, T., 281
Markus, H. R., 141
Marshall, W. L., 166
Martin, C. L., 141
Martin, G. B., 107, 110
Mason, M. G., 71
Mathabane, M., 119–120, 148, 255
Matthews, M. D., 146
Mattle, K., 249
Matwin, S., 42, 58, 61
Matza, D., 165
Maymon, Y., 69
McCabe, D. P., 53
McCall, H. J., 186
McCord, J., 177, 183
McCorkle, L. W., 177
McCrady, F., 157, 159–160, 165, 167
McDaniel, M. A., 53
McDonnell, P., 61
McDougall, W., 32, 135
McFall, R. M., 168
McGinnis, E., 168, 200
McGlone, D., 271
McGuire, W. J., 56, 141
McLoyd, V. C., 126, 275
McWilliams, B., 204
Meichenbaum, D. H., 77
Melin, L., 153, 160
Melis, A. P., 63
Mendelson, E. F., 203
Menon, M., 160
Menon, M., 160
Merritt, A., 160
Metcalfe, J., 25, 147, 268, 275
Meyers, V., 209, 226, 231
Michalska, K. J., 102
Michealieu, Q., 45
Michel, L., 148–151, 169–73, 178
Mitchell, M. L., 186
Miller, G., 267
Miller, J. G., 42
Miller, K. F., 50
Miller, M., 52
Miller, P. H., 41–43, 45–48, 50–51, 53–54, 
76, 91, 94, 206, 271
Miller, S. A., 41–43, 45, 46–48, 50–51, 
53–55, 76, 91, 94, 206, 245, 271
Mischel, H. N., 148
Mischel, W., 25, 147–148, 268, 275
Moll, H., 21
Monin, B., 160
Monshouwer, J. J., 163
Moody, R. A., 208, 230
Moore, B., 25, 269
Morelli, S. A., 267
Morgan, C., 72, 140
Morling, B., 77, 159
Morris, B. J., 271
Morris, P. A, 139, 152
Morrison, E. M., 141, 153, 159
Morse, M., 218–220, 223, 231–233
Moshman, D., 2–3, 5, 7–8, 14–15, 22, 24, 
34, 36, 39, 51, 52, 55, 57, 59, 64–65, 
85, 88, 96, 141, 143, 147–148, 165, 
170, 243, 246, 273, 277
Moskowitz, G. B., 30, 145
Much, N. C., 63
Mueller, E., 62
Mugny, G., 52
Muller, U., 34
Mullett, J., 103
Munakata, Y., 44, 49–50

Author Index 
■ 337
Munn, P., 23
Murphy, G. H., 75, 202
Murphy, W. D., 203
Murray, F. B., 53, 78, 211, 227, 271
Mustakova-Possardt, E., 91
Myers, D. B., 265
N
Narvaez, D., 3, 5, 24, 34, 70, 72, 77, 84, 141, 
144, 146
Nas, C., 203
Nassau, G., 54–55, 245, 271
Neisser, U., 77, 245, 254, 272
Nelini, C., 110
Nelson, E. E., 103
Nelson, J. R., 154
Nelson, K., 78, 123
Newcomb, T. M., 56, 141, 177
Newcombe, N. S., 40
Newman, J. P, 163
Newton, E. K., 50, 59, 111
Neziek, J. B., 158, 162
Nichols, S., 267
Nickerson, R. S., 26
Niles, W. J., 190
Nishida, T., 23–24
Noam, G. G., 277
Noddings, N., 98
North, A. C., 25
Nosek, B. A., 26
Novaco, R. W., 195
Noyes, R., 230, 233, 236, 254
Nucci, L., 143
Nucci, L. P., 3
Nussbaum, M. C., 266
Nyman, M., 45
Nystrom, L. E., 101, 267
O
O’Connell, L., 99
O’Leary, D., 158, 253
O’Neil, R. P., 70, 94
Oliner, P., 139, 143
Oliner, S., 139, 143
Olson, S. L., 127
Olthof, T., 158, 162
Orobio de Castro, B., 58, 135
Ortigue, S., 215, 227
Osgood, D. W., 177
Overbeek, G., 167, 203
Owens, J. E., 227
P
Paciello, M., 157, 160, 166
Palmer, E. J., 75, 154–155, 202, 222
Pan, J. W., 249
Panak, W., 164
Parfi t, D, 3, 265
Paris, S., 42
Park, L., 63
Parke, R. D., 124
Parker, J. G., 59
Parnia, S., 215, 217, 219, 222–229, 
233–235, 251, 254, 280
Pask-McCartney, C., 186
Pastorelli, C., 166
Patrick, R. B., 12, 129, 141, 276–276
Patterson, G. R., 168
Pellegrini, A. D., 62
Penrose, R., 207, 244, 248–249, 254, 
279, 281
Perry, D. G., 160
Peterson, J. L., 41–42, 46
Peterson, C. C., 41, 46,146
Pettit, G. S., 152, 163
Phon, Y. P. L., 75
Piaget, J., 3, 8–11, 13, 29, 36–37, 39–43, 
46–50, 52, 54, 56, 60, 62–65, 68, 
70–71, 76–78, 81–85, 93–95, 97, 106, 
113, 125, 131, 149, 151, 205–207, 236, 
241, 243–246, 249, 258–259, 263, 
268–270, 272, 278–279, 281
Pierroutsakos, S. L., 50
Pinker, S., 2, 3, 5, 6–7, 11, 15, 19, 26–27, 30, 
33–34, 50, 55, 69, 90, 10 3, 112, 114, 
117, 131, 157, 248, 257, 266–267, 269
Piquero, A. R., 157
Pithers, W. D., 203–204
Pizarro, D. A., 30, 33–34, 145–146
Plante, N., 167
Polaschek, D. L. L., 163
Polkinghorne, J. C., 281
Potter, G. B., 16, 153, 156–157, 160, 
163–164, 166, 176, 183, 189, 191–193, 
197–199, 201–202, 278
Potts, M., 215
Poulin, F., 177, 183
Powell, D., 272

338 
■ Author Index
Powell, M. C., 26
Powell, N., 275
Power, C., 92,230
Premack, A. J., 62
Premack, D., 24, 62
Prencipe, A., 41, 42
Price, J. M., 163
Q
Quiggle, N., 164
Quigley, K. S., 62
Quinn, M., 203
R
Radin, D., 222,281
Rai, T. S., 63
Rathunde, K., 272
Ratner, H. H., 52, 62, 91
Rawls, J., 90
Redl, F., 155–156, 159–160, 162
Reed, A. II., 141, 159–160
Reed, R. R. C., 273
Rees, J., 202
Reijntjes, 158
Reiser, M., 130
Repacholi, B. M., 112
Resick, P. A., 77
Rest, J. R., 5, 63, 70, 72, 76, 83, 144, 146, 268
Reyes, L. S., 203
Richardson, D., 279
Richardson, D. R., 60
Richardson, F. C., 5
Riessman, F., 185
Ring, K., 217–218, 220–221, 224, 226, 
228, 253
Ripley, A., 140
Robbins, M., 202
Roberts, J. C., 147
Roberts, W. L., 155
Robinson, J. L., 101, 123
Robinson, R., 155
Rockenbach, B., 23
Rodgers, R. F., 167
Roediger, H. L., 53
Rogoff , B., 52, 59
Rommer, B. R., 218–219, 232
Rosen, S., 60
Rosenberg, M. J., 56, 141
Rosenhan, D. L., 25
Rosenthal, L., 168
Rotenberg, K. J., 112
Roth-Hanania, R., 108, 110, 111, 250
Rowland, M. D., 190
Rowland, S., 168
Royzman, E. B., 265
Rubama, I., 186
Rubin, K. H., 59
Rushe, R. H., 159
Russell, T. M., 81
Rutland, A., 119
Rutter, M. L., 152
Ryncarz, R. A., 92–93
S
Sabom, M. B., 209–212, 215, 217, 221–223, 
226–228, 230–231, 251, 280
Sagi, A., 107
Saguy, T., 119
Saltzstein, H. D., 35, 128, 275
Samenow, S. E., 156, 159, 161, 165, 178,
Sameroff , A. J., 127
Sanbonmatsu, D. M., 26
Sandel, M. J., 3, 8
Sartori, L., 110
Sartori, P., 222
Sauer, H., 267
Saxe, R. R., 116
Scarf, D., 24
Schaal, B., 30,145
Schechtman, K. B., 216–217
Schlitz, M., 222
Schlundt, D. G., 168
Schmeichel, B. J., 146
Schnell, S. V., 71
Schoenwald, S. K., 190
Schonert-Reichl, K. A., 71
Schwaninger, J., 216–217
Schwartz, D., 144, 146
Sedikides, A., 71
Seeck, M., 215, 227
Seeto, D., 41–42, 46
Seewonarain, K., 203
Seider, S., 115
Selman, R. L., 3, 30, 42–44, 46, 61, 63–64
Shalvi, S., 159
Shaver, P. R., 77
Shaw, L. L., 116
Sherif, C. W., 20, 69
Sherif, M., 20, 69
Shively, R., 176, 186, 203

Author Index 
■ 339
Shnabel, N., 119
Shortt, J. W., 159
Shreyer, T. A., 62
Shulman, E. P., 157
Shultz, L. H., 46
Shultz, T. R., 54
Shure, M. B., 196
Shutts, K., 19
Shweder, R. A., 3, 26, 32, 63
Siegler, R. S., 40, 44, 49–50, 57, 76, 78–79, 
83, 272
Sigelman, C. K., 42, 64
Signorella, M. L., 42
Silberman, M. A., 273
Simion, F., 107
Simmel, G., 100
Simner, M. L., 107
Simonian, S. J., 168
Simonian, S. S., 168
Sinclair, S., 5
Singer, P., 14, 37, 65, 69, 119–120, 154, 244, 
247, 263, 267, 269, 271, 273
Skitka, L. J., 148
Slaby, R. G., 164–165
Sloane, S., 24
Slonim-Nevo, V., 69
Sloutsky, V., 271
Slovic, P., 117, 267
Smedslund, J., 55, 57, 60, 79, 136
Smetana, J. G., 3, 265
Smit, R. H., 228
Smith, A., 3, 99, 161, 234
Smith, D. J., 154
Snarey, J. R., 13, 73, 95, 154, 269, 272–273, 278
Sokol, A., 265, 270
Sokol, B. W., 34, 58, 153
Sommerville, R. B., 101, 267
Spelke, E. S., 19
Spinrad, T. L., 95, 108, 121, 159, 273
Spivack, G., 196
Stams, G. J., 153–154
Stanwick, K. E., 267
Stapp, H. P., 253
Staub, E., 100
Stegge, H., 158, 162
Steinberg, L., 68, 128, 130, 152
Sternberg, K., 20
Sternberg, R. J., 20, 138
Stevenson, I., 218, 225, 227–228
Stinson, B. L., 157, 164
Stouthamer-Loeber, M., 168
Straughan, R., 247
Strayer, J., 155
Streeter, R., 281
Suhler, C. L., 8, 268
Sullivan, C., 127, 130, 280
Super, C., 70
Surian, 24
Sutherland, C., 251
Svetina, M., 57, 79,272
Svetlova, M., 98–99, 101, 106–107, 110, 
112, 116, 118
Swann, W. B. Jr., 160
Swillinger, A., 168
Sykes, G. M., 165
T
Taba, H., 137
Tajfel, H., 18
Tannenbaum, D., 34
Tannenbaum, P. H., 56, 141
Tappan, M. B., 3
Targ, E., 222
Tarnowski, K. J., 168
Tarrant, M., 25, 137
Tart, C. T., 222
Taylor, J., 58–59, 190
Taylor, S. E., 276
Th au, S., 141, 159–160
Th eoret, H., 110
Th omaes, S., 158, 162, 171
Th ompson, R. A., 50, 59, 111
Th orson, E., 45
Th oma, S. J., 5, 70, 72, 77, 84, 146
Tierny, J., 146
Tobin, D. D., 160
Todd, R. M., 116
Toffl   r, B. L., 277
Tomasello, M. M., 14, 20, 52, 57, 62–63, 
91, 109
Tooby, J., 61
Tramontano, 116, 157, 160, 166
Trivers, R. L., 67, 100
Trope, Y., 24
Trzebinski, J., 77
Tuft  s, J. H., 83
Tugade, 53, 145, 284
Turiel, E., 1, 3, 27, 30, 31, 41–42, 63, 86–87, 
140, 145, 265, 269
Turnbull, C. M., 279

340 
■ Author Index
Turner, J. C., 18
Tversky, A., 46
U
Underwood, B., 25
Upton, L., 42
Utendale, W. T., 127, 130, 160, 166
V
Vaish, A., 100, 109
Vaitl, D., 229
Valdesolo, P., 47, 150, 160–161, 267
Valsiner, J., 125
Van der Heijden, P. G. M., 63, 79
Van der Laan, P., 153–154
Van Leeuwen, N., 167
Van Lommel, P., 208–209, 215, 217, 
224–226, 229, 231, 234, 252, 279
Van Rosmalen, L., 153–154
Van Wees, R., 209, 226, 231
Vandivier, K., 165
Varshney, A., 69
Vasey, M. W., 157, 159–160, 165, 167
Vasudev, J., 90
Veerman, J. W., 163
Vermuelen, S. C. A., 76
Verplaetse, J., 67
Viswanathan, V., 267
Vorrath, H. H., 161, 176–178, 183, 198
Vygotsky, L. S., 66
W
Wainryb, C., 42,153,157
Waitzman, K. A., 42, 64
Walker, L. J., 3, 57–59, 76–77, 125, 136, 
141, 150–151, 190, 271, 273
Waller, D. G., 217
Wallinius, M., 157, 167
Walsh, M. W., 140
Walton, G. E., 107
Ward, T., 163, 166
Warneken, F., 100, 109
Warnick, J. E., 81
Warnick, R., 81
Wasel, W., 30, 145
Wasmund, W. C., 177
Weaver, T. L., 77
Weber, R. A., 61
Wegner, D. M., 146
Weinbaum, E., 271
Weiner, B., 114
Weinfurther, H., 166, 249
Weiss, A. N., 216–217
Weiss, B. L., 224
Wellman, H. M., 77, 114
Weston, D., 137
Wheatley, T., 26
Whitbourne, S. K., 272
White, B. J., 20
White, R. W., 272
White, S., 147
Whiteford, M. G., 71
Wilson, D., 225
Wilson, E. O., 32
Wilson, J. Q., 3, 162
Wilson, T. D., 25
Wineman, D., 155–156, 159–160
Winer, G. R., 271
Witkin, H. A., 139
Woerlee, G. M., 228
Woodbury, R., 203
Wren, T. E., 247
Wright, R., 67
Wurf, E., 141
Wuthnow, R., 176
Wynn, K., 19, 24
Wynne, C. D. L., 24
Y
Yarbrough, G. L., 81
Yeates, R., 217
Yochelson, S., 156, 178
Youniss, J., 56
Yovsi, R. D., 111
Z
Zahn-Waxler, C., 12, 98–99, 101, 107–108, 
110–111, 123, 250, 260
Zajonc, R. B., 21, 25–26, 116, 122, 268
Zaleski, C., 218, 280
Zeilinger, A., 249
Zelli, A., 128
Zhou, Q., 130
Zola, S., 110

341
■ s u b j e c t  i n d e x
A
Abuse, physical, 13, 163, 173
See also cognitive distortions or thinking 
errors, self-serving or aggressogenic 
under Antisocial or externalizing 
problem behavior
Adaptation, evolutionary, 243–244
See also Haidt’s new synthesis or social 
intuitionist theory
Adolescent Problems Inventory-Short Form 
(API-SF), 168
Adult moral development. See Kohlberg’s 
moral theory
Aff ective primacy. See Moral motivation
Aggression, proactive or reactive. See 
Antisocial or externalizing problem 
behavior
Altruism. See Prosocial behavior
Anger
management, 157, 176, 185–189, 194–200
empathic, 6, 12, 102, 114–115, 149, 151, 
240
See also Antisocial or externalizing 
problem behavior; EQUIP and 
related programs for treating 
antisocial behavior; cognitive 
complications under Hoff man’s 
moral theory
Antisocial or externalizing problem 
behavior
aggression, proactive or reactive, 15, 
158–159, 164, 170, 172, 262, 277
brain damage and, 25, 273–274
case study
McVeigh, Timothy, 148–151, 153, 
169–174, 178, 235, 255
summary and comments, 173–174
cognitive distortions or thinking errors, 
self-serving or aggressogenic, 13, 15, 
26, 34–35, 47, 97, 134, 153, 155–167, 
169–172, 174, 185, 235, 239, 250, 
252, 271
assuming the worst, 160, 163–164, 166, 
169, 171–172, 175, 177, 182, 196, 235
blaming others, 15, 114, 123, 144, 
160– 167, 169, 171, 175, 177–178, 
182, 188, 190–192, 196, 198, 235, 274
dehumanization and, 165–166
ego, self-concept, or self-esteem 
protected by, 158–162, 164–166, 
170, 172
empathy or guilt neutralized by, 13, 15, 
102, 114, 123, 151, 158–159, 161, 
255, 274
minimizing/mislabeling, 33, 37, 
150– 151, 160, 164–166, 169, 
171–172, 177, 180, 182, 191, 196, 202, 
235, 251
physical abuse as a risk factor, 13, 163, 173
secondary, 159–166, 191
self-centered or primary, 1–2, 6, 15–16, 
35, 39, 45, 95, 152, 156–160, 165–166, 
168–170 173, 175–177, 181–182, 188, 
190–191, 194–196, 198, 208, 219, 
232–235, 237, 250, 271, 276–278
limitations or problematic tendencies, 
152–153, 173, 175–176, 183–185, 
257, 261–262
moral judgment delay, superfi cial social 
cognition or pronounced and 
prolonged egocentric bias, 13, 
95, 149, 151–156, 163, 167, 169, 
173–174, 176, 186, 193, 195, 262
negative or antisocial peer pressure, 152, 
168–169. 187
psychopathy or callous and unemotional 
traits, 142, 156–159, 166, 169–170, 
173, 277
self-esteem, infl ated, or grandiosity, 158, 
169–170
social skill defi ciencies, 167–168, 172–173, 
257, 262
wife batterers, 158–159
See also Bias; EQUIP and related 
programs for treating antisocial 
behavior; How I Th ink (HIT) 
questionnaire; Moral judgment or 
evaluation

342 
■ Subject Index
Attachment, secure, and constructive peer 
interaction, 59
See also attachment or infant care 
under Empathy or empathic 
predisposition
Authoritative parenting. See Discipline, 
parental, or socialization and moral 
internalization
Autoscopic near-death experience. See 
defi nition and types under 
Near-death experience
B
Balancing and moral type B, 138–140
See also Kohlberg’s moral theory
Beck, Aaron T., 161, 194, 205
Benevolence or benefi cence. See Character 
ideals, qualities, or virtues; Morality 
or moral domain
Bias
egocentric or confi rmation, 10–11, 20, 
23–24, 26, 39, 43, 45–49, 58, 95, 
109, 112, 123, 135, 147, 151–153, 
155–157, 159, 168–169, 173, 186, 
192, 194, 235, 250, 258
See also Cognitive-developmental 
approach to morality; Social 
perspective-taking or coordination 
of perspectives
empathic. See empathy’s limitations 
and their remedy under Hoff man’s 
moral theory
Blaming others. See cognitive distortions 
or thinking errors, self-serving or 
aggressogenic under Antisocial or 
externalizing problem behavior
Bloom, Paul, 7, 19, 30, 34, 44, 46, 119, 
136
Bystander guilt. See cognitive 
complications under Hoff man’s 
moral theory
C
Centrations or unidimensional thinking. 
See Cognitive developmental 
approach to morality
Character ideals, qualities, or virtues, 1, 3–4, 
6, 8, 28, 73, 135, 141–143, 146–147
Child labor abuse, 238–240
Classical conditioning as basic mode of 
empathic arousal. See Empathy or 
empathic predisposition
Cognitive behavioral approach. See EQUIP 
and related programs for treating 
antisocial behavior
Cognitive developmental approach to 
morality
centrations or unidimensional thinking, 
10–11, 13, 39–41, 43–44, 46–49, 
51–52, 54, 60–61, 71–72, 78–79, 93, 
94–96, 112, 116, 152, 156, 168, 173, 
176, 200, 246, 258
decentration or multidimensional 
thinking, 11, 30, 40, 44, 50–56, 
58–59, 61, 71, 79, 84–86, 94, 
111– 112, 124, 131, 147, 152, 165, 
176, 205–206, 234, 236, 255, 258, 274
critiques of, 40–41
cultural support for, 15, 57, 68–69, 124, 
250
development or construction as 
distinct from socialization or 
internalization, 11, 35, 37, 39–40, 
52–53, 56–57, 75, 78–79, 81, 84–86, 
125, 131, 238, 245–246, 270–271
evolutionary heritage or germinal roots, 
23, 33, 35, 61–62, 67–68
formal operations or hypothetical-
deductive thinking, 57–58, 64–65, 
81, 83, 87, 92, 94–95, 244, 260, 281
Haidt’s challenge, evaluation, 3–8, 79
happy victimizer phenomenon, 44–46, 
50, 58, 79
invariant sequence, 75–76, 82–84, 
86–89, 91, 96–97, 259–260
logic or logical necessity and morality, 
49–51, 54–55, 57, 59–60, 79, 136, 
244, 247, 259, 270, 271, 275
moral judgment, defi nition, 39, 269
reciprocity norm, 55–57, 68
refl ective abstraction, 65
social play, 41, 49
stages, 11, 40, 60–79, 84–97
stage mixture, 75–77, 83, 270
themes, 39–41, 80
working memory or executive attention, 
39, 46, 50, 53, 96, 146–147, 247, 
267, 270

Subject Index 
■ 343
See also Bias, egocentric or 
confi rmation; Conservation 
knowledge/task; Gibbs’ lifespan 
view and critique of Kohlberg’s 
theory; Kohlberg’s moral theory; 
Moral judgment or evaluation; 
Moral identity; Moral motivation; 
Piaget’s theory; Reciprocity; Social 
perspective-taking or coordination 
of perspectives
Cognitive dissonance. See Festinger, Leon, 
cognitive dissonance theory; 
ego, self-concept, or self-esteem, 
protected by, under Antisocial or 
externalizing problem behavior
Cognitive distortions or thinking errors
self-debasing or depressogenic, and 
internalizing problem behavior, 
164, 277
self-serving or aggressogenic. See 
Antisocial or externalizing problem 
behavior; EQUIP and related 
programs for treating antisocial 
behavior
Cognitive primacy. See Moral motivation
Columbus Dispatch, 245
Condition of reversibility. See Moral 
judgment or evaluation
Confi rmation bias. See Bias
Conscience and Moral Type B, 138–139
See also Kohlberg’s moral theory
Consciousness or mind
brain and, 224, 226–229, 250–254, 
273–274, 279–280
See also Near-death experience
Conservation knowledge/task, 47–49, 
51–57, 78, 136, 140, 145, 206, 242, 
245–247, 249, 254, 258–259
See also Cognitive-developmental 
approach to morality; Prosocial 
Behavior; Reality
Construction. See Cognitive developmental 
approach to morality; Social 
construction
Conventional level. See Kohlberg’s moral 
theory
Co-primacy. See Moral motivation
Cosmic perspective or Kohlberg’s “Stage 7.” 
See Kohlberg’s moral theory; 
Near-death experience
Cultural psychology, 3–4
See also Haidt’s new synthesis or social 
intuitionist theory; Moral relativism
Culture. See Cognitive developmental 
approach to morality; negative 
youth culture under EQUIP and 
related programs for treating 
antisocial behavior; Moral 
judgment or evaluation; moral 
reciprocity as internalized norm 
under Reciprocity
D
Death, concept of, and early childhood 
superfi ciality, 42
See also Cognitive developmental 
approach to morality
Decentration or multi-dimensional 
thinking. See Cognitive 
developmental approach to 
morality; Empathy or empathic 
predisposition
Delusional paranoia and assuming the 
worst, 163, 171
Deontology. See Greene’s argument; 
Morality or moral domain
Depression or internalizing problem 
behavior. See self-debasing or 
depressogenic under Cognitive 
distortions or thinking errors
de Waal, Frans, 6, 12, 19–20, 38, 61, 98
Dewey, John, 81–84, 90–91, 272
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders (DSM-IV), 167
Discipline, parental, or socialization and 
moral internalization
authoritative parenting and, 126–127
disappointed expectations, parental 
expression of, 12, 128–129, 
141, 275
empathy or empathy-based guilt and, 
123–128
evidence for Hoff man’s theory of moral 
socialization, 126–128
inductions, 12, 79, 124–126, 128–131, 
176, 242, 260–262, 275
love withdrawal, 125, 128–129, 275
moral identity and, 129–130
moral internalization or socialization 
and, 123–130, 219

344 
■ Subject Index
Discipline, parental (Cont.)
nurturance or parental warmth, 126, 
129–130, 169, 261
optimal pressure and, 125–126
permissive parenting and, 126, 130
power-assertion, 59, 125, 127, 129–130, 
155, 275
See also Hoff man’s moral theory
Dual process models. See Moral motivation
Durkheimian theory or group solidarity. 
See Haidt’s new synthesis or social 
intuitionist theory
E
Eff ectance motive, 247, 272, 274
See also Cognitive developmental approach 
to morality; Moral motivation; 
Rationality or rational agency
Egocentric or confi rmation bias. See Bias; 
centrations or unidimensional 
thinking under Cognitive 
developmental approach to morality
Egocentric or quasi-egocentric empathic 
distress, 107, 109
See also stages, immature and mature 
under Hoff man’s moral theory
Egoistic drift , 105, 115–116
See also Empathy or empathic 
predisposition; Hoff man’s moral 
theory
Egoistic motives or desires, 10, 14–15, 32, 
41, 59, 100, 114, 123, 127, 130–131, 
155–157, 235, 242, 246, 250
See also Antisocial or externalizing 
problem behavior
Ego strength, willpower, or self-control. See 
Prosocial behavior
Emotivism. See Haidt’s new synthesis or 
social intuitionist theory
Emotions, understanding mixed, 44, 50, 58
See also centrations or unidimensional 
thinking under Cognitive 
developmental approach to 
morality
Empathic bias. See empathy’s limitations 
and their remedy under Hoff man’s 
moral theory
Empathic over-arousal. See Hoff man’s 
moral theory
Empathy or empathic predisposition
aggression inhibition, 108, 119
attachment or infant care and, 59, 102, 
111, 130
biological substratum or brain neurology 
of, 101, 273–274
bystander intervention or guilt, 100, 102, 
114, 123
cognition and, 106–123
compassion fatigue and, 116–118
complexity or full capacity of, 101–102, 
105–106, 113
conditioning and, 101–103, 107, 116, 
124, 247
defi nition, 99
discipline encounters and, 124–129
empathetic life review, 234–235, 237, 252
guilt, empathy-based, 1, 12, 15, 25, 50, 
123, 127–128, 134–135, 151, 161, 198
human societal requirements and, 100
justice or the right and, 8–9, 115
mammalian, 101–102
modes of empathic arousal, 98, 101–107, 
109, 112, 115–116, 122, 124–125, 
131, 173, 203, 239, 260, 274–275
moral circle and, 14, 119
moral principles and, 115, 118, 120–121, 
123, 131, 134, 142, 145
preconcern, 102, 109
psychic numbing, 118–119
reframing or relabeling and, 119–120, 
147, 178, 195
regulating or remedying limitations of, 
100, 110, 115, 117–121
sympathy, 7, 98, 102, 104, 112, 126, 145, 267
synchrony with mother or group and, 
101–103
See also cognitive distortions or 
thinking errors, self-serving or 
aggressogenic, under Antisocial 
or externalizing problem 
behavior; Attachment, secure, and 
constructive social interaction; 
Discipline, parental, or socialization 
and moral internalization; EQUIP 
and related programs for treating 
antisocial behavior; Hoff man’s 
moral theory; Moral Motivation; 
Prosocial behavior

Subject Index 
■ 345
Empirical knowledge. See Moral 
motivation
Equality. See Cognitive-developmental 
approach to morality; Reciprocity
Equilibration/disequilibration. See Piaget’s 
theory
EQUIP and related programs for treating 
antisocial behavior
adaptations, 201–202
cognitive behavioral approach, 176, 184, 
262
anger management, 157, 176, 
185–189, 194–200
curriculum, 184–187, 189, 262, 278
equipment meetings, 184–201
EQUIPPED for Life game, 186
moral judgment and Social Decision-
Making meetings, 185–187, 189, 
191, 193–194
relaxation techniques, 187, 196
social skills defi ciencies and social 
skills, equipping with, 167–169, 
172–174, 176, 185, 187–189, 191, 
195, 197, 200–201, 204, 250
cognitive restructuring, reframing, or 
correcting cognitive distortions 
or thinking errors, 178, 186, 202, 
119–120, 278
evaluations of, 201–203
multi-component, 176, 186–189
Multi-Systemic Th erapy (MST), 190
mutual help approach
confronting, 178, 183–184
evaluation of, 183–184
faith-building opportunities, 178, 278
just community, 190, 198
mutual help meetings, 175–176, 178, 
184, 194, 202
negative youth culture, 152, 177
Positive Peer Culture or Guided 
Group Interaction, 176–178, 
183–184, 191, 262, 278
problem names, 179, 202
relabeling, 178, 187, 194–195
Responsible Adult Culture, 202
social perspective-taking or 
coordination of perspectives in, 16, 
175–178, 183–184, 186, 190–195, 
198, 200–203, 205, 262
severe off enders, 36, 203–205, 236, 
262–263
synergy of, 184–186
Th ink of the Other Person (TOP) 
technique, 196–197, 200
See also Antisocial or externalizing 
problem behavior; Bias; Social 
perspective-taking or coordination 
of perspectives
Ethic of autonomy or divinity. See Haidt’s 
new synthesis or social intuitionist 
theory
Ethnocentric bias or conceits, 4, 276
See also Bias, egocentric or confi rmation; 
cognitive distortions or 
thinking errors; self-serving or 
aggressogenic, under Antisocial or 
externalizing problem behavior
Eudaimonia, human fl ourishing, or the 
good life, 7, 27, 38, 272, 276, 278
Evolution or phylogeny. See Haidt’s new 
synthesis or social intuitionist 
theory and Hoff man’s moral theory
Existential development. See Gibbs’s two-
phase lifespan view and critique of 
Kohlberg’s theory
Externalizing problem behavior. See 
Antisocial or externalizing problem 
behavior
F
False moral identity. See Moral identity; 
Prosocial behavior
Female genital mutilation, 4–6, 20, 33, 37, 
266
See also Moral relativism
Festinger, Leon, cognitive dissonance 
theory, 247.
See also ego, self-concept, or self-esteem 
protected by, and empathy or guilt 
neutralized by, under Antisocial or 
externalizing problem behavior
Field dependence/independence or 
psychological diff erentiation, 4–5
Moral types A/B and, 138–139
veridical moral perception and, 139–140
See also Prosocial behavior
Formal operations. See Cognitive 
developmental approach to morality

346 
■ Subject Index
Freud or Freudian psychology 26, 32, 36, 
81, 131
Fundamental or universal valuing and 
moral type B, 138
See also Moral judgment or evaluation
G
Gender diff erences. See Moral judgment 
or evaluation
Gibbs’s two-phase lifespan view and 
critique of Kohlberg’s theory
construction confused with 
internalization, 84–86, 97
conventional level and internal 
contradiction, 88–89
ethical philosophy and basic stages, 
93–94
existential development, 11, 16, 33, 
91–92, 94–97, 188, 208, 216, 
229–230, 232, 239, 250, 252, 259, 
263, 273
post-conventional level, rarifi cation, 
89–91
standard development, 94–96
Golden Rule, 3, 64, 68, 95, 248
See also condition of reversibility, 
interchangeability of perspectives, 
moral point of view, or third-
person perspective under Moral 
judgment or evaluation
Gradient of caring. See empathic bias and 
multiple claimants dilemma under 
Hoff man’s moral theory
Greene’s argument, 266–267.
See also deontology under Morality or 
moral domain; Utilitarianism or 
utilitarian philosophy
Group solidarity. See Haidt’s new synthesis 
or social intuitionist theory
Guilt. See Empathy or empathic 
predisposition; Discipline, 
parental, or socialization and moral 
internalization
H
Haidt’s new synthesis or social intuitionist 
theory
analogies, 26–27, 32, 37
assisted externalization, 268
authority, 6–7, 14, 17–18, 21, 32
care, 18, 22, 25
confabulation, 26, 29, 134
conscience, view of, 28–29
critique, 4–7, 16, 29–38
culture or cultural diversity, 17–19, 
32–33, 37–38, 63, 73, 81, 258, 266
descriptive inadequacy or negative skew, 
33–35, 268
dumbfounding, 26, 29–31
emotivism, 26
enculturation or internalization, 18–19, 
35, 37, 55, 79, 250, 258, 269, 280
ethic of autonomy or divinity, 63
evolution or phylogeny, 7, 17–18, 20, 22, 
24–25, 28, 32–33, 37, 241, 243–244, 
258, 263
group or in-group solidarity or 
favoritism, 14, 17, 19–22, 31, 
36, 38
higher reaches of morality, neglect of, 
33–36, 96, 258
inequality aversion, 24
intuitive or aff ective primacy, 17, 21–22, 
24–25, 31, 38, 269
justice, equality, or reciprocity, view of, 
17, 22–24, 79
loyalty or social conformity, 6, 17–19, 
22, 31, 147
modules, biological, 17, 22, 27, 32, 79, 
268
moral relativism, 3, 33, 36–37, 265, 266, 
270
moral reasoning, role or view of, 22, 
29–31
nativist or neo-nativist view, 3, 10, 
22–24, 61–62, 79, 110–111
out-group, hostility against, 18, 20, 
29–30, 36
pragmatic functionalist perspective, 20, 
28, 37
prescriptivity, exclusion of, 20, 35–36
prosocial behavior, view of motivation 
for, 25
purity or disgust, 6–7, 17
rationality, reason, or truth, view of, 17, 
22, 24–27, 31–34, 36–37
social persuasion and success, 17, 20, 
27–29, 33, 73
themes, 17–29, 31
triune brain, 24

Subject Index 
■ 347
See also brain damage under Antisocial 
or externalizing problem behavior; 
Discipline, parental, or socialization 
and moral internalization; 
Durkheimian theory or group 
solidarity; Female genital 
mutilation; Moral motivation; 
Moral relativism
Happy victimizer phenomenon. See 
Cognitive developmental approach 
to morality.
Here-and-now empathic bias. See aff ective 
primacy under Moral motivation; 
Hoff man’s moral theory
Heteronomous morality. See centrations 
or unidimensional thinking under 
Cognitive developmental approach 
to morality
Hobbesian philosophy, 93, 96
See also Gibbs’s lifespan view and 
critique of Kohlberg’s theory
Hoff man, Martin L., 1–2, 37–38, 98
See also Hoff man’s moral theory
Hoff man’s moral theory
aff ective primacy in, 98–99, 121–122
arousal modes, 101–105, 274
cognitive complications
bystander intervention or guilt, 102, 114
causal attribution, 102, 114
empathy-based guilt, 102, 114
empathy, cognitive regulation of, 
120–121
empathic anger, 102, 114
injustice inference, 102, 114–115
critique of, 130–132, 173–174
construction, decentration or mental 
coordination and, 98, 101, 104, 110, 
112–114, 118 123–125, 130–131
empathy’s limitations and their remedy
empathic bias (here-and-now, 
familiarity-similarity), 12, 14, 19, 
104–105, 113, 115–117, 119, 136, 
250, 254, 260, 276
empathic over-arousal, 12, 114,115–
116, 118, 121, 136, 250, 260
remedying, 117–121, 260
evidence for Hoff man’s moral 
socialization theory, 126–128
evolution or phylogeny, 98, 100, 103, 
110, 112, 119
Haidt’s theory, comparison with, 98
Kohlberg’s and Hoff man’s theories, 
comparison or question of 
integration, 1, 106–107, 130–131, 
248, 263–264
moral principles, role of, 120–121
multiple claimants dilemma, 117, 207, 
236, 250, 254, 265
nurturance, role of, 130
parental discipline techniques, 123–130
Perceived Parental Discipline (PPD) 
questionnaire, 275
self-other distinction, self-awareness, or 
self-recognition, 109–111
stages, mature and immature, 106–113, 260
sympathy, 102, 112, 114
Timothy McVeigh, 173–174
See also aff ective primacy under 
Moral motivation; Discipline, 
parental, or socialization and 
moral internalization; Empathy or 
empathic predisposition; Moral 
motivation; Prosocial behavior
How I Th ink (HIT) questionnaire, 166–167
See also cognitive distortions or 
thinking errors, self-serving or 
aggressogenic, under Antisocial or 
externalizing problem behavior; 
EQUIP and related programs for 
treating antisocial behavior.
I
Ideal moral reciprocity. See Kohlberg’s 
moral theory; stages of under Moral 
judgment or evaluation; Reciprocity
Ideal speech, 3
Identity or self-concept, 129, 141, 143, 158, 
161–162, 164–165, 182–183, 222, 
250–251, 253–254, 272
See also Antisocial or externalizing 
problem behavior; Moral identity; 
Near-death experience
Impartial spectator. See condition of 
reversibility, interchangeability of 
perspectives, moral point of view, 
or third-person perspective under 
Moral judgment or evaluation
Inductive discipline. See Discipline, 
parental, and socialization or moral 
internalization

348 
■ Subject Index
Information-processing models. See 
Prosocial behavior
Interconnectedness, human, 16, 95–96, 
240, 249–253, 281
See also Morality or moral domain; 
Near-death experience; Reality
Internalization. See Discipline, parental, 
or socialization and moral 
internalization
Integrity. See Character ideals, qualities, or 
virtues
J
Just World Hypothesis or belief in a just 
world. See Reciprocity
Just Community programs, 190, 278
See also EQUIP and related programs for 
treating antisocial behavior
Justice. See Cognitive developmental 
approach to morality; Moral 
motivation
K
Kant or Kantian ethics, 3, 14, 33–34, 37, 
91–93, 95–97
See also Morality or moral domain
Kaszynski, Th eodore, 151
Kielburger, Craig, 220, 239–242, 249, 255, 
281
King, Martin Luther., Jr., 230
Knowledge, categories of. See Moral 
motivation
Kohlberg, Lawrence, 1, 10, 37, 39, 81, 97
See also Kohlberg’s moral theory
Kohlberg’s moral theory
adult moral development in, 91, 93–94, 
260
background, 81–84
contribution to fi eld of moral 
development, 11, 81
conventional level, 83–85, 88
Dewey’s emphasis on refl ection and 
trichotomy of levels, 81–84, 90, 97
elitism, 89–90
formal philosophy, 91
gender diff erences in moral judgment, 
273
Heinz dilemma, 83, 87, 89
invariant sequence, 82–84, 86–89, 91, 
95–97, 259–260
lifespan moral judgment development, 
94–97
longitudinal research, discoveries of, 
86–90
moral principles, 84, 91–92, 95, 145
moral types A/B, 88–89, 138–140, 144
Piaget’s phases, overhaul of, 84–86
preconventional level, 84, 90, 272
postconventional or principled level or 
post-skeptical rationalism, 84, 86, 
88–90, 93, 97, 272
“Stage 7” or cosmic perspective, 1, 11, 
16, 91–93, 95, 208, 230, 237–238, 
250–251, 255, 259, 263
stages as schemas, 77–78
transition 4 ½, 86–87, 92, 95
universality claims, 1, 73–75, 81–83, 
86, 90
See also Cognitive developmental 
approach to morality; Cosmic 
perspective or Kohlberg’s “Stage” 7; 
Gibbs’s lifespan view and critique 
of Kohlberg’s theory; Moral 
motivation; Social perspective-
taking or coordination of 
perspectives
L
Language-mediated association as mature 
mode of empathic arousal, 102, 
104–105, 275
See also Empathy or empathic 
predisposition; Hoff man’s moral 
theory
Lewis, C. S., 60, 207, 236
Life review. See Near-death experience
Logic or logico-mathematical knowledge. 
See Morality or moral domain; 
Moral judgment or evaluation; 
Moral motivation; Reality
Locality/non-locality. See Moral 
perception, reality and
Locus of control, internal, or self-effi  cacy 
theory. Prosocial behavior
Lord of the Flies (Golding), 59
Love

Subject Index 
■ 349
cosmic perspective or deeper reality and, 
92–93, 136, 207–208, 237, 240, 249
ideal moral reciprocity or justice and, 
8,148, 207–208, 236, 250, 252
empathic bias, 19, 236
near-death experience, 213–214, 220, 
230–234, 236–237, 251–252, 254, 
280
See also Hoff man’s moral theory
Love-withdrawal discipline. See Discipline, 
parental, or socialization and moral 
internalization
Loyalty or authority, morality and virtue 
of, 6
See also Haidt’s new synthesis or 
social intuitionist theory; Moral 
relativism
M
Mathematical substructures hidden 
in the workings of the world. 
See Reality
Maturity. See Empathy or empathic 
predisposition; EQUIP and related 
programs for treating antisocial 
behavior; Moral Judgment or 
evaluation
McVeigh, Timothy, 15, 148–151, 153, 
169–173, 178, 235, 255, 262
See also Antisocial or externalizing 
problem behavior
Member-of-society perspective. See 
conventional level under Cognitive 
developmental approach to 
morality
Metacognition. See Empathy or empathic 
predisposition; Moral judgment or 
evaluation
Might-makes-right philosophy, 93, 95–96
See also Gibbs’s two-phase lifespan view 
and critique of Kohlberg’s theory
Milgram experiment resisters. See 
Prosocial behavior
Mimicry as basic mode of empathic 
arousal, 101–104, 107–108, 116
See also Empathy or empathic 
predisposition
Moral circle, 4, 14, 119
See also empathic bias and multiple 
claimants dilemma under 
Hoff man’s moral theory; Social 
perspective-taking or coordination 
of perspectives
Moral courage. See Prosocial behavior
Moral or sociomoral development. See 
Cognitive developmental approach 
to morality; Empathy; Moral 
judgment or evaluation; Social 
perspective-taking or coordination 
of perspectives
Moral or prosocial education, 36, 115, 119, 
185, 190–191, 257, 271
See also EQUIP and related programs for 
treating antisocial behavior
Moral exemplars. See Prosocial behavior
Moral identity. See Moral motivation; 
Prosocial Behavior
Moral internalization. See Discipline, 
parental, or socialization and moral 
internalization
Moral Judgment Interview (MJI). See 
Moral judgment or evaluation
Moral Judgment of the Child (Piaget), 
82–83
Moral judgment or evaluation
assessment of stages, 71–74
condition of reversibility, 
interchangeability of perspectives, 
moral point of view, or third-
person perspective, 2–6, 11 13–14, 
35, 64–65, 69, 93, 205, 257, 265, 271
cross-cultural age trends, 73–75
defi nition, 39
developmental delay, 13, 169, 153–155, 
169, 186
forgiveness and, 66, 148–149
gender diff erences in, 273
Moral Judgment Interview, 86, 269, 274
moral reform and, 266
moral values, 82–3, 86, 90, 144–145, 
191, 269
retributive justice or vengeance, 61, 69, 
95, 148–149, 162, 173, 255, 259, 
271, 279
social institutions and the development 
of, 70

350 
■ Subject Index
Moral judgment or evaluation (Cont.)
Sociomoral Refl ection Measure-Short 
Form (SRM-SF), 72–76, 259
value of avoiding dilemma use, 
271–272
stages, 40, 50, 60–79, 84–97
See also Antisocial or externalizing 
problem behavior; Cognitive 
developmental approach to 
morality; EQUIP and related 
programs for treating antisocial 
behavior; Kohlberg’s moral theory; 
Reciprocity; Social perspective-
taking or coordination of 
perspectives;
Moral Life of Children, the (Coles), 17, 133
Moral motivation
aff ective primacy, 6, 10, 12–13, 21–22, 
25–27, 29, 68, 98, 121–123, 
134–136, 241–243, 245–247, 257, 
260–261, 267–269, 272–274, 281
cognitive primacy or violations of 
justice, 1, 3, 11, 13, 16, 18, 30, 38, 
40, 51, 53–56, 59–60, 66–68, 131, 
135–136, 241–243, 245–248, 259, 
272, 274
co-primacy or dual-process models, 3, 6, 
24, 30, 134–137, 240, 244, 248, 260, 
263, 267, 274.
eff ectance motive, 247, 272, 274
empirical knowledge and, 54, 78, 125 
242, 245–248
Kohlberg and Hoff man as guides to, 241
logico-mathematical or necessary 
knowledge and, 54–55, 78–79, 
242–248
moral identity as a source of, 13, 130, 
138, 142–143, 240, 276, 281
See also Cognitive developmental 
approach to morality; Empathy or 
empathic predisposition; Haidt’s 
new synthesis or social intuitionist 
theory; Hoff man’s moral theory; 
Moral judgment or evaluation; 
Reciprocity
Moral perception
information-processing models of, 
144–146
non-local reality and, 249–255, 279
See also Prosocial behavior; Reality
Moral point of view or third-person 
perspective. See condition of 
reversibility, interchangeability of 
perspectives, moral point of view, 
or third-person perspective under 
Moral judgment or evaluation
Moral principles. See Cognitive 
developmental approach to 
morality; Empathy or empathic 
predisposition; Kohlberg’s moral 
theory
Moral reciprocity. See Recipocity
Moral relativism, 2–4, 33, 36–38, 91, 
86–88, 92, 95, 258, 266, 270, 273
See also Morality or moral domain, 
objective basis of
Moral types A/B. See Kohlberg’s moral 
theory
Moral values. See Moral judgment or 
evaluation
Morality or moral domain,
ambiguity or confl ict in, 9–10
benefi cence as a principle, 8–9, 14, 117, 
246, 257, 268, 269, 273
defi nition, 6–10, 269
deontology, 247, 267
Greene’s argument, 266–267
logic or logical ideals and, 59–60, 207, 
243–244, 271
meta-ethical refl ection, 95
objective basis, 2–3, 5, 37, 17, 265, 279
panoramic memory 233,
purity (vs. disgust) and, 7–8
reality and, 249–255
social domain theory and, 265
twofold representation or the right and 
the good, 8–10, 79, 268
See also Cognitive developmental 
approach to morality; Empathy or 
empathic predisposition; Hoff man’s 
moral theory; Kant or Kantian 
ethics; condition of reversibility, 
interchangeability of perspectives, 
moral point of view, or third-
person perspective under Moral 
judgment or evaluation; Moral 
motivation; Reality; Reciprocity; 
Utilitarianism or utilitarian 
philosophy
Motivation. See Moral motivation

Subject Index 
■ 351
Multiple claimants dilemma. See Hoff man’s 
moral theory
Multi-Systemic Th erapy (MST), 190
See also EQUIP and related programs for 
treating antisocial behavior
Mutual help approach. See EQUIP and 
related programs for treating 
antisocial behavior
N
Narrative psychology, 3
See also Moral relativism; Vygotskian 
theory
Near-death experience
accurate, verifi able aspects or veridical 
perception, 222–225, 280
aft er eff ects, 212, 215, 230–233, 235–236, 
254
anomalies of, 218, 220, 229, 251, 
253–254
Asian accounts of, 217
case studies
Lowery, Pam Reynolds, 209–212, 215, 
227–231 237, 251–252, 280
Sawyer, Th omas, 209, 212–215, 218, 
230–231, 233, 235–236, 251–252, 254
connection or human 
interconnectedness, 16, 105–106, 
231, 237–238, 240, 249–253, 255, 
257, 281
contextual or cultural infl uence on 
content, 216–221
death, does near-death experience 
happen during near-, 227–229
defi nition and types, 16, 208, 217–219
dissociation and, 279
distressing versions, 218, 232
dying brain explanations of, 215, 224, 227
empathy and, 207, 254
existential crisis or development and, 11, 
16, 33, 91–92, 94, 95–97, 188, 208, 
216, 229–230, 232, 239, 250, 252, 
259, 263, 273
fabrication hypothesis, 227–229
forgiving life and, 252
hallucinations or dreams and, 215, 
219–222, 224, 227, 229, 274
incidence rate, 217
identity or self-concept, 221–222, 
250–251, 253–254
ineff ability, 213, 220–221, 229, 280
life review, 213–214, 217–218, 233–235, 
237, 252
light, 211, 213, 231–232, 279–280
oxygen deprivation or cerebral hypoxia, 
215, 224
panoramic memory, 233
proximity to death and, 226
real, do near-death experiencers 
interpret the experience as, 
221–222, 229
surprise in, 219–220
See also Consciousness or mind; 
Empathy or empathic 
predisposition; multiple claimants 
dilemma under Hoff man’s moral 
theory; Love; Reality; “Stage 
7” or cosmic perspective under 
Kohlberg’s moral theory
Negative youth culture. See EQUIP and 
related programs for treating 
antisocial behavior
Neo-nativist or nativist views. See Haidt’s 
new synthesis or social intuitionist 
theory; moral relativism
Newborn reactive cry as immature stage of 
empathic distress, 102, 107
See also Empathy or empathic 
predisposition; Hoff man’s moral 
theory
Nietzchean perspectivism, 4, 14, 28
See also Moral relativism
Nonsocial cognition. See Cognitive 
developmental approach to 
morality; Conservation knowledge/
task
Nurturance or parental warmth. See 
Discipline, parental, or socialization 
and moral internalization
O 
Objectivity. See Rationality or rational 
agency; Morality or moral domain
P
Paranoid behavior and assuming the worst, 
163, 171
See also Cognitive distortion or 
thinking errors, self-serving or 
aggressogenic

352 
■ Subject Index
Parental discipline. See Discipline, 
parental, or socialization and moral 
internalization
Peer interaction. See Piaget’s theory; Social 
perspective-taking or coordination 
of perspectives
Perspective-taking. See Social perspective-
taking or coordination of 
perspectives
Piaget, Jean. See Piaget’s theory
Piaget’s theory
adaptation and development, 78–79, 
243–244, 263
construction or social construction, 1, 
29, 40, 51–53, 55–61, 63, 65, 69, 
78–81, 84–85, 93, 97, 125, 131, 135, 
142, 166, 207, 215, 244–247, 249, 
253, 259, 267, 270
critiques of, 40
decentration or mental coordination, 
3, 11, 30, 34, 40, 43–44, 48–49, 
51–52, 55, 61, 79, 85, 95, 114, 
147, 246
domain-general view, 270
equilibration/disequilibration, 
equilibrium, assimilation, or 
accommodation, 56–57, 62, 65, 
76–78, 88, 186, 246, 251, 254, 272
heteronomy, 41, 84
infl uence on Kohlberg, 81–84
invariant sequence, 82–84, 86–89, 91, 
96–97, 259–260
logic or rationality inherent in social 
relations, 39, 78
moral judgment phases, 75–77, 82–83, 
106, 259, 272
peer interaction, 56–59, 69–71, 96
refl ective abstraction, 65
See also Bias, egocentric or 
confi rmation; Cognitive 
developmental approach to 
morality; Social construction; 
Kohlberg’s moral theory; 
Schemas
Positive Peer Culture. See EQUIP and 
related programs for treating 
antisocial behavior
Postconventional level. See Kohlberg’s 
moral theory
Post-modernism, 3, 265, 270
Power-assertive discipline. See Discipline, 
parental, or socialization and moral 
internalization
Pragmatic moral reciprocity. See Moral 
judgment or evaluation, stages of
Preconventional level. See Kohlberg’s moral 
theory
Primacy in moral motivation. See Moral 
motivation
Proactive aggression. See Aggression, 
proactive or reactive, under Antisocial 
or externalizing problem behavior
Prosocial behavior
case study, 133–137, 140
defi nition, 133, 273
ego strength, willpower, or self-control 
and, 13, 16, 130, 143–144, 146–148, 
151,172, 239, 261, 274
empathy and, 99–100, 121–122, 143, 151
false or spurious “moral” exemplars, 
148–151, 170
fi eld independence, Moral Type B, or 
veridical moral perception
and, 139–146, 276
individual diff erences in, 137–144
information-processing models and, 
144–146
locus of control, internal, or self-effi  cacy 
belief, 118, 139, 143–144, 146, 148, 
261
Milgram experiment resisters, 140, 
143–144
moral exemplars, moral courage, or 
whistle-blowers, 13, 31, 34,90, 100, 
113, 119, 136–151, 236, 238–239, 
255, 257, 261, 273, 276
moral identity and, 13, 77, 118, 129, 133, 
140–144, 146, 186, 198, 239–241, 
255, 257, 261, 276
moral judgment stage and, 143–144, 
148–149
social perspective-taking or 
coordination of perspectives and, 
121–122,
See also Discipline, parental, or 
socialization and moral 
internalization; Empathy or 
empathic predisposition; moral 
Types A/B under Kohlberg’s moral 
theory; Moral motivation

Subject Index 
■ 353
Psychopathy or callous and unemotional 
traits. See Antisocial or 
externalizing problem behavior
Purity (vs. disgust), 5–8, 17–18, 20–24, 26, 
32, 34, 37, 204–205, 247, 257, 278. 
See also Moral relativism
Q
Quantum reality. See local and nonlocal, 
subatomic, or quantum under 
Reality
R
Rationality or rational agency, 2–3, 7, 26–27, 
31, 33–34, 36, 39, 59, 71–72, 136, 
146, 205–206, 265, 267, 270, 274
See also rationality, reason, or truth, view 
of, under Haidt’s new synthesis or 
social intuitionist theory; objective 
basis under Morality or moral 
domain
Rationalism
critiques of Piaget’s theory as conscious, 
269
post-skeptical, 88
Rawls’s theory of justice, 90, 93
See also Gibbs’s two-phase and lifespan 
view and critique of Kohlberg’s 
theory
Reactive aggression. See Aggression, 
proactive or reactive, under 
Antisocial or externalizing problem 
behavior
Reality
cognitive developmental approach to 
morality and a deeper, 1, 53, 239
conservation knowledge and perception 
of a deeper, 53, 140, 248–249
ideal moral reciprocity and a deeper, 
207–208
Kohlberg’s, Hoff man’s, and Haidt’s 
theories, venturing beyond, 208
local and non-local, subatomic, or 
quantum, 249, 250–255, 281
substructures or logico-mathematical 
underpinnings, 82, 206–207, 236, 
244, 248, 254–255, 257, 278–279
moral perception or inspiration and a 
deeper, 249–255
paradox of, 249, 252, 254, 264, 279
See also Kohlberg’s “Stage 7” or cosmic 
perspective under Kohlberg’s moral 
theory; Near-death experience;
Reciprocity
activation of, 145
empathy and principle of, 121
equality and, 2, 53–54, 56–57, 136
germinal roots or precursors, 23, 35, 61
Just World Hypothesis or belief in a just 
world, 102, 105 114–115
ideal moral reciprocity or reciprocity as 
constructed ideal, 3–4, 11, 29, 56, 
63, 67–70, 72 80, 84–85, 93, 95–96, 
105, 133, 136, 142, 145, 149, 151, 
191, 205, 207–208, 237, 243, 246, 
252, 259, 271
moral reciprocity as societal norm, 
55–57, 68, 266
nonsocial cognition and, 55–56
primate societies and, 61–63
strong, 67
See also stages under Cognitive-
developmental approach to 
morality; Morality or moral domain; 
cognitive primacy or violations of 
justice under Moral motivation
Reframing, aggression inhibition, and 
moral development, 119–120
See also EQUIP and related programs 
for treating antisocial behavior
Relativism, moral or cultural. See Moral 
relativism
Relaxation techniques. See cognitive 
behavioral approach under EQUIP 
and related programs for treating 
antisocial behavior
Reversibility, condition of. See Moral 
judgment or evaluation
Reynolds, Pam. See Near-death experience, 
case studies.
“Right and Wrong as a Clue to the 
Meaning of the Universe” (Lewis, 
C. S.), 207
Rural or village cultures and the near-death 
experience, 217
See also Near-death experience
S
Sawyer, Th omas. See Near-death 
experience

354 
■ Subject Index
Schemas, 11, 40, 73, 77–79, 82–83, 105, 
107, 122–123, 127, 131, 140–142, 
145–146, 148, 151, 155–156, 
167–168, 174, 196, 216, 219, 
229, 240, 242–243, 245–246, 
248, 250–251, 272, 284
See also Eff ectance motive; stages under 
Moral judgment or evaluation
Self-awareness. See self-other distinction, 
self-awareness, or self-recognition 
under Empathy or empathic 
predisposition; existential 
development under Gibbs’s two-
phase lifespan view and critique of 
Kohlberg’s theory
Self-control. See ego strength, willpower, 
or self-control under Prosocial 
behavior
Self-effi  cacy. See locus of control, internal, 
or self-effi  cacy theory
Self-serving or aggressogenic cognitive 
distortions or thinking errors. See 
Antisocial or externalizing problem 
behavior
Social construction, 40, 51–53, 56–59, 65, 
85, 125, 142, 259, 270
See also development or construction 
as distinct from socialization or 
internalization under Cognitive 
developmental approach to 
morality
Social contract or libertarian theories, 86, 
88, 91, 93–95
Social domain theory or social 
conventions, 3, 8, 265
Social intuitionist theory or cultural 
psychology. See Haidt’s new 
synthesis or social intuitionist 
theory
Social perspective-taking or coordination 
of perspectives
appreciation of human diversity and, 4
defi nition, 1–2, 157
empathy or caring and, 15, 101–102, 
122,151, 203–205, 212, 275, 277
inadequate, self-serving, or 
manipulative, 131, 156–158
expansion of moral circle or scope and, 
1–2, 69–71
near-death experience or deeper reality 
and, 16, 208, 234–236
role-taking, opportunities for, 68, 70–71, 
104–105, 274
research evaluation, 70–71
time-out technique and, 275
See also cognitive distortions or 
thinking errors, self-serving or 
aggressogenic, under Antisocial or 
externalizing problem behavior; 
Bias, egocentric or confi rmation; 
Social construction; Empathy 
or empathic predisposition; 
EQUIP and related programs for 
treating antisocial behavior; Moral 
judgment or evaluation; Th eory of 
mind
Socialization. See Discipline, parental, 
or socialization and moral 
internalization
Social skills, 13, 133, 167, 174
See also Antisocial or externalizing 
problem behavior; EQUIP and 
related programs for treating 
antisocial behavior
Sociomoral Refl ection Measure—Short 
Form (SRM-SF). See Moral 
judgment or evaluation
Spetzler, Robert, 209, 227, 254, 279
Stages. See Cognitive developmental 
approach to morality; Empathy or 
empathic predisposition; Kohlberg’s 
moral theory; Moral judgment or 
evaluation
Sympathy. See Empathy or empathic 
predisposition
T
Texas Youth Commission Capital Off ender 
Group program, 203
See also EQUIP and related programs for 
treating antisocial behavior
Th eory of mind, 45
See also Social perspective-taking or 
coordination of perspectives
Th inking errors and antisocial behavior. 
See cognitive distortions or 
thinking errors, self-serving or 
aggressogenic, under Antisocial or 

Subject Index 
■ 355
externalizing problem behavior; 
EQUIP and related programs for 
treating antisocial behavior
Time-out technique, 255, 275
Toronto Star, 242, 245
Transcendental near-death experience. See 
defi nition and types under Near-
death experience
Transgression guilt. See Discipline, 
parental, or socialization and moral 
internalization
Turiel, Elliot, 1, 3, 32, 86
See also Social domain theory
12-Step programs, 200
See also EQUIP and related programs for 
treating antisocial behavior
U
Unidimensional thinking. See Cognitive 
developmental approach to 
morality
Utilitarianism or utilitarian philosophy, 3, 
8, 37, 81, 247, 266–267
See also Greene’s argument.
Universal morality, Kohlberg’s search for, 
11, 73, 81–82, 86
See also Kohlberg’s moral theory; 
Morality or moral domain; Moral 
judgment or evaluation
V
Victim Awareness programs, 203, 278
See also EQUIP and related programs 
for treating antisocial behavior
Virtues. See Character ideals, qualities, or 
virtues
Vygotskian theory, 3, 65–66, 85, 125, 
271. See also Zone of proximal 
development
W
Willpower. See ego strength, willpower, 
or self-control under Prosocial 
behavior
Working memory or executive attention. 
See Cognitive developmental 
approach to morality
Y
Yanomamo Indians, 69, 255
Youth Charter Programs, 190
Youth culture or Positive Peer Culture. See 
EQUIP and related programs for 
treating antisocial behavior
Z
Zahn-Waxler, Carolyn, 12, 98, 111
Zone of proximal development, 85, 271

