tion,” he says, as speech became the pre-
ferred modality for communication for vari-
ous reasons, such as the need to free the
hands for work or to talk in the dark.
But others believe equally strongly that
even if movement and language are insepara-
ble, language is primarily an oral, not manual,
behavior. Psychologist Peter MacNeilage of
the University of Texas, Austin, has devel-
oped a theory that monkey oral behaviors
(not vocalizations) are precursors of human
syllables, and he argues that the mirror neu-
ron system—especially the recent discovery
of neurons that respond to lip smacking and
nut cracking—bolsters his ideas.
MacNeilage suggests that the brain’s sup-
plementary motor area (an area adjacent to
the primary motor cortex that is important for
motor memory and sequential movements)
controls the physical constraints on vocal ex-
pression. The actions of chewing, sucking,
and licking took on communicative 
content—a job for Broca’s predecessor—
in the form of lip smacks, tongue smacks,
and teeth chatters. The next stage, says 
MacNeilage, was to give voice to these be-
haviors by bringing the larynx into play. This
theory fits well with the fact that the unique
sounds of click languages, which some spec-
ulate may have been the original mother
tongue (see next story), do not use the 
larynx. Once the larynx was involved, a
phonology—a set of sounds that could be
combined in endless ways to form a large 
vocabulary—developed, and this in turn
paved the way for the emergence of syntax.
“I don’t believe manual gestural commu-
nication got to the point of the combinatorial
phonology that I’m talking about, because if
it did we’d still have it,” says MacNeilage. In
his view, if sign language had become that
complex, there would have been no reason
strong enough—the desire to talk in the
dark notwithstanding—to cause a transition
to vocal speech. “Nobody who argues that
we went from sign to speech has given us an
adequate translation theory,” he says.
Others say the “which came first” debate
is beside the point. “Evolution selected the
ability to combine speech and gesture under
a meaning,” says McNeill. “The combina-
tion was the essential property”; neither ges-
ture nor speech could have evolved without
the other, he says. It doesn’t matter which
came first, agrees Zuberbühler: “Once an
individual reaches a certain threshold in its
cognitive sophistication, it will inevitably
express itself in a sophisticated way,”
through any means at its command, he says.
The deepest questions—such as how hu-
mans became symbolic thinkers and devel-
oped “theory of mind,” or awareness of oth-
ers’ thought processes—remain far from re-
solved. Researchers say one way to tackle
them will be through ever-finer brain imag-
ing technology so they can, as Bickerton
puts it, “find out the flow chart for a sen-
tence in the brain.” Harvard’s Hauser and
colleagues believe that research in animals
may identify behavioral analogs for “recur-
sion”: the ability to string words together in
infinite hierarchical combinations. Arbib
predicts that the discovery of other types of
mirror systems, in both humans and ani-
mals, will help yield a better “taxonomy” of
the language conundrum, especially if bol-
stered by computational modeling. But an-
swers won’t come all at once. “I see this as
a process of gradual convergence. The
problem space is shrinking” at long last,
says Bickerton. “It will be solved when that
space goes to zero, not when someone
comes up with the killer solution.”
–CONSTANCE HOLDEN
1319
www.sciencemag.org
SCIENCE
VOL 303
27 FEBRUARY 2004
CREDIT: NIGEL CRAWHALL
E V O L U T I O N
O F L A N G U A G E
SPECIAL SECTION
N E W S  
The First Language?
Genetic and linguistic data indicate—but can’t quite prove—that our ancient 
ancestors spoke with strange clicking noises
In the 1980 movie The Gods Must Be
Crazy, a soda bottle falls out of the sky and
lands among some strange-sounding
Africans. Their excited chatter, punctuated
by rapid-fire sucking and clicking noises,
sounded intriguing but alien to audiences
around the world. But a handful of studies
of this seemingly esoteric language suggest
that our early ancestors depended on such
clicks to communicate. The latest linguistic
work points to clicks as having deep roots,
originating at the limits of linguistic analy-
sis sometime earlier than 10,000 years ago,
and genetic data suggest that click-speaking
populations go back to a common ancestor
perhaps 50,000 or more years ago.
Although the idea is far from proven, “it
seems plausible that the population that was
ancestral to all living humans lived in the sa-
vanna and used clicks,” says vertebrate sys-
tematist Alec Knight of Stanford University.
Knight estimates that today only about
120,000 people rely on these odd sounds.
Even so, they are providing new insights into
how humans evolved the gift of gab, particu-
larly when researchers add up the results of
different kinds of data. “There’s a lot of
mileage to be gained by cross-referencing
linguistic, genetic, and archaeological data
and theories,” says Nigel Crawhall, a gradu-
ate student studying click languages at the
University of Cape Town, South Africa. 
Clicks in context
Today clicks are part of typical conversation
for about 30 groups of people, most from
Botswana, Namibia, South Africa, and
nearby. The only recognized non-
African click language is Damin, an ex-
tinct Australian aboriginal language
used only during manhood initiation
ceremonies. Among African click
speakers, daily conversations can be
dominated by clicks, and sometimes
verbal sounds drop out completely.
Adept tongue and inward air move-
ments distinguish clicks from other
nonverbal utterances. They are really
just very strongly pronounced conso-
nants, says Amanda Miller-Ockhuizen,
a linguist at Cornell University in Itha-
ca, New York. Click speakers have
click sounds in common, but they have
different words and therefore very dif-
ferent languages.* Some researchers ar-
gue that click languages are far more
different from each other than English
is from Japanese.
But that diversity is only now being
All alone. Researchers ponder why the Hadzabe live
so far from other click speakers.
* To hear click sounds, go to hctv.humnet.
ucla.edu/depar tments/linguistics/
VowelsandConsonants/index.html

27 FEBRUARY 2004
VOL 303
SCIENCE
www.sciencemag.org
1320
appreciated. In the 1960s, the influential
Stanford linguist Joseph Greenberg put all
click languages under one umbrella, which
he named the Khoisan language family after
the two biggest groups included: herders
known as Khoe and hunter-gatherers called
San. Now, however, historical linguists are
challenging Greenberg’s classification, ex-
amining Khoisan with more stringent ana-
lytical methods and splitting it into several
language groups. “It’s been easy to say they
are all in one family,” says Bonny Sands,
a linguist at Northern Arizona University
in Flagstaff, “because nobody has gone
and looked.” 
The latest work divides the Khoisan
family into at least three geographically
and linguistically distinct ones. And a few
of these languages don’t fit in any known
families, Crawhall notes. For example, in
1995 Sands reexamined the grammar,
meanings, and sounds of Hadzane, spo-
ken by about 1000 Hadzabe people in
north-central Tanzania, 2000 kilometers
away from the majority of click speakers.
She “proved that Hadzane cannot be
shown to be related to any of the other
families,” says Crawhall. Rather, says
Sands, linguistically Hadzane is unlike
any other known language. 
That suggests that either Hadzane had
a separate origin from other click
tongues or that it and other existing click
languages derive from a very ancient
protoclick language. Sands thinks that
there have always been multiple click
languages, but “if there was originally
only one click family, it must be many
tens of thousands of years old,” she says.
That’s further back than linguistic studies
can establish.
Tracking ancient populations
But genetic data on click speakers have also
been streaming in, and these results can of-
fer a glimpse into the more distant past. In
1991, one study hinted that Hadzabe were
an ancient people based on the great diver-
sity in their DNA; mutations accumulate
over time, so diverse sequences imply an
ancient population. Most recently, at a
physical anthropology meeting last year,
human geneticist Sarah Tishkoff of the Uni-
versity of Maryland, College Park, reported
great diversity in the DNA of the Hadzabe
and another click-speaking group in eastern
Africa, the Sandawe.  
The puzzling origins of these groups and
their clicks intrigued Knight and Stanford an-
thropological geneticist Joanna Mountain.
Last year, they decided to use genetic data to
decipher the relationship between the isolated
Hadzabe and the San in southern Africa. They
thought that perhaps the Hadzabe had recent-
ly moved into Tanzania from the south, bring-
ing clicks with them, or that the San had been
part of a northern group that migrated south.
“We expected a recent shared heritage, but the
data indicated something opposite [from the
recent origins] we expected,” Knight recalls. 
Knight, Mountain, and their colleagues
examined mitochondrial DNA and parts of
the Y chromosome from 49 Hadzabe and
about 60 people from three other Tanzanian
populations. They also gathered Y chromo-
some data from a San group, the Ju|’hoansi
(also known as the !Kung) from Namibia
and Botswana, and two non–click-speaking
groups in central Africa. 
Similar patterns in certain DNA segments
indicate relatedness—and the Hadzabe and
San turned out not to be closely related at all.
The genetic sequences suggest that the two
went separate ways very early on in their his-
tories; neither group had migrated recently
either northward or southward to bring clicks
to the other. “The research suggests that the
Hadzabe are the descendants of one of the
first groups to split off” from an ancient pool
of click speakers, says Crawhall. 
Some researchers think the split between
the Hadzabe and all other click speakers
could have been as early as 100,000 years
ago, but Knight puts it between 70,000 and
50,000 years ago. That’s roughly the time
frame proposed for the exodus of modern hu-
mans out of Africa, which some say might
have been spurred by the development of lan-
guage itself. But Knight warns that the dating
is the most tentative part of their study. 
Such an early origin for clicks appeals to
linguist Michael Corballis of the University
of Auckland, New Zealand, who has argued
for years that 100,000 years ago, our only
“words” were gestures: a flick of a finger, a
twirl of the wrist, and so on (see p. 1316).
“It may be that clicks themselves date back
to a time when language was not 
autonomously vocal; they were a kind of
[preverbal] way of adding sound,” or a step-
pingstone to human speech, he says.
Knight thinks that only groups that re-
tained ancestral hunting lifestyles continued
to need clicks, and other click languages died
out when early humans moved into new envi-
ronments. That fits with evidence from living
Hadzabe, who told Knight that when they
hunt, they use clicks—and verbal talk disap-
pears. Filmmaker John Marshall of Docu-
mentary Educational Resources in Water-
town, Massachusetts, who has made dozens
of films of click speakers, has noted this too.
“I know from experience that using only
clicks to communicate works well when
stalking game,” he explains. He and Knight
suggest that whereas voices can spook ani-
mals, clicks mimic rustling grass, a typical
sound on the dry savanna and one less likely
to send game running.
Plausible as it all sounds, the theory of
clicks as the first language is by no means
proven. Even though Knight’s work ex-
pands on Sands’s ideas about the history of
clicks, she’s worried that Knight may be
pushing his data too far. Genetic and lan-
guage evolution don’t necessarily go hand
in hand. “The most he can say is that [the
two] are correlative,” she says. Thus there’s
no way to prove whether clicks made up
the mother tongue, she argues.
Meanwhile, some researchers, such as
linguistic historian Christopher Ehret of the
University of California, Los Angeles, still
stand by Greenberg’s all-inclusive family for
the click languages and downplay the genet-
ic data. Furthermore, whereas most re-
searchers insist that all clicks stem ultimate-
ly from the same ancestral tongue, Sands
wonders whether clicks might have evolved
several times, with Damin in Australia and
Hadzane as examples. “Clicks are part of
the normal language mechanism that people
have,” Sands notes, and children make
clicks as they are learning to speak.
All agree that nothing can be settled with-
out more work. Knight and Mountain are
seeking DNA from more groups, and Sands
and Crawhall are scrambling to bag more
click languages for the linguists’ portfolio.
Sands worries that they can’t work fast
enough; one group has just 10 speakers left.
But as the data stream in, Knight remains op-
timistic. “In the year 2000, we didn’t know
anything compared to what we know now,”
he says.
–ELIZABETH PENNISI
CREDIT:ANTHONY BANNISTER/GALLO IMAGE/CORBIS
E V O L U T I O N
O F L A N G U A G E
SPECIAL SECTION
Silent stalkers. !Kung hunters may use clicks while
sneaking up on prey in the savanna.

