EXPERT REVIEW
The dappled nature of causes of psychiatric illness:
replacing the organic–functional/hardware–software
dichotomy with empirically based pluralism
KS Kendler
Department of Psychiatry, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, USA
Our tendency to see the world of psychiatric illness in dichotomous and opposing terms has
three major sources: the philosophy of Descartes, the state of neuropathology in late
nineteenth century Europe (when disorders were divided into those with and without
demonstrable pathology and labeled, respectively, organic and functional), and the influential
concept of computer functionalism wherein the computer is viewed as a model for the human
mind–brain system (brain = hardware, mind = software). These mutually re-enforcing dichoto-
mies, which have had a pernicious influence on our field, make a clear prediction about how
‘difference-makers’ (aka causal risk factors) for psychiatric disorders should be distributed in
nature. In particular, are psychiatric disorders like our laptops, which when they dysfunction,
can be cleanly divided into those with software versus hardware problems? I propose
11 categories of difference-makers for psychiatric illness from molecular genetics through
culture and review their distribution in schizophrenia, major depression and alcohol
dependence. In no case do these distributions resemble that predicted by the organic–
functional/hardware–software dichotomy. Instead, the causes of psychiatric illness are
dappled, distributed widely across multiple categories. We should abandon Cartesian and
computer-functionalism-based dichotomies as scientifically inadequate and an impediment to
our ability to integrate the diverse information about psychiatric illness our research has
produced. Empirically based pluralism provides a rigorous but dappled view of the etiology of
psychiatric illness. Critically, it is based not on how we wish the world to be but how the
difference-makers for psychiatric illness are in fact distributed.
Molecular Psychiatry (2012) 17, 377–388; doi:10.1038/mp.2011.182; published online 10 January 2012
Keywords: alcohol dependence; dualism; etiology; major depression; psychiatric illness;
schizophrenia
Glory be to God for dappled things —
For skies of couple-colour as a brinded cow;
For rose-moles in all stipple upon trout that swim;
Fresh-firecoal chestnut-falls; finches’ wings;
Landscape plotted and pieced — fold, fallow, and plough;
And all trades, their gear and tackle and trimy
Pied Beauty, Gerard Manley Hopkins (1844–1889)1
The difficulties [in understanding the etiology of insanity]
are, in the first place, due to the fact that, as a rule, a
number of causal factors work together to induce the
resultant insanity.
Richard von Krafft-Ebing (1840–1902),2 (p. 136)
Psychiatry
has
been
confused
long
enough
by
Descartes’ error. Famously, he postulated that the
human mind/brain system (HMBS) was constituted
from two fundamentally different kinds of ‘stuff’: the
brain, which was made up of physical ‘stuff’ and
occupied space, and the mind, which was made up
of thinking ‘stuff’ and was insubstantial. Critically, in
the Cartesian worldview, mind and brain became
incompatible and opposing ways of thinking about
causes of human behavior.
The profound impact of Descartes’ dualistic think-
ing on psychiatry is best understood through the lens
of two subsequent historical developments. The first
occurred in the late nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries where foundations were laid for the modern
disciplines of psychiatry and neurology.3,4 Applying
the
rapidly
improving
techniques
of
gross
and
microscopic neuropathology, some disorders of the
HMBS were consistently associated with neuropatho-
logical
findings
and
others
were
not.
Although
diverse influences were at play, Cartesian philosophy
and nineteenth century neuropathology were major
contributors to the bargain from which emerged the
modern fields of psychiatry and neurology. Neurology
dealt with disorders of the HMBS that produced
Received 11 August 2011; revised 24 October 2011; accepted 6
December 2011; published online 10 January 2012
Correspondence: Dr KS Kendler, Department of Psychiatry, Virginia
Commonwealth University, VCU PO Box 980126, Richmond 23298,
VA, USA.
E-mail: kendler@vcu.edu
Molecular Psychiatry (2012) 17, 377–388
& 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited
All rights reserved 1359-4184/12
www.nature.com/mp

consistent
neuropathological
findings.
Psychiatry
got what was left. Disorders were either organic (aka
brain based) or functional (aka mind based).
In the second major development, in the latter
third of the twentieth century, the digital computer
came to influence many aspects of modern life. More
importantly for our purposes, the computer gave rise
to the functionalist view of the HMBS. In function-
alism—the dominant philosophical approach to the
mind–body problem to this day5—the HMBS is
understood
as
an
information-processing
system
directly analogous to a digital computer. The brain
is the hardware. The mind is the software consti-
tuted
by
many
information-processing
programs
‘running’ in the brain. The computer functionalist
conceptualization of the HMBS postulates a sharp
division between its two parts: hardware and soft-
ware.
The influences of this dualistic view on psychiatry,
derived
from
a
‘perfect
storm’
of
Cartesianism,
nineteenth century neuropathology and computer
functionalism, are legion. Most important has been
the functional–organic dichotomy that has dominated
major conceptualizations in psychiatry for over a
century. An especially pernicious feature of this
approach is its ‘either/or’ ness. Disorders are either
organic/hardware or functional/software problems.
The effects of the functional–organic dichotomy
are insidious. It has been officially dropped from our
nosology with DSM-IV,6 and most modern psychia-
trists and neuroscientists when pressed will deny
being dualists, insisting that they are ‘eclectic’ and/or
fully recognize that psychiatric disorders are ‘multi-
factorial.’ Yet, their actions belie their words. In the
ways that we think about patients and their treat-
ments, and the etiology of our disorders a strong
tendency remains for us to emphasize either a
mentalistic mind-based or a biological brain-based
view of illness.7
The term ‘mental’ is still in the title of our
diagnostic manual and the section of the National
Institutes of Health that funds much of our research.
Although we might wish that this term would reflect
only
the psychological
nature of
the symptoms
displayed by our patients (delusions, sadness and
panic attacks, which are all experienced subjectively
in the first person), inevitably the term ‘mental’
carries with it connotations of etiology—mental and
not physical, mind and not brain, functional and not
organic. The problem with this approach, which
remains embedded in our vocabulary and way of
thinking, is that it assumes a discontinuity in the
HMBS that does not exist in nature.
Let me now give two vignettes to ‘bring home’ this
point—the deep influence of the ‘either/or’ ness of
the organic functional divide within our field. First,
Gary Greenberg is recounting a contact with his
dynamically
oriented
psychotherapist
in
which
Greenberg is describing to her his severe anxiety in
the setting of a depressive episode (Greenberg8 p. 19,
italics in the original).
‘‘Well, what do you think this means?’’ she asked y.
‘‘Maybe nothing. I have to say, it felt, I don’t know,
biological.’’
‘‘Biological? You mean, like there are little bugs
swimming in your blood or something, making you
feel dread?’’
‘‘She said this as if it were the most preposterous idea
in the world, as if anyone who believed it was either
evading the truth or just plain deluded.’’
Contrary to much data available then and now,
Greenberg’s therapist assumed a priori that the expla-
nation of his depressive symptoms was functional—
in the realm of the mind. The second vignette is a
personal story from earlier in my training, when I
was reviewing with a senior biological psychiatry
colleague my struggles trying to help a young man
with schizophrenia (SZ) to gain insight into the
unreality of his frequent referential perceptions. This
colleague’s reaction was, ‘I can see wanting to
medicate him, but spending a lot of time talking?
That is like playing with a computer that is badly
broken. Why would you want to do that?’ This senior
clinician assumed a priori that all SZ symptoms were
brain based and, therefore, trying to improve them by
cognitive therapy was a waste of time (again, contrary
to evidence9,10).
Before proceeding, let me pause to do a bit of
needed philosophy. Our experience of the HBMS
has an important discontinuity in it. Only we can
experience our own consciousness directly and in the
first person. However, we have shared experience
with others in the third person of behaviors, self-
reports, and scientific observations of various aspects
of brain structure and function. So from the perspec-
tive of knowledge—what philosophers call epistemo-
logy—the HMBS has an important first and third
person divide. But in terms of what exists—what
philosophers call ontology—no such discontinuity
exists. The HMBS provides us many levels of analysis
with no fundamental difference between psycho-
logical and physical phenomenon. Although this is
not the place to delve deeply into the metaphysics of
the mind–body problem, I here assume non-reductive
physicalism, which posits that psychological pro-
cesses arise in a non-spooky manner from the brain.11
In so doing, these processes have direct causal effects
which are not, at least in practical terms, reducible to
brain function. So, ontologically, no discontinuity in
the HMBS exists in nature.
In a continuation of a line of thought developed in
previous essays,11,12 I seek to disentangle psychiatry
from dualistic thinking through an analysis of the
causal factors that research has shown to contribute to
psychiatric and substance use disorders. Descartes’
error and computer functionalism assume that psy-
chiatric disorders should naturally sort themselves
into two groups: brain/hardware based and mind/
software based. But in reality, psychiatric distur-
bances, all of which arise in the HMBS, reflect a
multi-layered ‘dappled’ world on which many causal
processes impact and intertwine in their influences.
Empirically based pluralism
KS Kendler
378
Molecular Psychiatry

In reviewing these causal factors, I am looking at
how nature has distributed her ‘difference-makers’
with respect to psychiatric illness. Let me clarify this
key concept. Imagine I strike a match and light a
candle. The candle’s lighting requires a whole range
of background factors such as oxygen in the atmo-
sphere, a match that strikes and a candle that lights.
But my action was the difference-maker in that if
I had not struck the match, despite the presence of all
the other background factors, the candle would not be
lit. In philosophy, the concept of a difference-maker
reflects the counterfactual or ‘interventionist’ theory
of causality13,14 and is similar to what epidemiologists
would call a risk factor. Being exposed to a difference-
maker increases the probability of illness but the
difference-maker need not be necessary or sufficient.
This paper has a central thought experiment that
generates a clear prediction for the results of psychia-
tric research. I will show that this prediction is false.
You come to work in the morning and turn on your
computer. Instead of the reassuring welcoming screen,
you get a garbled mess. In a panic, for you have much
work to do before seeing your first patient, you call your
IT support person. She arrives quickly and reassuringly
gets to work. You chat with her about the problems of
differential diagnosis. There are, she says, two main
possibilities. Either it is a software problem—perhaps a
virus that came with that music video you downloaded
last
night—or
a
hardware
problem—perhaps
your
mother board needs to be replaced. ‘‘Is it that clear’’
you ask, ‘‘either hardware or software?’’ ‘‘Yes’’ she
replies.
So, if we took all malfunctioning computers, we could,
with minimal overlap, divide them into those with
software problems and those with hardware problems.
The ‘‘treatment’’ approach differs dramatically—that is
downloading an anti-viral software program and setting
it to work, or taking out your motherboard and shipping
it off for a replacement.
Does this story represent a good model for psychiatric
illness as Descartes and computer functionalism
might wish us to believe? We could live in a universe
where psychiatric disorders were like dysfunctional
computers where problems arose either from the
hardware or the software. But, as I show, we do not.
My argument has a short and a long version. The
short version begins with a long list of difference-
makers that alter risk for psychiatric and substance
use disorders by impacting on the HMBS largely
through psychological and social processes. These
would include such factors as poor parenting,15
childhood
sexual
abuse,16
stressful
life
events,17
severe trauma exposure,18 coping strategies,19 social
support,20 and exposure to deviant peers.21 These risk
factors and others like them contribute etiologically to
most psychiatric disorders. The next step in the
argument is to note that genetic risk factors—which
impact on the HMBS through DNA base pair variation
influencing
protein
abundance
or
structure
and
eventually brain function—have been shown to be
etiologically important in all major psychiatric and
substance
use
disorders.22
Therefore,
with
little
fuss, we can conclude that for most psychiatric
disorders, risk of the illness-related dysfunction of
the HMBS results from processes at both psycho-
logical and neurobiological levels. Therefore, the idea
that psychiatric disorders and patients can, like
dysfunctional computers, be cleanly sorted into those
with mental = software problems and brain = hard-
ware problems, is false.
Although succinct, this argument is a bit facile. Let
me therefore turn to my more ambitious second
argument. I seek to implement the concept of a
‘causal signature’ for psychiatric disorders: a bird’s
eye view of the distribution of known difference-
makers. I will review succinctly and selectively
difference-makers for three well-studied psychiatric
disorders: SZ (a relatively rare high heritability
disorder often seen as epitomizing the more ‘organic’
end of psychopathology), major depression (MD)
(a common disorder with strong environmental risk
factors often seen as having an important ‘functional’
component) and alcohol dependence (AD) (a sub-
stance use disorder that demonstrates the special set
of difference-makers so associated).
Will the causal signatures resemble those predicted
for computers? Will we see all the causal factors
clustered either at the hardware/brain end of the
continuum or the software/mental end? Or, will we
see a much more ‘dappled’ world with difference-
makers sprinkled across many levels?
Causal signatures need a heuristic structure of
levels at which causal effects impact on risk for
psychiatric and substance use disorders. I assume
three super-ordinate categories (biological, psycho-
logical and ‘higher-order’) each with sub-categories
that
roughly
approximate
a
progression
from
‘simpler’ to more ‘complex’. I assume five categories
of biological effects: (i) molecular genetic, (ii) mole-
cular/neurochemical
neuroscience,
(iii)
systems
neuroscience (including both anatomy and function),
(iv) aggregate genetic effects (not yet specified at the
molecular level) and (v) miscellaneous biological
influences. I assume three categories of psycho-
logical effects: (i) neuropsychology, (ii) personality
and cognitive/attitudinal patterns and (iii) trauma
exposure.
Finally,
I
assume
three
categories
of
higher-order effects: (i) social, (ii) political and (iii)
cultural. Furthermore, for pragmatic reasons, I initi-
ally assume an independence of difference-makers
that does not exist in nature. I pick-up this theme
below.
After
reviewing
the
distribution
of
difference-
makers for SZ, MD and AD, I assigned a rough score
representing the variance in risk that each causal level
contributes to the disorder. I forced the totals in the
11 ‘levels’ to sum to 100%. This is a necessarily
subjective exercise. My goal is to present a heuristi-
cally informative review with no claim that these
estimates are exact. Where possible, I reference
review articles and meta-analyses. I see this exercise
as illustrating an empirically based pluralism.
Empirically based pluralism
KS Kendler
379
Molecular Psychiatry

Schizophrenia
Molecular genetics
Despite tremendous efforts, robustly replicated com-
mon genetic variants that impact on schizophrenia
have been difficult to identify. The largest effort to
date, the Schizophrenia Psychiatric GWAS Consor-
tium,
identified
seven
genome-wide
significant
findings all of very small effect size (odds ratio
B1.1).23 Other replicated risk variants continue to be
reported24,25 all of small effect. Copy-number variants
that impact on schizophrenia risk have also been
replicated and have much larger effect sizes, but are
individually rare.26
Molecular neuroscience
Substantial efforts over many decades have gone into
developing neurochemical and, more recently, mole-
cular theories of schizophrenia. Almost every major
neurotransmitter has been implicated, at one point or
another, of playing a critical role in the etiology of
schizophrenia, with greatest focus on the dopamine,
glutamate and GABA systems.27–29 More recent work
has combined anatomical, molecular and neurochem-
ical perspectives to develop more specific etiological-
anatomic theories (for example, Volk and Lewis30).
Systems neuroscience
Evidence for alterations in brain structure in schizo-
phrenia are both old and very strong31 with less
consensus on the specific structures involved or the
nature of the lesions. Longitudinal studies have now
shown evidence for progressive brain changes in both
gray and white matter especially in frontal, parietal
and
temporal
areas.32
A
number
of
functional
abnormalities have been extensively researched in
schizophrenia
including
abnormalities
in
event-
related potentials and sensory-gating (especially via
prepulse inhibition).33
Aggregate genetic effects
Adoption and twin studies show consistent and
strong evidence for aggregate genetic effects in schizo-
phrenia with the best estimates of heritability being
quite high (B80%).34 To date, only a very small
proportion of this risk has been indexed by known
molecular
variants.
However,
recent
analysis
of
GWAS data for schizophrenia suggests that much of
this aggregate genetic effect can indeed be explained
by common genetic variants of very small effect
size.23,35
Other biological risk factors
A wide range of other putative biological risk factors
have been examined for schizophrenia and found
to be likely difference-makers including obstetric
complications,36 season of birth,37 extensive exposure
to cannabis,38 and intrauterine viral exposure,37 and
famine.37 In general, effect sizes for these risk factors
are modest to moderate.
Neuropsychology
A range of neuropsychological deficits have been
shown
in
individuals
with
schizophrenia,
their
relatives and unaffected individuals at high risk.
Probably the best demonstrated have been attentional
abnormalities, but deficits in working memory and a
range of executive functions have also been well
documented.33
Personality and cognitive/attitudinal patterns
High risk studies have uncovered a range of traits
that are moderately predictive of future risk of
schizophrenia
including
poor
social
competence
and schizotypal features.38
Trauma exposure
While social stressors adversely affect the course of
schizophrenia, evidence that they impact on etiology
is modest at best.39 The association with various
childhood traumas is similarly weak.37
Social
Urbanization is modestly and causally related to risk
for schizophrenia.37,40 The degree to which this risk is
mediated by biological or social processes is currently
unclear. Increased risk for schizophrenia is associated
with migration, particularly of individuals of African
extraction moving to Europe,40,41 and at least some of
this effect is likely to be causal. Replicated results
show that the incidence of schizophrenia in mino-
rities residing in mixed neighborhoods increases as
the proportion of minorities in that community
decreases.38,40 This strongly suggests a social etiologic
mechanism.
Political
I was unable to find any compelling evidence that
political factors impact on risk for schizophrenia
that is not better understood through other levels (for
example, famine resulting from war).
Cultural
While cultural factors have been shown to be related
to prognosis, compliance and explanatory models for
schizophrenia,42,43 the best study to date was unable
to find ethnic differences in rates of schizophrenia.44
Evidence for global variation in incidence of schizo-
phrenia is also weak.38
Major depression
Molecular genetic
Genetic variants that contribute significantly to risk
for MD have, to date, been difficult to detect and
replicate.45–47
Molecular neuroscience
Many efforts have been made to develop pathophy-
siological theories for MD based on a number of key
neurotransmitters and neuromodulators, for example
serotonin, norepinephrine and CRF,48,49 and abnorm-
alities in neuroplasticity.48
Empirically based pluralism
KS Kendler
380
Molecular Psychiatry

Systems neuroscience
Structural and functional MRI studies have suggested
a range of CNS abnormalities that distinguish indi-
viduals with MD from controls, including lateral
ventricle enlargement and smaller volumes of the
basal ganglia, thalamus, hippocampus and orbito-
frontal cortex.48,50,51
Aggregate genetic effects
Twin studies consistently show evidence for moder-
ate aggregate genetic effects in MD with the best
estimates of heritability of around 40%.52
Other biological risk factors
A number of physiological abnormalities in neuro-
endocrine53
and
immune
function,54
and
BDNF
levels,48 have been associated with risk for MD.
Neuropsychology
Research has indicated, with moderate consistency,
a range of potential neuropsychological changes in
depression, including heightened right-hemisphere
interaction, altered emotion processing, attention
biases and deficits in working memory.55–58
Personality and cognitive/attitudinal patterns
Several aspects of personality are strongly correlated
with risk for MD—especially neuroticism.59,60 This
association
is
almost
certainly
causal.61
Various
dysfunctional cognitions such as hopelessness have
been strongly associated with risk for MD58,62 and
their causal role has been demonstrated by many
RCTs of cognitive behavioral therapy.63
Trauma exposure
A range of early environmental risk factors have been
well established for MD (for example, poor parenting,
sexual abuse),64,65 are generalizable across cultures,66
and are probably causal.67 Stressful life events are
strongly associated with risk for MD and68,69 much,
but not all, of this association is likely causal.70
Social
Social factors can impact on risk for MD via levels of
unemployment, social disruption and poverty.71–73
Political
I have been unable to find consistent evidence for the
impact of political factors on risk for MD that is not
mediated through social influences and/or trauma
exposure.
Cultural
Cultural
factors
can
shape
the
expression
and
help-seeking
behavior
of
those
with
depressive
syndromes.74,75
Alcohol dependence
Molecular genetic
One molecular variant found only in East Asian
populations inactivates the aldehyde dehydrogenase
gene and is strongly protective against risk for AD.76,77
Variants in the alcohol dehydrogenase gene are more
weakly related to risk for AD and are more widely
dispersed across human populations.76 Functional
variants in bitter-taste receptors that reduce the
sensitivity to bitter stimuli are associated with risk
for AD.78,79 Of the range of other replicated molecular
variants, the most robust are in the GABA system—in
particular in GABA2 subunit genes.80 However, the
effects of these variants on risk for AD are indivi-
dually very small with odds ratios, for example, of
B1.15.81
Molecular neuroscience
Pharmacological studies have suggested that a range
of neurochemical systems are involved in the adapta-
tion to heavy alcohol consumption and subsequent
addiction including GABA, glutamate, dopamine and
opioids.82
Systems neuroscience
A range of studies has suggested that dysfunctional
neural systems predispose to AD. One large body of
research suggests that individuals at increased risk for
AD demonstrate electrophysiological abnormalities
manifest both in resting EEGs and in several event-
related potential paradigms, particularly a low P300
response.83 Imaging studies suggest that the frontal
lobes and their connections with limbic and other
cortical regions are compromised in subjects at risk
for developing AD.83
Aggregate genetic effects
Twin and adoption studies provide convincing evi-
dence that aggregate genetic risk factors impact strongly
on liability to AD with an estimated heritability of
50–60% (for example, Prescott and Kendler84; Kendler
et al.85; Heath et al.86; Pickens et al.87).
Neuropsychology
Individuals at high risk for AD demonstrate frontal
executive deficits,88,89 particularly those involving
attentional and visuospatial tasks.90–92
Personality and cognitive/attitudinal patterns
Personality traits that reflect either negative emotion-
ality or impulsiveness/novelty seeking predispose
to AD.93–97 Longitudinal samples beginning in child-
hood or adolescence (for example, Dubow et al.96;
Englund et al.97) have shown these traits predict AD
suggesting that the associations are probably causal.
Two sets of attitudes influence risk for AD. The first
of these is alcohol expectancies98–101 manipulation
of which in some, but not all, studies impacts on
subsequent risk for AD.102 The second are ‘reasons for
drinking’ which also impact on risk for heavy alcohol
consumption and AD (for example, Abbey et al.103;
Farber et al.104).
Trauma exposure
Several early childhood adversities have been asso-
ciated with risk for AD including parental loss,105,106
Empirically based pluralism
KS Kendler
381
Molecular Psychiatry

poor parent-child relationships107,108 and childhood
sexual abuse.16 Twin based twin and twin family
methods have examined the impact of parental loss105
and childhood sexual abuse67,109 and suggest that
most of the observed association is causal.
Social
Risk for AD is robustly predicted by social factors
such as peer substance use, drug availability and
social class.93,110 Confirming these observations are
ecological studies of college populations which show
very strong correlations between heavy-drinking and
drinking-related problems, and the density of near-by
alcohol outlets (for example, Weitzman et al.111) and
twin studies which consistently show that adolescent
alcohol use is strongly influenced by shared environ-
mental effects.112,113 Furthermore, a Cochrane review
shows that college students receiving feedback via the
web or computer about normative levels of alcohol
consumption
have
significantly
reduced
alcohol-
related problems and binge drinking.114
Political
Two detailed meta-analyses115,116 conclude that the
pricing of alcohol and its availability impact sub-
stantially on the risk for AD and related adverse
effects of alcohol use and that a good deal of this
relationship is likely causal. More specific factors that
have been studied and shown to impact on risk
include size of alcohol beverages,117 hours in which
pubs and bars are open,118 and the geographical
distribution
and
density
of
retail
outlets
where
alcohol can be purchased.119,120
Cultural
A wide range of strong cultural factors have been
shown on rates of AD including religious beliefs,110
the preferred form of ethanol (for example, beer, wine,
spirits),121 the acceptability of public drunkenness,122
and the appropriateness of drinking by men versus
women (which strongly influences gender-specific
risk for AD).123 In migrant and native populations,
rates
of
AD
often
rise
with
the
breakdown
of
traditional cultural practices and beliefs.94,124
Causal signatures
This exercise in empirically based
pluralism is
summarized in Figures 1a–c, which depict causal
Figure 1
(a) A causal signature for schizophrenia. The 11
‘bins’ of difference-makers (aka risk factors) are organized
along the x axis from the ‘lowest’ or most ‘basic’ (molecular
genetic) to the highest or most complex (cultural). The y axis
reflects the % of variance in liability to illness accounted for
by difference-makers in each of these bins. These estimates
arose from a detailed review of the relevant literature but
inevitably involve some subjective judgment. (b) A causal
signature for major depression. The 11 ‘bins’ of difference-
makers (aka risk factors) are organized along the x axis from
the ‘lowest’ or most ‘basic’ (molecular genetic) to the highest
or most complex (cultural). The y axis reflects the % of
variance in liability to illness accounted for by difference-
makers in each of these bins. These estimates arose from a
detailed review of the relevant literature but inevitably
involve some subjective judgment. (c) A causal signature
for
alcohol
dependence
(broadly
defined
to
include
serious alcohol related problems). The 11 ‘bins’ of differ-
ence-makers (aka risk factors) are organized along the x axis
from the ‘lowest’ or most ‘basic’ (molecular genetic) to the
highest or most complex (cultural). The y axis reflects the %
of variance in liability to illness accounted for by difference-
makers in each of these bins. These estimates arose from a
detailed review of the relevant literature but inevitably
involve some subjective judgment.
Empirically based pluralism
KS Kendler
382
Molecular Psychiatry

signatures for SZ, MD and AD. Three major conclu-
sions can be drawn. First, difference-makers for these
three psychiatric disorders are dappled, spreading
over
biological,
psychological
and
high-order
domains. There is no evidence, as predicted by
computer functionalism, that psychiatric disorders
can be cleanly divided into those that reflect hard-
ware versus software problems.
Second, for all three disorders, aggregate genetic
effects make the largest single contribution, largely
because these influences have been well studied and
quantified.
Third, the specific patterns of these three disorders
differ meaningfully. SZ has more difference-makers in
the biological arena, MD in the psychological arena
and AD in the higher-order domains. However, each
of these three disorders has important difference-
makers across all domains. Although the specific
features of the causal signatures will differ across
disorders, the spread of difference-makers across
these domains is likely a general feature of psychiatric
disorders. The HMBS is, by its nature, sensitive to a
wide range of causal processes.
The tidy pictures of Figures 1a–c imply that the
impact of each level of difference-maker is indepen-
dent of each other. However, as illustrated elsewhere
for MD64 and AD,125 the truth is far more complex.
The influences of high-level difference-makers often
flow through lower level processes. For example, the
impact of stressful life events on risk for depression17
is likely mediated by changes at more basic psycho-
logical
and
neurobiological
levels.
Lower
level
difference-makers can also impact on risk for illness
through higher-level processes. Genes can alter risk
for
AD via influencing self-selection of deviant
peers125 and on depression via their effect on perso-
nality.61 The causal paths of the difference-makers
start at one level but often flow through others on
their way to influencing disease risk. Furthermore,
the effects of individual binds of difference-makers
are often non-additive. Genetic factors can moderate
the impact of stressful events on risk for MD126 while
key features of the social environment can alter the
impact of genetic effects on alcohol intake.127 But this
complication only strengthens my argument. Not
only are difference-makers for psychiatric disorders
dappled across the traditional mind–brain or hard-
ware–software divide, but difference-makers sitting
on either side of these putative divisions often
mediate and moderate each other’s effects.
Concerns and comments
I tried to test the predictions of the two major
modern versions of dualistic thinking within psy-
chiatry: the organic–functional and hardware–soft-
ware
dichotomies.
Few
readers
of
the
modern
psychiatric literature will be surprised at the findings.
If the results of our science are accepted, for the three
archetypal disorders examined, difference-makers are
distributed across the biological, psychological and
social–cultural domains, and these levels are actively
inter-twined with each other in etiologic pathways.
These results support my main contention. Our field
needs to disentangle itself from the still influential
ghost
of
Descartes
and
adopt,
in
its
stead,
an
empirically informed pluralism.
The conceptual framework here advocated has been
focused at the level of disorders, not individuals.
Perhaps the research reviewed here and the subse-
quent causal signatures reflect a false complexity.
Perhaps
the
computer-functionalism
model
still
works for psychiatric illnesses, but at the level of
individuals and not disorders. So, for example, cases
of MD could be cleanly divided into ‘psychogenic’
forms—that have mind-based software problems—
and ‘biological’ forms—that reflect brain-based hard-
ware problems. However, both clinical and research
experience indicate that this is not the case. Psycho-
genic forms of MD (aka ‘reactive’ or ‘situational’) do
not differ from ‘non-psychogenic’ forms in their level
of familial/genetic risk for MD.128,129 In a large cohort
of depressed subjects, we found no relationship
between the level of adversity associated with onset
and the familial risk of MD,130 as would be predicted
if cases could be sorted into psychogenic and genetic/
biological forms. In empirically derived multifactorial
etiological models for MD, genetic and environmental
risk factors are positively and developmentally inter-
twined, not, as predicted by the computer-function-
alism model, negatively correlated.64,65 A similar
picture
is
seen
for
AD.125
Unlike
dysfunctional
computers, our patients do not simply sort them-
selves into those that have hardware/brain versus
software/mind problems.
This picture of difference-makers widely distribu-
ted across multiple levels is not unique to psychiatric
disorders. For some biomedical syndromes, differ-
ence-makers exist on only one level (for example,
Mendelian disorders and molecular genetic varia-
tion). But for other syndromes (for example, coronary
heart disease, type 2 diabetes), the picture would
likely resemble that seen for psychiatric illness,
including a significant number of difference-makers
from the social and cultural bins.
How does the empirically based pluralism differ
from the biopsychosocial model of Engel?131 The
crucial difference is that it is not a priori—driven by
a theoretical commitment to pluralism—but rather
driven directly by what our research reveals. The
biopsychosocial model—while making us feel good
about our open-mindedness—offers us no critical
guidance.132 As McHugh and Slavney cogently com-
ment ‘y the biopsychosocial model is heuristically
sterile’ (McHugh and Slavney133 p. 288). In letting all
flowers bloom, it provides no focus. By contrast,
research has increasingly told us where to look, but it
is surely not in only one place. For our various
disorders, some bins of difference-makers will be
quite full and others much emptier. Furthermore, our
research is providing cautious insights into etiologic
pathways. Ultimately the question, of course, is not
Empirically based pluralism
KS Kendler
383
Molecular Psychiatry

only which difference-makers are involved but also
how they join together to cause the disease. In moving
away from the antiquated dichotomies of Descartes
and computer functionalism, we need to be open
minded about where nature has put the difference-
makers, but hard nosed in following what our
research tells us rather than our prior expectations.
Empirically based pluralism offers one further
hope—that
it
can
guide
psychiatry
beyond
our
history of rancor and inter-denominational warfare.
It requires only the acceptance of a common metric—
the quality of research evidence. Otherwise, all
perspectives on psychiatric illness should be given
equal treatment.
Empirically based pluralism can help place in
perspective claims like ‘panic disorder is a brain
disorder’ that have become increasingly common in
the last several decades. Such a claim is only
meaningful in the context of the organic–functional
dichotomy. It might be seen as true in the sense that
brain- and biology-related difference-makers contri-
bute to risk for panic disorder and false in the sense
that it claims that panic is a ‘hardware only’ kind of
disorder. Although such claims reflect an appropriate
need for medical and social legitimacy for psychiatric
disorders, they are neither entirely true nor terribly
helpful in the context of empirically based pluralism.
The view that only by being ‘biological’ does a
psychiatric disorder become ‘real’ is a symptom of
the Cartesian error.
The
model
of
empirically
based
pluralism
is
vulnerable to reductionist attack that might take the
following form: you claim to find difference-makers
in psychological and social constructs. But how do
they work? Surely, the real effects are occurring in
brain even if the causal chain starts with mental or
social processes. Your empirically based pluralism all
collapses to neurobiology.
I have two responses: one pragmatic and the other
theoretical. The pragmatic approach is
While you can worry about your theoretical reductions,
where the world gives us causal traction is critical.
If I can treat MD with psychotherapy134 or show that
suicide rates decline substantially after major social
stressors,135 then these are real causal effects. Sure, they
are likely mediated by neurobiological processes but
that does not make these psychological or social risk
factors epiphenomenal. After all, everything that goes
on in brain is a result of chemical and ultimately sub-
atomic processes. Should we then conclude that the
only ‘‘real’’ causes of psychiatric illness are at the level
of quarks?
Theoretically, I would argue that the level of psycho-
logical is critical for many forms of psychiatric
illness. This can be no better demonstrated that
with the question of meaning which I illustrate with
a single research example. In our study of the effects
of CSA, rates of MD were increased over threefold
in women exposed to the most severe forms of
sexual abuse: attempted or completed intercourse.67
However, we also asked the women whether they told
anyone about the abuse and if so what happened? If
they told someone and got a negative response, risk
increased another 50%. However, it they told some-
one and the abuse stopped, the risk for lifetime
MD returned almost to control levels.136 What was
pathogenic about the abuse was not the physical acts,
but the meaning of that event for the young girl. Did
she feel abandoned and unprotected by those who
should be caring for her? Once that sense of care and
protection was re-established the future excess risk
for MD nearly disappeared. I am not suggesting that
feelings of abandonment and isolation do not have a
neurobiology.
The
point
is
that
the
feeling
of
abandonment is here the key difference-maker.
The messy results found in our analysis of causal
signatures are not consistent with simple models
of consilience of our world137 in which sociology
reduces easily to psychology, psychology to biology,
biology to chemistry, and chemistry to physics. Our
results reflect a more complex and dappled world-
view well captured by the philosophers John Dupre´138
and Nancy Cartwright.139
Why are we so different from computers? Does this
reflect the differences between an engineered ma-
chine and an evolved organism? What does it take to
develop a HMBS that functions well in those areas,
like affect regulation and reality testing, which are
disturbed in psychiatric illness? Recall that evolution
is a tinkering gradual process. Natural selection will
not produce or sustain genetic programs for experi-
ences that are typically available in the environment.
Consider our prolonged childhoods with sustained
parental care, our tight social groups with well
worked-out status relationships, the long-term pair
bonding strongly associated with good adjustment
and the symbolic logic related to language develop-
ment. An engineered machine can be designed to
operate at two distinct levels (that is, hardware and
software). However, for a complex evolved organism
like us, the product of eons of evolutionary tinkering,
multiple
inter-twined
genetic
and
environmental
influences will be needed for healthy functioning.
For each of these influences there will be, in multi-
level complex causal webs, difference-makers that
can push development down pathological pathways.
I also need to comment on the functional–organic
concept as it came down to use from late nineteenth
century Germany. It is not sensible to assume that—
whatever our technology—if we can ‘see it’ in the
brain then it is ‘organic’ and if it is not, it is ‘func-
tional’. The approach is fallacious and only makes
sense if you assume a Cartesian worldview and you
are looking for where to ‘split’ the HMBS. If, by
contrast, you accept that mind does not exist in a
spirit form free of physical instantiation in brain, it
does not make sense to assign a fundamentally
different
status
to
phenomena
which
produced
changes in (1) gross brain structure (for example,
reducing size of some key structure of 20%) and so
could be seen by the naked eye in a postmortem study
Empirically based pluralism
KS Kendler
384
Molecular Psychiatry

or by routine structural scans versus (2) subtle
neuronal structure (for example, increased boutons
on a subclass of dendritic spins in certain cell types)
that could only be seen by electron microscopy versus
(3) physiology function only with no detectable
anatomic changes (for example, alterations in key
protein concentrations).
Nothing in the essay is inconsistent with the fact
that HMBS can be vulnerable to strong biological
insults, ranging from Mendelian genetic disorders to
gunshot wounds, which, for all practical purposes,
act independent of psychological and higher-order
functions.
The results of the empirically based pluralistic
analysis of the causes of SZ, MD and AD reinforce the
conclusions from a prior essay that the commonly
expressed wish to develop an etiologically based
nosology for psychiatric disorders is deeply proble-
matic.140 Psychiatric disorders are a result of multiple
etiological processes impacting on many different
levels and often further intertwined by mediational
and moderational interactions between levels. It is
not possible a priori to identify one privileged level
that can unambiguously be used as the basis for
developing a nosologic system.
My call for an empirically based pluralism does not
reflect pessimism about the future of research in the
etiology of psychiatric disorders. Surely, they are
stunningly complex. But having overly simplified
views of them, often ideologically driven, has only
hampered our field. Following methods of decom-
position and reassembly, progress has been made
in the scientific understanding of very complex
systems.12,141,142 Having a realistic view of the causal
landscapes of psychiatric disorders can only help.
Summary
This essay began with a brief review of the origins
of the dualistic thinking that continues to plague our
field in Descartes’ philosophy, nineteenth century
neuropathology and computer functionalism. I posed,
as a central question, whether the HMBS becomes
disordered the way our laptops do—typically sorting
clearly
into
hardware
and
software
problems.
I
proposed the concept of difference-makers and causal
signatures, and then briefly reviewed these patterns
for SZ, MD and AD. Inconsistent with the predictions
of dualistic thinking, for all of these disorders,
difference-makers are distributed across the biologi-
cal, psychological and social–cultural spheres. Our
deeply entrenched dualistic thinking is a conceptual
impediment to our ability to integrate the diverse
information about psychiatric illness our research has
produced. We need to finally disentangle ourselves
from the ghost of Descartes and adopt, in his stead, an
empirically based pluralism.
Conflict of interest
The author declares no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgments
Supported in part by NIH Grants R01MH41953,
RO1MH068643, R37AA011408 and P20AA017828.
Discussions with John Campbell, PhD contributed
substantially to the ideas expressed in this essay.
Peter Zachar, PhD provided very helpful comments
on earlier versions of this essay.
References
1 Hopkins GM. Hopkins: Poems (Everyman’s Library Pocket Poets),
1st edn. Everyman’s Library, New York, NY, 1995.
2 von Krafft-Ebing R. Text-Book of Insanity: Based on Clinical
Observations
(for
Practitioners
and
Students
of
Medicine).
F.A. Davis Company: Philadelphia, PA, 1903.
3 Engstrom EJ. Clinical Psychiatry in Imperial Germany: A History
of Psychiatric Practice. Cornell University Press: Ithaca, NY,
2003.
4 Shorter E. A History of Psychiatry: From the Era of the Asylum to
the Age of Prozac. John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1997.
5 Heil J. Philosophy of Mind: A Comtemporary Introduction.
Routledge (ed). Routledge: London and New York, 1998.
6 Spitzer RL, First MB, Williams JBW, Kendler K, Pincus HA,
Tucker G. Now is the time to retire the term organic mental-
disorders. AJP 1992; 149: 240–244.
7 Luhrmann
TM.
Of
Two
Minds:
The
Growing
Disorder
in
American Psychiatry. Alfred A. Knopf: New York, NY, 2001.
8 Greenberg G. Manufacturing Depression: The Secret History of
a Modern Disease. Simon & Schuster: New York, NY, 2010.
9 Rathod S, Phiri P, Kingdon D. Cognitive behavioral therapy for
schizophrenia. Psychiatr Clin North Am 2010; 33: 527–536.
10 Grant PM, Huh GA, Perivoliotis D, Stolar NM, Beck AT. Rando-
mized trial to evaluate the efficacy of cognitive therapy for low-
functioning patients with schizophrenia. Arch Gen Psychiatry;
3 October 2011 (e-pub ahead of print).
11 Kendler KS. Toward a philosophical structure for psychiatry.
AJP 2005; 163: 433–440.
12 Kendler KS. Explanatory models for psychiatric illness. Am J
Psychiatry 2008; 165: 695–702.
13 Woodward J. Making Things Happen. Oxford University Press:
New York, 2003.
14 Kendler
KS,
Campbell
J.
Interventionist
causal
models
in
psychiatry: repositioning the mind-body problem. Psychol Med
2009; 39: 881–887.
15 Parker G. The parental bonding instrument. A decade of research.
Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol 1990; 25: 281–282.
16 Fergusson
DM,
Mullen
PE.
Childhood
Sexual
Abuse:
An
Evidence Based Perspective. Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks,
CA, 1999.
17 Brown GW, Harris TO. Life Events and Illness. Guilford Press:
New York, 1989.
18 Foa EB, Stein DJ, McFarlane AC. Symptomatology and psycho-
pathology of mental health problems after disaster. J Clin
Psychiatry 2006; 67(Suppl 2): 15–25.
19 Bruder-Mattson SF, Hovanitz CA. Coping and attributional styles
as predictors of depression. J Clin Psychol 1990; 46: 557–565.
20 Kessler RC, McLeod JD. Social support and psychological
distress in community samples. In: Cohen S, Syme L (eds).
Social Support and Health. Academic Press: Orlando, FL, 1985,
pp 19–40.
21 Hawkins JD, Herrenkohl T, Farrington DP, Brewer D, Catalano RF,
Harachi TW. A review of predictors of youth violence. In: Loeber
R, Farrington DP (eds). Serious & Violent Juvenile Offenders:
Risk Factors and Successful Interventions. Sage Publications,
London, 1998, pp 106–146.
22 Kendler KS, Eaves LJ. Psychiatric Genetics (Review of Psychia-
try). American Psychiatric Association: Washington, DC, 2005.
23 The Schizophrenia Psychiatric Genome-Wide Association Study
(GWAS) Consortium. Genome-Wide Association Study Identifies
Five Novel Schizophrenia Loci. Nature Genetics 2011; 43:
969–976.
Empirically based pluralism
KS Kendler
385
Molecular Psychiatry

24 Chen X, Lee G, Maher BS, Fanous AH, Chen J, Zhao Z et al. GWA
study data mining and independent replication identify cardio-
myopathy-associated 5 (CMYA5) as a risk gene for schizophrenia.
Mol Psychiatry 2011; 16: 1117–1129.
25 O’Donovan MC, Craddock N, Norton N, Williams H, Peirce T,
Moskvina V et al. Identification of loci associated with schizo-
phrenia by genome-wide association and follow-up. Nat Genet
2008; 40: 1053–1055.
26 Gejman PV, Sanders AR, Kendler KS. Genetics of schizophrenia:
new findings and challenges. Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet
2011; 12: 4.1–4.24.
27 Kendler KS, Schaffner KF. The dopamine hypothesis of schizo-
phrenia: an historical and philosophical analysis. Philos Psychol
Psychiatry 2009; 18: 41–63.
28 Abi-Dargham A, Grace AA. Dopamine and schizophrenia. In:
Weinberger DR, Harrison PJ (eds). Schizophrenia, 3rd edn. Wiley-
Blackwell: Hoboken, NJ, 2011. pp 413–432.
29 Krystal JH, Moghaddam B. Contributions of glutamate and GABA
systems to the neurobiology and treatment of schizophrenia. In:
Weinberger DR, Harrison PJ (eds). Schizophrenia, 3rd edn. Wiley-
Blackwell: Hoboken, NJ, 2011, pp 433–461.
30 Volk DW, Lewis DA. Prefrontal cortical circuits in schizophrenia.
Curr Topics Behav Neurosci 2010; 4: 485–508.
31 Lawrie SM, Pantelis C. Structural brain imaging in schizophrenia
and related populations. In: Weinberger DR, Harrison PJ (eds).
Schizophrenia, 3rd edn. Wiley-Blackwell: Hoboken, NJ, 2011,
pp 334–352.
32 Olabi B, Ellison-Wright I, McIntosh AM, Wood SJ, Bullmore E,
Lawrie SM. Are there progressive brain changes in schizophre-
nia? A meta-analysis of structural magnetic resonance imaging
studies. Biol Psychiatry 2011; 70: 88–96.
33 Egan MF, Cannon TD. Intermediate phenotypes in genetic
studies of schizophrenia. In: Weinberger DR, Harrison PJ (eds).
Schizophrenia, 3rd edn. Wiley-Blackwell: Hoboken, NJ, 2011,
pp 289–310.
34 Sullivan PF, Kendler KS, Neale MC. Schizophrenia as a complex
trait: evidence from a meta-analysis of twin studies. Arch Gen
Psychiatry 2003; 60: 1187–1192.
35 Purcell SM, Wray NR, Stone JL, Visscher PM, O’Donovan MC,
Sullivan PF et al. Common polygenic variation contributes to
risk of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. Nature 2009; 460:
748–752.
36 Clarke MC, Harley M, Cannon M. The role of obstetric events in
schizophrenia. Schizophr Bull 2006; 32: 3–8.
37 Brown AS. The environment and susceptibility to schizophrenia.
Prog Neurobiol 2011; 93: 23–58.
38 Jablensky A, Kirkbride JB, Jones PB. Schizophrenia: the epidemio-
logical horizon. In: Weinberger DR, Harrison PJ (eds). Schizophrenia,
3rd edn. Wiley-Blackwell: Hoboken NJ, 2011, pp 185–225.
39 Bebbington PE, Kuipers E. Schizophrenia and psychosocial
stresses. In: Weinberger DR, Harrison PJ (eds). Schizophrenia,
3rd edn. Wiley-Blackwell: Hoboken, NJ, 2011, pp 601–624.
40 Stilo SA, Murray RM. The epidemiology of schizophrenia: replacing
dogma with knowledge. Dialogues Clin Neurosci 2010; 12: 305–315.
41 Cantor-Graae E, Selten JP. Schizophrenia and migration: a meta-
analysis and review. AJP 2005; 162: 12–24.
42 Isaac M, Chand P, Murthy P. Schizophrenia outcome measures in
the wider international community. Brit Psychiatry Suppl 2007;
50: s71–s77.
43 Bhugra D. Severe mental illness across cultures. Acta Psychiatr
Scand Suppl 2006; 429: 17–23.
44 Jablensky A, Sartorius N, Korten A, Ernberg G, Anker M, Cooper
JE et al. Incidence worldwide of schizophrenia. Br J Psychiatry
1987; 151: 408–409.
45 Shyn SI, Hamilton SP. The genetics of major depression: moving
beyond the monoamine hypothesis. Psychiatr Clin North Am
2010; 33: 125–140.
46 Wray NR, Pergadia ML, Blackwood DH, Penninx BW, Gordon SD,
Nyholt DR et al. Genome-wide association study of major
depressive disorder: new results, meta-analysis, and lessons
learned. Mol Psychiatry 2010; e-pub ahead of print; 2 November
2010.
47 Verhagen M, van der Meij A, van Deurzen PA, Janzing JG, Arias-
Vasquez A, Buitelaar JK et al. Meta-analysis of the BDNF
Val66Met polymorphism in major depressive disorder: effects of
gender and ethnicity. Mol Psychiatry 2010; 15: 260–271.
48 Aan Het RM, Mathew SJ, Charney DS. Neurobiological mechan-
isms in major depressive disorder. Can Med Assoc J 2009; 180:
305–313.
49 Binder EB, Nemeroff CB. The CRF system, stress, depression and
anxiety-insights from human genetic studies. Mol Psychiatry
2010; 15: 574–588.
50 Kempton MJ, Salvador Z, Munafo MR, Geddes JR, Simmons A,
Frangou S et al. Structural neuroimaging studies in major
depressive disorder: meta-analysis and comparison with bipolar
disorder. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2011; 68: 675–690.
51 Gutman DA, Holtzheimer PE, Behrens TE, Johansen-Berg H,
Mayberg HS. A tractography analysis of two deep brain stimula-
tion white matter targets for depression. Biol Psychiatry 2009; 65:
276–282.
52 Sullivan PF, Neale MC, Kendler KS. Genetic epidemiology of
major depression: review and meta-analysis. AJP 2000; 157:
1552–1562.
53 Perlis RH, Fraguas R, Fava M, Trivedi MH, Luther JF, Wisniewski
SR et al. Prevalence and clinical correlates of irritability in major
depressive disorder: a preliminary report from the Sequenced
Treatment Alternatives to Relieve Depression Study. J Clin
Psychiatry 2005; 66: 159–166.
54 Blume J, Douglas SD, Evans DL. Immune suppression and immune
activation in depression. Brain Behav immu 2011; 25: 221–229.
55 Chamberlain SR, Sahakian BJ. The neuropsychology of mood
disorders. Curr Psychiatry Rep 2006; 8: 458–463.
56 Shenal BV, Harrison DW, Demaree HA. The neuropsychology of
depression: a literature review and preliminary model. Neuro-
psychol rev 2003; 13: 33–42.
57 Peckham AD, McHugh RK, Otto MW. A meta-analysis of the
magnitude of biased attention in depression. Depress Anxiety
2010; 27: 1135–1142.
58 Gotlib IH, Joormann J. Cognition and depression: current status
and future directions. Annu Rev Clin Psychol 2010; 6: 285–312.
59 Horwood LJ, Fergusson DM. Neuroticism, depression and life
events—a structural equation model. Soc Psychiatry 1986; 21:
63–71.
60 Kendler KS, Neale MC, Kessler RC, Heath AC, Eaves LJ. A longi-
tudinal twin study of personality and major depression in
women. Arch Gen Psychiatry 1993; 50: 853–862.
61 Kendler KS, Gatz M, Gardner C, Pedersen NL. Personality and
major depression: a swedish longitudinal, population-based twin
study. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2006; 63: 1113–1120.
62 Beck AT. Depression: Clinical, experimental and theoretical
aspects. Hoeber: New York, 1967.
63 Butler AC, Chapman JE, Forman EM, Beck AT. The empirical
status of cognitive-behavioral therapy: a review of meta-analyses.
Clin Psychol Rev 2006; 26: 17–31.
64 Kendler KS, Gardner CO, Prescott CA. Toward a comprehensive
developmental model for major depression in women. Am J
Psychiatry 2002; 159: 1133–1145.
65 Kendler KS, Gardner CO, Prescott CA. Toward a comprehensive
developmental model for major depression in men. Am J
Psychiatry 2006; 163: 115–124.
66 Cong E, Li Y, Flint J, Kendler KS, Shi S, CONVERGE consortium.
Childhood Sexual Abuse and Major Depression in China 2011
(unpublished).
67 Kendler KS, Bulik CM, Silberg J, Hettema JM, Myers J, Prescott
CA. Childhood sexual abuse and adult psychiatric and substance
use disorders in women: an epidemiological and cotwin control
analysis. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2000; 57: 953–959.
68 Brown GW, Harris TO. Social Origins of Depression: A Study of
Psychiatric Disorder in Women. Tavistock: London, 1978.
69 Kendler KS, Karkowski LM, Prescott CA. Stressful life events and
major depression: risk period, long-term contextual threat, and
diagnostic specificity. J Nerv Ment Dis 1998; 186: 661–669.
70 Kendler KS, Karkowski LM, Prescott CA. Causal relationship
between stressful life events and the onset of major depression.
Am J Psychiatry 1999; 156: 837–841.
71 Dooley D, Catalano R, Wilson G. Depression and unemployment:
panel findings from the Epidemiologic Catchment Area study.
Am J Community Psychol 1994; 22: 745–765.
Empirically based pluralism
KS Kendler
386
Molecular Psychiatry

72 Kinyanda E, Woodburn P, Tugumisirize J, Kagugube J, Ndyana-
bangi S, Patel V. Poverty, life events and the risk for depression in
Uganda. Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol 2011; 46: 35–44.
73 Broadhead JC, Abas MA. Life events, difficulties and depression
among women in an urban setting in Zimbabwe. Psychol Med
1998; 28: 29–38.
74 Kleinman A. Culture and depression. N Eng J Med 2004; 351:
951–953.
75 Tomlinson M, Swartz L, Kruger LM, Gureje O. Manifestations
of affective disturbance in sub-Saharan Africa: key themes.
J Affective Disord 2007; 102: 191–198.
76 Crabb DW, Matsumoto M, Chang D, You M. Overview of the role
of alcohol dehydrogenase and aldehyde dehydrogenase and their
variants in the genesis of alcohol-related pathology. Proc Nutr
Soc 2004; 63: 49–63.
77 Kendler KS. Reflections on the relationship between psychiatric
genetics and psychiatric nosology. AJP 2006; 163: 1138–1146.
78 Hinrichs AL, Wang JC, Bufe B, Kwon JM, Budde J, Allen R et al.
Functional variant in a bitter-taste receptor (hTAS2R16) influ-
ences risk of alcohol dependence. AJHG 2006; 78: 103–111.
79 Wang JC, Hinrichs AL, Bertelsen S, Stock H, Budde JP, Dick DM
et al. Functional variants in TAS2R38 and TAS2R16 influence
alcohol consumption in high-risk families of African-American
origin. Alcohol Clin Exp Res 2007; 31: 209–215.
80 Enoch MA. The role of GABA(A) receptors in the development of
alcoholism. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 2008; 90: 95–104.
81 Bierut LJ, Agrawal A, Bucholz KK, Doheny KF, Laurie C, Pugh E
et al. A genome-wide association study of alcohol dependence.
Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 2010; 107: 5082–5087.
82 Spanagel R. Alcoholism: a systems approach from molecular
physiology to addictive behavior. Physiol Rev 2009; 89: 649–705.
83 Porjesz B, Rangaswamy M, Kamarajan C, Jones KA, Padmanab-
hapillai A, Begleiter H. The utility of neurophysiological markers
in the study of alcoholism. Clin Neurophysiol 2005; 116:
993–1018.
84 Prescott CA, Kendler KS. Genetic and environmental contribu-
tions to alcohol abuse and dependence in a population-based
sample of male twins. AJP 1999; 156: 34–40.
85 Kendler KS, Prescott CA, Neale MC, Pedersen NL. Temperance
board registration for alcohol abuse in a national sample of
Swedish male twins, born 1902–1949. Arch Gen Psychiatry 1997;
54: 178–184.
86 Heath AC, Bucholz KK, Madden PA, Dinwiddie SH, Slutske WS,
Bierut LJ et al. Genetic and environmental contributions to
alcohol dependence risk in a national twin sample: consistency
of
findings
in
women
and
men.
Psychol
Med
1997;
27:
1381–1396.
87 Pickens RW, Svikis DS, McGue M, Lykken DT, Heston LL,
Clayton PJ. Heterogeneity in the inheritance of alcoholism. A
study of male and female twins. Arch Gen Psychiatry 1991; 48:
19–28.
88 Giancola PR, Moss HB, Martin CS, Kirisci L, Tarter RE. Executive
cognitive functioning predicts reactive aggression in boys at high
risk for substance abuse: a prospective study. Alcohol Clin Exp
Res 1996; 20: 740–744.
89 Giancola PR, Martin CS, Tarter RE, Pelham WE, Moss HB.
Executive cognitive functioning and aggressive behavior in
preadolescent boys at high risk for substance abuse/dependence.
J Stud Alcohol 1996; 57: 352–359.
90 Corral
MM,
Holguin
SR,
Cadaveira
F.
Neuropsychological
characteristics in children of alcoholics: familial density. J Stud
Alcohol 1999; 60: 509–513.
91 Knop J, Goodwin DW, Jensen P, Penick E, Pollock V, Gabrielli W
et al. A 30-year follow-up study of the sons of alcoholic men.
Acta Psychiatr Scand Suppl 1993; 370: 48–53.
92 Peterson JB, Finn PR, Pihl RO. Cognitive dysfunction and the
inherited predisposition to alcoholism. J Stud Alcohol 1992; 53:
154–160.
93 Sher KJ, Grekin ER, Williams NA. The development of alcohol
use disorders. Annu Rev Clin Psychol 2005; 1: 493–523.
94 Szlemko WJ, Wood JW, Thurman PJ. Native Americans and alcohol:
past, present, and future. J Gen Psychol 2006; 133: 435–451.
95 Dick DM, Smith G, Olausson P, Mitchell SH, Leeman RF,
O’Malley SS et al. Understanding the construct of impulsivity
and its relationship to alcohol use disorders. Addict Biol 2010;
15: 217–226.
96 Dubow EF, Boxer P, Huesmann LR. Childhood and adolescent
predictors of early and middle adulthood alcohol use and
problem drinking: the Columbia County Longitudinal Study.
Addiction 2008; 103(Suppl 1): 36–47.
97 Englund MM, Egeland B, Oliva EM, Collins WA. Childhood and
adolescent
predictors
of
heavy
drinking
and
alcohol
use
disorders in early adulthood: a longitudinal developmental
analysis. Addiction 2008; 103(Suppl 1): 23–35.
98 Goldman MS. Expectancy and risk for alcoholism: the unfortu-
nate exploitation of a fundamental characteristic of neurobeha-
vioral adaptation. Alcohol Clin Exper Res 2002; 26: 737–746.
99 Goldman MS, Del Boca FK, Darkes J. Alcohol expectancy theory:
the application of cognitive neuroscience. In: Leonard KE, Blane
HT (eds). Psychological Theories of Drinking and Alcoholism,
2nd edn. Guilford Press: NY, 1999, pp 203–246.
100 Reich RR, Below MC, Goldman MS. Explicit and implicit
measures of expectancy and related alcohol cognitions: a meta-
analytic comparison. Psychol Addict Behav 2010; 24: 13–25.
101 Goldman MS, Darkes J. Alcohol expectancy multiaxial assess-
ment: a memory network-based approach. Psychol Assess 2004;
16: 4–15.
102 Jones BT, Corbin W, Fromme K. A review of expectancy theory
and alcohol consumption. Addiction 2001; 96: 57–72.
103 Abbey A, Smith MJ, Scott RO. The relationship between reasons
for drinking alcohol and alcohol consumption: an interactional
approach. Addict Behav 1993; 18: 659–670.
104 Farber PD, Khavari KA, Douglass FM. A factor analytic study of
reasons for drinking: empirical validation of positive and
negative reinforecement dimensions. J Consult Clin Psychol
1980; 48: 780–781.
105 Tennant C, Bernardi E. Childhood loss in alcoholics and narcotic
addicts. Br J Addict 1988; 83: 695–703.
106 Kendler KS, Neale MC, Prescott CA, Kessler RC, Heath AC,
Corey LA et al. Childhood parental loss and alcoholism in
women: a causal analysis using a twin-family design. Psychol
Med 1996; 26: 79–95.
107 Jacob T, Johnson S. Parenting influences on the development of
alcohol abuse and dependence. Alcohol Health Res World 1997;
21: 204–209.
108 Kendler KS, Myers J, Prescott CA. Parenting and adult mood,
anxiety
and substance
use
disorders
in female
twins:
an
epidemiological, multi-informant, retrospective study. Psychol
Med 2000; 30: 281–294.
109 Nelson EC, Heath AC, Madden PA, Cooper ML, Dinwiddie SH,
Bucholz KK et al. Association between self-reported childhood
sexual abuse and adverse psychosocial outcomes: results from a
twin study. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2002; 59: 139–145.
110 Kendler KS, Liu XQ, Gardner CO, McCullough ME, Larson D,
Prescott CA. Dimensions of religiosity and their relationship to
lifetime psychiatric and substance use disorders. Am J Psychiatry
2003; 160: 496–503.
111 Weitzman ER, Folkman A, Folkman MP, Wechsler H. The
relationship of alcohol outlet density to heavy and frequent
drinking and drinking-related problems among college students
at eight universities. Health Place 2003; 9: 1–6.
112 Maes HH, Woodard CE, Murrelle L, Meyer JM, Silberg JL, Hewitt
JK et al. Tobacco, alcohol and drug use in eight- to sixteen-year-
old twins: the Virginia twin study of adolescent behavioral
development. J Stud Alcohol 1999; 60: 293–305.
113 Kendler KS, Schmitt JE, Aggen SH, Prescott CA. Genetic and
environmental influences on alcohol, caffeine, cannabis, and
nicotine use from adolescence to middle adulthood. Arch Gen
Psychiatry 2008; 65: 674–682.
114 Moreira MT, Smith LA, Foxcroft D. Social norms interventions to
reduce
alcohol
misuse
in
university
or
college
students.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2009; (3): CD006748.
115 Wagenaar AC, Salois MJ, Komro KA. Effects of beverage alcohol
price and tax levels on drinking: a meta-analysis of 1003
estimates from 112 studies. Addiction 2009; 104: 179–190.
116 Chaloupka FJ, Grossman M, Saffer H. The effects of price on
alcohol consumption and alcohol-related problems. Alcohol Res
Health 2002; 26: 22–34.
Empirically based pluralism
KS Kendler
387
Molecular Psychiatry

117 Mohler-Kuo M, Rehm J, Heeb JL, Gmel G. Decreased taxation,
spirits consumption and alcohol-related problems in Switzerland.
J Stud Alcohol 2004; 65: 266–273.
118 Plant EJ, Plant M. A ‘leap in the dark?’—Lessons for the United
Kingdom from past extensions of bar opening hours. Int J Drug
Policy 2005; 16: 363–368.
119 Campbell CA, Hahn RA, Elder R, Brewer R, Chattopadhyay S,
Fielding P et al. The effectiveness of limiting alcohol outlet
density as a means of reducing excessive alcohol consumption
and alcohol-related harms. Am J Prev Med 2009; 37: 556–569.
120 Popova S, Giesbrecht N, Bekmuradov D, Patra J. Hours and
days of sale and density of alcohol outlets: impacts on alcohol
consumption and damage: a systematic review. Alcohol Alcoho-
lism 2009; 44: 500–516.
121 World Drink Trends. International Beverage Alcohol Consump-
tion and Production Trends 2002. Produktschap voor Gedistil-
leerde Dranken: Henley-on-Thames, Oxfordshire, 2002.
122 Room R, Makela K. Typologies of the cultural position of
drinking. J Stud Alcohol 2000; 61: 475–483.
123 Wilsnack RW, Vogeltanz ND, Wilsnack SC, Harris TR, Ahlstrom
S, Bondy S et al. Gender differences in alcohol consumption and
adverse drinking consequences: cross-cultural patterns. Addic-
tion 2000; 95: 251–265.
124 Zemore SE. Acculturation and alcohol among latino adults in the
United States: a comprehensive review. Alcohol Clin Exp Res
2007; 31: 1968–1990.
125 Kendler KS, Gardner CO, Prescott CA. Toward a comprehensive
developmental model for alcohol use disorders in men. Twin Res
Hum Genet 2011; 14: 1–15.
126 Kendler KS, Kessler RC, Walters EE, MacLean C, Neale MC,
Heath AC et al. Stressful life events, genetic liability, and onset of
an episode of major depression in women. AJP 1995; 152: 833–842.
127 Dick DM, Rose RJ, Viken RJ, Kaprio J, Koskenvuo M. Exploring
gene-environment
interactions:
socioregional
moderation
of
alcohol use. J Abnorm Psychol 2001; 110: 625–632.
128 McGuffin P, Katz R, Bebbington P. The Camberwell Collaborative
Depression Study. III. Depression and adversity in the relatives
of depressed probands. British Journal of Psychiatry 1988; 152:
775–782.
129 Coryell W, Winokur G, Maser JD, Akiskal HS, Keller MB, Endicott
J. Recurrently situational (reactive) depression: a study of course,
phenomenology and familial psychopathology. J Affective Disord
1994; 31: 203–210.
130 Kendler KS, Myers J, Halberstadt LJ. Should the diagnosis of
major depression be made independent of or dependent upon the
psychosocial context? Psychol Med 2010; 40: 771–780.
131 Engel GL. The need for a new medical model: a challenge for
biomedicine. Science 1977; 196: 129–136.
132 Ghaemi SN. The Rise and Fall of the Biopsychosocial Model:
Reconciling Art & Science in Psychiatry. The Johns Hopkins
University Press: Baltimore, MD, 2010.
133 McHugh PR, Slavney PR. The Perspectives of Psychiatry, 2nd
edn. Johns Hopkins University Press: Baltimore, MD, 1998.
134 Beck AT, Alford BA. Depression: Causes and Treatment, 2nd edn.
University of Pennsylvania Press: Philadelphia, PA, 2008.
135 Salib E. Effect of 11 September 2001 on suicide and homicide in
England and Wales. Br J Psychiatry 2003; 183: 207–212.
136 Bulik CM, Prescott CA, Kendler KS. Features of childhood sexual
abuse and the development of psychiatric and substance use
disorders. Br J Psychiatry 2001; 179: 444–449.
137 Wilson EO. Consilience: The Unity of Knowledge. Vintage:
New York, NY, 1999.
138 Dupre J. The Disorder of Things: Metaphysical Foundations of
the Disunity of Science. Harvard University Press: Cambridge,
MA, 1993.
139 Cartwright N. The Dappled World: A Study of the Boundaries of
Science. Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK, 1999.
140 Kendler KS. Levels of explanation in psychiatric and substance
use disorders: implications for the development of an etiologi-
cally based nosology. Molecular Psychiatry 2011; e-pub ahead of
print; 14 June 2011.
141 Bechtel W, Richardson RC. Discovering Complexity: Decomposi-
tion and Localization as Strategies in Scientific Research.
Princeton University Press: Princeton, NJ, 1993.
142 Bechtel W. Mental Mechanisms: Philosophical Perspectives on
Cognitive Neuroscience, 1st edn. Lawrence Erlbaum: New York,
NY, 2007.
Empirically based pluralism
KS Kendler
388
Molecular Psychiatry

