1 
 
Mr Big Operations:  
Innovative Investigative Technique or Threat to Justice? 
Justice Susan Glazebrook DNZM1 
 
Introduction 
The “Mr Big” technique2 originated3 in Canada around the early 1990’s.4  The operations 
vary because they are tailored to the particular situation but there are common design 
features.  The target is a person suspected of a crime and, because of the expense involved in 
Mr Big operations, usually a very serious crime.  There is (or is perceived to be) insufficient 
evidence to bring the person to trial.  The aim of the Mr Big operation is to secure a 
confession.   
The operation often begins with what appears to be a chance encounter between the suspect 
and an undercover officer.5  A relationship is developed between the two, leading to the 
suspect being given the opportunity to become involved in a criminal organisation to which 
the undercover officer supposedly belongs.  The suspect takes part in a number of criminal 
activities6 (scenarios), often starting with what may appear to be on the border of legality (for 
example, debt collecting) but gradually escalating in apparent seriousness.  The suspect will 
                                                           
1  
Judge of the Supreme Court of New Zealand.  I am grateful to my clerk, Andrew Row, for his invaluable 
assistance with this paper.  The paper was prepared for the Judicial Colloquium 2015, 22–26 September 
2015, Hong Kong.  Participating jurisdictions: Australia, Canada, Hong Kong and New Zealand.  The 
views expressed are my own and do not necessarily represent those of the New Zealand Supreme Court. 
2  
The colloquial name.  The Royal Canadian Mounted Police call it the “major crime homicide technique”: 
see British Columbia Royal Canadian Mounted Police “Undercover Operations” <www.bc.rcmp-
grc.gc.ca>.  In New Zealand, it is formally referred to by the police as the “Crime Scenario Undercover 
Technique (CSUT)”. 
3  
It may be more accurate to say that the technique was resurrected.  The first reported Mr Big operation in 
Canada, although not called that, was in 1901 in Manitoba: The King v Todd (1901) 4 CCC 514 (Man KB).  
In that case, Dubuc J described the evidence gathering operation as “vile”, “base” and “contemptible” at 
[3] and [8].  The Court ultimately decided that the evidence was admissible, given that it was not excluded 
under the “voluntariness rule”.   
4  
It has been suggested that it is perhaps not coincidental that resort to this technique began around the time 
of the Supreme Court of Canada’s decisions in R v Hebert [1990] 2 SCR 151 and R v Broyles [1991] 3 
SCR 595 which set clear limits on the use of undercover investigative techniques against persons in 
custody: TE Moore, P Copeland and RA Schuller “Deceit, Betrayal and the Search for Truth: Legal and 
Psychological Perspectives on the ‘Mr. Big’ Strategy” (2010) 55 Crim LQ 348 at 350.  
5  
An extreme example occurred in the Netherlands where the Mr Big-type operation began by an undercover 
officer crashing into the suspect’s car so that the undercover officer could strike up a conversation and 
friendship with the suspect: see “Controversial murder confession ‘worthless’ experts say” (15 July 2015) 
Dutch News <www.dutchnews.nl>. 
6  
All of the conduct is staged by undercover police officers and none is in fact criminal. 

2 
 
be paid for the work undertaken and there will be the promise of further or more lucrative 
work if he or she is fully accepted into the organisation.   
The operation culminates in an interview with the purported boss of the organisation 
(Mr Big).  The suspect understands that succeeding in this interview will lead to progression 
within the organisation.  The interview is designed to extract a confession, sometimes using 
an interview style that would not be acceptable in a formal police interview.7   
At some stage, prior to the Mr Big interview, the suspect will have learned that the formal 
police investigation into his or her prior criminal activity has been activated or re-activated.8  
The suspect will, however, have been led to believe that the organisation can help make any 
charges relating to that past criminal activity disappear (often being shown tangible evidence 
of other cases where that has occurred).9  The assistance will be contingent on the suspect, in 
the Mr Big interview, meeting the organisation’s values of trust, honesty and loyalty.  These 
values have been stressed throughout the operation, in some cases reinforced by alleged lies 
on the part of other members being met by violence.10   
As at 2008, the Mr Big technique had been used more than 350 times across Canada.11  In 
75 per cent of these operations the person of interest was either cleared of, or charged with, 
the offence.12  Of the cases prosecuted, in excess of 95 per cent resulted in convictions.13  The 
scale of the operations has varied but in one operation more than 50 police officers were 
involved14 and in another 63 “scenarios” were played out.15  Several operations in Canada are 
                                                           
7  
See for example in Tofilau v The Queen [2007] HCA 39, (2007) 231 CLR 396 at [396] where Callinan, 
Heydon and Crennan JJ noted that the trial Judge said that, in his discussion with the “boss”, one of the 
appellants, Mr Clarke, was “hectored and harangued to a significant degree, in a manner which would be 
unacceptable in a formal police interview”. 
8  
And, even in some cases, that charges are imminent. 
9   In some cases the suspect has been told that the organisation can arrange for a person with a terminal 
illness to take responsibility for the offence but that the suspect must give accurate details so that the dying 
person could tell a convincing story to the authorities: see for example, R v Fliss 2000 BCCA 347, 145 
CCC (3d) 353; and Dix v Canada (Attorney-General) 2002 ABQB 580, [2003] 1 WWR 436.   
10   See for example the case of R v Terrico 2005 BCCA 361, (2005) 199 CCC (3d) 126, discussed further 
below.  
11  
British Columbia Royal Canadian Mounted Police, above n 2. 
12  
British Columbia Royal Canadian Mounted Police “Undercover Operations – Questions and Answers” 
<bc.rcmp-grc.gc.ca>.  The Royal Canadian Mounted Police do not specify the proportion of those that are 
cleared and those that are charged.  
13  
British Columbia Royal Canadian Mounted Police, above n 12.  I have been unable to find more up-to-date 
figures.  
14  
See Dix v Canada (Attorney-General), above n 9.  The operation in Dix cost a total of $137,000 (excluding 
salaries and overtime pay) and lasted thirteen months: see K T Keenan and J Brockman Mr. Big: Exposing 
Undercover Investigations in Canada (Fernwood Publishing, Winnipeg, 2010). 
15  
See R v Hart 2014 SCC 52, [2014] 2 SCR 544 at [38]. 

3 
 
reported to have cost over $1 million CAD with the highest reportedly costing approximately 
$4 million CAD.16  The Mr Big technique has been used in Australia17 and New Zealand.18  It 
does not appear that the technique has been used in Hong Kong.19  
Mr Big in court 
Canada 
In Canada, a confession made out of court by an accused to a person in authority is 
inadmissible unless the Court is satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the statement was 
made freely and voluntarily.20  For it to be voluntary, among other requirements, it must be 
free of inducement by threats or promises made by a person in authority.21  A person in 
authority is a person formally engaged in the arrest, detention, examination or prosecution of 
the accused.22  With regard to the Mr Big technique, it has been held that, as there is no 
awareness or perception on the part of the suspect that he or she is speaking to a person in 
authority, the voluntariness rule does not apply.23  The Mr Big technique has also been held 
                                                           
16  
Keenan and Brockman, above n 14, at 23–24. 
17  
See for example Tofilau v The Queen, above n 7, where the technique was used in Victoria and R v Cowan 
[2013] QSC 337 where the technique was used in Queensland.  
18  
See for example R v Cameron [2007] NZCA 564 (pre-trial); and R v Cameron [2009] NZCA 87 (post-
trial).  
19  
According to the British Columbia Royal Canadian Mounted Police, it is also used in other jurisdictions 
such as South Africa and other European countries: see British Columbia Royal Canadian Mounted Police, 
above n 12.  It also appears that the Mr Big technique has been used successfully in the Netherlands: see 
above at n 5.  There are conflicting views on whether the technique is used in the United States.  The Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police say that it is: British Columbia Royal Canadian Mounted Police, above n 12.  In 
State v Rafay 285 P3d83 (Wash App Div 1, 2012), a confession from a Mr Big operation conducted in 
Canada was admitted in evidence.  See also the case of State v Albrecht 516 NW2d 776 (Wis App, 1994) 
which involved a Mr Big-type undercover operation in the State of Wisconsin.  The confession obtained 
was held to have been voluntarily made and was admitted.  These are the only examples of cases involving 
Mr Big operations in the United States that I have found. Most commentators say that the technique is not 
used in the United States but without explaining in any detail why that is the case: see for example 
Caroline Law “The Law on Mr. Big Confessions” (23 July 2015) University of Calgary Faculty of Law 
<www.ablawg.ca>.  I note that the voluntariness rule may be wider in the United States than in Canada and 
Australia and that it may not need a person in authority: see State v Rafay at n 21.  This may restrict the use 
of the technique. The fact that prosecutors are often involved at the investigatory stage may also inhibit the 
use of the technique – see, the American Bar Association, standard 2.3 of the “Standards on Prosecutorial 
Investigations”.  There are also ethical rules restricting approaching suspects who are legally represented: 
see David Craig “The right to silence and undercover operations” Platypus Magazine – the official journal 
of the Australian Federal Police (September 2001) 34 at 34–35.  
20  
See R v Hodgson [1998] 2 SCR 449 at [12]. 
21  
In addition, it cannot be the result of oppression and must be the result of what the Courts call an 
“operating mind”: see further R v Oickle 2000 SCC 38, [2000] 2 SCR 3 at [48]–[63].   
22  
The term “person in authority” also includes persons the accused reasonably believes are acting on behalf 
of the police or prosecuting authorities and could therefore influence or control the proceedings against 
him or her: R v Hodgson, above n 20, at [48]. 
23  
See R v Grandinetti 2005 SCC 5, [2005] 1 SCR 27 at [44] where the Court said, “[w]hen, as in this case, 
the accused confesses to an undercover officer he thinks can influence his murder investigation by 

4 
 
not to engage the right to silence in the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms24 and the 
associated right to counsel.  This is because the suspect is not detained by the police at the 
time of the confession.  Thus the prohibition of active elicitation of a confession, set out in 
Hebert, does not apply.25  Confessions obtained through the Mr Big technique have not 
usually been excluded on other grounds, such as abuse of process.26 
In Hart the Canadian Supreme Court re-assessed the law relating to Mr Big operations, 
discussing the hazards with the technique and, in particular, the possibility of unreliable 
confessions.27  Also of concern were the risk of Mr Big operations becoming abusive28 and 
the credibility hurdles created by the fact that the suspect willingly engaged in what appeared 
to be a criminal enterprise.29  The current protections were not seen as adequate to meet these 
risks.  The Court therefore set out a “two-pronged” approach to admissibility.30   
Under the first part of the new approach, confessions obtained through the Mr Big technique 
are presumptively inadmissible.31  The Crown can, however, prove on the balance of 
probabilities that the probative value of the confession outweighs its prejudicial effect.32  The 
probative value of the evidence relates to its reliability,  which encompasses an inquiry both 
into the circumstances in which the confession was made and a consideration of any other 
                                                                                                                                                                                     
enlisting corrupt police officers, the state’s coercive power is not engaged.  The statements, therefore, were 
not made to a person in authority.” 
24   The right to silence has been derived from s 7 of the Charter. 
25  
Broadly, R v Hebert, above n 4, involved an accused placed in a cell with an undercover police officer 
posing as another suspect.  During the conversation with the undercover officer, the accused made various 
incriminating statements.  These were excluded as having been actively elicited in breach of the right to 
silence and the right to counsel. 
26  
For example, in the case of R v Bonisteel 2008 BCCA 344, (2008) 236 CCC (3d) 170, the accused 
overheard, and witnessed the “aftermath” of a staged beating of an undercover officer who had supposedly 
lied to the group.  The British Columbia Court of Appeal held in Bonisteel at [92] that the conduct of the 
police would not “shock the community” and therefore was not an abuse of process.  
27  
R v Hart, above n 15, at [6] per McLachlin CJ, Lebel, Abella, Moldaver and Wagner JJ.  
28  
At [9]. 
29  
At [7]. 
30   At [84]–[89] per McLachlin CJ and Lebel, Abella, Moldaver and Wagner JJ.  Cromwell J agreed with the 
majority’s new test at [152] but disagreed with the majority as to the application of that test to the facts 
before the Court.  Karakatsanis J dissented and held that a new approach was not required and that the 
principle against self-incrimination, under s 7 of the Charter, would provide a comprehensive and flexible 
protection to deal with the concerns raised by the Mr Big technique: see at [168]. 
31  
At [85]. 
32  
Prior to R v Hart, above n 15, there had only been one case in which a confession had been excluded on the 
basis that its prejudicial effect exceeded its probative value: R v Creek 1998 CanLII 3209 (BCSC).  This is 
mentioned by the majority in R v Hart, above n 15, at [65]. 

5 
 
markers of its reliability.33  The prejudicial effect stems from the harmful character evidence 
that accompanies its admission.34   
The second part of the new Hart approach is for judges to scrutinise the conduct of the police 
to determine if an abuse of process has occurred.35  There are inherent limits on the power of 
the state to manipulate people for the purpose of obtaining convictions.36  The Court said that, 
where the technique approximates coercion and overcomes the will of the accused, it will 
almost certainly amount to an abuse of process.37  Physical violence or threats of physical 
violence are examples of coercive police tactics.38  Taking advantage of the vulnerabilities of 
a suspect will also likely be unacceptable.39 
In applying the new approach to the case at hand, the Supreme Court held the probative value 
of Mr Hart’s confession did not outweigh the prejudicial effect.40  Given the “transformative 
effect” of the operations on Mr Hart’s life,41 the majority said the “financial and social 
inducements provided [Mr Hart] with an overwhelming incentive to confess – either 
truthfully or falsely”.  In addition, there were internal contradictions in the confession and a 
lack of corroborating or confirmatory evidence.  The Court held that the reliability of the 
confession was left in serious doubt.42  Given the findings on the first part of the new test, the 
majority did not need to consider whether there was also an abuse of process.43  
                                                           
33   R v Hart, above n 15, at [100]–[104].  At [105], the majority of the Supreme Court said that, in considering 
markers of reliability, trial judges should “consider the level of detail contained in the confession, whether 
it leads to the discovery of additional evidence, whether it identifies any elements of the crime that had not 
been made public (eg the murder weapon), or whether it accurately describes mundane details of the crime 
the accused would not likely have known had he not committed it (eg the presence or absence of particular 
objects at the crime scene).  Confirmatory evidence is not a hard and fast requirement, but where it exists, 
it can provide a powerful guarantee of reliability.  The greater the concerns raised by the circumstances in 
which the confession was made, the more important it will be to find markers of reliability in the 
confession itself or the surrounding evidence.” 
34  
At [106]–[107]. 
35  
At [86].  At [89] in her dissenting judgment, Karakatsanis J agreed with the majority on this point.  The 
majority at [65], however, recognised that the “parties could find no case in which a Mr. Big confession 
had to date been excluded as an abuse of process”.  This is likely to change with the broader approach to 
that concept in R v Hart, above n 15. 
36  
At [112]. 
37  
At [115]. 
38  
At [116].  This may mark a change from the previous position illustrated by Bonisteel, discussed above at 
n 26.  However, note the discussion below at n 43. 
39  
R v Hart, above n 15, at [115]–[117].  The majority in Hart gave the examples of “mental health problems, 
substance addictions, or youthfulness” as unacceptable vulnerabilities to prey on. 
40  
At [145]–[146]. 
41  
At the time the operation began Mr Hart was unemployed and socially isolated. 
42  
R v Hart, above n 15, at [143]–[144]. 
43  
At [148].  Two months after delivering its decision in R v Hart, a different result was reach in R v Mack 
2014 SCC 58, [2014] 3 SCR 3.  This was largely because the confession had led to the finding of remains, 

6 
 
As a result of Hart, the Canadian police have indicated that the age, educational level and 
economic condition of suspects will be considered before deciding whether to employ the 
Mr Big technique.  Further, investigators will strive to obtain confirmatory evidence of any 
confession.  Operations will also be shortened and better recorded.44   
Australia 
The admission of confessions arising out of the Mr Big technique has been upheld in Tofilau 
v The Queen.45  The appeal to the High Court from the State of Victoria, involved four 
separate appellants.  The Court considered the admission of the statements in three parts: 
whether the confessions: (a) were obtained in breach of the voluntariness rule; (b) were 
involuntary in a more general or “basal” sense; or (c) should be excluded under the residual 
discretion to exclude evidence.46 
As to the voluntariness rule, the Court refused to extend the person in authority doctrine to 
undercover police officers purporting to be able to influence the course of a prosecution 
through corruption.  This is because the test for voluntariness is largely subjective and the 
suspects clearly believed they were dealing with members of a criminal organisation, not with 
the police.47  The Court also rejected arguments that the confessions were involuntary in a 
                                                                                                                                                                                     
this showing its reliability.  Bullet casings at the site of the remains also matched those found in the 
accused’s apartment: at [34].  On the other hand, the criminal activity Mr Mack had been involved in was 
modest (lowering the prejudicial effect): at [35].  Further, there was no abuse of process.  The Court said at 
[36], “[t]he appellant was not presented with overwhelming inducements.  He had prospects for legitimate 
work that would have paid even more than the undercover officers were offering.  Nor did the officers 
threaten the appellant with violence if he would not confess.  The most that can be said is that the officers 
created an air of intimidation by referring to violent acts committed by members of the organization.  But 
the appellant was not coerced into confessing.” 
44  
See Daniel LeBlanc “RCMP to keep ‘Mr Big’ sting tactic” The Globe and Mail (online ed, 1 August 2014) 
<www.theglobeandmail.com>; and Mike Cabana “RCMP Statement Following the Supreme Court of 
Canada Decision in the Nelson Hart Case” (31 July 2014) Royal Canadian Mounted Police <rcmp-
grc.gc.ca>. 
45  
Tofilau v The Queen, above n 7.  This case was decided in accordance with the law as it was before 
Victoria introduced, in accordance with Australia’s uniform evidence laws, the Evidence Act 2008 (Vict).  
46  
The High Court (per Toohey, Gaudron and Gummow JJ), in an earlier case, R v Swaffield [1998] HCA 1, 
(1998) 192 CLR at [51]–[52] had set out the three classes of cases in which the discretionary principles of 
exclusion of evidence would be engaged.  First, those cases where it would be unfair to the accused to 
admit the statement – unfairness in this sense is related to the law’s protection of the rights and privileges 
of the accused persons.  The second is where considerations of public policy, such as improper police 
conduct, make it unacceptable to admit the evidence.  The third concerns the general power to reject 
evidence on the ground that its prejudicial effect outweighs its probative value. 
47  
Tofilau v The Queen, above n 7, at [13] per Gleeson CJ; at [29] per Gummow and Hayne JJ; and at [323] 
per Callinan, Heydon and Crennan JJ.  Kirby J (dissenting) said at [176], “[t]o limit the class of ‘person in 
authority’ to those whom an accused knows or believes to have lawful authority makes no sense if the 
reason for the rule is to discourage officials from exploiting hope or fear to procure confessions statements 
from suspects against their own interest.” 

7 
 
more general or “basal” sense.48  Neither a desire to obtain an advantage, such as acceptance 
into the criminal group, nor the mere fact of trickery on the part of the police would suffice.49  
The Court also held that the confession should not be excluded under the residual discretion 
for reasons of unfairness, probative value or public policy.50   
New Zealand 
In New Zealand the admissibility of confessions is governed by the Evidence Act 2006.  
Statements made by a defendant that are proffered by the prosecution are admissible against 
that defendant51 unless excluded on reliability52 or oppression53 grounds.  Statements may 
also be excluded54 because of a breach of the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 199055 or other 
enactment or rule of law, or because they are unfairly obtained.56  There is also a general 
requirement to exclude evidence where the prejudicial effect of the evidence exceeds its 
probative value.57  As to whether evidence is unfairly obtained, one of the grounds is a breach 
of the Chief Justice’s Practice Note on Police Questioning.58  Among other things, the 
Practice Note requires a person to be cautioned if there is sufficient evidence to charge the 
                                                           
48  
See the comments of Gummow and Hayne JJ at [60] where they say that “basal voluntariness” is 
concerned “with confessions made under compulsion”: “[t]he key inquiry is about the quality of the 
compulsion that is said to have overborne the free choice of whether to speak or to remain silent.  In this 
context, ‘overborne’ should be understood in the sense ... as ‘the result of duress, intimidation, persistent 
importunity, or sustained or undue insistence or pressure’.” 
49  
At [22] per Gleeson CJ; at [81] per Gummow and Hayne JJ; at [347] per Callinan, Heydon and Crennan JJ.  
Kirby J dissented (see [204]). 
50  
At [24] per Gleeson CJ; at [115] per Gummow and Hayne JJ; at [413]–[414] per Callinan, Heydon and 
Crennan JJ.  Only one of the appellants had argued unfairness and, unlike in Swaffield, none had argued 
breaches of the Australian equivalent of the Judges’ Rules. However, some Australian States have 
legislative provisions stating that police responsibilities, such as cautions to persons arrested or in lawful 
custody, do not apply to undercover officers engaged in covert operations: see for example s 396 of Police 
Powers and Responsibilities Act 2000 (Qld). 
51  
Section 27.  But not against a co-defendant. 
52  
Section 28.  In cases where there is an evidential foundation for doubting a statement’s reliability, judges 
must exclude the statement unless satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the circumstances in which 
it was made were not likely to have adversely affected its reliability. 
53  
Section 29.  Where there is an evidential foundation suggesting that a statement was influenced by 
oppression, it must be excluded unless proved beyond reasonable doubt not to have been so influenced.  
Oppression is defined as oppressive, violent, inhuman or degrading conduct towards the defendant or any 
other person or the threat of such. 
54  
I say “may” because evidence in these categories is excluded only after determining whether its exclusion 
is “proportionate to the impropriety by means of a balancing process that gives appropriate weight to the 
impropriety but also takes account of the need for an effective and credible system of justice.” 
55  
Section 30(5)(a).  The Bill of Rights protections only arise if a person is in custody and so would not 
usually be at issue in a Mr Big scenario case.   
56  
Section 30(5)(c). 
57  
Section 8(1)(a). 
58  
Practice Note – Police Questioning (s 30(6) of the Evidence Act 2006) [2007] 3 NZLR 297.  This is a 
modification of the old Judges’ Rules, which were initially promulgated by the Judges of the Queen’s 
Bench Division in 1912. 

8 
 
person.  The Court of Appeal, in R v Cameron, upheld the decision to admit confessions 
arising from the Mr Big technique on the basis that the confessions passed the reliability 
threshold and were not unfairly obtained, although in that case the lawfulness of the 
technique had been conceded.59   
Hong Kong 
The different legal framework in Hong Kong likely explains why the police in that 
jurisdiction have not utilised the Mr Big technique. The main difference between Canada and 
Hong Kong relates to the way the residual discretion to exclude voluntary confessions 
operates with regard to undercover operations.  This was dealt with by the Court of Final 
Appeal in Secretary for Justice v Lam,60 albeit not in the context of a Mr Big operation.61  
Under the Secretary for Security’s rules and directions,62 as soon as a law enforcement officer 
has evidence that would afford reasonable grounds for suspecting that a person has 
committed an offence, the suspect must be cautioned before questions are put to him or her.  
The Court in Lam differentiated those cases where an undercover officer plays a passive role 
and hears or overhears a confession63 from those cases where an officer plays an active role 
in procuring the confession.  This was on the basis that, if the operation were not undercover, 
“the suspect would have to be cautioned reminding him of his right of silence and enabling 
him to make a choice whether or not to speak”.64  The Court went on to say that the discretion 
to exclude the evidence will likely be exercised where there has been a functional equivalent 
                                                           
59  
See R v Cameron (pre-trial), above n 18, dealing with the issue before trial; and R v Cameron (post-trial), 
above n 18, dealing with the issue after trial.  Since this paper was written the Supreme Court has 
examined the admissibility of evidence obtained in the course of a Mr Big operation.  That judgment is 
subject to suppression orders until the defendant’s trial.  The judgment must not be published on the 
internet or on any publicly available database but may be published in law reports or law digests.   
60  
Secretary for Justice v Lam (2000) 3 HKCFAR 168 (HKCFA). 
61   The case involved police officers suspected of corruption.  Another suspect, Mr Wing, was arrested and 
was granted immunity in exchange for helping the police gather evidence against other suspects.  In a 
six month period Mr Wing adopted the role of a senior gang member and had recorded telephone 
conversations and interviews with the respondents in which they made numerous incriminating statements.   
62  
The Hong Kong equivalent of the Judges’ Rules, promulgated in 1992.  These rules are relevant to the 
exercise of the discretion. 
63  
At 181, citing the cases of R v Keeton (1970) 54 CrAppR 267; and HKSAR v Ng Wai Man [1998] 3 
HKC 103. 
64  
Secretary for Justice v Lam, above n 60, at 181. 

9 
 
of an interrogation by an undercover officer as it “would constitute a derogation of the 
accused’s right of silence and thus prejudice his fair trial”.65  
In addition, although Hong Kong has adopted the voluntariness rule,66 it may be that the 
definition of person in authority is wider than in Australia and Canada.  It may include a 
person “such as a parent, teacher or priest, who has influence on the defendant”.67  In a Mr 
Big operation the boss is set up to be in a position of influence and authority over the suspect. 
England and Wales 
In England and Wales, the admissibility of Mr Big confessions evidence has arisen in an 
extradition context.  R v Bow Street Magistrates’ Court, ex parte Proulx involved a Canadian 
national based in England who had been the subject of a Mr Big-type operation to extract a 
confession.  While the majority of the case was concerned about the use of the evidence in 
the extradition context, it was noted that, if the case had arisen in a domestic context, the 
evidence would likely be excluded.68 
In England and Wales, pursuant to the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984, codes of 
practice have been issued.  Code of Practice C, which deals with the detention, treatment and 
questioning of persons by police officers, replaced the old Judges’ Rules.  Cases have made it 
clear that undercover operations must not circumvent the PACE codes of practice.69  As the 
Court said in Regina v Christou, “[i]t would be wrong for police officers to adopt or use an 
undercover pose or disguise to enable themselves to ask questions about an offence 
uninhibited by the requirements of the code and with the effect of circumventing it”.70 
Concerns about Mr Big confessions 
Both in the caselaw and the literature on Mr Big operations, a number of concerns have been 
raised with the technique.  The main concern is with reliability and the spectre of false 
                                                           
65  
At 181.  However, given all the requisite evidence was not before the Court, the issue was sent back to the 
trial Court to determine.  The trial judge subsequently exercised his discretion to exclude the evidence: 
HKSAR v Lam DCCC 529/1997 (7 February 2001), [2001] 2 HKLRD 557 at [65].   
66  
See Secretary for Justice v Lam, above n 60, at 177.   
67  
HKSAR v Lam Hon Kwok CACC 528/2004 (CA) at [34].  There has not, however, been a case where the 
issue of who is a person in authority has been definitively decided. 
68  
R v Bow Street Magistrates’ Court, ex parte Proulx [2001] 1 All ER 57 (QB) at [75] per Mance LJ. 
69  
See Regina v Christou [1992] 1 QB 979 (CA); and R v Bryce [1992] 95 Cr App R 320 (CA).  
70  
Regina v Christou, above n 69, at 991.  

10 
 
confessions.71  But there have also been issues raised about the legitimacy of state action that 
effectively coerces a suspect into confessing, particularly if that involves oppressive conduct 
or the subversion of rights accorded to suspects.  There have been more general concerns 
expressed as to the technique, involving as it does fake criminal activity.  The prejudicial 
effect at trial of evidence showing often enthusiastic involvement in criminal activity has also 
been pointed to as of concern. 
I propose to examine each of these concerns in turn, although recognising that many may 
overlap.  I will do this from first principles, as against being tied to the legal rules of any 
particular jurisdiction.  My aim is to raise the arguments both for and against Mr Big 
operations for consideration, rather than coming to any definitive conclusions. 
Reliability 
Concern about false confessions 
Mr Big operations offer substantial inducements to confess, including full membership of the 
organisation and assistance with any police investigation.  These are, however, offered in an 
atmosphere where it is made clear that anything short of a full confession will not be believed 
and therefore will not lead to the advantages promised.  This provides suspects with an 
incentive to confess, even if they are innocent.  Further, the operation design ensures that a 
confession is seen by the suspect as without risk of adverse consequences, made as it is to the 
head of a criminal organisation with the values of trust and loyalty that have been stressed 
throughout the operation.72  Concerns about false confessions are exacerbated in cases where 
it is suggested, in the course of the Mr Big operation, that violence may greet any failure to 
confess or where suspects are encouraged to boast about their crimes.   
                                                           
71  
The issue of reliability was central to the Supreme Court of Canada’s decision in R v Hart, above n 15.  
See also Moore, Copeland and Schuller, above n 4, at 378–393; and S Smith, V Stinson and M Patry 
“Using the ‘Mr. Big’ Technique to Elicit Confessions: Successful Innovation or Dangerous Development 
in the Canadian Legal System” (2009) 15 Psychology, Public Policy and Law 168 at 180–183. 
72  
In some cases it may even be seen as beneficial to boast of crimes committed, a further incentive for a false 
confession: see the majority’s comment in R v Hart, above n 15, at [68] where the majority summarised the 
issue as follows: “[o]ver a period of weeks or months, suspects are made to believe that the fictitious 
criminal organization for which they work can provide them with financial security, social acceptance, and 
friendship.  Suspects also come to learn that violence is a necessary part of the organization’s business 
model, and that a past history of violence is a boast-worthy accomplishment.  And during the final meeting 
with Mr. Big – which involves a skillful interrogation conducted by an experienced police officer – 
suspects learn that confessing to the crime under investigation provides a consequence-free ticket into the 
organization and all of the rewards it provides.” 

11 
 
The problem of false confessions is not just theoretical.  Of the first 250 DNA exonerations in 
the United States, 40 (16 per cent) involved false confessions.73  Indeed, it was the emergence 
of proved false confessions that caused criminal justice professionals to acknowledge that this 
was a real issue.74  In recent years, various experiments have been conducted in an attempt to 
isolate the factors that may induce people to confess to crimes they have not committed.75  
Experiments have shown that promises of leniency can induce false confessions.  
Minimisation (for example suggesting that actions were justifiable by external factors) can be 
subtler but nevertheless can produce the same effect.76  Both of these factors are usually 
present in Mr Big operations.  Other experiments have shown that isolation, youth, other 
vulnerabilities of persons and particular interrogation techniques can also induce false 
confessions.77  Many of these factors are present in Mr Big operations.  
It does appear that there have been some occasions in Canada where the risk of the Mr Big 
technique causing a false confession may have crystallised: the cases involving Kyle Unger,78 
Andrew Rose and Cody Bates.  As to Kyle Unger, he was convicted of murder in 1993 and 
this was partly on the basis of a confession obtained through a Mr Big operation.  Subsequent 
DNA testing ruled out physical evidence that had initially been relied upon to link Mr Unger 
                                                           
73  
Brandon Garrett Convicting the Innocent: Where Criminal Prosecutions Go Wrong (Harvard University 
Press, Cambridge (MA), 2012) at 181 and 295.  Professor Gudjonsson has called these cases just the “tip 
of the iceberg”: Gisli Gudjonsson “False Confessions and Correcting Injustices” (2012) 46 New Eng L 
Rev 689 at 690. 
74  
It used to be thought that false confessions were not an issue.  Rather the difficulty with confessions was in 
assessing whether they had actually been made because witnesses (such as “paid informers, angry victims 
or over-zealous police officers”) often had a motive to lie: see John Henry Wigmore Wigmore on Evidence 
(Chadbourn revision, Aspen Law & Business, United States of America, 1970) [Wigmore] vol 3 at §820b.  
Wigmore considered a confession (if proved to have been made), however, to be evidence of the highest 
quality: “[t]he confession of a crime is usually as much against a man’s permanent interests as anything 
well can be; and ... no innocent man can be supposed ordinarily to risk life, liberty or property by a false 
confession.  Assuming the confession as an undoubted fact, it carries a persuasion which nothing else does, 
because a fundamental instinct of human nature teaches each one of us its significance.” 
75  
The experiments conducted often, due to the requirement for ethics board approval, involve relatively 
trivial matters.  Because of this, the circumstances replicating the Mr Big technique have not been able to 
be created in the laboratory.    
76  
S Kassin “The Social Psychology of False Confessions” (2015) 9 Social Issues and Policy Review 25  
at 35. 
77  
See for example Gisli Gudjonsson “False Confessions and Correcting Injustices” (2012) 46 New Eng L 
Rev 689 at 700; and I Candel and others “‘I hit the Shift-key and then the computer crashed’”: Children 
and false admissions” (2005) 38 Personality and Individual Differences 138. 
78  
Referred to by the Supreme Court of Canada in R v Hart, above n 15, at [62]. 

12 
 
to the murder scene.  While a new trial was ordered, it was eventually abandoned as the 
Crown thought it was be too unsafe to try him on the available evidence.79  
Andrew Rose was suspected of committing the unsolved murder of two German hitchhikers 
in British Columbia.  He was convicted in two trials, with both convictions being set aside.  
Before the third trial, the police decided to commence a Mr Big operation.  Mr Rose was 
subjected to “relentless pressure, abusive language, threats, inducements, robust challenges 
and psychological manipulation” in his final interview with Mr Big.80  After many emphatic 
denials, his confession to Mr Big included the statement “Well, we’ll go with I did it, ok?”81  
During the third trial, the Crown dropped the case against him as DNA testing could not link 
him to the crime.82  
As the third example, Cody Bates was involved in the attempted robbery and homicide of a 
drug dealer.  As a result of a Mr Big operation, he confessed to shooting the victim and said 
that he was “just eliminating the competition” and he “didn’t feel bad in the least”.  However, 
the agreed statement of facts at the trial stated that it was not in fact Bates who had shot the 
victim, but rather Bates’ co-defendant who had shot the victim by accident.83 
In light of the above, the issue is whether (and the extent to which) confessions resulting from 
Mr Big operation should be admitted in evidence.  A false confession has no probative value 
and therefore no relevance to the trial.  So a confession that is obviously false84 should not go 
before a jury.  But, in the case of Mr Big scenario confessions, there will usually only be a 
risk that a confession may be false.  The risk may be significant but, in the absence of 
incontrovertible proof of falsehood, there remains a possibility that the confession is true. 
                                                           
79  
See R v Unger (1993) 85 Man R (2d) 284 (MBCA); R v Unger (2005) 196 Man R (2d) 280 (MBCA); and 
BA Macfarlane “Wrongful Convictions: Determining Culpability when the Sand Keeps Shifting” (2014) 
47 UBC L Rev 597 at 615–616. 
80   Gisli H Gudjonsson The Psychology of Interrogations and Confessions: A Handbook (Wiley, Chichester 
(UK), 2003) at 578.  As some further background, a United States man had apparently confessed on 
numerous occasions to the murders prior to committing suicide and, subsequent to the second trial, DNA 
testing on two exhibits excluded Mr Rose as the source of the DNA.  In addition, the man who committed 
suicide could not be eliminated as a contributor to some of the DNA which was found on the exhibits. 
81  
At 574–575.  Professor Gudjonsson testified at the voir dire prior to the trial and it was his view that the 
confessions to the undercover officers were unreliable for a number of reasons set out in his book: see 
Gudjonsson, above n 80, at 576–578. 
82  
At 581.  
83  
See R v Bates 2009 AQBD 379, 368 AR 158. 
84  
For example as may be the case in situations where the key motivation is to seek notoriety: Gudjonsson, 
above n 73, at 693–694. 

13 
 
The arguments for no reliability filter  
One could argue that, as long as there is a possibility of a true confession, the evidence 
should go before the jury as it is the role of the jury in a jury trial to decide on the facts.85  
Indeed, there are many instances of potentially unreliable evidence that go before juries.  The 
best example may be jailhouse confessions,86 where there are not only the reliability issues 
with content but issues as to whether the confessions were made at all, given the incentives 
for inmates to lie.87  Jailhouse confessions are usually held to be admissible and the risk of 
unreliability is dealt with by strong directions to the jury.88  
Another example of potentially unreliable evidence that goes before juries is identification 
evidence.  Approximately three-quarters of the convictions that have been exonerated by 
DNA evidence in the United States were based on faulty eye-witness testimony.89  As with 
confessions, juries have difficulty assessing the reliability of identification evidence and have 
a tendency to put inordinate weight on it.  More importantly, the factors they use to assess 
                                                           
85  
See for example the US Supreme Court’s comments in Shannon v United States 512 US 573 (1994) at 579 
where it said “[t]he jury’s function is to find the facts and to decide whether, on those facts, the defendant 
is guilty of the crime charged”.  
86  
Also called “cell confessions” and “prison confessions”. 
87  
See the comments of the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in Benedetto v The Queen [2003] 1 WLR 
1545 at [31] and [32].  Even if no explicit concessions are offered to the informant, there remains the hope 
of more favourable treatment.  In some instances, incentives to lie may include protecting the actual culprit 
which would be particularly dangerous as the false confession could in those cases include details known 
only to the perpetrator, markedly increasing the apparent reliability of the confession.   
88   In Canada, see Vetrovec v The Queen [1982] 1 SCR 811, applied in R v Brooks 2000 SCC 11, [2000] 1 
SCR 237 in the context of jailhouse confessions. In the Canadian context, see also the miscarriage of 
justice inquiry into the Thomas Sophonow case where Commissioner Cory vividly stated “[j]ailhouse 
informants ... rush to testify like vultures to rotting flesh or sharks to blood.  They are smooth and 
convincing liars.  Whether they will seek favours from the authorities, attention or notoriety they are in 
every instance completely unreliable.  It will be seen how frequently they have been a major factor in the 
conviction of innocent people and how much they tend to corrupt the administration of justice.  Usually 
their presence as witnesses signals the end of any hope of providing a fair trial”: Hon Peter Cory “The 
Inquiry Regarding Thomas Sophonow” (2001) at 63.  As to the position in Australia, see Pollitt v The 
Queen (1992) 174 CLR 558; and Rozenes v Beljajev [1995] 1 VR 533 (VSCA).  For New Zealand, see 
s 122(2)(c) and (d) of the Evidence Act 2006 and the recent Supreme Court case of Hudson v R [2011] 
NZSC 51, [2011] 3 NZLR 289 dealing with the issue.  The Supreme Court held at [36] that, while there 
may be some scope to exclude prison admission evidence under the Evidence Act (pursuant to ss 7 and 8), 
“[t]he legislative scheme as a whole is indicative of a legislative intention that reliability decisions ought to 
be made by a properly cautioned jury”.   
89  
See Ian Fraser and others “The Police Line-up and Its Impact on the Justice System” (2009) 54 Crim L Q 
332 at 333; and Margery Koosed “Reforming Eyewitness Identification Law and Practices to Protect the 
Innocent” (2009) 24 Creighton L Rev 595 at 597. 

14 
 
reliability, such as witness confidence, memory for peripheral details and consistency of 
description, are not necessarily indicative of the reliability of the evidence.90 
There has been a great improvement in recent years in the gathering of identification 
evidence and limits on the admissibility of evidence where proper standards are not met.91  
But, because of the inherent difficulties with identification, such improvements do not 
necessarily lead to accurate identifications.  As noted by the British Psychological Society, 
several surveys have established that, even with the use of properly constituted identification 
parades, there is an approximate error rate of 20 per cent.92  
Even aside from those examples, human memory is fallible at all three stages: acquisition, 
retention and retrieval.  There are also issues with the techniques used to acquire witness 
accounts and with the inability of people to detect falsehood.93  This means that the 
cornerstone of evidence proferred in criminal trials, oral evidence from participants or 
bystanders, is potentially unreliable and difficult for juries to assess properly.  
In summary, the argument against a reliability filter for Mr Big confessions rests heavily on 
the proposition that it should be up to the jury, as the central fact finder in the criminal justice 
system, to assess the reliability of confession evidence. It is on the totality of evidence that 
decisions must be made.  What may appear unreliable considered in isolation may, in the 
context of the whole case, in fact be reliable and vice versa.  Juries or judge alone fact finders 
should therefore have access to all available evidence.   
                                                           
90  
As noted by the New Zealand Law Commission in Evidence: Reform of the Law (NZLC R55 – Vol 1, 
1999) at [199] [“Reform of the Law”]. 
91  
In New Zealand, see for example ss 45–46A and 126 dealing with identification evidence and Law 
Commission Evidence: Total Recall? The Reliability of Witness Testimony (NZLC MP 13, 1999) 11–36.  
As to Australia, see Australian Law Reform Commission Uniform Evidence Law (ALRC 102, 2006), 
Chapter 13 on “Identification Evidence”; see s 113–116 of the Uniform Evidence Acts, ss 3ZM–3ZQ of 
the Australian Commonwealth Crimes Act 1914 (the Commonwealth Crimes Act), and ss 233–237 of the 
Crimes Act 1900 (ACT).  As to England and Wales, see Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984, ss 66 and 
78; Code D: Code of Practice for the Identification of Persons by Police Officers (effective from 7 March 
2011); and Narissa Somji “When Will the Law Catch up to Science? A Call for Legislating Identification 
Procedures” (2009) 54 Crim L Q 299 at 317–318.  For a summary of the position in Canada, see Angela 
Baxter “Identification Evidence in Canada: Problems and a Potential Solution” (2007) 52 Crim L Q 175.  
92  
British Psychological Society Guidelines on Memory and the Law: Recommendations from the Scientific 
Study of Human Memory (Revised April 2010) at 33. 
93  
See L Smith and S Glazebrook “Assessing Witnesses: Can the Skills be Taught” (2013) 1 Judicial 
Education and Training 83 at 99.   For more on the fallibilities of memory, see Matthew Gerrie, Maryanne 
Garry and Elizabeth Loftus “False Memories” in N Brewer and K Williams (eds) Psychology and Law: An 
Empirical Perspective (Guilford, New York, 2005) at 222–253.  On detecting lies and deceit generally, see 
Aldert Vrij Detecting Lies and Deceit: Pitfalls and Opportunities (2nd ed, John Wiley and Sons Ltd, 
England, 2008). 

15 
 
The law, as it stands, already puts before juries types of evidence that are known to be 
fallible.  Confessions elicited from Mr Big scenarios should not be treated differently.  On 
this line of reasoning, strong judicial directions giving proper assistance on how to assess the 
evidence, not a reliability filter or threshold, should be the mechanism by which the risks are 
mitigated. 
Arguments for a reliability filter 
Those arguing in favour of a reliability filter point out that confession evidence is very 
powerful evidence, raising the real risk of wrongful convictions.94  Most people believe that 
they would never confess to a crime they did not commit and are thus very sceptical about 
claims of false confessions.95  In addition, studies have shown that people (including law 
enforcement agents) are unable to distinguish between true and false confessions.96   
Even more concerning, studies have shown that people do not adequately discount 
confessions, even if they are perceived to have been coerced.  For example in one experiment 
mock jurors were told that a confession had been induced by violence and that they should 
disregard it.97  The conviction rate was 44 per cent.  This compared to a conviction rate of 19 
per cent in a control group where the evidence did not include a confession.98  This 
experiment raises real issues, not just about the ability of juries to assess the weight to be 
attached to a coerced confession, but also as to the value and effect of jury directions.  Just as 
concerning is that similar results occurred when the participants were experienced judges.99   
Confessions may also influence the way in which other evidence is interpreted.  For example, 
in one experiment, identification of innocent suspects in line-ups increased markedly if 
                                                           
94  
Kassin, above n 76, at 37.  
95  
At 38.  
96  
In one study, despite being less able to distinguish a false confession from a true one than the student 
participants, the confidence of law enforcement agents in their ability to do so was higher than that of the 
students: S Kassin, C Meissner and R Norwick “‘I’d Know a False Confession if I Saw One’: A 
Comparative Study of College Students and Police Investigators” (2005) 29 Law & Hum Behav 211  
at 222. 
97  
The vast majority of participants remembered these instructions. 
98  
S Kassin and H Sukel “Coerced Confessions and the Jury: An Experimental Test of the ‘Harmless Error’ 
Rule” (1997) 21 Law & Hum Behav 27 at 42.   
99  
See D Wallace and S Kassin “Harmless error analysis: How do judges respond to confession errors?” 
(2012) 36 Law & Hum Behav 151.  This raises a real issue for judge alone trials where the same judge 
decides on the issue of admissibility and the ultimate verdict.  This is because, even if judges hold the 
confession inadmissible, it may nevertheless affect their verdict. 

16 
 
witnesses were told there had been a confession in the case.100  In another experiment, 
eyewitnesses to a mock crime were told that a different line-up member than the one they had 
selected had confessed.  A majority changed their identifications.  Of those who had not made 
an initial identification, half subsequently selected the confessor once his identity was 
revealed.101  The risk of a confession tainting the perception of other evidence is obviously a 
real issue if a confession is false.  
How should any filter operate? 
If there should, because of the risk of false confessions, be some filter before Mr Big 
confessions are placed before a jury, the next issue is when and how that filter should operate.  
This would presumably depend on the extent of the apparent reliability of the confession.  
The difficulty remains that judges are human too and so, in assessing threshold reliability 
questions, may be just as unable as jurors to assess whether a confession is reliable.  They 
may rely too heavily or misinterpret the significance of other evidence in making their 
assessment.   
Obviously, those confessions that lead to the discovery of evidence not known about by the 
police (including the discovery of remains) at first blush must be seen as being the most 
reliable.  The next most reliable confessions may be thought to be those which refer to 
evidence known to the police but not publicly available.  The difficulty with that view is that, 
of the first 40 DNA exoneration cases mentioned above, 38 “contained detailed and 
persuasive incriminating facts that must have either wittingly or unwittingly originated from 
the police”.102  As it is not usual to tape all stages of the Mr Big operations, there will be no 
way for a judge to know if this has occurred, unless there was a policy of not briefing police 
participants on the crime the suspect is alleged to have committed.  If possible police 
contamination is eliminated, the only real risk remaining is that the suspect got the details 
from the true perpetrator but whether that is the case or not seems a quintessentially jury 
question.103   
                                                           
100  See Kassin, above n 76, at 39. 
101  See L Hasel and S Kassin “On the Presumption of Evidentiary Independence: Can Confessions Corrupt 
Eyewitness Identifications?” (2009) 20 Psychological Science 122. 
102  See Gudjonsson, above n 73, at 691. See also Garrett, above n 73, at 19–21. 
103  This was the defence argued, and rejected by the jury, in the Australian case involving Mr Brett Cowan: 
see R v Cowan, above n 17, at [12]. 

17 
 
Other indicia of reliability include consistency with other evidence in the case (but known to 
the public and the suspect) and the general plausibility of the confession, including any 
apparently genuine emotional reaction when confessing.  Relying on the general plausibility 
of a statement and internal clues pointing to reliability may be dangerous.  In a study of 
20 proved false confessions,104 it was found that they contained not only vivid sensory details 
about the crime but “statements about the confession’s motivation, assertions that the 
confession is voluntary, apologises and expressions of remorse”.105  
All this suggests that, if there is to be a filter, the more likely the circumstances in which the 
confession is obtained point to the risk of unreliability, the stronger the indications of actual 
reliability should be and preferably those indications of reliability should be found outside of 
the confession itself.106  
Conclusion 
Whether there is a reliability filter or not, there will still remain the risk of false confessions.  
It may be necessary to admit that our trial processes can never be perfect and all that can be 
done is to try our best to avoid miscarriages of justice.  In this endeavour, jury directions will 
be important.107  Expert evidence, particularly in what may be counter-intuitive areas (for 
example where jurors think they would not falsely confess and evaluate others accordingly) 
may also assist.108  Robust post-trial procedures for assessing criminal miscarriages would 
also be important.109  
                                                           
104  Proved on the basis that 14 of the defendants were exonerated by DNA evidence and the other six were 
exonerated by other means (eg acquittal at trial, the real perpetrator was found or the conviction was 
overturned on appeal and the defendant was not re-tried): S Appelby, Lisa Hasel and S Kassin  
“Police-induced confessions: an empirical analysis of their content and impact” (2011) Psychology, Crime 
& Law 1 at 4.  Of these 20 confessions, only nine were audiotaped or videotaped. 
105  See Kassin, above n 76, at 39 and Appelby, Hasel and Kassin, above n 104, at 5–7. 
106  See the comments of the majority in R v Hart in set out at n 33 above.  
107  As noted above, there may be concerns about their efficacy.  However, to increase the chances of 
directions having an effect, at the least they should be in plain English and focused on the actual issues at 
hand.  In the Mr Big context, some academics have suggested extensive and robust jury directions: see for 
example, H A Kaiser “Mack: Mr Big Receives an Undeserved Reprieve, Recommended Jury Instructions 
Are Too Weak” (2014) 13 CR (7th) 251.  I am not to be seen as necessarily endorsing those suggested 
directions. 
108  For some recent New Zealand cases on the issue of counter-intuitive evidence, see the Supreme Court 
cases of DH (SC 9/2014) v R [2015] NZSC 35, [2015] 1 NZLR 625 and Kohai v R [2015] NZSC 36, 
[2015] 1 NZLR 833. 
109  For a discussion on the issue of miscarriages of justice, see for example G Hammond “The New 
Miscarriages of Justice” (Harkness Henry Lecture, University of Waikato, Hamilton, 2006) available at 
<www.courts.govt.nz>; and M D Birdling “Correction of Miscarriages of Justice in New Zealand and 
England” (Doctor of Philosophy thesis, University of Oxford, 2012).  In this context it is also important to 

18 
 
Oppression 
Some of the Mr Big operations have involved violent scenarios designed to instil in the 
suspect a fear that violence could greet a person who was not honest with or who betrayed the 
organisation.110  Of course, in the case of Mr Big operations, this is only simulated violence 
to others but the suspect is encouraged to think it is real. Under the new approach in Hart, 
violence or the threat of violence are less likely to be acceptable.  Such tactics would also 
likely fall foul of the oppression rule in New Zealand and the basal voluntariness rule in 
Australia.111  
Fear of violence can lead to false confessions and so would be relevant to the issue of 
reliability discussed above.  Excluding evidence obtained through violence or the threat of 
violence does not merely meet reliability concerns, however.  It also makes it clear that 
violence is unacceptable in a civilised society and in particular that it is unacceptable 
behaviour for those who should be enforcing the law to pretend to perpetrate or endorse 
violence.112  
Coerced self-incrimination 
A confession obtained through the Mr Big technique is very far from a confession where the 
suspect chooses voluntarily to speak, with no pressure to do so.  The whole design of the 
operation is carefully calibrated to force a confession:113 the creation of the false world, 
                                                                                                                                                                                     
recognise the work of many not-for-profit organisations worldwide, such as the Innocence Project, that 
attempt to correct miscarriages of justice.  In Canada, Royal Commissions of Inquiry have been used to 
investigate alleged miscarriages of justice.  In the Canadian context, see also K Roach “Wrongful 
Convictions in Canada” (2012) 80 U Cin L Rev 1465.  As to the position in Australia, see Lynne 
Weathered “Wrongful Conviction in Australia” (2012) 80 U Cin L Rev 1391. 
110  See for example R v Terrico, above n 10. In this Canadian case, one of the scenarios involved a “mock 
beating” in a hotel room.  The accused waited outside the hotel room while this occurred.  The hotel room 
was arranged to look as if a fight had taken place and “blood” was smeared on the “beaten up” undercover 
officer’s face.  The officers acknowledged that their objective was to convey the impression that the gang 
was “violent and ruthless and that one can get beaten up, if not worse, when one lies to them”. 
111  See also art 15 of the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or 
Punishment 1465 UNTS 85 (opened for signature 10 December 1984, entered into force 26 June 1987).  
Australia became a signatory to the Convention against Torture on 10 December 1985.  Canada became a 
signatory to the Convention against Torture on 23 August 1985.  As to Hong Kong, the Convention against 
Torture has applied to Hong Kong since 1992.  On 10 June 1997, China notified the Secretary-General that 
the Convention against Torture, with the reservations made by China, will also apply to the Hong Kong 
Special Administrative Region.  New Zealand become a signatory to the Convention on 14 January 1986. 
112  See, for example, the majority’s comment in R v Hart, above n 15, at [116], where they said “[a] 
confession derived from physical violence or threats of violence against an accused will not be admissible 
– no matter how reliable – because this, quite simply, is something the community will not tolerate”.  
113  As the majority in R v Hart, above n 15, at [68] said, “[t]he purpose of these operations is to induce 
confessions, and they are carefully calibrated to achieve that end.”  

19 
 
gradually drawing the suspect into that false world at great expense,114 the setting up of 
Mr Big as an authority figure to be respected (and in some cases feared), the build up to the 
interview with Mr Big as the final barrier to be passed before the promised rewards 
(financial, social and above all the assistance with the criminal charges), and the interview 
itself, often characterised by interrogative techniques (aside from the inducements already 
mentioned) that would not be acceptable in a formal police interview.115  It has been argued 
that all this means that, in practical terms, Mr Big operations leave the normal run of suspects 
with no choice but to confess.116   
In most jurisdictions it would be thought inappropriate for the police in their official capacity 
to offer inducements and threats to force a suspect to confess.  This would particularly be the 
case after the suspect has been charged and especially if they are in detention.  However, the 
voluntariness rule, which is still applied in a number of jurisdictions, also applies  
pre-detention.  The original reason for the voluntariness rule was a concern about the 
reliability of confessions extracted by means of threats or promises.117   
The rationale are now wider.  The rule has become in recent years also a means of ensuring 
the self-determination of the suspect (embodying the principle that the person should have a 
choice whether or not to confess) and also as dealing with issues of police conduct in 
extracting confessions.118  It could be argued that Mr Big operations, in effectively forcing 
suspects to confess, fall foul of these other rationale for the voluntariness rule and do so by 
using the coercive power of the state, albeit not overtly.119  Indeed, some might say that the 
covert forcing of a confession by the state is even worse, given that it involves deception so 
                                                           
114  As explained above. 
115  For example, see the comment in Tofilau v The Queen, above n 7. 
116  See the comments in Moore, Copeland and Schuller, above n 4, at 388.   
117  See A Godsey “Rethinking the Involuntary Confession Rule: Toward a Test for Identifying Compelled 
Self-Incrimination” (2005) 93 California L Rev 465 at 484; and Wigmore, above n 74, at §820b. 
118   See the thorough discussion of the history and rationale changes underlying the voluntariness rule by 
Gummow and Hayne JJ in Tofilau v The Queen, above n 7, at [43]. 
119  See the remarks of Kirby J in dissent in Tofilau v The Queen, above n 7, at [204]: “the will of the suspect 
(in respect of the choice whether to speak or to withhold incriminating statements, in a context where 
police officers were present, and the statements were being recorded for future use in evidence) was 
overborne by the tactics used to extract the confessional statements.  That will was overborne because 
tricks and deception were targeted directly at the suspect’s fundamental legal right under our criminal 
justice system, namely to remain silent in the presence of police investigators.  As to the suggestion that 
the tricks used by the undercover police officers were tolerable because the officers did not threaten 
violence, engage in unlawful conduct or use intimidation or duress to obtain the confessions, it is necessary 
to remember that violence, intimidation and duress can be deployed in different manifestations.  For 
frightened, vulnerable people of low intellect, a physical bashing may be much less effective than trickery 
and manipulation.” 

20 
 
that a suspect does not even know that he or she is dealing with the police.  As a recent article 
says:120  
[t]he state’s “superior resources and power” are not restricted to the interrogation 
room or a jail cell. The engineering of a new social world and the orchestration of the 
target’s actions for months at a time may constitute, in psychological terms, 
quintessential “control”. The state’s agents are not rendered impotent simply because 
they are pretending not to be state agents. 
On the other hand, others would argue that suspects still retain a choice whether or not to 
confess in the course of a Mr Big operation.121  Some subjects of Mr Big operations have 
indeed refused to confess, despite the inducements to do so.122  It could be argued that those 
who do confess do so for reasons of greed.  While they might also confess for assistance with 
the criminal charges, they could have had no expectation that any assistance was lawful, 
given that it is provided by what is thought by the suspect to be a criminal organisation.  
Suspects in effect confess to avoid the consequences of their offending.  This (assuming the 
confession is reliable) may even be seen as a strong argument in favour of admissibility.   
Avoiding Rights and Protections 
Another argument against Mr Big operations is that they involve the eliciting of confessions 
without administering a caution to remind the suspect of the right to remain silent and of the 
right to counsel.  Whether this is seen as a concern may depend in part on the stage at which 
particular jurisdictions require cautions to be administered.  As discussed above, some 
jurisdictions require a caution once there are reasonable grounds to suspect that a person has 
committed a criminal offence (for example, Hong Kong and England).  Some require a 
caution only where there is sufficient to charge (New Zealand).  Yet others only require a 
caution when a person is arrested or detained (Canada).123  But there remains the issue of 
whether undercover officers should be required to caution suspects at all. 
                                                           
120  Moore, Copeland and Schuller, above n 4, at 378. 
121   This was the view of the majority of the Court in Tofilau v The Queen, above n 7, in which they held that, 
in terms of basal voluntariness, the Mr Big scenarios did not compel the appellants to speak: see at [22] per 
Gleeson CJ; at [80], [88], [98] and [108] per Gummow and Hayne JJ; and [349]–[389] per Callinan, 
Heydon and Crennan JJ.  
122  See for example Jason Dix who, as a suspect in two execution-style killings, was the subject of a 13 month 
Mr Big operation in Canada.  No incriminating statements were made and Mr Dix eventually sued the 
Crown on numerous grounds, including malicious prosecution and false imprisonment.  He was awarded 
some $750,000: see Dix v Canada (Attorney-General), above n 9. 
123  A discussion of when the line should be drawn is beyond the scope of this paper.  As to the Australian 
position, many States have enacted provisions regulating the conduct of police interrogation and when 
officers are required to administer a caution: see further J D Heydon Cross on Evidence – Australian 

21 
 
Undercover officers should not have to caution 
Some would argue that the rules as to cautions should apply only when the suspect is 
speaking to the police in their official capacity.  When the police are acting undercover, the 
suspect does not know they are speaking to a law enforcement officer and so will not have 
been influenced to confess by the official status of the questioner.   
Further, to require cautions in the investigative stages will unduly limit undercover 
operations.  Undercover police officers in the course of such operations would have to 
caution a suspect once an incriminatory statement about any offending is made, even if that 
means breaking cover and jeopardising the whole operation and perhaps even their own 
safety.   
Mr Big operations in particular would be severely hampered.124 These operations have 
achieved results in serious cases that would otherwise remain unprosecuted and have even in 
some cases led to the finding of previously undiscovered remains of victims, something of 
great significance for relatives.125  
Covert operations should respect rights 
Others would argue that, if the police should have administered a caution had they been 
questioning the suspect officially, then they should be required do so if questioning covertly, 
at least where that questioning amounts to the functional equivalent of an interrogation.126  If 
that were not the case, the rules as to cautions could be easily subverted. 
Many suspects who are subjected to the Mr Big technique will have had dealings with the 
police during the official investigation into the offending and in many instances may have 
had the assistance of counsel.  They may have given their version of events to the police or 
they may have refused to speak to the police, exercising their right not to answer questions.  
In either case their decision on how to react to the investigation has been overridden by the 
                                                                                                                                                                                     
Edition (loose leaf, LexisNexis) at [33775].  Many of the States appear to have adopted the Hong Kong 
and England level of “reasonable grounds to suspect”.  
124  See for example the comments of Garry Clement, a former Royal Canadian Mounted Police superintendent 
who said the Mr Big technique is a “must” and “[a] lot of when we use this type of operation ... it’s dealing 
in the case of murders.  A lot of times it’s dealing in cold cases”: Sarah Trick “Despite ruling, Mr. Big 
tactic ‘a must’: expert” (31 July 2014) Global News <www.globalnews.ca>. 
125  See for example, the cases of R v Copeland 1999 BCCA, (1991) 131 BCAC 264; R v Cowan, above n 17; 
and R v Mack, above n 43. 
126  See the discussion of the England and Wales and Hong Kong cases above. 

22 
 
setting up of the false reality by the police who, in their official capacity, were likely to make 
no further progress. This is unfair and the unfairness is exacerbated if undercover police are 
allowed to interrogate a suspect without administering a caution. 
Further, the fact an operation is undercover may even increase the need for a caution.  The 
suspect does not know the questioner is a police officer and therefore has not made a 
conscious choice whether or not to speak to the police.  When confessing to a private 
individual, such as a relative or friend, a suspect only takes the risk of that confession being 
passed onto the police.127  In Mr Big operations, contrary to the suspect’s reasonable 
expectations engendered by the police in the course of the operation, it is certain the 
confession will be used by the police. 
Even if a caution has to be administered in undercover operations, this would not inhibit 
ordinary undercover operations.  The purpose of most undercover operations is to gather 
evidence of crimes and not to elicit confessions.128  Confessions made to, or in the hearing of 
undercover officers will still be admissible as long as they were not actively elicited.129   
Police Conduct 
There are two other aspects of Mr Big operations that may engage concerns about the proper 
conduct of the police: whether the police should use a technique that risks false confessions 
and that creates a false criminal world.  There is also the issue of whether it is appropriate to 
deal with police conduct issues by excluding evidence.  
Risk of false confessions 
The first (and probably the most concerning, given that it has the most potential to lead to 
substantive miscarriages of justice), is that the methods used by the police in these operations, 
including promises to make charges go away, have the potential to lead to false confessions.  
It is true that the Mr Big technique succeeds in persuading some offenders to confess to 
                                                           
127  This comment was made by the majority in R v Hebert, above n 4, where they said, at 181, “[i]f the suspect 
speaks, it is by his or her own choice, and he or she must be taken to have accepted the risk that the recipient 
may inform the police.” 
128  As Karakatsanis J said in R v Hart: “[u]ndercover officers usually role-play within existing circumstances 
to observe suspects and gather evidence – not to generate confessions...”: R v Hart, above n 15, at [216]. 
129  Further, most normal undercover officers will not be placed in a position of apparent authority over 
suspects or be in a position to offer incentives to confess.  The issue of coerced confessions therefore will 
not arise. 

23 
 
crimes they have actually committed when they would not otherwise have done so (true 
confessions) but this is likely to be at a cost of at least some false confessions.130  
In addition, there is research to suggest that a confession may taint the gathering of other 
evidence,131 and limit the investigation of other legitimate avenues of inquiry.132  The risk 
therefore is that the investigation will cease or be distorted, even if a confession is in fact 
false, leaving the true perpetrator free.  A confession may also serve to reduce the availability 
of potentially exculpatory evidence at trial and therefore the ability of a jury or judge to 
assess whether or not the confession is true. 
The police in most jurisdictions have been working to ensure that their official questioning 
techniques and practices minimise, to the extent possible, the risk of false confessions.  The 
issue is whether it is proper for undercover police in the course of Mr Big operations to be 
released from the constraints that would apply were they questioning in their official 
capacities.  In other words, should the police be able to use techniques known to increase the 
risk of false confessions undercover when they could not, and would not, use these overtly?   
It could be argued that, if confessions pass a threshold reliability test, then the risk that a 
confession may nevertheless be false is an acceptable risk, arising as it does from a technique 
that has been successful in extracting true confessions to serious crimes and in some cases to 
the discovery of further evidence.133  In any event, the question of whether a confession is 
reliable should, assuming an appropriate threshold reliability standard is met, be for the jury 
or judge fact finder to assess in light of the totality of the evidence. 
Others would argue that this analysis employs unacceptable “end justifies the means” 
reasoning, exacerbated by the fact that both judges and juries place great weight on 
confessions and have difficulty recognising false confessions.  Such commentators would say 
that the police should maintain standards, whether operating in their official capacity or 
undercover, and that these standards should eschew methods of interrogation that carry an 
                                                           
130  This is assuming that the research on false confessions can be applied to Mr Big operations.  
131  See S Kassin “Why Confessions Trump Innocence” (2012) 67 American Psychologist 431 at 436.  
132  See for example, S Kassin and others “Police-Induced Confessions: Risk Factors and Recommendations” 
(2010) 34 Law & Hum Behav 3 at 23 where the researchers stated that, once the police obtain a 
confession, they “often close their investigation, deem the case solved, and overlook exculpatory evidence 
or other possible leads” even if there is good reason to doubt the reliability of the confession.   
133  For a discussion of the consequentialist argument in favour of deceptive police practices, see the discussion 
in Andrew Ashworth “Should the Police be Allowed to Use Deceptive Practices?” (1998) 118 LQR 108 at 
117–118. 

24 
 
unacceptable risk of false confession.134  The courts should not be party to the breach of 
proper standards of police behaviour in this regard. 
False criminal world 
Another aspect of Mr Big operations that has attracted criticism is whether it is proper for the 
police to create a false criminal reality.135  In many cases the subjects of Mr Big operations 
have had little or no meaningful prior criminal history.  They have also often been socially 
isolated and financially vulnerable (possibly due to having been charged with a serious 
offence).136  The false world created gives them friendship and financial reward but at the 
same time invades their privacy.  Discovering that their new world and friends are fictitious 
risks going to the core of their psychological well being.  It is likely to create resentment of 
the police, both on the part of the suspect but also often their families.  It could also, given the 
skills and knowledge acquired in the scenarios, lower the suspect’s inhibitions if the 
possibility of engaging in criminal activity arises in the future.   
The counter to this concern is that the technique is successful in bringing serious offenders to 
justice where conventional investigative methods have failed.  The rules of fair play 
regrettably cannot apply in these circumstances.  Lamer J in the Canadian Supreme Court 
case of R v Rothman put this argument eloquently:137 
The investigation of crime and the detection of criminals is not a game to be governed 
by the Marquess of Queensbury rules.  The authorities, in dealing with shrewd and 
often sophisticated criminals, must sometimes of necessity resort to tricks or other 
forms of deceit and should not ... be hampered in their work.  
                                                           
134  The aim of the criminal justice system should be to implement procedures that increase the rate of true 
confessions while minimising the rate of false confessions and avoiding techniques shown to increase the 
rate of both true and false confessions: see M Russano and others “Investigating True and False 
Confessions Within a Novel Experimental Paradigm” (2005) 16 Psychological Science 481 at 481 and 
484. 
135  See for example, Moore, Copeland and Schuller, above n 4, at 396  
136  See Amar Khoday “Scrutinizing Mr Big: Police Trickery, the Confessions Rule and the Need to Regulate 
Extra-Custodial Undercover Interrogations” (2013) 60 Crim L Q 277 at 284–285. 
137  R v Rothman [1981] 1 SCR 640 at 697. This case did not involve a Mr Big-type scenario but rather 
involved an undercover officer questioning a suspect in custody after he had refused to answer questions.  
In R v Hebert, above n 4, overruled the result in R v Rothman. 

25 
 
Exclusion of evidence 
Finally, there is the issue of whether the exclusion of evidence is the best way to deal with 
issues of police misconduct.138  Where an individual police officer has acted contrary to 
normal police standards, it could be thought that individual disciplinary measures might be 
more efficacious.  Even if the police conduct at issue is systemic, it has been argued that 
individual offenders should not benefit from the courts’ wish to mark disapproval of the 
conduct by having relevant evidence excluded.  
The counter argument is that, particularly where there has been a breach of rights, the 
exclusion of evidence is a proportionate response to vindicate the right.  Further, it would 
bring the administration of justice into disrepute if the courts were to use the fruits of police 
misconduct.139  In addition, the police would not be adequately deterred from such conduct if 
the result is nevertheless admissible in evidence.140  
Trial issues 
If a confession from a Mr Big operation is held to be admissible, the defendant’s main 
problem, assuming he or she wishes to challenge the validity of the confession in whole or in 
part, will be raising a reasonable doubt as to the truth of the confession.  As already 
discussed, juries tend to place inordinate weight on confessions, even if there is reason to 
doubt their validity.   
This will be exacerbated in a Mr Big situation where, in order to challenge validity, it will be 
necessary to place at least some evidence before the jury of the suspect’s willingness to 
engage in what could have been quite serious criminal behaviour had it been real.  Despite 
directions to the contrary, there is a risk that jurors will be influenced in their perception, both 
of the defendant and the evidence, by this “bad character” evidence in circumstances where 
                                                           
138  For a thorough examination of the argument in favour of and against the exclusionary rule (albeit in the 
United States context), see for example H M Caldwell and C A Chase “The Unruly Exclusionary Rule: 
Heading Justice Blackmun’s Call to Examine the Rule in Light of Changing Judicial Understanding About 
its Effects Outside the Courtroom” (1994) 78 Marquette L Rev 45; and D H Oaks “Studying the 
Exclusionary Rule in Search and Seizure” (1970) 37 University of Chicago L Rev 665; and H M Caldwell 
“Fixing the Constable’s Blunder: Can One Trial Judge in One Country in One State Nudge a Nation 
Beyond the Exclusionary Rule?” (2006) BYU L Rev 1. 
139  Law Commission Criminal Evidence: Police Questioning (NZLC PP21, 1992) at 93. 
140  See the discussion by the New Zealand Law Commission, above n 139, at 91–92.  It was the New Zealand 
Law Commission’s view that “[w]hile the deterrent effect of the exclusion of confessions and other forms 
of evidence may well be overstated, those responsible for the conduct of the New Zealand Police certainly 
endeavour to ensure that police act within the boundaries set by the law and react to judicial rulings 
accordingly”. 

26 
 
normally such evidence would not be admissible.  As the majority of the Supreme Court of 
Canada said in Hart, the combination of reliability issues and prejudice makes “for a potent 
mix – and the risk of a wrongful conviction increases accordingly”.141 
The other aspect of Mr Big operations that could decrease even further the willingness of 
juries to doubt the validity of a confession is the fact that, throughout the operation, the value 
of honesty has been stressed.  Prosecutors are sure to point out that a false confession would 
go against the values of the organisation the suspect was so anxious to join.  The difficulty 
with this argument is that it is usually made clear to a suspect that the only version that will 
be accepted as truthful, and therefore in line with the values of the organisation, is a full 
confession to the crime.  As a recent article has said:142   
Typically, the boss is resolutely unreceptive to denials or exculpatory explanations. … 
Consequently, in the inverted moral universe that the operatives have created the 
confession is in the target’s self-interest … He is motivated to lie to the “boss”, and to 
lie convincingly.  
At trial it is not unusual for the police and Crown to draw the Court’s attention to the 
frequency with which the suspect was admonished to tell the truth, the implication 
being that because this advice preceded the confession, the reliability of the latter is 
therefore enhanced.  Here is a context, however in which the meaning of “truth” has a 
shaky connection to its objective essence. … It is disingenuous to then transport this 
convoluted version of “truth” into court as if it had the same legal tender usually 
associated with the term “truth”.  Although it is the same word, we should not assume 
it has the same meaning at the trial as it did in the gang’s depraved and fictitious 
fantasy world. 
The first concern could be met by the argument that it was the suspect’s choice to 
become involved in the Mr Big operation and eventually confess.  Any prejudice can 
be mitigated by putting before the jury truncated and sanitised details of the criminal 
activity143 and by strong directions.  A less uncompromising view would assess the 
admissibility of the confession by balancing the extent of the prejudice against the 
probative value of the evidence.144  
The second concern could be addressed by not allowing prosecutors to make the 
argument based on honesty to the jury or alternatively (and perhaps additionally) 
                                                           
141  R v Hart, above n 15, at [8]. 
142  See Moore, Copeland and Schuller, above n 4, at 387–388. 
143  See R v Hart, above n 15, at [107]. 
144  This is the first “prong” of the new approach set out by the majority of the Supreme Court of Canada in R v 
Hart, above n 15. 

27 
 
countering it in directions, by pointing out the incentives for even an innocent person 
to confess and the distorted notion of  “truth” in the Mr Big world.  
Innovation or threat? 
So far each concern with the technique has been examined individually but what about the 
cumulative effect?  
Some would argue that the fact the technique works is key. Under this utilitarian view, in 
cases of serious crime where conventional methods have failed and with suitable 
safeguards,145 the technique could continue.  Indeed, it could be argued that this is the more 
rights-centred approach, particularly taking into account the human rights of victims and their 
relatives.146   
A further restriction could perhaps be added.  Professor Ashworth maintains, albeit in the 
context of undercover operations generally without the added features of the Mr Big 
operations, that the consequentiality (“ends justify the means”) approach should not be 
accepted in full.  In his view, any cases that involve “tricks about rights”, including those in 
any codes of police practice,147 are wrong and “any attempt to justify [them] in terms of 
convicting the factually guilty is constitutionally and morally unsustainable”.148 
 
Others would take a more uncompromising view and call for the technique to be banned 
altogether, considering the risk of false confessions and the moral threat to the criminal 
justice system too high a price to pay. For example one commentator, writing after Hart, 
said:149  
Despite all of the red flags and potential for trouble identified – the ‘significant risk 
of false confessions’ being the worst – Mr. Big operations will continue to be 
tolerated and used in this country.  Why?  Here’s the Supreme Court’s bottom line: 
The technique works.  Of course it does.  It relies on coercion, inducements and 
threats.  As such, it should be stopped. 
                                                           
145  Such as those set out in R v Hart, above n 15, and the limits now placed on Mr Big operations by the 
Canadian Police.  Some commentators also argue for more independent control over and review of 
operations and even for prior judicial authorisation: see for example, K Puddister and T Riddell “The 
RCMP’s ‘Mr. Big’ sting operation: A case study in police independence, accountability and oversight” 
(2012) 55 Can Publ Adm 385 at 400–405.  
146  See Ashworth, above n 133, at 117–118. 
147  Note the need for a caution (and therefore the rights of suspects in this regard) arises earlier in Hong Kong, 
England and Wales than it does in Canada and New Zealand. 
148  Ashworth, above n 133, at 138. 
149  Brian Hutchinson “Of course Mr Big confessions work. They rely on coercion, inducements and threats” 
National Post (online ed, 1 August 2014) <www.nationalpost.com>.   

28 
 
The view taken on the legitimacy or otherwise of the Mr Big technique depends on the view 
taken on the core features of the criminal justice system and the proper limits of police 
powers.  The debate takes place at a four-way intersection: between the private interests of 
victims and their families; the public interest in bringing offenders to justice; the private 
interest and right of suspects not to be coerced into confessions; and the public interest in 
guarding against wrongful convictions, upholding individual rights and enforcing proper 
standards of police behaviour.  The challenge is to achieve the appropriate balance between 
these fundamental values and the question is whether any of the jurisdictions represented at 
this symposium has achieved that balance. 

