See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/310442389
Vervaeke, J. & Kennedy, J. M. (2004) Conceptual
metaphor and abstract thought. Metaphor & Symbol,
19(3), 213–231
Article  in  Metaphor and Symbol · July 2004
DOI: 10.1207/s15327868ms1903_3
CITATIONS
44
READS
3,168
2 authors:
John Vervaeke
University of Toronto
31 PUBLICATIONS   611 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
John Kennedy
University of Toronto
199 PUBLICATIONS   3,762 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by John Kennedy on 17 November 2016.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

Conceptual Metaphor
and Abstract Thought
John Vervaeke and John M. Kennedy
Department of Life Science—Psychology
University of Toronto
David Ritchie (2003b) defended Lakoff & Johnson’s (1980) theory of conceptual
metaphor against criticism made by Vervaeke and Kennedy (1996). Though Ritchie
modified theory of conceptual metaphor, he held fast to the idea that much of abstract
thought depends on metaphorical projection from embodied experience. We argue
therein lie reductionism’s dangers, seriously misrepresenting abstract thought, and a
straightjacket—an inability to account for significant cognitive phenomena that are
often presupposed by the theory of conceptual metaphor. As an alternative to expla-
nations relying on embodied experience, we propose a more cognitive account of
pervasive mappings, e.g., of spatial relations onto other domains. We show our ac-
count fits well with procedural knowledge and procedural similarity, factors that
Ritchie addressed. Finally, we suggest that conceptual blending theory, a theoretical
foundation Ritchie favored for conceptual metaphor theory, cannot do the work he
has hoped for.
Our purpose is to assess a lively and thought-provoking article by David Ritchie
(2003b). Ritchie has developed a case in favor of cognitive linguistics, a widely in-
fluential school that many have suggested has developed effective novel tools “to
understand individual and social cognition” (Paxman, 2003, p. 108), and “the pri-
mary role grounded and embodied meanings play in language comprehension”
(Giora, 2003, p. 28). The school tackles fundamental problems about the literal
and the figurative defined first and foremost by Lakoff and Johnson (1980, 1999).
It has strongly affected linguistics, psychology, and literary studies (Gibbs, 1992,
1994, 2003; Wilson, 2002) showing, for example, very rapid and possibly auto-
matic effects in experimental psychology studies that examine how one word, such
METAPHOR AND SYMBOL, 19(3), 213–231
Copyright © 2004, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Requests for reprints should be sent to John M. Kennedy, Department of Life Science—Psy-
chology, University of Toronto, 1265 Military Trail, Toronto, ON M1C1A4, Canada. E-mail:
kennedy@utsc.utoronto.ca

as head, leader, see, or understand, can prime or be primed by others related to it
metaphorically, in ways that may be culturally universal because we have similar
bodies no matter what our culture. Gibbs (2003) noted how many expressions im-
ply our vantage point, that is, our body’s place in the world, and influence our com-
prehension thereby. Both Gibbs (2003) and Ritchie (2003b) have pointed out that
embodiment theory may show how meaning is related to action and thereby help
solve the “grounding” problem: how meaning (our comprehension) gets translated
into activity (our bodily reactions). It also has implications for theology and politi-
cal studies, for example. Its game is well worth the candle. We wish to narrow the
focus here to consider Ritchie’s (2003a, 2003b) particular contributions and a spe-
cific bank of proposed solutions to problems with the school we raised in Vervaeke
and Kennedy (1996). Ritchie’s proposals are ingenious, but we contend they are
not sufficient.
COGNITIVE LINGUISTICS AND OUR GOALS
Lakoff and his colleagues (Lakoff & Johnson, 1980, 1999; Lakoff & Turner, 1989)
wrote a theory of conceptual metaphor in which much of abstract thought is actu-
ally generated by metaphorical projection from the domain of embodied experi-
ence. The theory has two big parts. The first, colorfully put, is this: Metaphors do
not come singly, like hermits. They live in groups. Again colorfully, thought is not
just abstract, rarified. Its anchor is a human body, in living experience. These are
attractive hypotheses (as we know only too well, for our introduction and criticism
of these ideas usually leaves our audiences wanting them to be true, and our criti-
cism to be in vain).
More plainly, metaphors influence the bulk of our thought, the embodiment
school suggests, in an implicit fashion. They are usually implied by what a speaker
is saying rather than directly spoken. For example, Lakoff and Johnson (1980)
nicely argued that formal argumentation is understood via a conceptual metaphor
“ARGUMENT IS WAR,” and that is why we say things such as “he attacked my ar-
gument,” and “he defended his position” when we are discussing formal argumen-
tation. Vervaeke and Kennedy (1996; see also Kennedy & Vervaeke, 1993) ob-
jected that the theory was unfalsifiable if possible groups of metaphors that might
plausibly be linked to a common theme were the only evidence. The objection was
that any metaphor about argument that did not fit the “WAR” theme would be used
as evidence for another theme, such as “WEIGHING,” “TESTING,” or
“COMPARING,” so nothing would count as evidence against “WAR.” In addition,
we hazarded there was evidence that terms such as attack and defend were being
used in a way that no longer seemed metaphorical.
Of course, evidence for and against a theory can be brought to bear from many
avenues, so the fact that one line of evidence is a cul-de-sac is not the end of the dis-
214
VERVAEKE AND KENNEDY

cussion. Far from it. Finessing the problem we defined with rivalrous groups pre-
venting falsification of a particular proposed group, Ritchie (2003b) responded by
arguing for a more expansive interpretation of specific examples and for a more
complex interpretation of metaphors. His steps need to be laid out, but first it will
be useful for fellow readers to know our final goal.
Ritchie argued that our criticisms point out that the connection between explicit
expressions and implicit metaphors can often be “interpreted in multiple ways”
(Ritchie, 2003b, p. 126). This much seems like joining forces with our 1996 con-
clusion. It accepts that “both the level of generality at which implicit metaphors are
to be identified and the family of metaphors to which a particular expression be-
long are indeterminate” (2003b, p. 130) and that such metaphors “have multiple
and indeterminate roots” (2003b, p. 130). These are valuable alliances for our con-
clusions, yet Ritchie argues that these points do “not cancel the considerable evi-
dence for the role of metaphor in conceptual experience and reasoning” (2003b, p.
130). We concur. It is precisely the extent and nature of this role that is under dis-
pute. We accept that use of metaphor is widespread, and often metaphors influence
thought. God is our shepherd, or father, or judge, some think, and reckon on conse-
quences. Attention is a mental spotlight or a process demanding mental energy,
some think, and discern implications. Programs have viruses and worms, alerting
us to some kind of undue proliferation and horrid things spreading steadily, unde-
tected. Let us see how we can characterize Ritchie in this domain.
One danger in the argument that our most abstract thought often has deep roots
in embodied experience, via metaphor, is that the abstract matter (with many fea-
tures, relations, and dimensions) is being reduced to a more primitive material
(with fewer aspects and nuances). This is the problem of reductionism. Those who
risk arguing from analogy often describe the subtle (e.g., politics of crowds) in
terms of the simple (e.g., physical masses in an avalanche). Likewise, beauty might
be related to attraction between magnets, with consequences for like and unlike
poles pulling and pushing.
Although Ritchie resisted a fully reductionist thesis in which abstract thought is
made strongly dependent on metaphorical projection from embodied experience,
we argue that in fact he did not escape the problem. We conclude he endorsed an
interesting version of a reductionist thesis and vigorously attempted to clarify and
defend it. We argue that there are very good reasons to reject the reductionist thesis
that ensues. The key implications we come away with form a viable and significant
alternative to the claim that conceptual metaphor is based almost entirely on em-
bodied experience. If we are on track, our alternative can account for some of
Ritchie’s important insights, notably about the role of experience and procedural
knowledge in metaphoric comprehension.
We hope cashing our promissory note about a useful alternative brings two ex-
tra benefits. First, the alternative does not fall prey to Ritchie’s well-motivated crit-
icisms of theoretical circularity in many accounts of metaphor. Second, it succeeds
RESPONSE TO RITCHIE
215

without recourse to a solution favored by Ritchie, namely “conceptual blending
theory” (Fauconnier & Turner, 2002), which we argue misses some of what is
needed in a theoretical foundation for metaphor comprehension.
THE RITCHIE MODIFICATIONS
Ritchie modified the conceptual metaphor theory but nevertheless stated he
“leaves the broad outlines of Lakoff and Johnson’s (1980) original account more or
less intact” (Ritchie, 2003b, p. 143). A key element of this position is the idea that
most abstract thought depends on metaphorical projection from embodied experi-
ence that is literal in the sense that it is directly understood.
What is dependency and what is direct understanding? We need an absolutely
clear consensus on the dependency relation between abstract thought and the meta-
phorical projection from embodied experience. Ritchie found our 1996 character-
ization of this thesis as metaphors being said to govern abstract thought too strong
(Ritchie, 2003b, p. 39), but Lakoff and Johnson (1999) have clearly stated that ab-
stract thought is practically impossible without conceptual metaphor and that cog-
nition is metaphorical in nature. Did Ritchie settle on a single view? Certainly
Ritchie seemed to follow the conceptual metaphor line of thought when he “takes
seriously Lakoff and Johnson’s (1980) proposal that abstract concepts … are un-
derstood by metaphorical extension of immediate embodied (physical and social)
experience” (Ritchie, 2003b, pp. 132–133). He tried to clarify his position by stat-
ing that “many of our abstract concepts are themselves shaped by structural meta-
phors” (Ritchie, 2003b, p. 139) and that this shaping involves two main processes.
First, one will be unable to express ideas contradictory to such structural meta-
phors “without inventing new metaphors,” and the entailments of a metaphor “will
become part of the meaning of the concept” (Ritchie, 2003b, p. 139). A favorable
example for his case might be deists that fully believe God judges us at our every
waking moment. He then stated that if our abstract concepts are shaped in this way
by structural metaphors then “we do not have very many truly ‘literal’ ideas to ex-
press, beyond the basic ideas that are grounded in direct physical experience like,
‘I fell down,’ ‘I stood up,’ and ‘I ate a carrot’” (Ritchie, 2003b, p. 139). In fact,
Ritchie explained the Lakoff and Johnson position as one in which “we actually
experience the target concept in terms of the source” (Ritchie, 2003b, p. 138). He
endorsed this claim and made creative proposals about the subtle term experience
here, but in offering parries to our criticisms he thought the claim might best be
subsumed under conceptual blending theory (2003b, p. 138), a point that we ad-
dress in closing.
In short, although Ritchie resisted the claim that abstract thought is governed by
metaphor, he claimed a very strong dependency relation in which abstract ideas are
understood via metaphorical projection; these abstract ideas are shaped by meta-
216
VERVAEKE AND KENNEDY

phorical projection; we cannot contradict these structural metaphors except
through other such metaphors; entailments from the metaphor generate meaning
for the abstract concept; we do not have very many literal, especially abstract,
ideas beyond those grounded in direct physical experience; and we experience the
target domain in terms of the source domain.
We might sum up his position as: “Some abstract concepts are not due to em-
bodiment etc., but many if not virtually all are.” To this he added (we emphasize)
appealing ideas, which we discuss later, about what shapes our experience of con-
cepts or messages—the notion he describes as “experiencing the target concept.”
REDUCING HIGH-FLYING IDEAS
The distinction between a dependency relation and the statement that abstract
thought is governed by metaphor is unclear, except for the caution that not all are
so governed, because a few are not. For the majority of thoughts said to be resting
on embodiment, Ritchie’s explanations amount to the claim that the target do-
main’s meaning is generated and maintained by metaphorical projection from the
embodied source domain. It is to this strong reductionistic thesis that Vervaeke and
Kennedy have consistently responded (Kennedy & Vervaeke, 1993; Vervaeke &
Kennedy, 1996). We have no quarrel with the idea that one can and often will un-
derstand some implications of a metaphor. For example, with the metaphor “Dick
is a pig,” we take it that some properties of a pig are projected onto the target Dick,
and we then draw conclusions about his naughty behavior. However, we also argue
that in this mapping and implication process the targets are active, not passive in
the sense that our knowledge of what Dick might do constrains which animal we
choose as a source and which properties from that source are mapped onto Dick.
This must also be the case for conceptual metaphor generally.
For a metaphor to influence our thought, the target domain must have consider-
able premetaphoric structure to constrain the metaphoric selection of features
(Glucksberg, 2001) and to attract the metaphor in the first place. The mapping pro-
cesses from a source domain, like war, onto the target domain, such as argumenta-
tion, do not sample wars at random. It is crucial to acknowledge here that if the tar-
get domain were a conceptual blank slate, so to speak, then it is unclear why we
would adopt or offer one metaphor over any other. Further, as Nelson Goodman
(1972) famously noted, any two things are infinitely similar (even if the properties
are merely that we are thinking of them now, that they have names, that they are
both conceivable, that Ray Gibbs and David Ritchie appreciated them, that they are
celebrated in Metaphor and Symbol, and the like). They share an infinity of proper-
ties, and the selection of which domain is going to serve in the source is therefore a
very significant problem. Simply put, an unstructured target domain makes this se-
lection process much too unconstrained, for any and all of its potential properties
RESPONSE TO RITCHIE
217

could serve as targets for the source domain. We also take it that very many proper-
ties of the source domain are not ever mapped onto the target domain at any time,
by anyone, for sensible reasons and also because it is logically impossible to take
the time to transfer an infinite number of properties. This is not a flaw in metaphor
but rather is absolutely necessary, by definition, precisely for the mapping to be
metaphorical rather than a simple case of categorization or comparison. Many ir-
relevant properties do not get mapped, necessarily, by definition of the term meta-
phor. To make the embodiment claim and for there to be a conceptual metaphor
thesis to entertain, this limit on properties must hold. If there are no properties that
are not mapped, then we simply have a straight identity claim or a modified one
such as a class inclusion statement.
LIMITS TO TRANSFER
This point about limited transfer is important precisely because of cases of prop-
erties that are transferred to the extent that one can weaken a supposed metaphor
so much that its status as a metaphor is very doubtful. For example, when
Ritchie considered several of our most central criticisms of the claim that we
think of argument as war, he conceded that it “is likely that our experience of
both argument and war are grounded in the common experience of frustrated de-
sires and the consequent conflict of wills,” and clarified this when he stated that
“the processes of interpersonal competition and conflict are more basic that the
processes of either war or formal academic argument” (Ritchie, 2003b, p. 133).
Does this mean, however, that the underlying conceptual metaphor is that
“ARGUMENT IS INTERPERSONAL CONFLICT”?
If this claim about argument is indeed an entirely sensible remark about formal
argumentation in the context of, say, two-sided academic debate, the conceptual
identity claim is no longer a metaphor but a literal class inclusion statement,
namely, one of the politer forms of interpersonal conflict is some kind of formal ar-
gumentation as a debate. In this instance, the claim sets formal argumentation into
the class of academic debate, which itself is part of the class of interpersonal con-
flict. The example can be written in indisputable form as follows: There is a cate-
gory of formal argument that is a type of academic debate that is a kind of interper-
sonal conflict.
An intriguing implication follows from our example. If we recognize this claim
about categories and “CONFLICT,” then a view of what it means to be basic to
thought follows inexorably. The “basicness” of interpersonal conflict is not so
much that it is “experienced first” (Ritchie, 2003b, p. 133) but that it is a more in-
clusive class than formal argumentation. The conclusion is that categorization, not
embodiment and experience, allows us to establish what is basic, a root of a state-
ment, and a necessary foundation of an idea.
218
VERVAEKE AND KENNEDY

Note that throughout this discussion literal aspects of the concept of argumenta-
tion, such as a class inclusion relation, have played a significant role in constrain-
ing the mapping process and even in the choice of the correct representation of the
source domain. However, Ritchie resisted this point when he claimed that to “‘at-
tack’an opponent’s argument is to do something more than merely to ‘try to refute
it,’” and that “something more is approximately the sense of conflict and
no-holds-barred antagonism suggested by the metaphorical association with child-
hood name-calling and fist-fights” (Ritchie, 2003b, p. 137). (We note in passing
that this is another criterion for being basic—early in child development. We cau-
tion many theorists, not only those of the embodiment camp, that young children
express very abstract ideas such as desire in I want, nothing in all gone, failure in
uh oh, tools of categorization in all and some, and many more. They do not simply
build incrementally from concrete to abstract, but leap to some abstract ideas as-
tonishingly early. We contend that human thought is impossible otherwise.) Yet if
we asked someone what was involved in formally attacking another person’s argu-
ment, would they say name-calling and physical violence? If they mentioned only
the attempt to criticize, refute, and disprove, would we claim they had misunder-
stood our meaning? Would they find the sentence “formal argumentation is not a
fist fight” a contradiction? We strongly believe the answers to all these questions
are negative. We draw the conclusion that some central implications of the general-
ization “ARGUMENT IS INTIMATE CONFLICT” fail outright and we suggest the
conclusion that follows is we cannot subsume argument so. If we cannot, then the
claim about “ARGUMENT” and personal antagonisms is at best a vivid, provoca-
tive metaphor that does not address the central properties of argumentation. It
makes properties of the target salient (Giora, 2003). It does not constitute the basis
for understanding argument.
We can bolster our conclusion. Formal argumentation involves very many rules
of how the conflict is to be done, and that is what distinguishes it very importantly
from no-holds-barred antagonism. Formal argument is like a conclave of ancient
Greeks, and antagonism is more like the marching Imperial Romans. So all that
seems to remain of the something more that Ritchie mentioned is the sense of inter-
personal conflict, like argument, often involving two people and perhaps involving
a lot of serious effort and difficulty. After all, it can require a lot of work to try to re-
fute someone’s argument (or one’s own). It is not something one just tries to do idly
with every prospect of success. It can require attention and study, writing and revi-
sion, we know. Yet all of this, once again, seems to be driven by our nonmetaphoric
understanding of formal argumentation.
Our sense of the inferential, conversational, and logical rules that constitute for-
mal argumentation highly constrains which source domain is chosen for a meta-
phor, that is, interpersonal conflict rather than war per se, Greeks rather than
Romans, editing rather than shouting, and which properties are mapped and which
are not. So, this sense is importantly premetaphoric. It is in just this sense, surely,
RESPONSE TO RITCHIE
219

that we can see a formal geometrical proof full of parallel lines and similar trian-
gles as an elegant argument. The proof may be simple, but it is certainly rule fol-
lowing, and it is persuasive, not by personal force but rather by the features of a
well-tuned accomplishment.
NOVEL PROPERTIES
We have not exhausted the notion that the target domain is reached by the source
by respecting proper restrictions. Ritchie very properly raised the issue of novel
metaphors, by which we can mean the surprising and enlightening contradictions
of an Oscar Wilde (XXXX; bigamy is having one too many spouses, and so is mo-
nogamy), today’s search for God as She, and the phrases that allow new openings
in science (“black holes,” “mind as computer,” and “embodied cognition” itself as
a case in point). In this connection, surely there must be some sense of the abstract
target domain if we are going to account for conceptual and theoretical innovation.
If the sense that attracts metaphors we call premetaphoric, we might call the sense
that attracts insights that can be expressed in metaphors transmetaphoric. Meta-
phors are fertile powers, but why?
“Wisdom begins and ends in wonder” is likely a new thought for many readers.
They may notice how it points usefully and insightfully to the need for curiosity at
the outset of an inquiry and for a truly satisfying conclusion at the close. They may
spot a symmetry they never appreciated before.
In contrast, as a useful example in which the key insight allows something to be
rejected, think of time as akin to a spatial extent. This is temptingly easy. It is inter-
esting that Bergson (1903) famously criticized spatial metaphors for time. He re-
peatedly pointed out our sense of time, which he called duree, was seriously mis-
represented by the “TIME IS SPACE” metaphor. More recently, Visser (2002) also
argued that the spatialization of time is seriously misleading and helped to create
the idea of inevitable fate in the ancient world. This is a handy example for our
case, for the metaphor of time as space is a one that many serious contributors to
metaphor theory outside of the embodiment school point to as a central conceptual
metaphor (e.g., Gentner & Bowdle, 2001). Gentner, Bowdle, Wolff, and Boronat
(2001, p. 242) wrote “some metaphors, such as space-time metaphors, become
conventionalized as systems.”
If the metaphor constitutes our understanding of the target domain, then how
does a thinker such as Bergson or Visser come to recognize and reject it as an inad-
equate and at times a misleading metaphor? To begin with, two things must be un-
derstood separately and distinctly, as their own kinds of entities, with their own
properties, for one to realize that one thing is the source of ideas for the other via
metaphorical projection. Initial independence sets up the opportunity for meta-
phor. There is no chicken-and-egg problem here. Independence comes first.
220
VERVAEKE AND KENNEDY

Ritchie argued that perhaps a “field” of conceptual metaphors could get us
around problems besting analyses of individual conceptual metaphors. However,
to offer explanations of comparisons between pairs such as A and B, time and
space, or God and judges in terms of multiple metaphors for A or time or God is
simply to beg the question. Such a twist in the discussion from one key metaphor to
many simply shifts the question to how we get beyond the first metaphor that gen-
erated the abstract domain to some other metaphor in a large set of pairs. At best it
suggests that the intersection of the sets of pairs contains the crucial property (or
array of properties). That notion of the geometry of intersecting pairs fails in the
crunch, however. To establish an intersection with common properties, we have to
establish the properties of each of the intersecting and contributing pairs. To do
that we must establish the set proper to any one of the contributing pairs.
We have just denied that any one of the pairs on its own allows us to find rele-
vant properties unless we have some premetaphorical understanding of the target
domain. We hasten to caution that this is a minimum condition, in that other influ-
ences also would be required. For the moment all we need for the argument afoot is
this: That which allows us to judge any existing conceptual metaphor as inade-
quate and which motivates and constrains the search for a new one is some idea
about the target. Notice the puzzle here, if the only tools are an old metaphor and a
new one. The new metaphor cannot be responsible ahead of time for all of this cog-
nitive work (i.e., disdaining the old metaphor), and the old metaphor itself cannot
be doing the work because it is being rejected as inadequate. So, conceptual meta-
phor does not actually seem to be doing most of the important work in conceptual
innovation.
In a nutshell, we need a theory about fertility, about possible new properties of
old domains, a theory that tells us how to evaluate new metaphors. A metaphor is
just one possible source of ideas, and it cannot evaluate itself. Unless there is a rea-
son other than the metaphor itself to take the new candidate property seriously then
there is, frankly, no reason to take it seriously. “The atom is a solar system.” Does
that mean the third electron out has ice and snow caps north and south? Well, no.
This is just a metaphor. (What is a “bed pencil”? Keane & Costello, 2001, offer
many interpretations. The lesson is that the concept combination, like a metaphor,
does not specify enough on its own.)
METAPHORIC AND LITERAL
Just a metaphor? Undoubtedly a metaphor? There must be something that allows
us to recognize that patterns of thought and speech to do with atoms and solar sys-
tems or God and shepherds are metaphoric in nature.
One possible response is that we directly understand embodied experience and
only indirectly understand the target domain, and that is why we realize that these
RESPONSE TO RITCHIE
221

patterns are metaphoric in nature. Something like this seems to be at work in
Ritchie’s account, because he clearly reserved the term literal for “basic ideas
grounded in physical experience,” (Ritchie, 2003b, p. 139) and often spoke of “im-
mediate physical experience” (p. 130) or “direct physical and social experience”
(p. 130). This is one reason why Ritchie rejected war as a basic source domain. He
noted that given “the small number of people in the United States who have di-
rectly experienced war, it is not easy to see how “ARGUMENT IS WAR” can be
grounded in direct physical or social experience” (p. 132).
Much theoretical work was done in Ritchie’s presentation by terms like direct
or immediate. However, it is simply not the case that the literal–metaphoric distinc-
tion maps onto the direct–indirect distinction. Much of our knowledge of elephants
is indirect. We have very little direct experience of elephants; yet we know they are
mammals, they have internal organs like hearts, they are mortal beings, they
evolved from different kinds of creatures, and so on. All of this knowledge is very
indirect, yet of course we seriously hesitate to call it metaphorical in nature.
One way out for Ritchie might be to argue that the difference is relative, that
the source domain is just more direct than the target. However, it is also the case
that the source domain can be less direct than the target domain. Grady (1999)
points out “death is a thief” uses a source that may be understood indirectly.
This “thief” source may not be a rich domain, so let us bring forward a domain
understood relatively indirectly but used as a rich source. We have many expres-
sions that point to a conceptual metaphor “SOCIAL INTERACTION IS MAGIC,”
for we say things like “I’m under her spell,” “she enchanted me,” “I found her
utterly charming,” and so on. However, given that magic does not exist, we as
adults believe we cannot have directly experienced it (at best, simulations that
we take to be entertaining pretense). Nonetheless, we as adults know these ex-
pressions are metaphorical. (Notice we stress here the idea of actually experienc-
ing the real thing. Let us leave children or the naïve tricked by conjurors, Disney,
or Graceland aside!)
Theexplanationofoursenseofmetaphoricityintermsofindirectnessversusreal
contact with the real thing seems very inadequate. Surely a more plausible explana-
tion is that we have a nonmetaphorical understanding of many of the target concepts
that allows us to recognize metaphoric patterns that use these concepts.
There is a fine bonus to this account. Ritchie referred to fields of interseeded
conceptual metaphors. His point was that several metaphors may be about the
same thing. A bonus of the idea of nonmetaphoric understanding is that it would
explain why we find certain statements to be very similar in import even when they
are based on very different embodied source domains. For example, we find “I see
your point,” “I grasp your point,” and “I understand your point” all very similar
although the direct experiences of seeing, grasping, and standing under something
are very different. It is as though they have converged on a common meaning. Once
again, this is very difficult to explain if the abstract target domain is a blank slate
222
VERVAEKE AND KENNEDY

with very little independent cognitive power. However, a premetaphoric concept of
understanding explains the aforementioned phenomena very well.
ALTERNATIVES TO EMBODIMENT AND PROJECTION
The theory of directly understood embodied experience on which Ritchie relied
aims to explain its effect on thought via metaphors. We have opened the door to al-
ternatives. If so, we need to show they are not reductionist.
Let us consider a cluster of metaphors with subgroups. Many of the relevant
metaphors are instances of a more general pattern of mapping spatial relations
onto nonspatial relations. We have conceptual metaphors along the lines of
“TEMPORAL
RELATIONS
ARE
SPATIAL
RELATIONS,”
“LOGICAL
RELATIONS
ARE
SPATIAL
RELATIONS,”
“CAUSAL
RELATIONS
ARE
SPATIAL RELATIONS,” “SOCIAL RELATIONS ARE SPATIAL RELATIONS,”
and “EPISTEMIC RELATIONS ARE SPATIAL RELATIONS.” Note how all the
metaphors for understanding discussed in the previous section can be seen as in-
stances of spatial relations mapped onto nonspatial epistemic relations. For ex-
ample, the vision-based metaphor of understanding as seeing can be about how
the simultaneity of spatial relations we perceive is similar to the relations be-
tween bits of information deemed to be all in play equally. They are all under-
stood to be relevant in specific ways, we appreciate, but describe this as seen as
simultaneous. One could explain all of this by talking about our experience of
space being more embodied or direct than our experience of understanding, but
we have seen difficulties with definitions in this approach. Further, one would be
hard pressed to justify the claim that our experience of understanding was not di-
rect. It is our very being, if cogito, ergo sum.
Note also that our tendency to map spatial relations onto other domains extends
beyond metaphor to the use of graphs and diagrams to represent all forms of infor-
mation. The issue at heart here could simply be that one ordered set can be aligned
one-for-one with another ordered set (Gentner et al., 2001). Indeed, the term align-
ment is spatial, though the crux here is just matching-up. There should be cognitive
benefits to spatial alignment, or we fall prey to Goodman’s (1972) scolding that
anything has many similarities with anything else.
What are the cognitive benefits of trying to convert information into a spatial
format? Is the reason embodiment or advantages of the physical mode of represen-
tation? The mode in fact has several major benefits.
Spatial relations are multimodal and therefore allow for the integration of infor-
mation from different sense modalities. This allows for converging lines of evi-
dence when we examine some topic. In practice, spatial relations allow for the si-
multaneous representation of data that fosters the noticing of higher-order
invariants and patterns that are easily missed when the information is presented
RESPONSE TO RITCHIE
223

more sequentially. Simultaneous presentation of data lets us look back and forth
and helps to reveal incoherence and inconsistency by making lots of pairs of bits of
information copresent in working memory. Spatial relations are highly
intersubjective, such that many a classical epistemologist made them the mark of
objective reality. They can readily be used to orient an audience, as in Look at the
left corners of the table. Notice how many of these features are used to assess the
reality of our experience, and some are emphasized in the reality-monitoring liter-
ature (Johnson, 1985; Johnson & Raye, 1981). In conjunction with reality monitor-
ing, also note that the conceptual operations involved in spatial reasoning are quite
automatic, and therefore, following Johnson and Raye, the information processed
in this manner would seem undemanding, and perhaps more realistic than fanciful.
Pilots in computer-driven cockpits can have panels with spatial displays showing
radar information about terrain, fuel levels, time to destination, injuries to the air-
craft, and reliability of radio contact with home base for example. Because the dis-
plays are computer driven, they could be playful and arbitrary, for example varying
features of a caricature of Mickey Mouse to code the same information for the pi-
lot, if we desired. Using Mickey’s ear size as an indicator of aircraft damage might
seem fanciful, however, in contrast to a spatial column showing fuel reserves.
We suggest that spatial relations are used as a way of displaying information
(objectively, physically, on screens, for example) to prime and trigger our real-
ity-monitoring skills (attention, perceptual grouping, immediate memory) so that
we can apply important procedural knowledge1 (search skills) to assess informa-
tion. Likewise, we can provide guiding metaphors in “an interpretive frame of ref-
erence” (Katz, 1996, p. 269) that will order information in salience (Giora, 2003)
in our immediate memory and mental sketchpad, help determine relevance, and es-
tablish important connections within that information by reformatting it. Maybe
part of what makes a metaphor useful is that it primes the interpretive, procedural
sense (that we use to scan reality as well as metaphors) although not usually sup-
porting a declarative conclusion of truth. That is, metaphors trigger guiding con-
ceptual operations we would use in reality-monitoring but not a belief in the truth
of the metaphorical statement. In sum, these operations transfer candidate proper-
ties from sources to targets (Glucksberg, 2001), tell us what is relevant and why
(Chiappe & Kennedy, 2001), affect the order of salience of the properties of con-
224
VERVAEKE AND KENNEDY
1Procedural knowledge and procedural similarity are not discussed much in the metaphor literature.
This could be an oversight, because it is generally accepted that metaphor involves change or transfer of
some kind between disparate domains. Empirical evidence from the problem-solving and insight litera-
tureshowsthattransferofdeclarativecontentfromonesourcedomaintoanothertargetdomain(Gentner
& Landers 1985; Gick & Holyoak, 1983) is very poor even when seemingly obvious analogies are in-
volved. In contrast, the literature on the facilitation of transfer by means of procedural similarity is very
positive(Adamsetal.,1988;Gick&McGarry,1992;Lockhartetal.,1988;Morris,Bransford,&Franks,
1977; Needham & Begg, 1991). In fact, Gick and McGarry plainly averred that “it is the similarity of the
processing induced by the acquisition and transfer tasks that is important” (p. 637).

cepts (Giora, 2003), and allow “structural re-alignment” (Gentner & Bowdle,
2001) of the relations between those properties so that we know how key proper-
ties belong to both the source and the target.
Perhaps this priming is indeed part of the aesthetic aspect of the experience of
metaphor, to which Ritchie alludes when he describes metaphors affecting our ex-
perience of a concept. Perhaps this is what we mean when we say that a metaphor
makes its target more vivid, or visual, or to stand out more in thought. Many au-
thors have described metaphors as apt, but Ritchie notes they engender experi-
ences, which is not quite the same.
Procedural knowledge is often ineffable (Schooler et al., 1993; Schooler &
Melcher, 1995), and this may explain why we find it difficult to talk about the ef-
fect of a metaphor and why Ritchie’s notion of a significant change in experience
of a concept deserves attention. Just as the experience of music is hard to put into
words, when we hear “Toronto is New York run by the Swiss” a shift in our pro tem
attitude to Toronto, New York, and the Swiss is invited. Some of the shift is ex-
plicit, some implicit. The properties that come to the fore are not well defined or
precisely limited. Likewise, in general the set of properties pertinent to abstract en-
tities for many people is difficult to express without relying on metaphor because
much of this information is encoded procedurally. As Augustine famously noted,
we know what time is until someone asks us. Our activities are greater in kind than
just being explicit and outputting words. We can be primed to run, not just to think
of the word run, to decide and not just to think of the word decision, to treat a
phrase as ironic, not just to repeat words.
A metaphor helps to structure pertinent properties in the desired order of sa-
lience, we suggest, and this structure helps to translate only part of that information
into a more declarative format. A few properties are available in explicit form, but
many properties are salient, although some we take as relevant and sense reasons
for the difference. (If we could not make the relevant–salient distinction, we would
not be able to tell the difference between a faux pas and a bon mot.) This difference
between features available to be spoken and features changed in relevance and sa-
lience is surely key to the idea of the experience of being exposed to a metaphor,
especially an effective, novel one. What is active in our comprehension, but only
implicit, can shape what Ritchie calls “an experience.” There would be a role for
what we can state immediately, in this experience, but what is implicit may play a
crucial, necessary role.
The work in construing salient and relevant properties is not the metaphor con-
structing the abstract target from a tabula rasa, or making the abstract concrete, but
linking largely procedural knowledge from one abstract domain (such as space or
love) to another domain (such as time or God) to set properties in order of signifi-
cance, structuring information for evaluative and expressive purposes.
In this connection, it is worth noting that the ability to solve insight problems is
best predicted by perceptual restructuring abilities such as picture disambiguation
RESPONSE TO RITCHIE
225

and figure–ground disembedding (Schooler et al., 1993) as well as the ability to
notice invariants in information representation (Kaplan & Simon, 1990). Both of
these findings point to the spatial aspects of insight problem solving that we dis-
cussed earlier in connection with conceptual metaphor. We offer these references
as aids in understanding what procedural knowledge entails. We do not think the
visual skills or spatial skills are precise, elemental cognitive entities out of which
procedures are built. We take it that the skills are quite modifiable from time to
time, by instruction, by experience, by the purpose of the moment, or by the ob-
server’s grasp of the task at hand. For example, figure–ground is a set of options at
a border (Kennedy, Juricevic, & Bai, 2003), not a compulsory percept.
Our theoretical speculations on priming and procedural knowledge, rather than
easily expressed lists of properties, are triggered by Ritchie’s emphasis on embod-
ied experience as a key part of the conceptual metaphor theory. In these specula-
tions, however, we have tried to highlight several factors involving theory of cogni-
tion and conceptual metaphor that do not rely on the temporal or other priority of
matters of the body, sensorimotor behavior, or the directness of embodied experi-
ence. In our story, reasons that depend on information formatting (e.g., in spatial
displays) and processing (e.g., procedural knowledge) play a key role.
COGNITIVE RESPONSES AND COGNITIVE CONTENT
Ritchie also discussed a procedural side to metaphor in his explanation of the role
of experiencing concepts and expressions (Ritchie, 2003b). He took an unusual
tack, with which we sympathize, although we suggest it needs fixing up, because
he went perilously far. He noted that many metaphors may not be based on a simi-
larity of declarative content but on a similarity of what he called “cognitive re-
sponses.” He discussed the “Juliet is the sun” metaphor, but he pointed out that
there “are not qualities common to a young woman and the sun that could possibly
define a superordinate category, and none are needed” (Ritchie, 2003b, p. 141). In-
stead, what the metaphor “brings to the fore is the kind of emotions, comparisons,
and expectations they each arouse” (p. 141). What is involved is not a mapping of
properties from source to target but “correlated cognitive states” that link similar
“cognitive responses” (p. 141). He went on to discuss the Glucksberg et al. (1992,
p. 578) account of the metaphor “my job is a jail.” Ritchie claimed that the similar-
ity is not between jobs and jails but between “our responses to these situations”
(Ritchie, 2003b, p. 142). In fact, he stated that “the sense of incapacity to change a
situation, nullify a social or emotional commitment, or find the answer to a prob-
lem or puzzle is almost impossible to express except through some metaphor asso-
ciated with bondage or confinement” (p. 142). Note how Ritchie’s account relies
on a procedural sense of an incapacity to perform some, usually cognitive, action,
226
VERVAEKE AND KENNEDY

and how that procedural knowledge is practically ineffable unless it is associated
with a spatial metaphor.
To a degree, Ritchie’s account supports what we’ve been claiming. However,
we stop at a major intersection and take a different path. Our friendly amendment
is this. We suggest it is too strong to insist that no declarative similarity is involved
in such metaphors. In our account, declarative information about shared properties
is present, and it is reordered and reformatted through its interaction with proce-
dural transfer, thus giving us a different experience much as a new view brings
properties freshly into the foreground.
Ritchie might object to our contention, because he has argued some such ac-
counts of metaphors are circular. In Ritchie (2003a), he argued that explanations of
declarative similarity in terms of shared properties can fall into circularity. He
pointed out that “jobs do not ordinarily share any of the qualities that define a jail”
(Ritchie, 2003a, p. 50). Instead the “sense of confinement and constraint is wholly
metaphorical,” and jobs “do not share the qualities that define jails in any literal
sense, but only in a sense that is already metaphorical” (2003a, p. 50). A reliance
on such “common properties” to explain metaphor therefore results in a circular
explanation (2003a, p. 50). This is a good point in that there is equivocation in ex-
planations that involve such purported common properties. However, the equivo-
cation is present not just in the theoretical explanations but also in participants’re-
ports of what they find in common between the target and source in metaphors (see
Chiappe & Kennedy, 2001). The pattern is pervasive and almost transparent,
which indicates a very significant interaction between procedural and declarative
similarity. This is a significant psychological phenomenon that needs further ex-
amination. It is also the case that not all of the shared properties are equivocal in
this manner. Jails typically literally involve an authority figure that can punish the
prisoner, and jobs typically literally involve an authority figure that can punish the
employee. So, a model that deals with the interaction between declarative and pro-
cedural similarity is quite likely to provide an adequate explanation of metaphoric
comprehension while avoiding the charge of circularity.
Ritchie (2001a), in contrast, argued that circularity in theories of metaphor can
best be avoided by adopting either conceptual metaphor theory or conceptual
blending theory. Ritchie (2001b) further argued that conceptual metaphor theory
may probably be subsumed under conceptual blending theory (Coulson & Mat-
lock, 2001; Fauconnier & Turner, 1998, 2002). However, conceptual blending the-
ory does not really provide a good explanation for conceptual metaphor and there-
fore fails as a theoretical framework for analyzing conceptual metaphor.
In conceptual blending theory “the conceptual structures of two or more ‘input
spaces’ (e.g., topic and source) are selectively combined into a new separate
‘blended’mental space (the metaphor)” (Ritchie, 2001b, p. 138). So, for example,
“men are wolves” (Gentner & Bowdle, 2001) “combined the schema of men who
are single-minded and emotionally uninvolved in pursuit of sexual gratification
RESPONSE TO RITCHIE
227

with a pre-existing schema of wolves as heartless and vicious predators” (Ritchie,
2001b, p. 138).
We have some serious reservations about this account as an explanation rather
than an analogy. The status of the main theoretical entities, the mental space and
the blended space, may be metaphoric, and if not is then unsatisfactorily unclear.
Coulson and Matlock described a mental space as “a temporary container for rele-
vant information about a particular scenario as perceived, imagined, remembered
or otherwise understood” (Coulson & Matlock, 2001, p. 299). They further de-
scribed a blended space as one in which “incompatible information is brought to-
gether to generate inferences that can be projected to other spaces” (p. 299).
Our problem here is uncertainty about how this works and whether it is a loose
description of a problem, like a good first stab at characterizing a problem, rather
than an actual explanation. If it is in fact an explanation, we are not sure what com-
ponents of the description are explanatory and which are loosely descriptive. We
are not sure what this aims to explain because the principles that govern admittance
into containers are not clear. Likewise, it follows that we are not sure that we see
the rules that govern how information can leave a container.
Invoking relevance information from any possible information source to govern
entry and exit of properties is simply to say that any information can enter a con-
tainer because all information is potentially relevant to something. This is fine as
an interesting description of the problem but is in fact nonexplanatory, because
mental space theory can explain everything and thereby really explain nothing.
This is probably what is behind Gibbs’s worry that with conceptual blending the-
ory “it remains unclear exactly what kinds of empirical data can falsify it” (Gibbs,
2001, p. 323). To us it looks that, in principle, nothing could so falsify it. Even
Ritchie noted that he was “not yet convinced that it represents more than a useful
metaphor for a poorly understood neurological process” (Ritchie, 2001b, p. 138;
see also Ritchie, 2004, for further discussion and reservations).
Perhaps this blending theory is yet another instance of a provocative mapping of
spatial relations onto epistemic relations, in which case the charge of circularity is
not avoided. If we remove the spatial metaphor, it is not clear what distinguishes a
blended space from the ad hoc category emphasized in theories such as Glucksberg
(2001) and Chiappe and Kennedy (2001).
BLENDING MEN AND WOLVES AS WEREWOLVES
A problem with the blending scheme is that it is unclear what is going on in such a
conceptual blending. For example, when one claims that men are wolves does this
mean that one now thinks of men as having sharp teeth and claws? One cannot rule
this out, because a blended space combines incompatible information. Invoking
intuitions of this not being relevant is to shift the burden of explanation to these in-
228
VERVAEKE AND KENNEDY

tuitions. Also, why does the blending of the two spaces not serve to highlight that
men are animate, mammals, eat meat, are mobile, and have eyes, because these are
all important properties shared by men and wolves? Or highlight things that cannot
be blended such as writing and reading? If the blended space is the creation of a
third new concept that is distinct from the concept of men or wolves, then it is not
clear what governs what this new concept is. Because it combines features of men
and wolves, it is not clear why it would not be the concept of a wolf man or were-
wolf, or the kind of talking wolf that appears in fairy tales.
A clear account is needed of how this blend can distinguish all the various red
herring possibilities from the relevant one. An infinite number of errors of under-
standing could result from combining potentially incompatible information from
perception, imagination, memory, and understanding.
All of these problems point to the conclusion that conceptual blending theory
really does not add much of significance to what is valuable in Ritchie’s own posi-
tion, and it is questionable that it will do the theoretical work he hopes it will.
CONCLUSION
Ritchie’s account of the conceptual metaphor theory is a very sophisticated ac-
count, and he made some very good points concerning circularity in theoretical ex-
planations of metaphors and the procedural aspects of metaphorical comprehen-
sion. However, we still feel that he endorsed a reductionist claim regarding abstract
thought, and we object to this position as inadequate for explaining many cognitive
phenomena that point to the need for premetaphoric and independent abstract
thought. We argue that some of this may be procedural in nature, and the pervasive
mapping of spatial relations onto other relations may be designed to trigger very
important procedural skills and to provide a declarative vocabulary for said knowl-
edge. We argue that procedural similarity probably plays a significant role in meta-
phor comprehension and that it probably interacts with declarative similarity. We
note that current attempts to provide noncircular explanations of metaphor in terms
of conceptual blending theory do not seem successful.
REFERENCES
Adams, L., Kasserman, J., Yearwood, A., Perfetto, G., Bransford, J., &; Franks, J. (1988). Memory ac-
cess: The effects of fact-oriented versus problem-oriented acquisition. Memory & Cognition, 16,
167–175.
Bergson, H. (1903). An Introduction to Metaphysics. Indianapolis, IN: Bobbs-Merrill.
Chiappe, D. L., & Kennedy, J. M. (2001). Literal bases for metaphor and simile. Metaphor and Symbol,
16, 259–276.
RESPONSE TO RITCHIE
229

Coulson, S., & Matlock, T. (2001). Metaphor and the space structuring model. Metaphor and Symbol,
16, 295–316.
Fauconnier, G., & Turner, M. (1998). Conceptual integration networks. Cognitive Science, 22,
133–187.
Fauconnier, G., & Turner, M. (2002). The way we think: Conceptual blending and the mind’s hidden
complexities. New York: Basic Books.
Gentner, D., & Bowdle, B. F. (2001). Convention, form, and figurative language processing. Metaphor
and Symbol, 16, 223–247.
Gentner, D., Bowdle, B., Wolff, P., & Boronat, C. (2001). Metaphor is like analogy. In D. Gentner, K.
Holyoak, & B. N. Kokinov, (Eds.), The analogical mind: Perspectives form cognitive science. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gentner, D., & Landers, R. (1985). Analogical reminding: A good match is hard to find. In Proceedings
of the International Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics. Tucson, AZ.
Gibbs, R. W., Jr. (1992). When is metaphor? The idea of understanding in theories of metaphor. Poetics
Today, 13, 575– 606.
Gibbs, R. W., Jr. (1994). The poetics of mind: Figurative thought, language, and understanding. Cam-
bridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Gibbs, R. W., Jr. (2003). Embodied experience and linguistic meaning. Brain and Language, 84, 1–15.
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1983). Schema induction and analogical reasoning. Cognitive Psychol-
ogy, 15, 1–38.
Gick, M. L., & McGarry, S. J. (1992). Learning from mistakes: Inducing analogous solution failures to
a source problem produces later successes in analogical transfer. Journal of Experimental Psychol-
ogy: Learning, Memory, and Cognition. 18, 623–639.
Giora, R. (2003). On our mind. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Glucksberg, S. (2001). Understanding figurative language. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Glucksberg, S., & Keysar, B. (1990). Understanding metaphorical comparisons: Beyond literal similar-
ity. Psychological Review, 97, 3–18.
Goodman, N. (1972). Seven strictures on similarity. In N. Goodman (Ed.), Problems and projects. New
York: Bobbs-Merrill.
Grady, J. E. (1999). A typology of motivation for conceptual metaphor: Correlation vs. resemblance. In
R. Gibbs and G. Steen (Eds.), Metaphor in cognitive linguistics (pp. 79–100). Amsterdam:
Benjamins.
Johnson, M. K. (1985). The origin of memories. Advances in Cognitive-Behaviour Research and Ther-
apy, Vol. 4. Edited by P. C. Kendall.
Johnson, M. K., & Raye, C. L. (1981). Reality monitoring. Psychological Review, 88.
Kaplan, C. A., & Simon, H. A. (1990). In search of insight. Cognitive Psychology, 22, 374–419.
Katz, A. (1996). Pragmatics and the processing of metaphors: Category dissimilarity in topic and vehi-
cle asymmetry. Pragmatics & Cognition, 4, 265–304.
Keane, M. T., & Costello, F. (2001). Setting limits on analogy: Why conceptual combination is not
structural alignment. In D. Gentner, K. Holyoak, & B. N. Kokinov, (Eds.), The analogical mind: Per-
spectives form cognitive science. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kennedy, J. M., & Vervaeke, J. (1993). Metaphor and knowledge attained via the body. Philosophical
Psychology, 6, 407–412.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the flesh: The embodied mind and its challenge to
Western thought. New York: Basic Books.
Lakoff, G., & Turner, M. (1989). More than cool reason: A field guide to poetic metaphor. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Lockhart, R. S., Lamon, M., & Gick, M. L. (1988). Conceptual transfer in simple insight problems.
Memory & Cognition, 16, 36– 44.
230
VERVAEKE AND KENNEDY

Morris, C. D., Bransford, J. D., & Franks, J. J. (1977). Levels of processing versus transfer appropriate
processing. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 16, 519–533.
Needham, D. R., & Begg, I. M. (1991). Problem-oriented training promotes spontaneous analogical
transfer: Memory-oriented training promotes memory for training. Memory & Cognition, 19,
543–557.
Paxman, D. (2003). Metaphor and knowledge in George Eliot’s Middlemarch. Metaphor and Symbol,
18, 107–124.
Ritchie, D. (2003a). Categories and similarities: A note on circularity. Metaphor and Symbol, 18,
49–53.
Ritchie, D. (2003b). “ARGUMENT IS WAR” – Or is it a game of chess? Multiple meanings in the anal-
ysis of implicit metaphors. Metaphor and Symbol, 18, 125–146.
Ritchie, L. D. (2004). Lost in space: Metaphors in conceptual integration theory. Metaphor and Symbol,
19, 31–150.
Schooler, J. W., McCleod, C., Brooks, K., & Melcher, J. (1993). Individual differences in solving in-
sight and analytical problems. Unpublished raw data discussed in Schooler & Melcher, 1995.
Schooler, J. W., & Melcher, J. (1995). The ineffability of insight. In S. Smith, T. Ward, & R. Finke
(Eds.), The creative cognition approach. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Schooler, J. W., Ohlsson, S., & Brooks, K. (1993). Thoughts beyond words: When language overshad-
ows insight. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 122, 166–183.
Vervaeke, J., & Kennedy, J. M. (1996). Metaphors in language and thought: Falsification and multiple
meanings. Metaphor and Symbolic Activity, 11, 273–284.
Visser, M. (2002). Beyond fate. Toronto, Ontario: Anansi.
Wilson, M. (2002). Six views of embodied cognition. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9, 625–636.
RESPONSE TO RITCHIE
231
View publication stats

