Endel Tulving's Monohierarchical Multimemory Systems Model
Eric Pettifor
Department of Psychology
Simon Fraser University
Endel Tulving, in his paper 'How Many Memory Systems Are There' (1985), provides the answer to the 
question posed in the title by outlining his own monohierarchical multimemory systems model. This model 
supports three memory systems which work together in a quasi-dependent way, only the first system being 
sufficient in itself, though all higher animals will have at least the first two systems. The memory systems 
are procedural, semantic, and episodic.
AQUISITION:
 accretion, direct perception, 
experience 
EPISODIC:
 restructuring, comprehension 
SEMANTIC:
 tuning in, overt behavioral 
responding
PROCEDURAL:
REPRESENTATION:
 events, descriptive and 
relational 
EPISODIC:
 descriptive, facts, concepts 
SEMANTIC:
prescriptive, blueprint 
for future action, increased probability of
specific response to specific stimuli
PROCEDURAL:
KINDS OF CONSCIOUSNESS:
(self-knowing), 
identity in subjective time, past/present/future 
EPISODIC: autonoetic
 (knowing), awareness 
of internal & external world 
SEMANTIC: noetic
(nonknowing), 
stimulus/response
PROCEDURAL: anoetic
EXPRESSION OF 
KNOWLEDGE:
 flexible, recollective, 
remembering. Access is conscious, 
deliberate, relatively slow 
EPISODIC:
 flexible, knowledge can be 
expressed in different circumstances than
it as learned. Access is automatic & fast 
SEMANTIC:
 inflexible, overt 
PROCEDURAL:
05/11/02 14:44
Sans titre
Page 1 sur 6
http://www.sfu.ca/%7Ewwwpsyb/issues/1997/summer/pettifor.htm

response, direct expression -- determined,
stimulus response learning
Procedural memory is most simply 'knowing how'. Wayne Podrouzek (1994, lecture) gave the example of 
turning a comer on a bicycle. The angle at which the bicycle must tilt in relation to the speed of the bicycle 
could be computed mathematically, but that's not how we do it. We just 'know how' automatically. Very 
simple organisms have this memory system alone (Tulving, 1985). It is a little more advanced than pure 
instinct since it does involve stimulus response learning, but nothing more. A hypothetical very small 
creature possessed only of procedural memory might avoid a particular area if it was once savagely attacked 
by wolves there, barely escaping with its life. It wouldn't have to 'think' about it, it would just avoid the 
area. In this regard it is prescriptive (Tulving, 1985), determining future behavior.
Semantic memory might more properly be termed 'generic memory' (Hintzman, 1978, cited in Main, 1994). 
It is memory of general knowledge which does not involve any event structure. Lower animals, very young 
children, and the brain damaged may possess only procedural and semantic memory (Tulving, 1985). If our 
very small creature was possessed of both these memory systems, coming upon the area of the unfortunate 
experience with the wolves it might think something like, 'Hammy, this looks like wolf-country,' and avoid 
the area.
Episodic memory is the memory of temporal events in subjective time ('I did this, I will do this, I remember 
that I have to do this tomorrow'). Tulving neglects to mention who is fortunate enough to possess all three 
systems, which enables him to leave unaddressed any questions of the 'do dogs and cats have souls' variety, 
but it would be safe to conclude that children beyond a certain undefined age and normally functioning
adult humans would be the prime candidates. If our very small creature was included it could think to itself, 
'The last time I went there I was savagely set upon by wolves. The world is very big and I am very small, I 
will only go where before I have been, where events are nurturing and kind, episodes tinted with only so 
much sorrow as to provide that semantic shade of blue which blends ever so ephemerally into time, 
effectively coloring all our days.' It could not think this unless it had all three systems, since semantic and
episodic memory cannot exist alone, as "procedural memory contains semantic memory as its single 
specialized subsystem, and semantic memory, in turn, contains episodic memory as its single specialized 
subsystem." (Tulving, 1985). Thus the monohierarchical nature of the model.
Our very small creature brings up a troublesome point, though, in assigning an affective tone to a semantic 
concept 'blue'. For Tulving it is episodic memories which have affective tone (which one assumes is 
something not altogether unlike emotion or 'feeling') (Tulving, 1983, cited in McKoon, Ratcliff, and Dell, 
1986). McKoon et al. essentially concede the point but they "attribute the difference to the content of the 
memories, not to separate stores." (McKoon et al." 1986)
A piece of evidence for separate memory systems comes from the experiment in Tulving, Schacter, & Stark 
(1982). Given limited space I will refer the reader to the following diagram. The important thing to note 
about this experiment, the point upon which Tulving's theory of separate memory systems depends, is the 
dissociation between the recognition task and the word fragment completion task. 
05/11/02 14:44
Sans titre
Page 2 sur 6
http://www.sfu.ca/%7Ewwwpsyb/issues/1997/summer/pettifor.htm

Graph from 
(Tulving, Schacter, & Stark, 
1982,
Priming Effects in 
Word-Fragment Completion Are 
Independent of Recognition Memory
Journal of Experimental 
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and 
Cognition 8:4:336-342, © 1982, 
American Psychological Association.)
EXPERIMENT IN BRIEF 
Present subjects with a list of words. 
An hour later, test for: 
recognition 
Was this word in the list? Answer yes/no. 
word fragment completion 
_G_O_T_C 
Repeat test a week later. 
Over the week recognition declined while word fragment completion ability remained
virtually the same. 
Dissociation: Two different things, independent, therefore two different memory
systems. 
Recognition - have you seen this before? -- episodic 
Word fragment completion -- physical properties of word -- possibly semantic, 
possibly procedural, possibly something else. 
"We could refer to this unknown system as the QM system (QM for question mark) 
and keep our eyes and minds open for evidence for and against its hypothesized
existence." - Tulving, 1985
Tulving interprets the time-dependent recognition task as being the concern of episodic memory, while he 
remains uncommitted to the nature of the memory system involved in the word fragment completion task. 
One of his coworkers on this 1982 paper, Schacter, later went on to assign phenomenon like word fragment 
05/11/02 14:44
Sans titre
Page 3 sur 6
http://www.sfu.ca/%7Ewwwpsyb/issues/1997/summer/pettifor.htm

completion to the visual word form system within a system of perceptual representation systems, essentially 
subsystems which could be accessed by any memory system, multi- or unitary (Schacter, 1990).
Tulving (1985) describes three modalities of these memory systems; 
and goes on to describe the 
acquisition, representation, expression 
of knowledge, 
kind of
consciousness of each. In procedural memory acquisition is by overt behavioral responding. Something 
happens which elicits a response, if the response is successful it is likely to be repeated. Where, exactly, the 
response initially comes from Tulving doesn't make clear, at least not in this paper (1985). Hopefully it isn't 
purely instinctual, or else the need for this kind of learning is unnecessary, except, perhaps, to reinforce 
instinct, if it needs reinforcing... A troublesome question best ignored in a short paper. Certainly those of us 
with all three systems can learn to ride a bicycle through 'overt behavioral responding' (doing it and trying 
not to fall over), but we at least have some idea of what (semantic) it is we are trying to accomplish 
(episodic - specific accomplishment of objective, intentional eventual acquirement).
In semantic memory we acquire knowledge through comprehension (Main, 1994). If you don't get it you 
haven't got it. Acquisition in episodic memory is by I accretion, direct perception, experience (Tulving, 
1985). Basically knowledge adds up over time. 
Representation in procedural memory, as mentioned already, is prescriptive - it is a "blue print for future 
action," (Tulving, 1985), and is manifested in an increased probability of a specific response to a specific 
stimuli. Semantic memory is
of concepts and facts. Likewise representation in episodic memory 
is also descriptive, but of events, and it is relational in terms of how these events go together (event
structure, plot, story-line).
descriptive
In procedural memory expression of knowledge is an inflexible direct expression acquired through 
stimulus/response learning, according to Tulving, yet what would our very small creature possessed only of 
procedural knowledge do if, after having fallen off of a cliff and injured itself badly, a very kind wolf 
carried it back to its den and nursed it back to health and released it without even taking a nibble out of it? 
Can it be that inflexible? Would not a little flexibility be something of an adaptive advantage? Not if upon 
beaming at the next wolf to come along the very small creature were devoured. Again, a question best 
ignored in a short paper.
Expression of knowledge in semantic memory is more flexible in that it can be applied to situations other 
than the one in which it was initially learned. Yet could not the same be true of procedural memory? What 
of Baby Albert's fear of all things furry, a generalized classically conditioned response originally connected 
to rats (Watson and Rayner, 1920, in Krebs and Blackman, 1988)? Also problematic is Tulving's assertion 
that in semantic memory access is automatic and fast. McKoon et al. (1986) ask for a fruit beginning with 
the letter 'k'. Most people will pause at least briefly before answering 'kiwi'.
Expression of knowledge in episodic memory is also flexible, but differs from expression in semantic 
memory in that access is conscious, deliberate, and takes time to recall (Tulving, 1985). Again, it is not 
difficult to find exceptions. There are memories of events we were involved in which, for better or worse, 
are always close to hand. And sometimes we unintentionally remember things in response to certain cues, 
not always definable.
Finally, there are the 'kinds of consciousness'. 
consciousness is the term Tulving applies to the kind 
of consciousness of procedural memory (1985). It means unknowing knowing' or 'unconscious 
consciousness', something of a contradiction in terms, yet not surprising in the context of memory theory, 
given that procedural memory seems so clearly 'other' than other proposed types of memory. If it is as real 
as it seems to be, then it may indeed be inflexible, inflexible to conforming to any given theoretical scheme, 
since it doesn't seem to bend. It's almost Taoist - 'doing does', 'knowing without knowing', etc.
Anoetic 
05/11/02 14:44
Sans titre
Page 4 sur 6
http://www.sfu.ca/%7Ewwwpsyb/issues/1997/summer/pettifor.htm

Simply 
is the consciousness of semantic memory. It is an awareness of the internal and external 
worlds (Tulving, 1985). We know what our address is and likely what is the nearest major intersection. We 
can identify our emotions. We can consider the feeling of joy (despite its affectional tone) without 
necessarily associating it with an event, at least not consciously.
noetic 
Autonoetic describes the consciousness of episodic memory. It is identity in subjective time (Tulving, 
1985). It is 'I', it is the psyche in psychology, the big consciousness of consciousness. 
(Descartes, 1637, in Trager, 1992). Obviously 'psyche' is more complicated than 'anoetic 
consciousness' (which may be why the angelic fear to tread there), but congratulations to Tulving for even 
his obftuscajargontory implication of something of the kind.
Je pense donc je 
suis
Without going into great detail, McKoon et al's (1986) criticism of Tulving's model are primarily in regard 
to two main areas: 
where the distinction between semantic and episodic memory is not well 
enough defined to be testable, and consequently results of experiments that claim to prove such a distinction 
must be viewed as inconclusive; and
where the 
need to be modeled, not just labeled, 
since merely labeling them "does not provide a theoretical explanation, but only a categorization." 
(McKoon et al., 1986)
definition - 
modeling - 
processes 
Part of the problem derives from the nature of Tulving's 'model'. As pointed out by Main (1994), it 
"focuses on the 
of the material that is stored in memory." As such it is qualitatively descriptive right 
to its foundation which may make it somewhat elusive to empirical quantitative verification.
nature 
McKoon et al. also provide outlines of several experiments which seem to contradict Tulving's theory, and 
note Roediger's (1984, cited in McKoon et al., 1986) concern that dissociations may exist between different 
processes within a system and therefore cannot be used as the only evidence for separate memory systems. 
This is a point which is taken up by Schacter (1990) when he wishes to make clear that the existence of 
separate processing modules of his perceptual representations system approach "need not be taken 
evidence for the existence of multiple memory systems," and goes on to note that dissociations 
alone are "not sufficient grounds for postulating multiple memory systems, because empirical
dissociations
a system can be observed (e.g., Roediger, 1984)." Also important is consideration of
functions of systems, since to argue for multiple memory systems the systems in question
should perform
and
functions." (Sherry and Schacter, 1987, cited in 
Schacter, 1990, italics mine). Given the complementary nature of semantic and episodic memory in 
Tulving's model (1985), and the dependence of episodic memory upon semantic memory, it would not 
seem to satisfy that last requirement. Likewise McKoon et al. (I1986) question 'just how different 
ultimately, the monohierarchical multimemory model is from a unitary system given the degree of
interrelatedness of the components Is it not perhaps a unitary system with three processes?
as 
primafacie 
within 
"different 
 mutually incompatible 
. 
By the tenor of the times, Tulving's time is up. He is a pantheist in a time of monotheism. He seeks 
multiplicity while others want to believe in something unitary. He has the gift of imagination. In answer to 
the question posed in the title of his 1985 paper Tulving says that there are basically three systems, "But if 
we try to imagine what might lie beyond our currently limited horizon we may decide that a better answer
might be "at least three and probably many more."" (Tulving, 1985)
References
Krebs, D. and Blackman, R. (1988). 
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, Inc. 
207-209.
Psychology: A First Encounter. 
McKoon, G., Ratcliff, R., and Dell, G.S. (1986). A critical evaluation @the semantic episodic 
distinction.
295-306.
Journal of experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 12, 
Main, M.W. (1994). 
Harcourt Brace. 86-92
Cognition. 
05/11/02 14:44
Sans titre
Page 5 sur 6
http://www.sfu.ca/%7Ewwwpsyb/issues/1997/summer/pettifor.htm

Podrouzek, W. (I 994). Unpublished lecture in introductory cognitive psychology course at Simon Fraser 
University, fall semester.
Schacter, D.L. (1990). Perceptual representation systems and implicit memory.
543-571.
Annals of the New York 
Academy of sciences, 608, 
Trager, J.(1992).The People's Chronology. Henry Holt and Company, Inc.
Tulving, E. (1985). How many memory systems are there? American Psychologist,
40, 385-398.
Tulving, E., Schacter, D.L., and Stark, H.A. (1982). Priming effects in word-fragment completion are 
independent of recognition memory. 
336-142
Journal of experimental Psychology:Learning, Memory, and 
Cognition, 8, 
05/11/02 14:44
Sans titre
Page 6 sur 6
http://www.sfu.ca/%7Ewwwpsyb/issues/1997/summer/pettifor.htm

