
 

March 2007 
Vol. 1 No. 3 
www.seattlelym.com/dynamis 
 
EDITORS  
Peter Martinson 
Jason Ross 
Riana St. Classis 
 
ART DIRECTOR 
Chris Jadatz 
 
LaROUCHE YOUTH 
MOVEMENT OFFICES: 
Boston, MA: 617-350-0040 
Detroit, MI: 313-592-3945 
Houston, TX: 713-541-2907 
Los Angeles, CA: 323-259-1860 
Oakland, CA: 510-251-2518 
Seattle, WA: 206-417-2363 
Washington, D.C.: 202-232-6004 
 
For submissions, questions, or 
comments, please email 
peter_martinson@hotmail.com 
               -or -   
jasonaross@gmail.com 
- or - 
rianaelise@gmail.com 
 
On the Cover 
Urania, front piece designed by 
Johannes Kepler for the 
publication of the Rudolphine 
Tables.  Kepler took over this 
project upon Tycho Brahe’s death, 
and Kepler labored almost 20 
years of his life to finish these 
astronomical tables.  Kepler 
created these tables by applying 
his revolutionary discoveries to 
Tycho’s extensive observations.  
In a sense, the Rudolphine Tables 
became the application of 
Kepler’s method in his  
Commentaries on Mars to all the 
other planets.  In the center of the 
engraving, standing in Urania’s 
temple, are Tycho, Copernicus, 
Ptolemy and Hiparchus, 
deliberating in the simultaneity of 
eternity.  If you look on the lower 
left side of the temple, through 
one of the windows, you can see 
Kepler working late into the night 
by candle light. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
4 
 
 
13 
 
 
17 
 
 
20 
 
 
26
 
From the Editors 
 
De Astronomia 
By Mike Vander Nat 
 
Never Metaphysics I Didn’t Like 
By Spencer Cross 
 
The Fallacy of the Equant 
By Jason Ross 
 
Physics, Not Statistics: Kepler’s Paradoxical Return to the Equant 
By Jason Ross 
 
A Preliminary Investigation of the LaRouche-Riemann Method 
By Michael Steger 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“…God, like one of our own architects, approached the task of constructing 
the universe with order and pattern, and laid out the individual parts 
accordingly, as if it were not art which imitated Nature, but God himself had 
looked to the mode of building of Man who was to be.” 
Johannes Kepler
Mysterium Cosmographicum

∆υν
∆υν
∆υν
∆υναµι
αµι
αµι
αµιςςςς Vol. 1, No. 3 
March 2007 
 
 
From The Editors 
 
Here, now, I sit in the same chair that I occupied when 
composing the editorial for the first issue of ∆υναµι
∆υναµι
∆υναµι
∆υναµιςςςς, a mere 
seven months ago.  But today, as if this chair and the person 
sitting in it were in a completely new universe, I write from a 
different place and a different time, a locus where time and 
place are themselves, different.  Imagine: I doze in this chair one 
September evening, pressed by the enormity of the idea of 
launching this journal, relieved that words have indeed 
staggered onto the page.  I awake to an odd sensation, as if my 
body’s presence in the world were somehow different.  I arise 
from this chair.  I wonder, “Is this really my body?  Could I still 
be dreaming?”  But, yes, my body does feel like its familiar self; 
it is not noticeably altered; my foot has the proper weight upon 
the floor.  Perhaps this curious impression is merely the residue 
of sleep still clinging to my mind.   
Imagine: I exit the house, stepping not onto the well-
worn stairs I could descend even in my sleep, but into an 
unfamiliar street along a blooming park in spring, where the 
alien song of strange birds carries from one peculiar tree to the 
next. 
Now imagine: While I expect a fantastic scene, as I 
have just described, to impinge on my senses when I step 
through my door, instead the street appears just as it had before.  
Though I am aware of a great change, this change, so profound 
that I expect to see it wrought everywhere, wrought into the 
very essence of nature itself, is not visible.  Or, at least, the 
internal reorganization of nature is not fully visible upon its 
surface, yet.  My body feels the same; the street looks the same, 
but simply trusting appearances is foolishness in the extreme.   
When we launched the first issue of ∆υναµι
∆υναµι
∆υναµι
∆υναµιςςςς    a mere 
seven months ago, the animations team assigned the task of 
breaking through Kepler’s New Astronomy was just bringing 
the first phase of their work to a close.  I and four other 
members of LaRouche’s Youth Movement had just arrived in 
Virginia to begin work on Kepler’s Harmony of the World.  As 
we began our work, the specter of our dying economy loomed 
large, darkening the horizon, as the collapse of the housing 
bubble, the collapse of the auto industry, the collapse of the 
living standard of the majority of the citizens of this and other 
countries alike, could no longer be denied, just as they are 
today, though, perhaps, the acute disaster is now more generally 
acknowledged.  We were coming upon a midterm election, an 
event in the political spectrum that usually pales next to the 
hoopla and brouhaha of presidential races.  But this election was 
different, as we would likely never impeach the egregious Dick 
Cheney or contain the idiot George Bush without a sea change 
in congress, without a Democratic majority coming to power 
with the ability to fully investigate this administration’s crimes.      
When we launched this journal, we knew within our 
organization, within LaRouche’s Youth Movement, that a 
powerful potential was developing, a potential to revive 
classical art and science, to regenerate sanity in society, to 
exemplify the renaissance community. We knew that we, a 
small but growing portion of our generation, dedicated to 
recreating LaRouche’s economic discovery, were changing the 
reigning culture, though this was not reflected in the media, and 
though often, our success in influencing policy-making for the 
good would seem to be obscured by the great stupidity of even 
the better elements of Congress, and by the great fascist 
criminality of the Cheney administration.  We knew that it was 
time to create a definite forum to express this changing culture, 
to make it more apparent.  We knew that within our youth 
movement a developing capability for a dialogue about the 
principles of art and science was emerging.  We wanted to make 
this dialogue public, to aid in inspiring and challenging the 
citizens of the United States and the world to become better, to 
become actively engaged in the future survival of civilization. 
And, so, we launched this journal. 
Upon its inception, LaRouche wrote: 
 
The birth of this publication reflects a significant 
moment in an ongoing process of the reliving of the act of 
original discovery in the case of the Pythagoreans, Plato, 
and Plato’s Academy, and, now, the foundations of 
modern physical science in the work of Johannes Kepler 
as the avowed follower of Nicholas of Cusa. So, the LYM 
has reached the point of actually launching what will 
become, hopefully, a rebirth of that specific current of 
science upon which the greatest achievements of European 
civilization had been premised, heretofore.1 
 
That moment in late September last was pregnant with 
the awesome developments that have unfolded since, while their 
actuality remained invisible.  Shortly after we put forth the first 
issue of ∆υναµι
∆υναµι
∆υναµι
∆υναµιςςςς, , , , the first animations crew returned to their 
homes and fully initiated the entire youth movement’s 
commitment to mastering Kepler’s New Astronomy.  Soon it 
was clear that this enabled a level of discussion that had not 
existed before.  In many ways, Jason Ross, who was a member 
of that first team, reflects this new capability in his articles on 
Kepler’s treatment of the equant.  In fact, Ross comments that 
the question he addresses in his second paper arose because of 
the deep investigation of Kepler’s work generally taken up by 
the LYM, that the question of why Kepler reintroduces the 
theory of the equant for the earth when he had disproved the 
very idea of the equant previously, would not have been a 
question if people were not thoroughly engaged with Kepler’s 
work.  
Then, in the first weeks of October, leading into the hot 
phase of the midterm election campaigns, an investigative team 
composed primarily of LYM members, uncovered the full 
implications of Lynne Cheney and David Horowitz’s American 
Council of Trustees and Alumni, ACTA, as a repressive 
organization targeting professors and students that they  
                                                 
1“Actually Relive History!”, Lyndon LaRouche, Jr., September 
2006 Dunamiςςςς, Vol. 1, No. 1   
2

∆υν
∆υν
∆υν
∆υναµι
αµι
αµι
αµιςςςς Vol. 1, No. 3 
March 2007 
 
 
perceived as opponents to the Cheney administration agenda.2 
This organization acted as a key component in the attempt to 
suppress the youth vote, to intimidate professors and students 
from engaging in political dialogue, and thus to assure yet 
another Republican victory on November 7th.  Between Lynne 
Cheney’s active coercion and Howard Dean’s passive sabotage 
of his own party’s campaigns3, apparently, little would change 
politically, except for the worse, over the months before the 
2008 presidential race. 
After the LYM investigation exposed the nature of 
Lynne Cheney’s operation on college campuses, the LYM 
mobilized to get out thousands of pamphlets to share this fact 
with the students and professors who were the implicit and 
explicit targets of Lynne Cheney’s dirty work.  They 
concentrated their efforts in key states, intervening into 
important congressional races where the Democratic candidate 
was often not getting the support required from the Democratic 
National Committee.  We provided the impetus.  We changed 
the course of history. 
After this fierce political fight was waged and largely 
won, LaRouche conducted a webcast from Washington D.C.4  
At that event, members of the LYM from the East Coast and 
Midwest, and some of us present from the West Coast, 
participated in a presentation of J. S. Bach’s Jesu, Meine 
Freude motet, conducted by John Sigerson, before LaRouche’s 
address.  That presentation, which can be viewed in its entirety 
at www.wlym.com, exemplified a new level of capability and 
understanding of classical modes of communication, of insight 
into the conveyance of profound ideas. Though the performance 
was imperfect, though the full power of Bach’s work was not 
yet fully developed, that performance revealed that the LYM 
had evolved to a new level of capability.  LaRouche increased 
the intellectual challenge to his youth movement accordingly.      
Meanwhile, I and the four other LYM members 
working on the second phase of the animations work, on 
Kepler’s Harmony of the World, continued to labor.  When we 
launched our website5 in the beginning of February, when we 
revealed what we were able to do, we showed that LaRouche 
was right when he wrote in that introduction to the first issue of 
∆υναµι
∆υναµι
∆υναµι
∆υναµιςςςς    so many months before that: 
 
I read the reports contained within this first edition of 
∆υναµι
∆υναµι
∆υναµι
∆υναµιςςςς    as marking the beginning of the true rebirth of 
the university from a long, downward journey into that 
Sophistry of a thus-self-doomed Athens which has become 
the characteristic contemporary mood within popular 
opinion and governments in Europe and the U.S.A. today. 
The opportunity to rejuvenate the universities has thus 
arrived. 
                                                 
2 Is Joseph Goebbels On Your Campus? John Train and the Bankers’ 
Secret Government, LaRouche PAC pamphlet, October 2006.  
Available as a PDF at www.larouchepac.com 
3 “The Inside Story of Dean’s Sabotage,” Debra Hanania-Freeman, EIR 
January 5, 2007, vol. 34. no.1 
4 “Organizing the Recovery from the Great Crash of 2007,” Nov. 16, 
2006 webcast transcript in pamphlet form.  Webcast archived at 
www.larouchepac.com 
5 http://wlym.com/kepler/ 
Our work, like that choral presentation, also 
represented a new phase in the growth of the LYM, a point of 
departure.  Now a third group is working in LaRouche’s 
basement on the discoveries of Carl Friedrich Gauss, pushing 
the work on Kepler into the realm of ideas preceding Bernhard 
Riemann’s development of the concept of hypergeometries.  
This is the key discovery leading the mind to “know what 
universe it is in,” as LaRouche has said, the key discovery to 
master, as we rediscover LaRouche’s discovery. 
While this third team works on Gauss, they are also 
involved, along with an extended group of the LYM, in intense 
choral sessions with John Sigerson and Lyndon LaRouche every 
week.  The harmonic nature of the universe, of man’s role as the 
embodiment of the characteristic of development in that 
universe, is becoming conscious, is waking within an essential 
group that will act as a catalyst for the rest of human society 
today.  Soon the LaRouche Youth Movement will have the 
foundations to embark on making new discoveries. 
Thus, while the LYM rediscovers the true nature of 
humanity, it is entirely lawful that we should be involved in a 
massive political fight that directly hinges on that concept of 
humanity.  If the Democratic party will survive, if they will 
regain their potency, then they will no longer tolerate the 
environmentalism that they have increasingly donned as their 
banner; they will no longer tolerate the absurd hypocrisy and 
poorly hidden genocidal nature of the policies Al Gore claims 
must be adopted for the good of the earth.  Al Gore, as a 
political figure, is only able to be promoted now, and to garner a 
following, because the truth about man’s fundamental goodness 
has been so debased, so abused, so forgotten.6   
From this standpoint, read Spencer Cross’s article on 
the first astronomy with joy and good humor; read Michael 
Vander Nat’s engrossing dialogue, seemingly on the same 
subject as Cross’s, and yet, so completely different, with that 
sense of capturing something which has been lost.  Employ 
Michael Steger’s pedagogical exercise to free your mind of 
Euclidean assumptions about the nature of space, a prerequisite 
for any truthful exploration of astrophysics. Along with Ross’s 
treatment of Kepler’s use of the equant in The New Astronomy, 
these articles represent the first of what will be a series of issues 
on Kepler’s discovery of universal gravitation.  Future issues 
will develop the ideas presented here further and will venture 
into realms not yet imagined.  
 
Suddenly, tectonic changes, changes in the essential 
structure of nature as we think we know it, are occurring with 
great rapidity.   
 Peter Martinson 
Jason Ross 
Riana St. Classis 
editors 
                                                 
6 “Implications of the Gore Hoax for international Policy,” Lyndon 
LaRouche webcast of March 7, 2007; EIR March 2, 2007, vol. 34, 
no.9; EIR March 9, vol. 34, no. 10; EIR March 16, vol. 34, no. 11; EIR 
March 23, vol. 34, no 12; EIR March 30, vol. 34., no. 13; and certainly 
many future issues of EIR, until the idea is fully driven home for the 
congress and the population at large. 
3

De Astronomia 
Vander Nat 
∆υν
∆υν
∆υν
∆υναµι
αµι
αµι
αµιςςςς Vol. 1, No. 3 
March 2007 
 
De Astronomia 
    
Mike Vander Nat 
 
A dialogue between a Master and his Disciple 
 
Disciple.  What is the astronomer’s art? 
 
Master.  According to the ancients, the astronomers explain the 
motions of the heavenly bodies which appear irregular to us and 
preserve the appearances so that their future positions may be 
predicted. 
 
D.  Have not all the heavenly bodies the same motion?  For I do 
not posses the astronomer’s art but I have often seen their risings 
and settings from East towards West. 
 
M.  Have you not also witnessed the rising of a planet 
throughout the season?   
 
D.  Yes, I believe Mars was clearly visible this summer last. 
 
M.  Was there regularity in the time of its ascension and 
descent?   
 
D.  I do not understand your meaning. 
 
M.  In other words, did Mars enjoy the entire night, always 
setting on the western horizon before the Sun arose? 
 
D.  If I remember correctly, Mars did reach the horizon before a 
new day, but now that I think of it, Mars would appear very 
high, beyond the eastern horizon and more toward the West.  By 
Fall, Mars would set soon after the Sun. 
 
M.  Very well.  I shall tell you why Mars and the other planets 
all appear irregular to us when they are in fact well ordered.  
However, since I myself am a student of astronomy, I will 
borrow from the testimony of the three great astronomers: 
Ptolemy, Copernicus and Brahe.  But this is no easy task, so I 
may ask you to help me from time to time.   
 
D.  I would very much like to hear your explanation, although I 
do not think I will be of much help to you for as I said, I have 
not the knowledge of astronomy, save what I hear from the 
townsfolk.  From them, the names Ptolemy and Copernicus are 
familiar to me but their works are not. 
 
M.  Did you not say just now, you observed Mars throughout the 
summer? 
 
D.  Yes. 
 
M.  Then answer only what you have seen for yourself and when 
you are in doubt say what you think most reasonable.   
 
D.  I shall. 
 
M.  You say, do you not, that all the heavenly bodies pass above 
us from East toward the West? 
 
D.  I do. 
 
M.  Both those we call stars and those we call planets? 
 
D.  Yes. 
 
M.  But are not some stars visible throughout the night, neither 
rising nor setting but remaining aloft? 
 
D.  Yes of course, I meant that those which rise and set will 
move in the westward direction.  The others I suppose revolve in 
an arc around the Northern Star which is stable.  This unique star 
is used by navigators to arrive at far away lands and without 
which they might never return home again.   
  
M.  This common motion then is called by astronomers the First 
Motion, on account of what is immediately visible to us.  The 
ancients took more careful notice of the stars which appeared to 
change their positions relative to those rather fixed groups which 
today we call constellations.  Over many years there was 
observed the circuit of these wanderers.   
 
D.  What do you mean ‘circuit’? 
 
M.  By that I mean the procession of the wandering stars through 
the fixed images of The Bull, The Twins, The Crab and so on, 
until they returned where they once began.   
 
D.  Yes I recall that these are the signs of the Zodiac, and that 
each planet moves about the heavens on an orbit or what you 
called a circuit.  But I have often wondered how the planets 
arrive at these signs, for they never seem to remove themselves 
from the other stars; rather, they move in common.   
 
M.  Yes dear pupil, it is not apparent how they move from sign 
to sign, but remember this is in fact the end of astronomy, to 
explain the motions which carry each planet in consequence 
through the heavenly sphere.  This then, the motion peculiar to 
each planet, is called proper motion.  The proper motions are 
more difficult to observe, and this knowledge was acquired 
slowly from year to year and generation to generation.  The 
astronomer follows the wanderers, recording the places they 
once occupied until they are no longer visible, moving too near 
the Sun.   
 
D.  When these wanderers traverse the zodiac, keep they their 
distance apart? 
 
4

De Astronomia 
Vander Nat 
∆υν
∆υν
∆υν
∆υναµι
αµι
αµι
αµιςςςς Vol. 1, No. 3 
March 2007 
 
M.  Do you mean to ask if they move in unison, never crossing 
one another? 
 
D.  Yes.  That is my meaning. 
 
M.  The planets do cross each other and the Sun. 
 
D.  How can they pass through one another?  Will their courses 
not collide? 
 
M.  Excellent question, and here I shall defer to the authority of 
the astronomers, for I believe their answers are most excellent.  
The planets then, are distant from one another and for this reason 
only appear to collide with the Sun.  When this happens they are 
said to conjoin.  Those that move slowest have extremely large 
orbits, and those that move more swiftly have smaller orbits.  All 
the astronomers are in perfect agreement on this but they differ 
greatly as to the arrangement of these orbits. 
 
D.  What says Ptolemy?   
 
M.  Ptolemy declares the Earth to be still, at the center, or very 
near the midpoint of the planetary orbits.  He places the Moon 
closest to the Earth and next Venus and Mercury enclosed by the 
Sun.  Venus and Mercury vary in their speeds and overtake each 
other, sometimes passing the Sun and other times falling behind.  
Mars is next, placed very far from the Earth, Jupiter around Mars 
and finally Saturn is highest above the Earth having the slowest 
motion.  All these bodies then are enclosed within the orb of the 
stars. 
 
D.  Why do you say the orbits are swift or slow when they seem 
to move no differently than the fixed stars? 
 
M.  Remember, the common motion carries all the heavenly 
bodies around in unison; however, planets appear differently 
from week to week and season to season.  Since Ptolemy placed 
the Earth at rest, the outermost stars move quickly, the planets 
move somewhat slower.  Copernicus and Brahe say the Earth 
rotates in place like dancers who turn about; if so, the stars are at 
rest. 
 
D.  Yes I see that makes a difference.   
 
M.  A great difference indeed, for when you consider the places 
the planets occupy, and watch over the places they move toward, 
an even more wonderful occurrence appears.   
 
D.  Appears? 
 
M.  Yes, in the astronomer’s eye.  The astronomer will show that 
the planets move contrary to the fixed stars. 
 
D.  I think I see now what you mean.  If the dancer takes notice 
of the audience around herself, they, being at rest, will appear to 
her, to revolve, or rise and set as it were.   
 
M.  You understand well.   
 
D.  And should someone arise and depart, slowly making his 
way through the crowd, the dancer’s eye perceives his motion to 
be contrary to the seated crowd.   
 
M.  Yes exactly.   
 
D.  Would not the speed of the outermost stars be greatly 
reduced if the Earth rotates rapidly toward the opposite 
direction? 
 
M.  Yes.  I knew you would understand, having no prior 
knowledge, provided you answer what seems most reasonable to 
you.   
 
D.  I was in great confusion about the common motion of the 
planets and stars, but it is quite plain to me now that the planets 
do in fact move, as my memory can testify, but in the opposite 
way my eyes perceive them to move. 
 
M.  This contrary motion is called the Second Motion.  It is also 
called proper motion.  The rotation of the Earth is called by 
astronomers the diurnal motion, which was first.  Your 
confusion is quite common on account of the fact that the two 
motions of the planets are mixed together.  But you have 
separated them remarkably well. 
And if the effect of the diurnal motion is removed, so to speak, 
you will see a most irregular motion of the planets. 
 
D.  I do remember you said the motions appear irregular when in 
fact, they are well ordered.  Please go on.  I am eager to know 
what irregularities occur.   
 
M.  Try to recall the summer last when Mars was visible.   
 
D.  I do recall.   
 
M.  Did you not say that Mars was more advanced beyond the 
East and more overhead each time you happened to see the 
sunset? 
 
D.  I did. 
 
M.  There is then a sort of chase between the planets and the 
Sun? 
 
D.  Reason forces me to admit a chase does take place, whereby 
Mars gains upon Apollo, the Sun.  So it is with all the gods, if 
they do in fact move upon orbits.  There would have to be a 
conjunction as you said which we cannot perceive on account of 
the Sun’s light.   
 
M.  You nearly have it, for remember that the diurnal motion 
may be an illusion and as we said before, the gods move 
contrary to the stars, that is, from West to East.   
 
D.  How easily I forget.  So, in the case of Mars advancing 
toward the Sun, as I observed, the proper motion carries Mars 
toward the West and it is Apollo who chases Mars.   
 
5

De Astronomia 
Vander Nat 
∆υν
∆υν
∆υν
∆υναµι
αµι
αµι
αµιςςςς Vol. 1, No. 3 
March 2007 
 
M.  Exactly.  Now think about the conjunction and the passing 
of the heavenly bodies.  Does it not seem to you that the planets 
must also depart from the Sun after the moment of conjunction? 
 
D.  It does seem so to me.   
 
M.  There is a moment when a planet will at some time be 
opposite the Sun? 
 
D.  There is.   
 
M.  According to the astronomers, at this moment a most 
surprising act occurs. 
 
D.  What occurs? 
 
M.  As the planets take the 
place opposite the Sun, they 
retard, stop, and retrace their 
steps or like crabs, move in the 
opposite direction as they face 
us.   
 
D.  This is most astonishing.  I 
do not understand what this 
looks like for I have never 
seen it, nor have I ever heard 
of such a thing until now.   
 
M.  I will try to explain as best 
I can what the astronomers call 
retrogression.  The planets 
advance 
in 
the 
eastward 
direction as we discussed, but 
as the Sun departs the planets 
slow their steps until they 
come 
to 
rest, 
and 
then 
retrogress, 
that 
is, 
move 
backwards in a loop, then 
continue on in the eastward 
direction.  This occurs over 
many days time and is seen 
only in the astronomer’s eye.  
It is a most curious pattern 
which occurs in various signs of the zodiac, not keeping to one 
sign alone.   
 
D.  Tell me if I follow your meaning.  You say the planets move 
swiftly with the approach of the Sun. 
 
M.  Yes. 
 
D.  The planets strive to escape the Sun.  When they are passed 
by him they retard, as if fatigued by the chase and thankful that 
Apollo is in pursuit of some other god.  In relief they slow to a 
halt and decide to reverse their path hoping to evade the Sun for 
good; but, they recollect halfway through their regress that they 
may encounter Apollo all the sooner because their courses are in 
the round shape, and not the straight.  In this way they return to 
their eastward course, quickening their steps as they anticipate 
the return of the Sun and strive to outrun him once again. 
 
M.  Yes, you have narrated it all so poetically.  I believe you 
were just now speaking in the dithyramb. 
 
D.  I cannot say for certain if those were the words of Dionysus 
or my own words.  Perhaps our discussion is pleasing to God, 
because our thoughts are upon Him. 
 
M.  Very good.   
 
D.  One thing more confuses me.  You said the planets vary their 
steps, that they accelerate and also retard? 
 
M.  They do. 
 
D.  I am curious how this can 
be seen when as you said 
before, the motions of the 
planets are mixed with the 
rotation of the stars.   
 
M.  Remember 
it 
is 
the 
astronomer’s art to record the 
places 
each 
planet 
travels 
through.  From them it has 
come down to us that each 
divinity moves in sequence of 
the zodiacal images.   
 
D.  I understand that now, but I 
am still at a loss as to the 
observation of each planet’s 
speed; especially when they are 
not always visible.   
 
M.  You must think hard as I 
answer in the best manner I 
can.  I said this knowledge we 
attributed to the astronomers 
was acquired slowly, over 
many generations.  When the 
days are counted as the planets 
traverse the stars, we gather that they spend more time in one 
constellation than another, making more progress in one season 
than another.  And it is a great convenience to astronomy that the 
signs through which the planets move are spaced evenly enough 
that we may observe the variance in pace.   
 
D.  Very convenient indeed.  If it were otherwise, I perceive a 
great difficulty in measuring their progress. 
 
M.  Such are the wondrous designs of God.  His divine reason 
hath provided man all that is needed to discern His works.   
 
D.  Wonderful are His works, and I marvel at them.  And just 
now something has occurred to me.   
 
 
6

De Astronomia 
Vander Nat 
∆υν
∆υν
∆υν
∆υναµι
αµι
αµι
αµιςςςς Vol. 1, No. 3 
March 2007 
 
M.  What is it?   
 
D.  When you said it is by the signs of the zodiac that we behold 
the movements, I remembered that it is the Sun’s traversal of the 
heavens which determines our year, though we depart somewhat 
from the pagan calendar.  In light of what you said about the 
altering of the speeds, I wonder now if the Sun too changes its 
speed throughout the year. 
 
M.  It certainly does. 
 
D.  How astonishing indeed.  Is this what you meant in saying 
the motions are irregular? 
 
M.  Yes; and there is still more.  Let us return to a point that 
came up earlier.  We say that the planets will spend more time in 
one constellation than another.  Know this too, that the time a 
planet requires to complete its circuit from a sign of origin, is 
quite irregular as well.   
 
D.  This is all very perplexing.  The astronomer’s art must be 
rare among men.   
 
M.  So it is.  But be assured that these perplexities have been 
overcome by the astronomers, although not removed entirely, for 
there is disagreement between them.   
 
D.  Yes of course, how silly of me to forget.  You said the 
astronomers differed greatly over the arrangement of the 
heavenly bodies.  I was distracted by the mixture of the common 
and proper motions.  Now, I would like to return to the other 
astronomers, for I should very much like to hear how each 
explains the perplexing irregularities.   
 
M.  These unequal motions caused men to wonder if the heavens 
might somehow be defective, or if somehow they appear 
differently to us besides being exceedingly well ordered.   
 
D.  I should like to think they are well ordered, for I cannot 
comprehend why God would chose to create lawless motions.   
 
M.  Nor can I.   
 
D.  I am very anxious to get past these irregularities, for I see 
therein lies the true structure of the universe which will reveal to 
us whether God has fashioned the world poorly or well.   
 
M.  Well said.  But before we go on to the other hypotheses, it is 
necessary to separate the two irregularities, for they are very 
mixed together. 
 
D.  Two did you say?  I thought you named several irregular 
motions: a reversal of the path, the increase and decrease of 
speed, the rising up and descending motions, and completing the 
signs unevenly.   
 
M.  Yes, I said all these things.  But answer me this.   
 
D.  What? 
 
M.  Is it not so that the planets revolve through the heavenly 
sphere, returning once again to a place of origin? 
 
D.  It is so.  The planets do in fact have a proper motion forming 
an orbit, at least on the authority of the great astronomers, and 
this seems reasonable to me.   
 
M.  And the Sun too, does it traverse the heavens? 
 
D.  It does. 
 
M.  This then, is called the First Inequality. 
 
D.  I am not sure if I understand.  Was this motion not called by 
you, the Second or Proper Motion? 
 
M.  You perceive very well and to answer you, I must admit the 
two are very much alike. 
 
D.  How then, do they differ? 
 
M.  They are the same in so far as we say the planets are carried 
around not in the westward direction but in the eastward, which 
distinguishes them from the common motion.  But the First 
Inequality signifies exactly how the planets traverse the heavens 
in order that they may return.  I will have more to say on this 
later.   
 
D.  I accept your answer provided you do as you say and explain 
more when the time comes.   
 
M.  Next, did we not also say the planets are attuned to the Sun, 
causing them to conjoin and oppose one another, and also to rise 
up and make a ring across the fixed stars? 
 
D.  Indeed we did.   
 
M.  This then is another motion, connected to the Sun, for 
retrogression occurs at no other time than at opposition. 
 
D.  That is clear, but I do not recognize what is unequal about 
this. 
 
M.  What appears to be unequal is the duration of these 
backward motions, meaning sometimes forming a large ring, 
other times a smaller one.  These retrogressions also cause the 
planets to rebound in the upright position and sometimes down-
turned.  For these reasons it is called an inequality.   
 
D.  Why is the first one called ‘First’ and why the second, 
‘Second’? 
 
M.  On account of the first one being observed first I suppose, 
for it too belongs to the Sun and the Moon.  As for the second it 
is absent in these two.  The First Inequality being present in all 
bodies makes it prior to the Second, found only in some. 
 
7

De Astronomia 
Vander Nat 
∆υν
∆υν
∆υν
∆υναµι
αµι
αµι
αµιςςςς Vol. 1, No. 3 
March 2007 
 
D.  Did you not say that the Sun did in fact cause these motions 
called the Second Inequality?  Now you say it is absent in the 
Sun. 
 
M.  Right well my pupil, I did say that and I do not contradict 
myself.  I say it does not apply to the Sun, meaning the Sun does 
not reverse its direction, nor is it ever opposite to itself.  Being a 
cause of the planet’s evasive maneuvers, it does not itself 
commit an evasive act. 
 
D.  That is more clear.  Perhaps you can clarify one more 
uncertainty. 
 
M.  Perhaps. 
 
D.  You have indicated that both 
inequalities affect the speed of 
the planets, one measured in each 
sign, the other measured by the 
entire orbit.  This being so, as 
well as the other odd maneuvers 
taken by the planets, how can it 
be known that there are two 
inequalities and not three or very 
many inequalities? 
 
M.  You have hit upon a most 
important question which I have 
asked myself; for both produce 
irregularities and they are always 
mixed together.  The separation 
of 
the 
two 
was 
extremely 
difficult indeed and in order that 
you might distinguish them as 
well, be careful that you do not 
confuse the two.  You are right in 
saying that they both affect the 
speed or velocity of the planets, 
but do you remember what I said 
a little while ago? 
 
D.  What? 
 
M.  That these retrogressions can occur anywhere in the 
heavens, not having a fixed home. 
 
D.  I do.  That is why I am confused now.  To my thinking there 
may be many causes which move all the bodies unevenly 
through the expanse, both the stars and those we call wanderers. 
  
M.  Your inquisitiveness is delightful.  In order to settle this 
doubt, answer me this: do not all the planets have their own 
separate orbits, whose distance from the Earth makes some 
revolve more slowly than others?   
 
D.  Yes they have each their own course. 
 
M.  Will the presence or absence of the Sun prevent them from 
arriving at their starting points, say in Aries, or in Taurus or in 
some other sign where they may return? 
 
D.  No, it will prevent them not. 
 
M.  Then if the other inequality has its own effect upon the 
separately moving bodies, it cannot possibly be one motion 
which accomplishes both effects, namely the retrogressions 
determined somehow by the Sun and the motion which returns 
the planet to a beginning place. 
 
D.  It is not possible provided there be some regularity to these 
effects, for if not I do not see how you could say there is one or 
two or very many inequalities mixed together. 
 
M.  Your reasoning is excellent 
and I believe you would make a 
fine astronomer.  To this I say 
there 
is 
regularity 
or 
near 
regularity between the times of 
opposition 
and 
conjunction.  
Moreover, 
the 
retrogressions 
occur in near order of the zodiac, 
moving methodically from one 
sign to the next.   
 
D.  Then it is easier for me to see 
now, that the inequalities are 
distinct.  For if the planet is 
passed by the Sun in a somewhat 
regular time, although in various 
places, and each planet eventually 
returns to his origin, the two 
cycles are separate. 
 
M.  You have separated them 
admirably well. 
 
D.  This cycle with the Sun and 
each planet seems to me less of a 
chase and more of a dance, 
keeping nearly in time, as dancers modulate their movements to 
keep in time with musical rhythms. 
 
M.  You are quite right.  The ancients have often compared the 
celestial motions to creating music. 
 
D.  This Second Inequality then, the dance, is very perplexing to 
me, and I cannot at this moment imagine what would determine 
such an act, even if it is rhythmic.  As for the First Inequality, it 
seems to me it can be none other than a circle, for what other 
shape can it be? 
 
M.  That seems reasonable, though not yet certain.  This is where 
the great astronomers differ in their explanations.  I think it 
would be appropriate now to distinguish the hypotheses since we 
have separated the awkward motions seen by us.   
 
 
8

De Astronomia 
Vander Nat 
∆υν
∆υν
∆υν
∆υναµι
αµι
αµι
αµιςςςς Vol. 1, No. 3 
March 2007 
 
D.  I have not seen them myself, but what you relate to me on 
the authority of the astronomers seems reasonable and in 
agreement with what I have seen. 
 
M.  Returning to Ptolemy then, he explains the First Inequality 
thus: the planets are carried around a circle, as you concluded, 
with the exception that the Earth is not at the center of these 
orbits.   
 
D.  What is the reason for this? 
 
M.  The reason is manifold.  The planets are seen to return to 
their origin; but remember, this will not happen uniformly.  
Astronomers have discerned however that each orbit is in fact 
uniform in its own esteem regardless of how it is seen by us.   
 
D.  What do you mean ‘uniformly’? 
 
M.  I mean in equal times, from sign to self-same sign.   
 
D.  Of course.  Uniform in this case means ‘equal time’. 
 
M.  And by so placing the Earth off center, or as he says, 
eccentric, the regions where a planet is more distant from the 
Earth appear to lapse in more time, and when it comes nearer the 
Earth, it will appear to pass more quickly. 
 
D.  I must ask you to pause while I imagine this eccentric, it is 
no easy matter.   
 
M.  Think carefully, while I too pause to regain my breath. 
 
D.  I think I have it.  If the body were carried around uniformly, 
seen from the center, then this would create the illusion of a 
slowing down and speeding up seen by the off center observer. 
 
M.  That is correct.  However, Ptolemy places the equalizing 
point not at the center but beyond the center as far removed as 
the Earth. 
 
D.  What do you mean ‘equalizing point’? 
 
M.  I mean what you said about the uniform motion; except, the 
place where the planet is seen to move in equal times is not at 
the center but beyond the mid- point.  This is called the ‘equant’. 
 
D.  Beyond the mid-point where?  Does it matter where? 
 
M.  Yes, it matters greatly.  It must lie on the line dividing the 
orbit equally in half.  The endpoints of this diameter must be the 
moments of slowest and swiftest motion.   
 
D.  Why through these moments and not others? 
 
M.  For if otherwise the two halves of the orbit would be 
unequal in time which is contrary to observation. 
 
D.  I see that the authority of the observer must hold if we are to 
unfold Ptolemy’s hypothesis. 
 
M.  Upon this line, struck through the center, place the 
equalizing point and the Earth on opposite sides of the mid-point 
and equally removed. 
 
D.  I do not understand why this is done.  Does not the 
displacement of the observer explain the First Inequality? 
 
M.  I see that follows but the reason is this: in order that the 
planet not only appear to change speed, but also to physically 
effect this change as the observations required.   
 
D.  Do you mean a sort of compensation occurs?  That, as much 
as the planet slows down at the distant side, it speeds up when at 
the nearer side.   
 
M.  I suppose that is a type of compensation. 
 
D.  I see that if the equant were the observer, he too would 
experience this illusion, if only the uniform motion was beheld 
from the center.  And when the equalizing point is placed 
beyond the center opposite the Earth, the planet must change its 
speed in order to compensate for the longer distance in the 
region opposite the equant.  So the inequality is both apparent 
and physical. 
 
M.  You have envisioned it well.  I detect the hand of Athena 
guiding you through this difficult passage. 
 
D.  Indeed, she guides all those who revere wisdom.  I am all the 
more determined now, to discover the mind of God through his 
creative works; therefore, I must know next what Ptolemy says 
of the Second Inequality. 
 
M.  Ptolemy and the Alexandrians before him, supposed there to 
be additional circles borne upon those we call orbits.  In this 
way, smaller circuits are completed before the planet has 
returned to its origin.  These smaller circuits are called epicycles. 
 
D.  I think I understand, but go on, for I would like to know in 
what manner these epicycles move.   
 
M.  Imagine if you can, a circle with smaller circumference than 
the orbit.  Next, fasten the center of this epicycle to the orbit 
which revolves around the Earth.  As the planet is carried along 
the epicycle westward, the epicycle itself advances eastward thus 
explaining the proper motion.   
 
D.  It is hard to visualize. 
 
M.  First imagine the stars at rest and allow the planets to move 
in the eastward direction upon their eastbound epicycles.   
 
D.  This seems easy enough. 
 
M.  Now follow my hand as I trace the circular path of the 
epicycle.  If I place this cycle parallel to your line of sight as 
Ptolemy does, do you perceive a reversal of direction? 
 
9

De Astronomia 
Vander Nat 
∆υν
∆υν
∆υν
∆υναµι
αµι
αµι
αµιςςςς Vol. 1, No. 3 
March 2007 
 
D.  Yes of course.  I did not think of it until now.  There is 
indeed a sweeping back in the westward direction when the 
planet is coming nearer to me.  I now recognize the 
retrogressions. 
 
M.  Well done.  Now remember, the planets all attune their 
motions to the Sun, and this we called the Second Inequality.   
 
D.  I remember, and something else comes to mind when you 
describe the retrogressions.  You stated earlier that the Sun never 
retrogresses, but I wonder if it can be the only body to surround 
the Earth which does not move on an epicycle. 
 
M.  The Sun is a beating heart in the body of the world whereby 
all the epicycles are circulated by the Sun’s orbit, giving them 
each a pulse.   
 
D.  That seems just, since the Sun is the source of  heat.   
Yet something else perplexes me. 
 
M.  What is it? 
 
D.  You said, did you not, that the planets depart from their 
positions very slowly, not in one evening? 
 
M.  I did say so. 
 
D.  Ptolemy moved the stars ahead of all else, leaving the planets 
behind, did he not? 
 
M.  He did so.   
 
D.  How then, might the planets proceed contrary to the stars, 
and yet move with them as I always see them?  If the stars are 
fastest would not the planets appear in a different sign from one 
night to the next? 
 
M.  They would were it not for the common axis which moves 
the entire dome of the universe.  I see you are confused, let me 
explain it more simply: The planets are carried eastward by the 
First Inequality, as well as eastward upon the epicycle which 
causes them sometimes to retrogress.  Meanwhile the entire 
system is pulled in the direction of the stars, moving swiftest of 
all, completing its course in one day.  This is accomplished by 
an axis through the celestial sphere which spins in the westward 
direction. 
 
D.  Then the motions of the First Inequality are quite slow as if 
resisting the motion of the celestial sphere? 
 
M.  I am not entirely sure if the planets are unwillingly pulled in 
the direction of the stars in the time of one day, but this is how I 
understand Ptolemy’s hypothesis.   
 
D.  Ptolemy has seemed to achieve the end of astronomy: to give 
order to the irregular motions and preserve the appearances 
thereof. 
 
M.  Copernicus however did not approve of this explanation. 
  
D.  What says Copernicus? 
 
M.  Copernicus agreed that Heaven should be made more perfect 
than the Earth, but the many motions described by Ptolemy 
seemed to him less perfect. 
 
D.  To me, Ptolemy has given excellent reasons for the irregular 
motions, accounting for all the subtle movements. 
 
M.  Indeed he seems to have accounted for all the movements; 
however, Copernicus questioned whether it were wiser for the 
planets to change their velocity or to move evenly through the 
heavens; whether it were wiser for the planets to retrogress or 
remain perfectly circular. 
 
D.  How could he know which was wiser?   
 
M.  The reasoning of those who contemplate divine things is 
this: the universe lacks nothing, yet nothing created is 
superfluous; for, if unnecessarily, then created without reason.  
Nature creates many effects with the fewest causes.  She prefers 
accomplishing the most with the very least, so that no cause is 
obsolete. 
 
D.  Then Nature loves simplicity?  How did Copernicus simplify 
the compound motions? 
 
M.  I shall give you Copernicus’ explanation of the Second 
Inequality first, for in this did he differ most with Ptolemy, 
preferring a more ancient theory which moves the Earth.  In this 
cosmography the Second Inequality is the result of an illusion 
caused by the Earth’s annual motion around the Sun.  Those 
irregular retrogressions are accomplished by one simple 
movement of the Earth passing the others planets.   
 
D.  The Sun was said to cause the Second Inequality, how can 
the Earth do this work instead? 
 
M. What Ptolemy saw as a motion attuned to the Sun, 
Copernicus believed to be attuned to the Earth.  He put the Sun 
at rest, the Earth and all the other worlds are borne along in the 
easterly direction.  In this schema, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn are 
superior to Earth, while Mercury and Venus are inferior, lying 
between the Earth and Sun.  When Earth approaches Mars, like 
racing charioteers, the gallop of Mars will appear to slow down 
until Earth catches up with him at which time he appears still, 
locked at her side.   
 
D.  I see it now.  The Earth running the inner track must pass 
Mars making him appear behind, when in fact his course is 
straightforward and uninterrupted.   
 
M.  Yes pupil.  When Earth gets far enough ahead, the Sun will 
appear between us and Mars.  When we see Mars from the 
opposite side of the Sun, as you observed, this is called 
conjunction, for those two bodies seem to meet. 
 
10

De Astronomia 
Vander Nat 
∆υν
∆υν
∆υν
∆υναµι
αµι
αµι
αµιςςςς Vol. 1, No. 3 
March 2007 
 
D.  So what was said before about Apollo gaining upon Mars, is 
only an illusion?  This too is accomplished by the departing 
motion of the Earth, rounding ahead of Mars. 
 
M.  You understand well.   
 
D.  One thing more must be made clear.   
 
M.  What? 
 
D.  I remember that Mars was said to quicken his steps when 
anticipating the Sun and to recede as if to evade the Sun.  I 
thought that Ptolemy had given excellent reasons for this 
occurrence, and now I would like to hear Copernicus’ 
explanation. 
 
M.  You shall have it.  
Think once more about 
the charioteers.  Do you 
perceive that the Earth 
will pass Mars? 
 
D.  Yes, 
according 
to 
hypothesis. 
 
M.  Imagine yourself in 
the Earth’s chariot at the 
moment of conjunction of 
Mars with the Sun.  Is not 
Mars so much the farther 
than at the moment of 
opposition?   
 
D.  Yes of course.  He is 
farthest of all at this point, 
if my geometry is correct.   
 
M.  Is not the horse of 
Mars 
drawn 
in 
the 
opposite direction of your 
own at this moment? 
 
D.  It certainly does seem so, as if the two horses were running 
away from each other. 
 
M.  Yes, the effect of the Earth’s motion augments that of Mars; 
the two contrary motions cause Mars to appear all the faster. 
 
 D.  Do I understand correctly?  His change in speed, his change 
in luminosity and the curious retrogression are all due to the 
Earth’s proper motion?   
 
M.  Yes, the Second Inequality is entirely swallowed up by the 
Earth’s annual motion.   
 
D.  What of the First Inequality? 
 
M.  Copernicus held the First Inequality to be a circle, or near 
circle, keeping with the customary hypothesis, but he thought it 
were less wise for the circles to vary in speed.  He therefore 
explains the eccentricity by a concentric circle with a double 
epicycle.  In this way, both the smaller epicycles and the 
concentric motion move uniformly, with a combined effect of a 
near circle moving unevenly. 
 
D.  I am confused.  Did you not say the epicycle was an illusion 
according to Copernicus? 
 
M.  With respect to the Second Inequality, Copernicus did reject 
the epicycle.  However to effect the First Inequality, he has 
carried over two epicycles, which move so as to never cause a 
retrogression. 
 
D.  Why are three circles 
necessary to accomplish 
the work of one?  Did not 
Copernicus 
seek 
simplicity? 
 
M.  He did.  The reason I 
suppose was to preserve 
uniform 
movement.  
Together 
they 
could 
achieve 
an 
eccentric 
motion, shifting the planet 
ahead of and behind an 
even rotation, while each 
epicycle 
is 
perfectly 
uniform in its own esteem.  
The 
smallest 
circle 
revolves 
quickly, 
its 
rotation being double the 
concentric orbit.  The mid-
size 
epicycle 
revolves 
westward, that is, opposite 
the smaller and opposite 
the concentric path but at 
exactly the same rate as 
the latter.   
 
D.  In my view, the revolution of the Earth eliminates the 
retrogressions of other planets which is simpler, but Copernicus 
has introduced more epicycles than Ptolemy which is more 
complex.   
 
M.  You have made a fine point. 
 
D.  It seems he has made an inversion in the hypothesis. 
 
M.  In what way? 
 
D.  Both astronomers make use of epicycles: Ptolemy for the 
Second Inequality, Copernicus for the First.  Ptolemy deems the 
world to be Earth- centered, Copernicus, Sun- centered. 
 
M.  I agree that is a sort of inversion.   
 
D.  What says Brahe? 
 
11

De Astronomia 
Vander Nat 
∆υν
∆υν
∆υν
∆υναµι
αµι
αµι
αµιςςςς Vol. 1, No. 3 
March 2007 
 
 
M.  Brahe could not bring himself to displace the Earth from the 
center of God’s creation, but could not ignore the advances made 
by Copernicus.  Brahe proposed a compromise between the two 
cosmographies, the geocentric and the heliocentric.  He placed 
the Earth very near the center of the heavenly sphere and placed 
the Sun in orbit around us, like Ptolemy, yet the five planets 
have the Sun as their center, like Copernicus. 
 
D.  Do the epicycles explain the Second Inequality in this case as 
it does for Ptolemy? 
 
M.  At conjunction Mars recedes above the Earth for the Sun is 
his center and passes in between them.  At opposition the 
lapping Sun draws Mars downward to the Earth.  This makes the 
Sun’s First Inequality responsible for the Second Inequalities of 
the planets, very much like Ptolemy.   
 
D.  How could both the Sun and Earth be center? 
 
M.  The five planets keep the Sun at their center as much as 
possible, as if they were all epicycles of one orbital circle.  This 
center revolves around the Earth, like our Moon, but much 
farther off. 
 
D.  Why do you say the planets keep the Sun at center “as much 
as possible”? 
 
M.  By this I mean they are eccentric.  All the astronomers are in 
agreement on this point: Ptolemy places the planets eccentric to 
a point near the Earth, while Copernicus and Brahe place the 
point of attraction not in the body of the Sun, but at a point near 
the Sun. 
 
D.  This hypothesis too seems like an inversion.  Ptolemy has 
put epicycles on eccentrics, while Brahe placed the eccentric 
epicycles about the point near the Sun.   
 
M.  I must admit this too seems to be an inversion. 
 
D.  But why would the planets revolve around this point?  How 
are the planets able to know where it is? 
 
M.  That is a fair question and one which I cannot answer, or 
rather, which the astronomers in question cannot answer.  For as 
Ptolemy put into use the equant point and Brahe has brought 
forth another, the end of astronomy thus far has been describe 
the irregular motions, not to lay down their causes.   
 
D.  Is not the equant a cause of changes determined by the First 
Inequality? 
 
M.  Truly, it is determined by the First Inequality and therefore 
seems geometrical in nature, not physical.  For similar reasons 
Brahe has maintained the point near the Sun but has not 
improved upon the ancients by demonstrating a cause.   
 
D.  What do you mean “improved upon the ancients”? 
 
M.  I mean that the ancients believed each planet moved of its 
own force, either by aid of a god or by its own soul desiring to 
move through the expanse.  Ptolemy, Brahe and Copernicus as 
well, all satisfy the appearances with their geometrical 
constructions, but the cause of each motion is no more than 
mythical belief. 
 
D.  Do you state that the hypotheses merely conform to the 
appearances, giving no account for the cause of these paths? 
 
M.  I do indeed.   
 
D.  Then it seems to me that astronomy has not yet reached its 
end, for unless we can lay down the motive causes once and for 
all, we cannot affirm which of the Worlds is correct.   
 
M.  I see clearly the obstacle you have in mind, and I leave it for 
you to settle what to some seems fruitless, but to those who love 
wisdom, most productive.  You are well beyond the layman in 
your comprehension, so by aid of the goddess you may attain the 
truth, and display for all mankind, those secrets of the universe.   
 
D.  Would that the goddess reveal to me the beauties of divine 
work, that I might measure them and thereby know them. 
 
M.  Let that be our prayer. 
 
 
 
 
 
12

Never Metaphysics I Didn’t Like 
Cross 
∆υν
∆υν
∆υν
∆υναµι
αµι
αµι
αµιςςςς Vol. 1, No. 3 
March 2007 
 
 
Never Metaphysics I Didn’t Like 
    
Spencer Cross 
 
“I know Global Warming is a fraud, 
but all my constituents believe in it!” 
 
When politically organizing the U.S.  Congress, the 
amoral Baby Boomer generation, or the pessimistic youth of 
today, the problem is not within their stated beliefs as such, but 
more with their approach to thinking about the universe as a 
whole.  It is for this reason that Lyndon LaRouche initiated the 
curriculum for his International Youth Movement to study the 
mind of Johannes Kepler, specifically his approach to 
Astrophysics.  To aid the process of our population beginning to 
think for themselves, this essay aims to present part of Kepler’s 
approach to finding the path of Mars. 
 
The New Astronomy 
 
An important thing to remember when beginning to 
master Astrophysics, is that, much like the United States from 
2007-2015, Kepler had no space shuttle, or space program with 
which he could “measure” the stars.  He had no ruler or light-
year long measuring stick, only the ability to measure changes 
in angle, and to proceed from there.  As I hope to show, ditching 
the ruler is the first step to overthrowing the tyrant of pseudo-
science.   
If you view the night sky, you’ll see the sky doesn’t 
change.  If you look more than once, however, you’ll notice that 
the heavens are now arranged differently.  Now either you’ve 
been drugged and/or are imagining things, the trees in the 
background have moved, or something has happened with the 
Earth and the heavens.  A good question to ask is, what is really 
moving?  Ptolemy thought that if the Earth moved, we would be 
constantly thrown against walls and the clouds would just zoom 
past us, so why would anyone assume we move?  Regardless of 
who moves, we can know the relationship is changing.   
The heavens appear to move East-West in a fixed 
formation, except for a few anomalous stars which seem to 
move in the same direction, but slower.  Now, why does 99% of 
the sky move at the same speed but these few?  Are these stars 
eating at Al Gore’s mansion, and simply too hefty to keep up?  
Two possibilities emerge.  To think like today’s existentialist 
youth, we would say, “Aw sweet, those stars are totally creative, 
they’re just doing their own thing, and defying the authority of 
the rest of the world.”  That is one option, but Kepler put his 
faith in “However, when experience is seen to teach something 
different to those who pay careful attention…it gives rise to a 
powerful sense of wonder, which at length drives men to look 
into causes1.”   
Since we know the relationship is changing, we can 
turn our universe into a flip-book and take a few pictures at 
known astronomical intervals to try to map the change.  Take 
                                                 
1 Kepler, Johannes New Astronomy, Ch.1 
the constellation Leo, for example, and take a “picture” of it at 
the same astronomical time everyday.  Take the “pictures” at the 
same fixed, geographical location, i.e.  from your toilet seat2 
looking out the window, and snap a picture every time Leo 
reaches a known point like a prominent tree or power line.  You 
need a fixed reference point, so it will not benefit anyone to 
witness a full moon here, or movements of other types3.  You 
can imagine the relationship between your fixed observation 
point –the view from the Crapper-, through the horizon to the 
constellation as a fixed line, and you may view the night sky as 
though the change in relationship wasn’t occurring.  You are in 
effect stopping the change in relationship to view the night sky 
from a standstill.  Now this probably won’t tell us much, 
because we are stopping the Earth-heavens rotation, and that 
includes everything, right?   
  You can use this method to begin to look at how the 
planet moves, in relation to the heavens around it, (i.e.  a 
constellation).  The starkest aspect is that the planet is not 
moving east to west slower than the heavens, but West-East, in 
the opposite direction from the stars!  Since what appeared to 
our senses as a slower movement of the stars was actually a 
different direction, are our senses deceiving us?  Kepler calls the 
motion of all the heavens from East to West the “first motion,” 
and the motion of the anomalous planets from West to East the 
“second, or proper motion.”  
 
In an Arc of Crisis, You can Know an Arc 
 
 
  Since we know the general direction of the planet, 
let’s try finding its speed.  Now again, how are we to know the 
speed of the planet?  To my knowledge, there is no policeman’s 
speed gun capable of clocking a star, much less some galactic 
speedometer to reference, so then, how?  It is incumbent on us 
to try a simple example.  If Al Gore weighed 250 lbs.  before he 
lost to a primate in 20004, then ballooned to 293 lbs.  by the end 
of ’01, then you would know Al Gore gained weight5.  
Similarly, if you take multiple observations of the same planet, 
you notice that it travels different distances in the same time 
intervals.  If between the first and second observations it travels 
3° of arc in the sky (a simple measure of distance), while 
between the second and third observations it travels 5°, then 
how is the planet changing?  Investigating this process more 
closely, you notice that the planet speeds up to a certain, fastest 
                                                 
2 For countries with modern sanitation, toilets are common, 
fixed positions.   
3 See Appendix A. 
4 His animal rights activism was considered a conflict of 
interest. 
5 Recent Computer models calculate Gore’s concentration of 
Cake-Oreo2 (CO2) ppmv has skyrocketed in the last decades, 
and the cause is “likely” algorepogenic. 
13

Never Metaphysics I Didn’t Like 
Cross 
∆υν
∆υν
∆υν
∆υναµι
αµι
αµι
αµιςςςς Vol. 1, No. 3 
March 2007 
 
 
speed, at which point it slows down until it reaches the slowest 
point, and this repeats.  This cycle of the planet’s change in 
speed is called the first inequality.   
 
“But the Emperor has no clothes!” 
 
Yet again, we are confronted with the problem of 
explaining a seeming miracle.  Does the Star simply choose to 
slow down and speed up whimsically?  Is the Star speeding up 
to get to work at the same time every year and then slowing 
down after a hard year on the job, or is something else going 
on?  We can say that if the orbits are circular, and we are at the 
center of the circular orbit, it would appear to us that the planet 
travels at the same speed all the time.  Since it is not uniform, 
we can admit that the planet changes speed, that we are not at 
the center, or both.  Kepler had already seen several 
explanations for the planets’ quirkiness, so instead of bothering 
with that “hypothesizing” stuff, he began with the ideas of 
Ptolemy and Copernicus.   
 
1.  A concentric circle with epicycle: The observer is at A, with 
the center of the planet’s orbit (B) orbiting it.  The planet travels 
on this smaller circle, tracing out the arc CEG, taking orders 
from the point B, which in turns takes orders from the point A.   
 
2.  The Second model is a circle where the observer is not at the 
center, called an eccentric circle.  The planet γ travels around 
the center of the circle β, even though the observer is observing 
it from α, which makes the planet appear to change speed.  
(Today’s baby-boomer sub-species must study this model to 
prove they’re not the center of the universe.) 
 
Concentric with epicycle (above), and eccentric (below) 
 
Kepler shows geometrically how these two are 
equivalent if CAE = γαε.  In other words, these models are two 
ways to describe what you observe in the heavens, and they 
show the same thing.   
You could adopt either model to explain the positions 
of the planets, and both models would fit everything you see 
well beyond what your eyes could observe.  Now, if these two 
very different models can both explain the phenomena you are 
observing, which one is right?  Could they both be right at the 
same time?  Or, could neither be correct?  I won’t spoil the fun 
by telling you, but if you tried to explain the motions of the 
planets, would the largest object in the sky factor into your 
model?  In other words, could the giant, raging ball of fusion 
that dominates the sky just possibly have something to do with 
heavenly motion? 
 
Get a Map of the Stars! 
 
 
Speaking of segues, we will now reunite with our Sun.  
If you are to chart the movement of Mars against the 
background stars, what will you see?  You should construct this 
map yourself, but observe Diagram 2 to get a quick look.  Mars 
slows down, changes direction, then returns.  This happens 
about every two Earth years, but what does this tell us?  Are we 
to believe that the planet is simply riding a roller coaster, or 
driving drunk, tanked on ethanol?  Kepler terms these changes 
of the star in relation to Earth and the Sun, and the cycle of all 
the changes and discrepancies, the Second Inequality.  The first 
and second inequalities combine to produce what you see in a 
given night, which produces these anomalous effects, but the 
bigger question is, why?   
 
 
Diagram 2 
     
Hold on a Second! 
 
Now this wild motion of the star Mars seems large 
enough for Ptolemy and Copernicus to rethink their whole 
system, right?  Appendices B and C are attempts to explain the 
motion of the planet seen in diagram 2.  In order for their system 
to work, Ptolemy added an epicycle to his original theory, and 
Copernicus thought the Earth would have to move.  The latter 
was a theory the Dark Age-scientists wouldn’t touch with a 5½ 
foot pole.  You might notice again that they both are different, 
14

Never Metaphysics I Didn’t Like 
Cross 
∆υν
∆υν
∆υν
∆υναµι
αµι
αµι
αµιςςςς Vol. 1, No. 3 
March 2007 
 
 
yet seem to explain the motions you observe in the sky.  So 
again, who is right; or, is either? 
 
Never Metaphysics I didn’t like 
 
 
Kepler discusses that although the two models share a 
geometrical equivalence, their philosophical differences are as 
big as “Scale” Tipper Gore’s disgust with procreation6.  If we 
are to believe that the heavens function as these models 
describe, then what kind of Universe do we think we live in?  In 
current life, most humans don’t believe that our wristwatches 
are powered by microscopic slave factories of fairies, because to 
honestly think that, we would have to 1. Believe in fairies.  2. 
Support slavery.  3. Comprehend next to nothing about basic 
mechanics.  4. Believe in global warming.  Now, that last one 
was a trick, in that you wouldn’t necessarily have to believe in it 
to believe the wristwatch hypothesis, but if you believed in the 
fairy idea, then you might also believe in Global Warming.   
 
For instance, Ptolemy believed in a concept known as 
“orbs.” He thought the universe was composed of a whole series 
of solid, glass orbs, within which the planets move.  Now, if the 
Heavens were merely a mechanical system of solid, glass orbs 
that move according to a predetermined ratio, then all the 
creator of the universe would have to do would be to “flip the 
switch” or set the system of orbs in motion, and then die, 
because his continued actions were unnecessary.  The idea is 
that God is perfect, (which in this line of thinking means 
unchanging) and once his universe is set into motion, he has 
done all that he would ever need to do, so he can “retire.” If we 
are to believe in solid orbs, then we must admit that God is 
dead.  Nietzsche wasted his time by not reading Aristotle more 
thoroughly, because 2000 years before Nietzsche was born, 
Aristotle’s universe logically removed God, allowing the 
Romans to stop worrying and get back to pillaging. 
 
If we were to maintain solid orbs but have epicycles as 
well, we would have to devise two types of motion, one to move 
the center of the epicycle around the observer, another to move 
the planet around the center of the epicycle.  This system would 
require two motions, each acting with respect to a different point 
in the universe, and in the case of the planet on the epicycle, 
acting with respect to a point that doesn’t even really exist! 
 
The other type of System of the Universe is one which 
does not have solid orbs, but one in which the planets move of 
their own accord in the heavenly ether.  This requires that the 
planet knows by itself to make a circle with its path, for no 
reason other than its own discretion.  In the case of the 
eccentric, the planet is traversing a circle around a point that has 
no physical existence!  In the epicycle model, the center of the 
epicycle revolves around the observer, but the planet is 
revolving around a center, which has no physical existence!  
Now since the planet is changing speed in the air, you would 
also attribute a mind to the planet such that it knows (on its own 
accord) not only how to travel in an enclosed circular system by 
itself through the air, but how to change speed by itself.  In that 
sense, we are attributing multiple minds to each planet, and  
                                                 
6 Clinically, algoraphobia, see Appendixie D. 
making them into demi-gods.  Is this really the consequence of 
scientific theory?  To believe in either of them, I would either 
have to admit that 1. God is dead, or 2. that the universe is run 
by many Gods, whose motives humans are forbidden to 
discover?   
 
Sun of What? 
 
 
At this point you might be wondering, “how is working 
on Astrophysics going to do anybody any good?”  The beauty 
and difficulty of Economics, especially as developed by Lyndon 
LaRouche, is that Economics is the realm where science, belief 
systems, and human survival are all the same thing.   
 
To use a modern example, radical ecologists and 
environmentalists begin with an old idea.  Hitler and the Nazi 
movement believed that the Jews were “vermin,” who did 
nothing but destroy, therefore it was acceptable for them to be 
exploited and eventually eliminated for good.  Today’s greenies 
have advanced this idea, and because they believe all men are 
created equal, they believe that mankind as a whole is vermin, 
which does nothing but destroy the Earth, and we need to 
implement policies to eliminate them.  These ideologues then 
concoct a theory of Global Warming to fit their ideology, to 
give them the backing of “science” to implement their policies. 
 
It is humorously non-ironic that the global warming 
fanatics of today share so much with our ancient astronomical 
friends.  In order to prove something they “really believe in,” 
something they are “really compassionate for,” they construct a 
belief that frees their conscience from a real scientific 
investigation into causes.  To give a specific example, CO2 
levels have been higher during the last 140 years, yet 
temperature has not been higher during those periods.  Human 
CO2 is less than a 1% factor in the “greenhouse effect,” yet the 
Greenshirts of today demand we refuse Africa modern industry 
and sanitation, because “most Scientists might agree.”  The Sun 
is a larger factor by magnitudes in climate theory, and most 
long-term cycles in global climate go back before human 
records, and well before the emergence of environmentalists.  I 
would happily mention that Kepler’s astronomer-predecessors 
and modern-day environmentalists have both ignored (except to 
mystically worship) the Sun. 
 
Working through Kepler’s method of scientific 
thinking, is proving crucial for not only the current mis-
leadership of the United States, but more importantly, for the 
next generation of scientific/cultural leadership, typified by the 
international LaRouche Youth Movement.  My fellow scientific 
thinkers have an immense responsibility today.  Because of the 
U.S.  economic breakdown and the push to immediately end the 
Nation-State system by implementing green-brownshirt policies, 
we have to challenge the leaders of the United States to fight for 
the soul of the Democratic Party.  We have to ask them, “If the 
consequences of your policy are to prevent Africa from 
developing for 100 years, and to sign the death warrant for the 
U.S. economy and constitution, are you certain about this 
‘science’?” 
15

Never Metaphysics I Didn’t Like 
Cross 
∆υν
∆υν
∆υν
∆υναµι
αµι
αµι
αµιςςςς Vol. 1, No. 3 
March 2007 
 
 
Appendices 
 
Appendix A 
 
“The Cow” Tipper, waiting to observe a full moon where she 
can wolf down some carbonated beverages. 
 
Appendix B 
 
 
Appendix C 
 
Appendixie D 
 
To date, this is Gore's best argument against population growth. 
16

The Fallacy of the Equant 
Ross 
∆υν
∆υν
∆υν
∆υναµι
αµι
αµι
αµιςςςς Vol. 1, No. 3 
March 2007 
 
 
The Fallacy of the Equant 
 
    
Jason Ross 
 
Typically, actually scientific method, as teams of the 
LaRouche Youth Movement (LYM) have experienced 
this for themselves, is the crucial example, demon-
strated by Johannes Kepler, of the problematic attempt 
to define Solar orbits in a manner congruent with the 
notion of an equant. All comprehensive notions of a 
competent modern physical science are implicitly em-
bedded in the implications of the problematic nature of 
the assumption of the equant.  It is this discovery by 
Kepler, which provided modern science with a rigor-
ously defined notion of the ontologically efficient actu-
ality of what is rightly considered a universal physical 
principle, such as gravitation. It was Kepler's recogni-
tion of the fallacy of the equant which, according to 
Kepler's account, prompted Kepler's conception of the 
infinitesimal reflection in the very small, by a universal 
principle in the very large. All competent modern sci-
ence is premised on an apriorism-free notion of a uni-
verse defined by a process of development among a set 
of universal physical principles of the same, experimen-
tally defined, ontological quality, in themselves, as Ke-
pler's notion of universal gravitation.1 
 
The Fallacy of the Equant 
 
Moreover, it is no less false that the center of the world 
is within the earth than that it is outside the earth; nor 
does the earth or any other sphere even have a center.  
For since the center is a point equidistant from the cir-
cumference and since there cannot exist a sphere or a 
circle so completely true that a truer one could not be 
posited, it is obvious that there cannot be posited a cen-
ter [which is so true and precise] that a still truer and 
more precise center could not be posited.  Precise equi-
distance to different things cannot be found except in 
the case of God, because God alone is Infinite Equality.  
Therefore, He who is the center of the world, viz., the 
Blessed God, is also the center of the earth, of all 
spheres, and of all things in the world.  Likewise, He is 
the infinite circumference of all things.2 
 
 
In Part II of his The New Astronomy, Kepler takes up 
the motion of Mars, having identified two a priori, axiomatic 
assumptions which had bounded the investigations of astronomy 
up to that time: that the planets move in perfect circles, and that 
an equant point can be found for the orbit – a point from which 
the planet could be observed to move at a constant speed, trav-
ersing equal angles in equal times – a point of uniformity.  
                                                 
1 Lyndon H. LaRouche, Jr., “The Dance of the Bio-Fools,” EIR, Feb 2, 
2007 
2 Nicolaus of Cusa, De Docta Ignorantia, trans. Jasper Hopkins 
Rather than this approach to investigating the apparently irregu-
lar motion of Mars, Kepler’s healthier mind posed the question: 
what are the characteristics of change of Mars’s apparent mo-
tion? 
 
Investigating Mars 
 
 
The motion of the planets were seen to have one perio-
dicity and movement through the zodiac proper to themselves,  
and a second movement related to their apparent proximity to 
the sun.  Kepler’s predecessors Claudius Ptolemy, Nicolaus Co-
pernicus, and Tycho Brahe offered hypotheses for these two 
actions.3   To investigate a planet, it is first necessary to untan-
gle these two motions.  Using the Copernican model, the second 
inequality, as it is called, does not reflect a change in the motion 
of Mars, but rather reflects the motion of our Earth, from which 
we observe it.  This inequality can be removed by using specific 
observations: those taken at opposition.  If we see the Sun and 
Mars at opposite sides of the horizon (one setting while the 
other rises), then the Sun, Earth, and Mars lie on a straight line, 
and the sun “sees” Mars in the same direction that we on the 
Earth observe it.   Thus, while making observations as we stand 
physically on the Earth, our mind’s eye is transported to the sun, 
from which we can watch Mars.  
Earth orbit
Mars orbit
 
Oppositions: when the Sun, Earth, and Mars are lined up, the 
Earth sees Mars in the same direction as does the Sun.  
 
Having eliminated the effect of our moving Earth on 
the observations of Mars, the first inequality still remains; 
Mars’s motion, freed form the second inequality, is determined 
to have one position on the zodiac at which its motion is fastest, 
                                                 
3 See Vander Nat’s “De Astronomia,” ∆υναµι
∆υναµι
∆υναµι
∆υναµιςςςς, this issue. 
17

The Fallacy of the Equant 
Ross 
∆υν
∆υν
∆υν
∆υναµι
αµι
αµι
αµιςςςς Vol. 1, No. 3 
March 2007 
 
 
and another where it is slowest.  How can this changing speed 
be understood? 
Two geometrical hypotheses that cause an apparently 
changing speed are the eccentric model, and the equant model: 
   
 
Eccentric motion (left) and equant motion (right) 
 
In the eccentric model (left), the planet moves uni-
formly around the center of its orbit, but is seen from a point 
off-center.  This causes the apparent speed of the planet to 
change based on how close it is to the observer.  (Remember, 
we are still “observing” from the sun by using opposition obser-
vations.)  In the equant model (right), there are two centers: 1. a 
center of motion, the equant (top point), around which the 
planet describes equal angles in equal time, and 2. a center of 
location, from which the planet maintains a constant distance, 
simply called the center (middle point).  In the equant model, 
the planet actually does change its speed, a physical change, 
whose appearance is further affected by its changing distance 
from the observer (bottom point).  Ptolemy introduced the 
equant, rather than the simple eccentric, because he found it to 
better represent the motion of the planets.4 
 
From Ptolemy through Kepler, the aprioristic assump-
tion of a principle of uniformity acting efficiently in the uni-
verse, was unchallenged.5  For what alternate cause of motion 
could be said to exist? 
 
                                                 
4 For a comparison of the two types of models, see 
http://wlym.com/~animations/part2/16/aside.html and 
http://wlym.com/~animations/part2/21/index.html. 
5 Copernicus writes: “We must however confess that these movements 
are circular or are composed of many circular movements, in that they 
maintain these irregularities in accordance with a constant law and with 
fixed periodic returns: and that could not take place, if they were not 
circular. For it is only the circle which can bring back what is past and 
over with; and in this way, for example, the sun by a movement com-
posed of circular movements brings back to us the inequality of days 
and nights and the four seasons of the year. Many movements are rec-
ognized in that movement, since it is impossible that a simple heavenly 
body should be moved irregularly by a single sphere. For that would 
have to take place either on account of the inconstancy of the motor 
virtue -- whether by reason of an extrinsic cause or its intrinsic nature -- 
or on account of the inequality between it and the moved body. But 
since the mind shudders at either of these suppositions, and since it is 
quite unfitting to suppose that such a state of affairs exists among 
things which are established in the best system, it is agreed that their 
regular movements appear to us as irregular…” (De Revolutionibus, 
I.4) 
Kepler’s Model 
 
Before directly challenging the assumptions of the 
equant and of circular orbits, Kepler aims to vindicate his use of 
the apparent sun (the one we see in the sky) instead of the mean 
sun, an imaginary point near the real sun used by Ptolemy, Co-
pernicus, and Tycho to set up their planetary hypotheses.  To do 
this, Kepler uses opposition observations made with respect to 
the apparent sun, rather than the mean sun oppositions used by 
his predecessors.6  With twelve observations of Mars at opposi-
tion at his disposal, Kepler selects four with which he works out 
a planetary hypothesis using an equant and a circular orbit. 
From the observed distance along the zodiac between 
one observation to the next, we know how far Mars has moved 
as seen by the sun (apparent longitude).  From the time between 
the oppositions, we know how far Mars has moved as seen by 
the equant (mean longitude), since the equant is the hypothe-
sized point around which Mars moves at a constant angular 
speed.  With four observations, and an incredible amount of 
time spent on a difficult procedure, Kepler determines the best 
alignment of the sun, center, and equant with respect to orienta-
tion and distances.  He calls this model his vicarious hypothesis. 
Sun
Equant
Center
 
The Vicarious Hypothesis (not to scale) 
 
Kepler remarks that the solar eccentricity of this model 
(the distance from the sun to the center) is 11.3% of the radius 
of the orbit, a value determined not by finding the center as the 
midpoint between Mars locations, but as the best value to use to 
make his model “work.”  To test this model, simply determine 
the angles around the equant corresponding to the times of the 
other oppositions, draw lines from the equant to the orbit at 
those angles, and see where the sun would see those planetary 
positions. 
His vicarious hypothesis is a success!  Among the 
twelve oppositions, the largest disparity between his model and 
the observations is only about 2' (two minutes of arc), 7 which is 
the margin of observational error in the measurements them-
selves.  Thus, he can conclude that his model works “perfectly” 
all around the zodiac.  This is better than the models of his 
predecessors, all of whom had used the mean sun rather than the 
apparent.  Some might now rest from their labors, content at 
                                                 
6 See http://wlym.com/~animations/part1/meanapparent.html. 
7 An arc of 1' is one-sixtieth of a degree of the nighttime sky, and is 
about the width of a pencil lead held eight feet away from you. 
18

The Fallacy of the Equant 
Ross 
∆υν
∆υν
∆υν
∆υναµι
αµι
αµι
αµιςςςς Vol. 1, No. 3 
March 2007 
 
 
having developed the world’s best method for determining the 
position of Mars, but not Kepler.  He poses the question: just 
because any possible error in his model is too small to be ob-
served, does this necessarily mean that he has found the truth?  
And how can we settle the debate between Ptolemy, Copernicus, 
and Brahe – Kepler’s vicarious hypothesis could be imple-
mented equivalently in any of the three world-views, if the ap-
parent sun be used. 
 
Another Determination of Eccentricity 
 
Kepler then sets out to check this eccentricity, by de-
termining it directly, rather than the indirect method used in the 
vicarious hypothesis.  Kepler will use measurements of latitude, 
rather than longitude, and find the physical distances of Mars 
from the sun at opposite points of its orbit, as a way of finding 
the center of the Mars path.   
Mars
Mars
Earth
Earth
Sun
 
 
By observing the latitude of Mars north and south of 
the plane of the ecliptic – the plane of the Earth’s motion around 
the sun – and using some trigonometry, Kepler determines how 
far Mars was from the sun.  Doing this at nearly the closest and 
farthest parts of the orbit means that the mean between these 
two gives the radius of the orbit, and the distance of the center 
from the sun – the solar eccentricity.  With this method, Kepler 
determines this eccentricity to be 8.0% - 9.9% of the size of the 
orbit, which does not match the eccentricity determined by the 
vicarious hypothesis (11.3%). 
A paradox emerges: how can Mars have one required 
eccentricity according to his longitude model, and another when 
investigated directly according to latitudes?  What can be said of 
a model that gives correct results while using a parameter 
known to be false?8  
 
A Crack 
 
 
In an attempt to reconcile these two eccentricities, Ke-
pler adjusts his vicarious hypothesis to have an eccentricity in 
keeping with that determined by his study of latitudes.  The total 
eccentricity of the vicarious hypothesis – the distance from the 
equant to the sun – is 18.6%, of the radius, whose half, 9.3% 
does fit in the range of 8.0-9.9% required by latitude observa-
tions.  So, if he bisects the eccentricity, moving the center to be 
in the middle between the equant and the sun, he can apply the 
eccentricity determined by latitudes to the functionally perfect 
vicarious hypothesis model.  This also agrees with Ptolemy, 
who assumed a bisected eccentricity when working out his 
model.   
                                                 
8 Here, too large an eccentricity. 
135°
135°
>90°
<90°
Original Vicarious Hypothesis
Bisected Eccentricity
 
In this diagram with greatly exaggerated eccentricity, the sun’s 
perception of Mars changes when the eccentricity is bisected.  
After a time of 135° from aphelion, measured by the equant, the 
angle between Mars and the perihelion is greater than 90° in the 
vicarious hypothesis, and less than 90° in the bisected version. 
 
Changing to the bisected eccentricity alters the vicari-
ous hypothesis, and this change is significant: the perfection of 
the vicarious hypothesis is lost when the bisected eccentricity 
determined by latitudes is introduced.  When drawing lines from 
the equant at angles determined by the times of opposition, Ke-
pler finds a gap: the bisected model is now 8’ off for the opposi-
tion of 1582.  This difference is not within observational 
margins of error. 
Thus, his model cannot both give correct positions of 
Mars (original vicarious hypothesis) and incorporate the true 
eccentricity (bisected) at the same time.   There is therefore no 
possible way of adjusting it to make it work.  Kepler writes: 
 
 
Therefore, something among those things we have 
assumed must be false.  But what was assumed was: 
that the orbit upon which the planet moves is a perfect 
circle; and that there exists some unique point on the 
line of apsides at a fixed and constant distance from the 
center of the eccentric about which point Mars de-
scribes equal angles in equal times.  Therefore, of these, 
one or the other or perhaps both are false, for the obser-
vations used are not false… 
 
Now, because they could not have been ignored, 
these eight minutes alone will have led the way to the 
reformation of all of astronomy. 
 
 
The statistical approach to astronomy, the attempt to 
understand the heavens by making models of the footprints of a 
cause of motion, has not only failed so far to achieve perfection; 
Kepler has proven, conclusively, the impossibility of creating a 
perfect model with this approach. 
What is the implication of this new category of experi-
ence for the practice of Man’s mastery over nature?  Kepler has 
demonstrated the required existence of a universal, physical (not 
geometrical) principle.  The unavoidable, paradoxical implica-
tions of the equant, force the mind to a new sort of wonder. 
To attempt to present Kepler’s discovery of universal 
gravitation, without a thorough working-through of the paradox 
of the equant, were to proffer an answer to an audience incapa-
ble of posing the right question. 
19

Kepler’s Paradoxical Return to the Equant 
Ross 
∆υν
∆υν
∆υν
∆υναµι
αµι
αµι
αµιςςςς Vol. 1, No. 3 
March 2007 
 
 
Physics, Not Statistics: Kepler’s Paradoxical Return to the 
Equant 
    
Jason Ross 
 
Since all competent modern physical mathematics is 
based on the pioneering achievements of Johannes 
Kepler, the argument to be made, in explanation of the 
intrinsic incompetence of statistical mechanics for 
economics, will employ the image of a planetary orbit, 
as defined by Kepler's uniquely original discoveries, to 
define a forecastable quality of true long-term cycles in 
an economy. That lesson, from Kepler, for economics 
today, is the best source of remedy for the failures 
intrinsic to the consistently failed methods which have 
been employed by economics statisticians generally 
during the recent decades.1 
 
Preface: A Dispute on the Equant 
 
 
A social process, created no later than the summer and 
fall of 2006, when the LaRouche Youth Movement, following 
Lyndon LaRouche’s guidance, embarked on a mass socialized 
project to work through Kepler’s The New Astronomy to make 
the breakthroughs in economic science required to politically 
organize the rebuilding of the collapsing world physical-
economic system, has borne fruit in a new level of discussion, 
allowing new questions to be developed, and breakthroughs to 
be made, that would never have occurred among a group of 
isolated individuals working on discoveries in their bedrooms, 
or among students listening to a lecture series.  Evidence of the 
successful gestation of this process was borne out in one 
incident in early December, 2006, at a meeting of the LaRouche 
Youth Movement in Washington, DC.  A question was raised 
there that was being pondered by an increasing number of 
members of the LYM around the world, a question that 
provoked a lively back-and-forth: “Why does Kepler re-
introduce the equant in Part III after he has already refuted the 
possibility of its existence in Part II of The New Astronomy?”  
Follow-up discussions on the question, particularly after Lyndon 
LaRouche’s December 22nd paper, in which he first makes 
explicit reference to the equant,2 prompted the writing of this 
article. 
 
These discovered, universal principles, belong to a 
category of experience which Kepler was the first to 
define, through exploring the paradoxical implications 
of the equant, as showing the ontologically infini-
tesimal reflection of any universal physical principle.3 
                                                 
1 Lyndon H. LaRouche, Jr., “Re-Animating an Actual Economy,” EIR, 
August 4, 2006 
2 LaRouche, “What the Congress Needs to Learn: The Lost Art of the 
Capital Budget,” EIR, Jan 12, 2007 
3 Ibid. 
And: 
 
That function of irony, in language, as in physical 
science, which distinguishes the creative mental powers 
typical of the specific notion of the human individual, is 
the same function associated with the process of 
discovery of a universal physical principle in physical 
science, as Kepler's treatment of the fallacy of the 
equant, in proceeding toward the discovery of a 
universal principle of gravitation, illustrates the 
existence of the apparent infinitesimal magnitude 
associated with the quality of action by a universal 
physical principle of gravitation.4 
 
The Equivalence of Hypotheses 
 
 
Claudius Ptolemy, Nicolaus Copernicus, and Tycho 
Brahe offered hypotheses for the motions of the planets, 
hypotheses which, at first glance, appear to be immensely 
different.  Ptolemy has all planets move around the Earth with 
an equant and an epicycle, Copernicus has all move around the 
sun with a double epicycle, and Brahe combines the two, 
allowing the planets to move around the sun which itself moves 
around the Earth.  Kepler, professing himself to be of the 
Copernican outlook, nonetheless does not begin his The New 
Astronomy with a defense of the Copernican hypothesis.  
Rather, his first task is to demonstrate the equivalence of these 
three seemingly different systems.5  Kepler proves that all three 
world systems can have their parameters adjusted in such a way 
as to completely agree. 
 
If these hypotheses are capable of making exactly the 
same results (within observational precision), that is, if they all 
“work” equally well, how can one decide which among them is 
correct?  Should “working well” even be the metric of 
truthfulness?6 
And, what is equivalent about these hypotheses?  
Certainly not their outward appearances (although they can be 
used to create equivalent predicted appearances for the planets), 
but rather their equivalent assumptions.  All are based on 
uniformity as a guiding principle of the organization of the 
universe: both uniform angular motion, and motion of uniform 
distance (circular motion).  They also share a rejection of the 
                                                 
4 Ibid. 
5 See http://wlym.com/~animations/part1/index.html for animations of 
this equivalence. 
6 A society convinced that human beings are evil, which decides to 
organize itself according to that principle, will achieve results that 
cohere with that thought.  “I know I didn’t try to do anything good, but 
doesn’t my failure prove that it was impossible anyway?” 
20

Kepler’s Paradoxical Return to the Equant 
Ross 
∆υν
∆υν
∆υν
∆υναµι
αµι
αµι
αµιςςςς Vol. 1, No. 3 
March 2007 
 
 
body of the sun playing any role besides celestial décor; instead 
of the actual sun (the apparent sun), they all use a geometrical 
point near the sun known as the mean sun.  For Ptolemy and 
Brahe, this is a point moving around the Earth with the same 
period as the sun, but, unlike the actual sun, it moves uniformly.  
Copernicus considered the mean sun to be the center of the 
Earth’s orbit, and he set up the orbits of other planets using this 
point as his anchor. 
 
It is upon this use of the mean sun that Kepler targets 
his investigative acumen.  Kepler writes that Ptolemy “chose the 
mean motion, thinking that the difference (if any) between 
taking the mean sun and the apparent sun could not be perceived 
in the observations, but that the form of computation and of the 
proofs would be easier if the sun’s mean motion were taken.”  
What, for Ptolemy, was a decision in favor of computational 
ease, became a physical absurdity for Copernicus and Brahe.  
Yet, they continued to use it.7  Kepler’s insistence on relating 
planetary orbits to the apparent sun required that he demonstrate 
that, unlike the equivalence of hypotheses discussed above, the 
difference between the mean and apparent sun does result in 
incompatible hypotheses.  That is, this question is something 
susceptible of a crucial experiment. 
Kepler sets out to develop his own tentative hypothesis 
for the first inequality of the motion of Mars, a hypothesis, 
which, by its use of the apparent sun, will not be equivalent to 
those of Ptolemy, Copernicus, and Brahe.  This tentative 
hypothesis, based on the use of circular orbits and a point of 
uniform motion rather than physical considerations, Kepler calls 
his Vicarious Hypothesis.  
 
The Vicarious Hypothesis 
 
 
Before reading on, be sure to have read The Fallacy of 
the Equant (∆∆∆∆υναµι
υναµι
υναµι
υναµιςςςς, this issue). 
 
Kepler’s vicarious hypothesis works better than those 
of his predecessors, vindicating his use of the apparent sun.  
However, it is not yet perfect, for its successful application 
requires the use of a value (the eccentricity of the orbit) known 
to be false.  Furthermore, Kepler proves the impossibility of 
adjusting such a hypothesis to provide a perfect representation 
of the heavens.  Of this constructive failure, Kepler writes in 
Part II of his The New Astronomy: 
 
Therefore, something among those things we have 
assumed must be false.  But what was assumed was: 
that the orbit upon which the planet moves is a perfect 
circle; and that there exists some unique point on the 
line of apsides at a fixed and constant distance from the 
center of the eccentric about which point Mars de-
scribes equal angles in equal times.  Therefore, of these, 
one or the other or perhaps both are false, for the obser-
vations used are not false.8 
                                                 
7 See http://wlym.com/~animations/part1/meanapparent.html for a 
development of the mean sun and the apparent sun. 
8 Johannes Kepler, Astronomia Nova, trans. William Donahue, pp. 
283-284. 
It would seem that a totally new approach to astronomy 
is in order.  Yet, after his demonstration of the unavoidable 
paradoxes inherent in approaching astronomy with the 
assumptions of uniform motion embodied by the equant, and of 
uniform distance required by a circular orbit, Kepler surprises 
many readers with what he does next to refute the approaches of 
Ptolemy, Copernicus, and Brahe.  He spends the first half of 
Part III demonstrating that the motion of the annual orb (the Sun 
or Earth) is not a simple eccentric, as his predecessors insisted, 
but that it does conform to the equant-hypothesis!  That is, it is 
wrong to say that the annual orb does not have an equant in its 
theory.  But, why would Kepler add an assumption that he has 
seemingly just refuted? 
 
A Different Type of Equant 
 
 
But, before getting into the details, let us review 
Kepler’s mind.  In his argument for the existence of the equant, 
from the chapter of Mysterium Cosmographicum titled “Why a 
planet moves uniformly about the center of an equant,” he says 
of an equant with bisected eccentricity: 
 
Therefore at the middle part of the eccentric path 
where it projects above the concentric circle, the planet 
will be slower, because it moves further away from the 
Sun and is moved by a weaker power; and in the 
remaining part it will be faster, because it is closer to 
the Sun and subject to a stronger power… Let A be the 
source of this moving spirit, namely the Sun….  Then, 
naturally, let the whole universe be full of a spirit which 
whirls along any stars or comets it reaches, and that 
with the speed which is required by the distance from 
the Sun or of their positions and the strength of its 
power there.9 
 
 
As you can see, Kepler had always considered the 
equant-model a good hypothesis to explain the motion of the 
planets, not because of a power of uniform angular motion, but 
because it mimicked a physical power, a “moving spirit,” whose 
source is in the Sun.  Here we have, over a decade before the 
printing of The New Astronomy, Kepler’s hypothesis of a 
physical cause!  The failure of the vicarious hypothesis in Part II 
was a successful demonstration that the geometrical mimic can 
be differentiated from the physical truth.10 
 
Note the difference in method: Ptolemy introduced the 
equant to match the observations, but Kepler, looking back at its 
introduction, forms a physical hypothesis for why the equant 
appears as a useful geometrical tool.  Now, the search for what 
might ironically be called a physical equant can begin! 
 
But, before moving ahead, Kepler raises an objection 
to this idea: 
 
                                                 
9 Johannes Kepler, Mysterium Cosmographicum, trans. A. M. Duncan, 
Ch. 22, pp. 217-219 
10 As Kepler says in Chapter 4 of his Astronomia Nova: “The point of 
the equant… is nothing but a geometrical short cut for computing the 
equations from a hypothesis that is clearly physical.”  
21

Kepler’s Paradoxical Return to the Equant 
Ross 
∆υν
∆υν
∆υν
∆υναµι
αµι
αµι
αµιςςςς Vol. 1, No. 3 
March 2007 
 
 
[W]hat explanation will be eventually put forward 
for the annual motion of the Earth?  For it did not need 
an equant either in Ptolemy’s theory or in Copernicus’s.  
Consequently, this is also a doubtful case awaiting the 
judgment of astronomy.11 
 
 
How can his physical hypothesis be universal, if it is 
not expressed in the motion of the annual orb, which does not 
have an equant? 
 
A Barrier to Hypothesis 
 
 
Kepler writes of this mental barrier to consideration of 
his physical reasoning in the beginning of Part III of his The 
New Astronomy: 
 
 
In chapter 22 of the Mysterium Cosmographicum, 
when I was giving the physical cause of the Ptolemaic 
equant or of the Copernican-Tychonic second epicycle, 
I raised an objection against myself at the end of the 
chapter: if the cause I proposed were true, it ought to 
hold universally for all planets.  But since the earth, one 
of the celestial bodies (for Copernicus), or the sun (for 
the rest) had not hitherto required this equant, I decided 
to leave that speculation open, until the matter were 
clearer to astronomers.  I nevertheless entertained a 
suspicion that this theory might perchance also have its 
equant.  After I gained the recognition of Tycho, this 
suspicion was confirmed in me.12 
    
Studying the Earth 
 
 
The study of the annual orb is of particular interest for 
studying Kepler’s method of thought.  Unlike their theories of 
the motion of Mars, which, at times, were off by degrees, the 
hypotheses of Ptolemy, Copernicus, and Tycho for the motion 
of the annual orb left nothing to be desired: the predicted 
locations were never found to be at variance with the actual 
locations of the sun.  Upon what grounds might Kepler 
introduce an equant into the theory of the annual orb, when a 
simple eccentric already works “perfectly?”  We seem to be 
facing the same problem encountered in Part I of the 
equivalence of hypotheses: were Kepler to show that using an 
equant for the annual orb gives correct values, could he claim 
that he is more correct than his predecessors, or only 
equivalently correct?  Clearly, a different, active, type of 
reasoning is required here. 
 
An Irony From Above 
 
 
But, how can we begin to study the motion of our 
home the Earth, when we are moving along with it?  This 
question is akin to the use of irony in political organizing. 
                                                 
11 Kepler, Mysterium Cosmographicum, p. 219 
12 Kepler, Astronomia Nova, pp. 305-306 
 
All humans have assumptions about how the world 
around them, and the mind within them, operate.  These 
predispositions act upon all that we observe or consider; 
therefore our observations are shaped by our assumed axioms.  
Is it possible to examine these assumptions themselves, and, if 
so, how?13  How can anyone be made to see their assumptions, 
if all their perceptions are made according to these very 
assumptions?  How can we see the motion of the Earth while we 
are moving with it? 
 
Watching the Earth from Mars 
 
 
Kepler uses an irony in the Sun-Earth-Mars relationship 
to allow this feat of self-reflection, by watching the Earth from 
the Sun and from Mars.  This he does by making Mars remain 
motionless, an observer of our moving Earth.  But, how does he 
accomplish this? 
Mars has its year just as does our Earth.  In the same 
way that the sun appears at the same location in the zodiac each 
Earth year (keeping in mind the precession of the equinox), 
Mars is in the same position with respect to the sun after each of 
its years.  But, our Earth is not in the same position after one of 
Mars’s years.  Therefore, the motionless Sun and Mars are 
Kepler’s two celestial eyes, watching our Earth in its course 
through the heavens.14 
 
Four different positions of the Earth, with the Sun 
and Mars always at the same positions. 
 
Just as in Part II, where a dialogue involving the Sun 
and the Earth was used to determine the path of Mars by using 
observations taken at opposition, Kepler again allows Sol, Earth, 
and Mars to work in harmony to determine their relationships.  
So, armed with this tool of creating irony, we can retrace 
Kepler’s footsteps as he demonstrates conclusively that the 
Earth (or Sun) does not move on a simple eccentric. 
                                                 
13 Kant believed this to be impossible; he writes of one such 
unquestionable assumption in his Critique of Pure Reason:  “Not only 
in judgements, however, but even in conceptions, is an a priori origin 
manifest. For example, if we take away by degrees from our 
conceptions of a body all that can be referred to mere sensuous 
experience—colour, 
hardness 
or 
softness, 
weight, 
even 
impenetrability—the body will then vanish; but the space which it 
occupied still remains, and this it is utterly impossible to annihilate in 
thought.” 
14 See http://wlym.com/~animations/part3/24/index.html.  
22

Kepler’s Paradoxical Return to the Equant 
Ross 
∆υν
∆υν
∆υν
∆υναµι
αµι
αµι
αµιςςςς Vol. 1, No. 3 
March 2007 
 
 
Let us create a very specific irony, to directly examine 
the assumption of a simple eccentric.  Allow the position of 
Mars, to which it returns each Mars-year to be perpendicular to 
the Earth’s line of apsides, and, in fact, to be on a perpendicular 
raised from the point of uniformity of the Earth’s motion (which 
is also the center, according to those who came before Kepler). 
F
C
E
D
A
 
Here, A is the sun, C the point of uniform motion (both 
the equant and the center, assuming a simple eccentric), E and D 
are two positions of the Earth looking at Mars at the same 
position F.  The motion of the planets did not provide Kepler 
with the good fortune of angles FCE and FCD being exactly 
90°, but he did get both to be equal to 64°23'30". 
By the hypothesis of the simple eccentric, this 
orientation should be symmetrical: 
F
C
E
D
A
 
 
However, observed angles CEF and CDF do not come 
out equal.  Working from the location of Mars, the angle Earth 
moves around the equant, the observed positions of Mars, the 
orientation of the line of apsides for the Earth, and, finally, the 
assumption of a circular orbit, we arrive at this unsymmetrical 
result, indicating that C is not the center of the Earth’s orbit.  
Thus the mean sun is not the center of the Earth’s orbit it all, but 
is actually its equant.  How much more absurd it now appears to 
set up planetary hypotheses using the mean sun! 
F
C
E
D
A B
 
B is introduced as the center of Earth’s orbit, distinct from C. 
With this result, Kepler, using beautiful insight into 
triangles, is able to determine the distance BC to be around 
1837, which is almost exactly half of the distance AC, which 
was taken to be 3584 (whose half is 1792); this appears to be a 
bisected eccentricity!  Kepler is emboldened to move ahead with 
his physical hypothesis from his Mysterium Cosmographicum: 
 
Such, then, was the beginning of this enquiry, timid 
and encumbered with such concern that the anomaly of 
commutation be equal on both sides [that the diagram 
work out to be symmetrical]. 
 
Now that we have once made a hazard of this, we 
are buoyed by audacity to sally forth again more freely 
onto the battlefield.  For I shall seek out three or more 
observed positions of Mars with the planet always at 
the same eccentric position, and from these find by 
trigonometry the distances of that number of points on 
the epicycle or annual orb from the point of uniform 
motion [equant].  And since a circle is defined by three 
points, I shall use three such observations to find the 
position of the circle, its apsides (previously taken as a 
presupposition), and its eccentricity with respect to the 
point of uniform motion.  Should a fourth observation 
be at hand, it will serve as a test.15 
 
 
Now that Kepler has shown a paradox, a crack in the 
results he obtains from using Tycho’s assumptions, he is able 
more freely to investigate what is really happening, no longer in 
terms of why others are wrong, but to find what is right. 
 
Watching the Dance 
 
 
Rather than using two observations, let us use four: 
three to define a circle, and a fourth to test.  To avoid the 
objections of those who suspect novelty in his introduction of 
the apparent sun, Kepler first does this using the hypothesis of 
the mean sun, finding the distance between the center of the 
annual orb and its equant to be around 1530, very close to the 
1800 required by a bisected eccentricity. 
α
β
ζ
ε
η
θ
 
In Chapter 25, Kepler finds the distance of the center of the 
annual orb (β) from the point of uniform motion (α).  An 
animation 
of 
a 
similar 
process 
is 
at 
http://wlym.com/~animations/part4/41/index.html. 
                                                 
15 Kepler, Astronomia Nova, p. 316 
23

Kepler’s Paradoxical Return to the Equant 
Ross 
∆υν
∆υν
∆υν
∆υναµι
αµι
αµι
αµιςςςς Vol. 1, No. 3 
March 2007 
 
 
 
Kepler next switches his anchor to the apparent sun, 
and finds the distance between Sol and the center of Earth’s 
path.  He does this in chapter 26 using the vicarious hypothesis 
for the position of Mars as seen from the sun, and then proceeds 
without this assumption in chapter 27.  He finds an eccentricity 
of 1800 in chapter 26, and 1653 in chapter 27. 
η
δ
γ
ε
ζ
α
β
 
Kepler uses the Sun (α) as his anchor, and finds the distance 
between it and the center of the Earth’s orbit (β), again finding a 
bisection of the total eccentricity used by Tycho Brahe. 
 
To confirm this bisected eccentricity, Kepler assumes it 
is true, and then devises a method of determining Mars’s 
position based on positions of the Earth using this assumed 
eccentricity.  His concluded positions of Mars as determined 
from several Earth positions agree among themselves, and with 
his vicarious hypothesis.  Thus, he has concluded the bisection 
of the eccentricity in the annual orb by four different methods. 
 
Effects on Observations 
 
 
Despite these demonstrations using observations of 
Mars, some might object to Kepler that since Brahe’s tables 
based on a simple eccentric never reveal an error with respect to 
observations of the sun, that introducing an equant could only 
serve to add an error to the theory.  Kepler writes: “Brahe feared 
that if I bisected the sun's eccentricity I would vitiate his 
equations of the sun’s motion.”  To test this, Kepler simply 
calculates the maximum difference between the eccentric-model 
and his equant-model for the annual orb, and finds this 
maximum difference to be on the order of seconds of arc – too 
small to be observed: the equant does not vitiate the equations. 
 
A remarkable consequence of this is that simply 
observing the sun would never have generated an irony requir-
ing the equant.  Since the two models are indistinguishable by 
solar observations, this question could have met the same fate as 
the debate between the equivalence of hypotheses of Ptolemy, 
Copernicus, and Brahe addressed in Part I: it would have been 
considered undecidable by observation.  The universe required 
Kepler’s active, experimental seeking, rather than passive 
observations to reveal its secret!  Without observing Mars, the 
perceived motion of the Sun in the heavens could not have been 
known.  In engaging in a dialogue with Mars, we come to know 
the Earth. 
A Universal Physical Principle 
 
 
Now what held him back need no longer hinder him.  
Rather than adding an axiom of equant-motion, Kepler has 
removed an exception to the existence of a universal physical 
principle of motion; he has removed the exceptional status 
granted to the annual orb. 
 
With his irrefutable demonstrations that the center of 
the annual orb is not its center of angular motion, and that, in 
fact, it too possesses an equant with bisected eccentricity, 
Kepler can look for a universal cause of motion: 
 
 Now in my Mysterium Cosmographicum… I 
postponed arguing this case of the cause of the 
Ptolemaic equant for the sole reason that it could not be 
said on the basis of ordinary astronomy whether the sun 
or earth uses an equalizing point and has its eccentricity 
bisected.  However, now that we have the confirmation 
of a sounder astronomy, it should be transparently clear 
that there is indeed an equant in the theory of the sun or 
earth… Now that this is demonstrated, it is proper to 
accept as true and legitimate the cause to which I 
assigned the Ptolemaic equant in the Mysterium 
Cosmographicum, since it is universal and common to 
all the planets.  So in this part of the work I shall make 
a further declaration of that cause.16 
 
 
It is in “making a further declaration of that cause 
[emphasis mine]” that Kepler leaps across the pit into which a 
statistician would stumble. (See box) 
 
Kepler moves to declare this cause, with his 
demonstration in chapter 32, that an equant with bisected 
eccentricity closely imitates his physical hypothesis of the sun 
serving as the seat of a power moving the planets: the time for a 
planet to traverse equal amounts of arc is measured by its 
distance from the sun: “the elapsed times of a planet… on equal 
distances in the ethereal air are in the same ratio as the distances 
of those spaces from the… center of the world.”  This could also 
be stated that the planet’s speed is in inverse relationship to its 
distance from the sun.  But, this holds only when the equant and 
the sun are at equal distances from the center along the line of 
apsides.  When they are at unequal distances along the line of 
                                                 
16 Kepler, Astronomia Nova, p. 372 
Box: Perfectly More 
Since the equant works so well in the vicarious 
hypothesis, perhaps a slight alteration of it would work even 
better.  This is the temptation to make a small addition to the 
model, to make it “more perfect.”  But, this is not Kepler’s 
approach.  Rather, he develops our reason to be “perfectly 
more.”  When Cusa was confronted with the paradox of the 
squaring of the circle, he developed a new principle, rather than 
seeking to fill a sieve by adding more and more sides to a 
polygon.  Thus does Kepler, instead of making a slight change 
to the equant-model to better match observations, hypothesize 
the true, physical principle of which the equant acts as an 
imitation. 
24

Kepler’s Paradoxical Return to the Equant 
Ross 
∆υν
∆υν
∆υν
∆υναµι
αµι
αµι
αµιςςςς Vol. 1, No. 3 
March 2007 
 
 
apsides (as, for example, in the vicarious hypothesis) the motion 
created does not closely approximate speed depending on 
distance from the sun.  Now, a solution to the mystery of the 
repeated appearance of bisected eccentricities can be proposed: 
the universal principle causing motion is imitated only by a 
bisected eccentricity. 
 
Developing the Hypothesis 
 
 
In a state of hurried excitement, the reader sweeps 
through Chapters 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, and 38.  We discover more 
about this “immaterial species… the primary agent of every 
motion in the universe.”  But how could a physical species, 
which inheres in no matter, and “between the source and the 
movable thing is in a state of becoming, rather than of being,” 
be subjected to geometrical laws? 
 
 
The reply is this: although the motive power is not 
anything material, nevertheless, since it is destined to 
carry matter (namely, the body of a planet), it is not free 
from geometrical laws, at least on account of this 
material action of carrying things about.  Nor is there 
need for more, for we see that those motions are carried 
out in space and time, and that this power arises and is 
poured out from the source through the space of the 
world, all of which are geometrical entities.  So this 
power should indeed be subject to other geometrical 
necessities.17 
 
 
We discover that the sun is a magnetic body, like the 
Earth, and that it rotates, all before anyone had ever seen a 
sunspot move!  The cause of motion explains why the planets all 
lie near a certain plane of power close to the ecliptic (hinting at 
a truly revolutionary insight in Part V).  His new hypothesis 
allows him to make sense of the “variation” of the Moon’s 
motion: the intension of the Moon’s speed when it is along the 
line from the Sun to the Earth is because of the intensity of the 
force along this “diameter of power.”  Kepler writes: “It would 
be preferable to attribute to the Earth a force that retains the 
moon, like a sort of chain, which would be there even if the 
moon did not circle the earth at all.”18 
 
The cause of the planet’s ascent from and descent 
towards the sun are understood by a vis insita, an inherent force 
in the planet which expresses itself only in its relation to the 
species of the sun.  No direct cause pushes the planet along this 
direction, but only an accidental one, like the shape of a 
riverbed causing water, which seeks to move downwards, to 
move out to sea in a river.  What a panoply of breakthroughs his 
pregnant hypothesis has engendered! 
 
A Historic Recapitulation 
 
 
Now, Kepler tests his hypothesis by posing his physical 
principle as the cause of motion.  To offer a compelling 
conclusion, he must demonstrate that his hypothesis accurately 
                                                 
17 Kepler, Astronomia Nova, p. 383 
18 Kepler, Astronomia Nova, p. 402 
describes the motion of the annual orb.  In chapter 40, he finds 
between the equant model – which, by its close equivalence to 
the eccentric model, works – and his proposed physical model, a 
greatest difference of 33", well within observational precision.  
Thus, in the case of the annual orb, no objection can be raised to 
the implementation of the physical principle of gravitation to 
understand its motion. 
 
Circular Motion? 
 
 
A dynamic universe has a different potential than does 
a mechanical one.  Near the close of Part III, with the dynamic 
universe in mind, Kepler re-approaches the assumption of 
circular orbits.  Although circles are very easy to draw with a 
compass or a piece of string, they are literally impossibly 
difficult to generate with physically driven motion.19 
 
Analysis Situs!20  What shape does this motion give 
itself?   Instead of imposing geometric concepts from outside 
the self-governance of the orbit, ask instead: according to the 
principles causing motion, which shapes are possible?21 
 
Completing His Mission 
 
 
The operation of the species of the sun is very close to 
the use of an equant with bisected eccentricity, and such an 
equant was found to be within 8' accuracy for the motion of 
Mars.  Has Kepler yet proven that gravitation is a required 
principle, and not only an interesting additional surmise?  Armed 
with his hypothesized physical principle, and calling into 
question any use of geometry as a possible cause, 22 will Kepler 
find the perfection that the geometric mimic – the equant – 
missed?  That is the task of Part IV. 
                                                 
19 See http://wlym.com/~animations/part3/39/index.html. 
20 G.W. Leibniz, “Analysis Situs,” in Leibniz: Philosophical Papers 
and Letters, trans. Leroy E. Loemker, Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
21 “This quality of experimentally premised conceptual evidence, which 
is associated, like the Pythagorean comma, with the notion of 
universals, implicitly defines the physical universe as composed not of, 
but by universal principles of this quality. These do not represent a 
perfected set of such principles, but a set undergoing implicitly anti-
entropic developments. Any event in that universe is acting upon, and is 
acted upon by that universe, as Leibniz makes this point in, as 
referenced above, his sundry, anti-Cartesian writings on the subject of 
dynamics. This anti-entropic quality of the universe so defined, is 
echoed as the implications of Kepler's empirical demonstration of the 
problematic character of the implicitly anti-entropic notion of the 
paradox of the equant.” 
 
“Principles are not something amid, and as if connecting Cartesian-like 
objects in a pair-wise fashion. They are the essential, existing matter of 
which the universe is composed as a universe. It is a self-developing 
universe, in which essential action is expressed as, or in resistance to 
efficient action supplied by, for example, the human individual's will. 
This is, essentially, dynamics as its experience is traced in known 
history to the method of the Pythagoreans and Plato's circles.” 
From LaRouche: “What Congress Needs to Learn: The Lost Art of the 
Capital Budget,” EIR, Jan 12, 2007 
22 Including the use of circular orbits 
25

A Preliminary Investigation of the LaRouche-Riemann Method 
Steger 
∆υν
∆υν
∆υν
∆υναµι
αµι
αµι
αµιςςςς Vol. 1, No. 3 
March 2007 
 
 
A Preliminary Investigation of the LaRouche-Riemann 
Method 
    
Michael Steger 
 
Part 1 of 4 
 
The advancements made in the field of physical 
economic science by LaRouche over the course of the last half-
century, are not separate, but are rather a continuous 
advancement on the questions of mathematical physics dating 
back to Cusa and Kepler, and onward through Gauss and 
Riemann, subsuming the work of Einstein and Vernadsky.  But 
rather than describing these developments, let us rather leave the 
narrative to personal research and political discourse, and take 
up a pedagogical example to uncover certain underlying 
assumptions, that may reveal a more truthful method. 
Keep in mind, this is only the first of a series, and the 
implications of our investigation into the field of physical-
economy will be drawn out over the course of the entire 
discussion.   
Consider this an experiment, which would then require 
a playful spirit for success, and let us attempt to communicate a 
necessary characteristic of the universe as it, the universe, 
presents itself to your field of vision.  Before continuing, it is 
helpful to remind ourselves that we exist in the universe, which 
may contradict previous high-school and university doctrine.   
So, might we start with this.  Imagine you exist as a 
point in space.  Your perception of sight is as from a point in 
space, with vision in every direction.  Assume you cannot move, 
and are fixed in one location.  To create a sense of this, just keep 
your head still, and look at the room 
around you.  Make sure you are not 
standing too close to a wall, but 
look towards a part of the room or 
outside which has images cascading 
over one another, such as a tree in 
front of a car, or chairs standing on 
the floor.  What do you notice, that 
might be different from your 
‘expected’ field of vision? 
How many dimensions of 
space are there in the area within 
which you see?  Are there three?  
Forward-back, left-right, up-down?  
One’s friend might say, “Yes, of 
course there are three.  Every point 
in the room can be described by 
three coordinates: x, y, and z.” 
Well, before assuming Euclidean 
space applies to our experiment, 
look again.  Determine first what is 
provably known, so that we may 
then venture into the unknown. 
 
For example, if you wanted, you could say there were 
seventeen dimensions, and then choose seventeen different axes, 
and give seventeen different coordinates for each location, but 
all seventeen would not be necessary.  So, how many 
dimensions of space are necessary to describe the space from 
which you now perceive as a fixed point? 
If the answer is not obvious, let us investigate further.  
Use your arm and finger as a linear extension of the ‘so-called’ 
point, and place your finger in the direction of some object in 
front of you.  Now, pick another object in your limited field of 
vision, (which is only a slice of your theoretically possible  
field), and move you finger to the second object.  Pick a third 
and a fourth object, and move your finger accordingly.  
Continue to investigate the spatial determinations necessary to 
describe each object’s position in relation to every other.   
This may remind you of astronomical investigations, 
where, faced with the challenge of mapping the stars onto a flat 
piece of paper, you first had to determine the orientation of the 
stars to one another within the night time sky, before you could 
recreate them on the page. 
For those who are unfamiliar with astronomy, describe 
the locus your finger traces as you place it in the various 
directions.  (It’s important to keep your arm fully extended to 
maintain continuity.) Do not continue onward until you have 
demonstrated a working hypothesis which approximates the 
most necessary and sufficient locus. 
 
 
26

A Preliminary Investigation of the LaRouche-Riemann Method 
Steger 
∆υν
∆υν
∆υν
∆υναµι
αµι
αµι
αµιςςςς Vol. 1, No. 3 
March 2007 
 
 
Why has the room, which, for our friend, seemed so 
obviously to conform to x, y, and z coordinates, become two 
dimensional?  Our room appears to allow three directions of 
action.  How is it possible that the positions of every object and 
every point in that room, can be uniquely located with two 
circular actions, as if each point were located on a sphere? 
  
The answer lies in the nature of the experiment, as one 
might guess.  What were our assumptions?  First, you were a 
point in space, which seems unrealistic, but not problematic, 
unless you were coincidentally convinced.  Second, you were a 
fixed point in space.  How would removing motion from your 
potential field of vision change the dimensions of space?  Do 
not the dimensions of space exist independently from your 
perception of them?  One might ask his new-age physics 
professor, “How many dimensions are necessary to describe the 
unseen monk falling in the forest?” 
Return to the fundamentals of astronomy and optics 
and our initial problem is easily solved.  You may be familiar 
with the idea of parallax, when the position of an object is 
changed due to the change of the observer’s position.  Take as 
an example, the suggested motion of an object when perceived 
first with left eye closed, and then with the right.  Often known 
as triangulation, this method provides a measurable distance, or 
sense of depth, for perceived objects through three given points, 
for example: 1. the right eye, 2. the left, and 3. the perceived 
object.  We can then measure the object’s distance from the 
observer by the metric of length between the two eyes. 
 
The circle is the perceived object, which when seen with only 
one line of sight, can only be identified by its direction.  But with 
both lines of sight, i.e., with both eyes, the object is seen as from 
two positions and is perceived with both direction and depth. 
 
This is the same method used by Kepler in his 
imitation of the ancients known as the Vicarious Hypothesis, 
where he uses the acronychal position of the planet in the 
zodiac, or acronychal direction, as well as the location of the 
planet as seen from the equant, to measure the assumed 
characteristics of Mars’s eccentric orbit.  For more on this, see 
Kepler's New Astronomy, Ch. 16 through 19, and the relevant 
pedagogicals in this issue. 
Equant 
Earth or Sun, 
depending on 
which system. 
Mars 
Acronychal direction 
Direction 
from the 
Equant 
 
As above with eyesight and depth, the planet Mars is given a 
position of both direction and distance on a circle of some 
diameter when perceived from both the earth/sun and 
hypothetically from the equant.  This is a facet of Kepler’s 
Vicarious hypothesis. 
 
Let us now see how this notion of parallax applies to 
the universe as it presents itself to our field of vision.  Return to 
the experiment, while remaining as a theoretical ‘point,’ and 
move one step to the left or right.  Has something which was 
previously blocked from your field of vision, now come into 
view?  If not, continue stepping to one side until you distinctly 
notice something appear that was previously unseen.  How 
would this previously unseen object map onto the first 
hypothesis of a sphere?  If it does not fit onto the spherical 
surface, is there another two dimensional surface upon which it 
would fit?  Could this be what A. Halevy meant by “mapping 
the invisible?”1 
It should be obvious now that perceived space is not 
actually two dimensional, because there are objects which exist 
outside any two dimensional mapping.  But, if by using three 
dimensions, such as the x, y, and z axes, we are then able to map 
every position within the perceived space, then must the 
universe as it presents itself to us necessarily be three 
dimensional, and must it conform to what is commonly taught in 
math and physics classrooms?  For some, the problem is solved, 
and the universe coheres with commonly accepted notions 
found in almost every scientific institution. 
But before we end our experiment, consider something 
about our three dimensional space: what necessary characteristic 
of three dimensional space, such as a Euclidean type box, 
                                                 
1 See ∆υναµι
∆υναµι
∆υναµι
∆υναµιςςςς, Vol I, No. 2, at http://seattlelym.com. 
27

A Preliminary Investigation of the LaRouche-Riemann Method 
Steger 
∆υν
∆υν
∆υν
∆υναµι
αµι
αµι
αµιςςςς Vol. 1, No. 3 
March 2007 
 
 
permits motion?  What aspect of three spatial extensions enables 
our movement, so that we may then map space according to 
these three dimensions?   
Perhaps we are assuming that motion solely depends 
upon our pre-conceived notion of spatial dimension, and at that, 
requires only three dimensions?  Before these questions could 
be answered, we would first have to ask, “What is motion?” 
But, for now, let us return again to our initial inquiry, perhaps 
more conscious of the direction of our experiment. 
Remember, 
in 
the 
original experiment, as a point in 
space, the room was physically 
three dimensional (as we later 
proved through parallax), but, as a 
fixed 
point, 
the 
room 
only 
required two dimensions (i.e. a 
spherical surface) to communicate 
its every location.  So, three 
dimensions were mapped as only 
two.   
Might then a mapping of 
space 
with 
three 
necessary 
dimensions as discovered above, 
require 
a 
fourth 
‘dimension’ 
which permits motion, as the 
mapping of space 
with two 
necessary dimensions depended 
physically on three?  (For those 
curious, how many dimensions 
would be necessary to map a 
space of only two dimensions?  
Try to develop a pedagogical 
example.) 
Now, a four dimensional 
space may seem plausible, living 
after Einstein’s presentation of the 
concept of relativity, where the 
four dimensions of “space-time” 
have 
become 
a 
house-hold 
conception.  But, what is time, 
other than motion?  Try to 
consider some measurement of time that does not require 
motion.  One may start with the obvious increments of time 
such as a day, a month, a season, or a year.  If these seem 
obvious, discover how your cell phone keeps time.  Is your cell 
phone smarter than you?  (Only move forward when the 
answers to these questions no longer seem obvious.) 
 
 
After a thorough investigation into the origins of 
measured time, for one to say, then, that the dimension of time 
permits motion, is like saying money produces food.  (For the 
Federal Reserve money apparently grows on food.  But for 
them, time is only money.)  
So, while attempting to determine the spatial 
characteristics of our local environment, we’ve encountered a 
necessary fourth ‘dimension’ which permits motion.  To grasp 
this visually, imagine a holographic three dimensional room, 
animated over a series of snap-shot freeze-frame images.  The 
room was three dimensional, and the fourth dimension was that 
which permitted the physical changes to occur in the succession 
of images, conventionally referred to as time. 
Let us reconsider the ground we’ve covered.  A three 
dimensional room, perceived from a fixed point, could be 
perfectly replicated as a two dimensional spherical image.  
However, once our point of perception changed, the room 
transformed, and was no longer spherical or any other two 
dimensional surface, but now 
only 
replicable 
three 
dimensionally, such as by a 
holographic image.  And yet, our 
three 
dimensional 
Euclidean 
space 
does 
not 
necessitate 
change, with which we associate 
time, which has then forced us to 
confront 
some 
fourth 
‘dimension.’  
So, 
what 
then 
is 
responsible for the nature of 
change associated with this fourth 
dimension, 
which 
permits 
motion, and from which we 
measure time?  Is it another, 
totally unperceived, and visually 
unimaginable fifth ‘dimension’?  
Proceeding this way, each new 
phenomenon 
encountered 
requires a higher dimension from 
which to communicate the newly 
perceived phenomenon, i.e. a 
necessary third dimension to 
communicate previously hidden 
objects unseen in two, and a 
fourth dimension to communicate 
the change in spatial relations of 
objects as seen in three, etc.   
Following 
this 
argument, there must then be 
infinite ‘dimensions’ of space, 
since for that which causes the motion associated with the fourth 
dimension, there must be the fifth, which when discovered, will 
then beckon the question, “What permits this fifth ‘dimension’ 
of action?” and hence a sixth, and so on.  But, perhaps we’ve 
passed our boundary of skeptical reason.   
 
If, however, this is not completely absurd, let our 
investigation continue, asking: 
         1.   What is dimension, such that it permits successively 
higher changes, including both extension, as well as action? 
         2.   What is the nature of change, as perceived in higher 
dimensions of action? 
 
         Perhaps Kepler will provide the necessary insight. 
 
 
 
(To be continued in part two.) 
28

