Director of the NUS Interactive and Digital 
Media Institute, Professor Ryohei Nakatsu, 
talks to INNOVATION’S Edmund Wee about his 
plans for the center.
Soul Man
www.innovationmagazine.com
   C o v e r  S t o r y
22

A
for researchers from different disciplines to work together. IDMI 
is made up of eight laboratories, of which five are from natural 
science and the other three from social science; one lab focuses 
on linguistics and language.  “It’s very difficult because the various 
researchers’ ways of thinking are so different,” says Nakatsu.  At 
the same time, there is potential for “creative tension” between 
artist and engineers. 
 
 Nakatsu is optimistic about IDMI producing results soon. One 
reason for his optimism is Singapore’s openness to researchers 
from around the world. “Singapore is a very open place; it is easy 
for people to come and work together. It is at a very good place 
between the East and the West, and because of this there is a 
good chance for IDMI to expand” says Nakatsu. He says that IDMI 
is looking to increase its headcount from 80 to 160. 
In fact, he predicts that IDMI will become world-class in two years’ 
time and that it will soon catch up with the Media Lab at MIT in 
the US, a leading research lab in this field. He has seen another 
lab do it. “When I was at the ATR [Advanced Telecommunications 
Research Institute in Kyoto, Japan], we could catch up and in 
some areas do even better than Media Lab, all in a period of 
seven years,” he says.
 
That said, IDMI is not concerned with just playing catch up. “It 
is necessary for the East to come up with its own way of carrying 
out research, including its own research standards, and to achieve 
its own Eastern way of research with new directions,” he states. 
For instance, he is proud of how the East has come up with new 
ways to treat interactive digital media content, which the West is 
picking up. “In the Western world, people are studying affective 
computing — how computers can identify people’s emotions by 
listening to voice, and studying facial expressions, etc. This kind 
of thing has not happened in the past and this is really a very 
interesting trend,” he says. 
 
For more information, please visit the IDMI homepage at  
http://www.idmi.nus.edu.sg. 
“Singapore is a very open place; 
it is easy for people to come 
and work together. It is at a very 
good place between the East and 
the West, and because of 
this there is a good chance for 
IDMI to expand” 
 
sk Professor Ryohei Nakatsu what the next  
 
generation of interactive digital media will bring  
 
and he replies “that’s a big question”. But as Director 
of the NUS Interactive and Digital Media Institute (IDMI), he is 
better-placed than most to make predictions. 
 
“Thirty years ago, we expected mobile phones to come onto 
the market soon but how they would be used, we could not 
imagine,” he says. “From a telecommunication viewpoint, it’s 
‘anyone with anyone, anywhere’.” However, divides between 
cultures and between different generations still exist. Nakatsu 
believes that future technology should overcome these barriers, 
making use of tools that go beyond language.
Transcendent goals
 
IDMI was established in April 2007 and leverages the university’s 
growing strength in research in science, computer science, 
engineering, arts and social sciences, performing arts, medicine, 
and architecture. It is an interdisciplinary research entity, an 
intersection where technologists, artists, and social scientists 
collaborate. 
 
Nakatsu aspires to develop a kind of media that is all-
transcendent, one that is multidimensional and which can support 
people in expressing their thoughts and ideas with more than 
language — to “express the human soul”, so to speak. Images, 
for example, can be a powerful form of communication. “When 
we grow up, we forget how to ‘use’ images. Of course, using 
language, we can talk, just as we use mobile phones. But still we 
are using the same language,” he says. 
 
The quest to develop next-generation media will not be 
easy. Nakatsu says that developing media to succeed game 
machines and mobile phones is a long-term goal for IDMI. In 
the shorter term, he says that IDMI’s focus will be on enhancing 
the application of existing media, focusing on game machines. 
The application of games in education will be one of the key 
themes of IDMI, he reveals. 
 
Nakatsu has also identified content as the key element in 
the new media of this century. “Hardware is only the base,” 
he says. He adds that connecting real life with virtual life is 
another area that the IDMI would like to research. People 
may live a “second life” in a virtual world, also known 
as living life in a network. “The problem with present 
interactive digital media is that there is an issue of 
connecting the two realities. The world is ‘closed’ 
in that sense; there is no connection,” he says. 
Beyond soul
Part of the challenge of developing new 
interactive digital media is the need 
 INNOVATION • Vol. 8 No. 3, 2008
   C o v e r  S t o r y
23

