REVIEW ARTICLE
The role of PFC networks in cognitive control and executive
function
Vinod Menon
1✉and Mark D’Esposito
2✉
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to American College of Neuropsychopharmacology 2021
Systems neuroscience approaches with a focus on large-scale brain organization and network analysis are advancing foundational
knowledge of how cognitive control processes are implemented in the brain. Over the past decade, technological and
computational innovations in the study of brain connectivity have led to advances in our understanding of how brain networks
function, inspiring new conceptualizations of the role of prefrontal cortex (PFC) networks in the coordination of cognitive control. In
this review, we describe six key PFC networks involved in cognitive control and elucidate key principles relevant for understanding
how these networks implement cognitive control. Implementation of cognitive control in a constantly changing environment
depends on the dynamic and ﬂexible organization of PFC networks. In this context, we describe major empirical and theoretical
models that have emerged in recent years and describe how their functional architecture and dynamic organization supports
ﬂexible cognitive control. We take an overarching view of advances made in the past few decades and consider fundamental issues
regarding PFC network function, global brain dynamics, and cognition that still need to be resolved. We conclude by clarifying
important future directions for research on cognitive control and their implications for advancing our understanding of PFC
networks in brain disorders.
Neuropsychopharmacology (2022) 47:90–103; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41386-021-01152-w
INTRODUCTION
Cognitive control, the coordination of mental processes and
action in accordance with current goals and future plans, is a
primary function of the prefrontal cortex (PFC) [1]. The term
“cognitive control” is meant to capture the same abilities labeled
in the clinical literature as “executive function”. The coordination
of cognitive processes is implemented by multiple functional
circuits
anchored
in
the
PFC,
and
systems
neuroscience
approaches with a focus on large-scale brain organization and
network analysis have become inﬂuential in advancing knowledge
of how cognitive control processes are implemented in the brain.
Much of our current knowledge of the role of PFC in cognitive
control has been derived from the modular paradigm, in which
speciﬁc functions have been ascribed to localized subdivisions
of the PFC with the underlying assumption that they act as
independent processors for speciﬁc cognitive functions [2].
However, the notion that PFC functions should be considered in
conjunction
with
distributed
and
heavily
interconnected
neurons with long-range axons has now grown into an
important paradigm for investigation of the role of the PFC in
cognitive control. Such a view, is, of course, not new, as
formulations of dedicated brain circuits for working memory,
spatial attention, and cognition-action plans have been central
to the proposals of Goldman-Rakic, Mesulam, Fuster and others
[3–5]. Over the past decade, technological and computational
innovations in the study of brain connectivity have advanced
our understanding of how brain regions function together,
inspiring new conceptualizations of the role of PFC networks in
cognitive control.
The PFC is a highly heterogenous brain structure consisting of
anatomical units each with its own cytoarchitectonic, neurochem-
ical, and microstructural properties [6]. The function of a speciﬁc
PFC area depends on its intrinsic properties as well as its extrinsic
connections [7]. Each PFC area has a unique pattern of cortico-
cortical and cortico-subcortical connections—a “connectional
ﬁngerprint” that distinguishes it from other areas (Fig. 1a).
Although no two brain areas share identical connection patterns,
their dense interconnections lead to a network organization with
shared functional characteristics. Given the central role of the PFC
in adaptive goal- directed behaviors, characterization of its large-
scale functional networks and their dynamic spatiotemporal
properties has the potential to provide foundational knowledge
of their role as cognitive hubs for coordinating mental processes.
A large-scale functional network is a collection of intercon-
nected brain areas, or nodes, that are linked together to perform
circumscribed functions [8]. The nodes of a network share dense
interconnections among its constituent nodes when compared to
connections with nodes that form other brain networks. A large
body of research using multiple methodologies has established
that the human brain is intrinsically organized into networks, each
consisting of a distinct set of cortical and subcortical areas linked
by temporally synchronous neural activity (Fig. 1b). The intrinsic
connectivity of brain networks displays close correspondence with
task-related
co-activation
of
brain
regions,
and
this
Received: 8 March 2021 Revised: 3 August 2021 Accepted: 6 August 2021
Published online: 18 August 2021
1Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Sciences, Department of Neurology & Neurological Sciences, Stanford Neurosciences Institute, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
2Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute and Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA. ✉email: menon@stanford.edu; despo@berkeley.edu
www.nature.com/npp

correspondence has allowed intrinsic and task-related connectiv-
ity to be demarcated and studied under a common systems
neuroscience framework. While brain networks impose constraints
on signaling, their role in cognition is far from static and ﬂexible
integration with other networks lies at the core of the adaptive
functions of PFC networks. Crucially, by virtue of their unique
“connectional ﬁngerprints”, component brain areas of large-scale
functional networks may perform different roles, some acting as
controllers that switch on the engagement of other areas, others
contributing speciﬁc sensory or semantic content to network
operations.
Six PFC networks that play central roles in cognitive control are
the focus of this review (Fig. 2): the fronto-parietal (FPN) network,
the salience network (SN),
cingulo-opercular network (CON), the default mode network
(DMN), and the dorsal and ventral attention networks (DAN and
VAN). While these networks are proposed to serve as dedicated
and specialized functional units, they do not function in isolation,
and they display complex patterns of context-dependent dynamic
interactions amongst each other. Moreover, dynamic integrative
between-network communication is crucial for efﬁcient cognitive
control and adaptive behaviors [9–11], and models of intra- and
inter-network dynamics are central to our understanding of how
the PFC orchestrates cognitive control.
This chapter is organized as follows. We brieﬂy describe
multimodal imaging and computational techniques that are
commonly used to identify PFC networks and provide an essential
background for assessing demarcation of PFC networks involved
in cognitive control. We then describe the anatomical and
functional organization of PFC networks and review the role PFC
networks that have been widely used for probing cognitive
control. We next highlight basic principles of PFC network
organization, followed by a review of potential network mechan-
isms implementing cognitive control. Finally, we present future
directions for research on PFC network function and clinical
implications of a network view of cognitive control for individuals
with psychiatric and neurological disorders.
IDENTIFICATION OF PFC NETWORKS
Distributed patterns of PFC connectivity associated with cognitive
control were initially identiﬁed by Pandya, Petrides, Mesulam and
others
using
tract
tracing
studes
in
non-human
primates
[4, 12, 13]. These studies established the presence of dense white
matter tracts linking individual PFC areas with distinct cortical and
subcortical areas. Two distinct PFC networks each dedicated to
distinct cognitive functions, a working memory–executive func-
tion network and a spatial attention network were among the ﬁrst
to be identiﬁed [4]. The electrophysiological basis of these
networks was also clariﬁed on the basis of similar neuronal
response
proﬁles
during
cognitive
tasks
involving
working
memory and spatial attention [3]. Subsequently, studies using
non-invasive diffusion tensor imaging provided robust support for
homologous pathways in the human brain which can now be
quantiﬁed in each individual and linked to other multimodal
characterizations of PFC networks [14]. With rapid improvements
in the spatial and temporal resolution of in vivo brain imaging,
computational analysis of functional, structural and diffusion MRI
now permit the investigation of the anatomical and functional
connectivity in a reliable and robust manner across time within
individuals.
Characterization of functional brain networks requires prin-
cipled and computationally rigorous tools for specifying PFC
nodes and edges, or inter-regional connectivity. We summarize
some of the key methods below, providing essential background
for assessing demarcation of PFC networks in cognitive control.
For additional methodological details, readers are referred to
excellent reviews on brain network analysis [15]. Connectivity
analyses of task-induced and task-free (resting-state) fMRI (rs-fMRI)
data have over the past decade become the mainstay for PFC
Afferents of area 14
Afferents of area 9
Efferents of area 14
Efferents of area 9
3
2
1
0
3
2
1
0
3
2
1
0
3
2
1
0
10
11
12
13
14
24
25
45
46
8A
8B
9
10
11
12
13
14
24
25
45
46
8A
8B
9
10
11
12
13
14
24
25
45
46
8A
8B
9
10
11
12
13
14
24
25
45
46
8A
8B
9
z = 0
z = 34
z = 10
z = 60
z = 44
z = 38
z = 24
x = -56
x = 2
x = -46
x = -22
x = -22
x = 2
x = 2
x = -38
x = 42
x = 8
x = -30
x = -10
x = 26
x = -40
x = 12
x = 2
x = -6
x = -48
x = 30
x = -18
x = 38
x = 14
y = -16
y = -14
y = 28
y = -18
y = -68
y = 10
y = -34
y = -52
z = 40
z = -2
z = 40
z = -6
z = 14
z = 32
z = -2
z = 50
z = 44
z = 22
z = 30
y = -10
y = -88
y = 38
y = -14
y = -78
y = 14
y = -62
a
b
A
B
C
D
F
H
J
L
N
M
K
I
G
E
Fig. 1
From connectivity ﬁngerprints to large-scale brain networks. a Each PFC area has a unique pattern of cortico-cortical and cortico-
subcortical connections—a “connectional ﬁngerprint” that distinguishes it from other Brodmann’s areas. Adapted from [7]. b Large-scale
networks in the human brain, each consisting of a distinct set of cortical and subcortical areas linked by temporally synchronous neural
activity. Fourteen intrinsic connectivity networks identiﬁed using independent component analysis. (A) Auditory, (B) Basal Ganglia, (C)
Posterior Cingulate Cortex (PCC)/Medial Prefrontal Cortex (MPFC), (D) Secondary Visual Cortex (V2), (E) Language, (F) Left Dorsolateral
Prefrontal Cortex (DLPFC)/Left Parietal Lobe, (G) Sensorimotor, (H) Posterior Insula, (I) Precuneus, (J) Primary Visual Cortex (V1), (K) Right
Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex (DLPFC)/Right Parietal Lobe, (L) Insula/Dorsal Anterior Cingulate Cortex (dACC), (M) Retrosplenial Cortex (RSC)/
Medial Temporal Lobe (MTL), (N) Intraparietal Sulcus (IPS)/Frontal Eye Field (FEF). Adapted from [20].
V. Menon and M. D’Esposito
91
Neuropsychopharmacology (2022) 47:90 – 103
1234567890();,:

network identiﬁcation. Independent component analysis, cluster-
ing and modularity analysis of inter-regional fMRI connectivity are
three of the most commonly used methods. Independent
component analysis is a blind deconvolution technique which
decomposes fMRI signals into spatially distinct components
without requiring pre-speciﬁcation of the nodes that constitute
individual networks [16]. This approach has led to the identiﬁca-
tion of multiple spatially segregated PFC networks [17–19].
Importantly, spontaneous coupling between spatially distributed
regions can be reliably identiﬁed at the individual subject level
and the PFC networks identiﬁed in this manner also share
consistent features across individuals [18–20].
Clustering of intrinsic functional connectivity of each brain area
is another widely used approach for network identiﬁcation [21]. In
this approach, boundaries of functionally distinct cortical regions
are deﬁned on the basis of differences in patterns of functional
connectivity across regions distributed throughout the cerebral
cortex. Sets of cortical regions with similar proﬁles of cortico-
cortical and cortico-subcortical connectivity are deemed to
constitute a network [21–24].
Network analysis based on graph theory has been central to our
understanding of complex biological systems [25], and the human
brain is no exception. Graph-theoretical analysis of inter-regional
connectivity have identiﬁed network modules associated with the
PFC [15, 26]. This approach is dependent on pre-deﬁned nodes
and researchers have used both anatomical atlases and functional
parcellations for deﬁning network nodes. Each module in this
formulation is characterized by a high clustering coefﬁcient with
specialized hubs that bind nodes with a module, as well as
connector hubs which link modules and are therefore anchors for
dynamically reconﬁguring networks.
None of the techniques described here currently dominates the
study of PFC network function, and no single atlas of functional
networks has emerged dominant. One reason for this is that each
technique makes assumptions about stationarity of fMRI data,
whose validity is hard to establish, and each involves estimation of
model parameters, such as the number of independent compo-
nents, the number of clusters, or the number of modules, for
which there is no unique solution. Thus, for example, the FPN
might be described by distinct networks in the left and right
hemispheres in some studies and by a joint network encompass-
ing both hemispheres in others. Moreover, individual networks
can also be subdivided at different levels of spatial granularity [21].
Challenges of matching anatomical boundaries in native MRI
Default-mode Network (DMN)
x = -6
y = -56
z = 26
PCC
PCC
vmPFC
vmPFC
Fronto-parietal Network (FPN)
x = 48
y = 20
z = 42
dlPFC
PPC
dlPFC
PPC
dlPFC
PPC
Salience Network (SN)
x = -6
y = 12
z = 2
ACC
AI
ACC
AI
AI
Dorsal attention Network (DAN)
Ventral attention Network (VAN)
a
b
e
d
f
aPFC
aPFC
aPFC
aPFC
al/fO
al/fO
dlPFC
dlPFC
dFC
dFC
IPL
IPL
IPS
IPS
Thalamus
Thalamus
Precuneus
Precuneus
dACC/msFC
mCC
Cingulo-opercular Network (CON)
c
3
5
-3
-5
Fig. 2
Six PFC networks that are the focus of this review. a Fronto-parietal network (FPN), with key nodes in dorsolateral PFC (dlPFC) and
posterior parietal cortex (PPC). b Salience network (SN), with key nodes in anterior insula (AI) and dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (ACC). c
Cingulo-opercular network (CON, black) with key nodes in anterior insula/frontal operculum (aI/fO), dorsal ACC and medial superior frontal
cortex (dACC/msFC), anterior PFC (aPFC) and thalamus, as distinguished from the FPN (yellow). d Ventral attention network (VAN), with key
nodes in insula (Ins), inferior frontal junction (IFJ), supramarginal gyrus (SMG), and superior temporal gyrus (STG). e Dorsal attention network
(DAN), with key nodes in frontal eye ﬁelds (FEF), inferior frontal junction (IFJ), intra-parietal sulcus and superior parietal lobule (IPS/SPL),
angular gyrus (AG), visual area 3 A (V3A), and middle temporal visual area (MT). f Default mode network (DMN), with key nodes in
ventromedial PFC (vmPFC) and posterior cingulate cortex (PCC). Adapted from [20, 32, 62, 93].
V. Menon and M. D’Esposito
92
Neuropsychopharmacology (2022) 47:90 – 103

space and imprecision from the use of normalized MRI-templates
impose additional uncertainty in this regard. Nevertheless, while
the PFC networks identiﬁed using these disparate approaches are
not identical, they have revealed common underlying patterns of
organization which make them powerful tools for probing PFC
circuit function in a principled manner. The techniques discussed
here are useful not only for network identiﬁcation but also for
probing their ﬂexible reconﬁguration during cognitive control [27].
ANATOMY AND TAXONOMY OF PFC NETWORKS IN COGNITIVE
CONTROL
Six PFC networks proposed to be involved in cognitive control
have been consistently identiﬁed using computational approaches
for network identiﬁcation described in the previous section (Fig. 2).
In this section we consider the anatomical anchors of these
networks in the PFC and brieﬂy consider their taxonomy in the
context of task-based activation studies of cognition. It should be
noted that networks identiﬁed using intrinsic functional con-
nectivity are labeled on the basis of their relations to task-based
functional activation proﬁles and, our current understanding of
the cognitive processes these networks subserve. These networks
have been historically assigned either anatomical or functional
labels, however, the ﬁeld has begun to grapple with a universal
taxonomy for functional networks that will hopefully provide
consistency for comparison of ﬁndings across studies [28].
Fronto-parietal network
The fronto-parietal network (FPN) is comprised of the dorsolateral
(BA 9/46) and dorsomedial PFC (BA 6), the supramarginal gyrus
(BA 40) in posterior parietal cortex and subcortical regions
including the dorsal caudate and anterior thalamus [18]. A tight
link between lateral PFC and posterior parietal cortex is supported
by the demonstration of strong bidirectional anatomical connec-
tions with each other [4], as well as similar proﬁles of neuronal
responses [3].
Salience network
The salience network (SN) is comprised of the anterior insula,
adjoining fronto-insular cortex, and dorsal anterior cingulate
cortex (BA 24), with prominent subcortical nodes including the
amygdala, substantia nigra, ventral tegmental area, dorsomedial
thalamus, hypothalamus, and periaqueductal gray [18].
Cingulo-opercular network
The cingulo-opercular network (CON) is comprised of the anterior
insula, adjoining fronto-insular cortex and the anterior cingulate
cortex and adjacent dorsomedial PFC [29]. The CON was identiﬁed
using graph-based modularity analysis of resting-state fMRI data
extracted from 39 brain areas that showed consistent activation
across a wide range of tasks [30]. Although the SN and CON
networks show considerable overlap in the insula and anterior
cingulate cortex, they also diverge in speciﬁcation of other cortical
and subcortical network nodes due possibly due to differing
methodologies used for network identiﬁcation. However, it has
been suggested the SN and CON may be distinct networks based
on the ﬁnding that nodes within insular and anterior cingulate
cortex may be anatomically distinct [27, 31]. Also, this anatomical
divergence may explain differences in the hypothesized functions
of the SN and CON in models of cognitive control, which we will
discuss further later in this chapter.
Ventral attention network
The ventral attention network (VAN) is comprised of the ventral-
posterior aspects of the inferior frontal gyrus and the tempor-
oparietal junction in posterior cortex [32]. VAN nodes show
signiﬁcant anatomical overlap with the SN in the fronto-insular
cortex. A crucial distinction however is that VAN comprises fronto-
insular cortex connectivity with the temporoparietal junction
whereas the SN (and similarly the CON) comprises connectivity
with the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex and subcortical regions.
Dorsal attention network
The dorsal attention network (DAN) is comprised of the frontal eye
ﬁelds (FEF) and intra-parietal sulcus (IPS). The network was initially
identiﬁed in tract-tracing studies [4, 33], and subsequently further
characterized and investigated using lesion [34] and resting-state
fMRI studies [20, 35].
Default mode network
The default mode network (DMN) is comprised of the medial
prefrontal cortex, the posterior cingulate cortex, medial temporal
lobe, and angular gyrus [17, 18, 36]. The DMN was ﬁrst identiﬁed
using independent components analysis and seed-based con-
nectivity of rs-fMRI and conﬁrmed with multiple approaches
including coactivation analysis and DTI studies showing a strong
link between the medial PFC and posterior-medial nodes of the
network [37].
BASIC PRINCIPLES OF PFC NETWORK ORGANIZATION
Despite differences in methodology yielding differing levels of
granularity and anatomical boundaries, most approaches have
converged on the FPN, SN, CON, DAN, VAN, and DMN as robust
and reliably identiﬁable functional networks anchored in the PFC.
An important feature of each of these networks is that they span
association areas across frontal, parietal, temporal, and cingulate
cortices. In this section, we highlight several principles of PFC
network organization that are relevant for understanding how
they may implement cognitive control.
First, PFC networks are presumed to operate as distinct and
independent functional units, such that, nodes that comprise
these networks will coactivate across a wide range of cognitive
tasks, presumably supporting a speciﬁc cognitive process. Thus,
for example, the middle frontal gyrus (BA 9/46) and supramarginal
gyrus (BA 40) nodes of the FPN are almost always coactivated
during tasks that engage working memory [38, 39]. Moreover,
there is a strong spatial correspondence between functional
networks derived from rs-fMRI data and the task-evoked activity
maps of cognitive components derived from the BrainMap
database (comprising 9208 experiments of 77 cognitive tasks),
supporting the idea that speciﬁc networks perform distinct
cognitive functions [40]. Indirect evidence for the notion that
PFC networks are functionally distinct and independent derives
from rs-fMRI data showing that these networks are anatomically
distinct components when analyzed as a brain graph, and are anti-
or weakly-correlated, that is, there is greater connectivity between
regions within a network than between networks [29]. Direct
evidence for functional independence has come from rs-fMRI
studies of patients with focal lesions demonstrating that damage
to the FPN and CON, thought to support different components of
cognitive control, alters connectivity within the damaged network
but leaves the other network preserved [41]. It is important to
note,
however,
that
the
ﬁnding
that
these
networks
are
functionally distinct units does not preclude the possibility that
they ﬂexibly interact to carry out cognitive control, which will be
discussed later in this review.
Second,
each
PFC
node
includes
a
distinct
reciprocally
connected
node
in
the
parietal
cortex,
for
example,
the
supramarginal gyrus in the case of the FPN and posterior
cingulate cortex in the case of the DMN. Thus, each PFC network
implements a unique pattern of dedicated signaling between
anatomically distinct subdivisions of the PFC and parietal cortex.
This anatomical realization highlights the importance of the
parietal cortex in models of cognitive control as another critical
source of top-down control signals, in addition to the PFC [42].
V. Menon and M. D’Esposito
93
Neuropsychopharmacology (2022) 47:90 – 103

Third, the functional organization of PFC networks is aligned
along a dorsal-ventral gradient with dorsal PFC regions linked to
dorsal parietal cortical regions, and ventral PFC regions linked to
more ventral parietal cortical regions. Thus, the FEF and dorsal IPS
nodes of the DAN are dorsal to the dorsolateral PFC and SMG
nodes of the FPN, which in turn are dorsal to the fronto-insular
and temporal parietal junction nodes of the VAN. This functional
segregation reﬂects anatomical segregation of pathways asso-
ciated with three major ﬁber tracts that connect PFC and parietal
cortex: the dorsal, middle, and ventral superior longitudinal
fasciculi [43]. Notably, an outcome of this architecture is that
adjacent PFC regions belong to entirely different networks.
Fourth, segregation of PFC networks also extends to distinct
subcortical regions. Notably, the SN includes distinct limbic areas
including the amygdala, ventral striatum, dorsomedial thalamus,
hypothalamus, and substantia nigra/ventral tegmental area [18]
(Fig. 3). In contrast, the FPN includes the dorsal caudate and
anterior thalamus but lacks connectivity with limbic, hypothala-
mic, and midbrain structures. In general, subcortical nodes of PFC
networks, and the interaction between PFC networks and basal
ganglia/thalamic networks are often ignored in empirical studies
of cognitive control. However, important models have been put
forth postulating a critical role for the basal ganglia [44, 45] and
thalamus [46] in cognitive control networks. A comprehensive
view of the role of PFC networks in cognitive control will
undoubtedly require an understanding of PFC-basal ganglia-
thalamic interactions.
Fifth, PFC networks exhibit a high degree of symmetry
reﬂecting strong intrinsic functional connectivity between homo-
logous regions across hemispheres [47]. This symmetry reﬂects
both direct monosynaptic inter-hemispheric cross-callosal tracts
anatomical links as well as multi-synaptic links via cortico-thalamic
tracts. During cognition, however, this intrinsic symmetry can be
shifted with greater right hemisphere response and connectivity
associated with visuo-spatial attention [32] and inhibitory control
processes [48].
DYNAMIC MECHANISMS OF PFC NETWORK FUNCTION
In this section, we review several models that have emerged
regarding dynamic network mechanisms that implement cogni-
tive control. Importantly, we highlight the interplay between PFC
networks and global brain dynamics necessary for integration of
perceptual, cognitive, and motor plans during the implementation
of cognitive control.
Top-down and bottom-up spatial attention
PFC networks are central to guiding attention in space and involves
dynamic interactions between the segregated DAN and VAN, with
each playing distinct and dissociable roles [49]. DAN nodes are also
consistently coactivated by a wide range of tasks involving
manipulation of overt or covert spatial attention [32]. The FEF
and IPS contain retinotopically organized maps of contralateral
space, which makes them candidate regions for the maintenance of
spatial priority maps for covert spatial attention and saccade
planning [34, 50]. Speciﬁcally, it is proposed that the DAN is
primarily involved in applying top-down selection for stimuli and
responses, whereas the VAN detects behaviorally relevant stimuli
and might act as a “circuit breaker” for the DAN [49] (Fig. 4a). A
further distinction is drawn between the PFC and parietal nodes of
the VAN, with the temporoparietal junction consistently activated
by stimulus-driven reorienting, whereas the fronto-insular cortex/
inferior frontal gyrus is preferentially activated during reorientation
to unexpected, surprising, stimuli which require a change in
behavioral response via cognitive control [51, 52], analogous to the
anterior insula node of the SN [53].
+18
-4
+48
+4
+6
+12
dACC
SLEA
dCN
Put
HT
dmTHAL
dACC
DMPFC
pre-SMA
SN/VTA
antTHAL
FI
FI
VLPFC
DLPFC
lateral
parietal
PAG
HT
TP
AI
AI
Fig. 3
Cortical and subcortical nodes of the salience and frontoparietal networks. The SN (red) shows stronger connectivity to amygdala,
ventral striatopallidum, hypothalamus, dorsomedial thalamus (dmThal), periaqueductal gray (PAG) and ventral tegmental area (VTA). In
contrast, the FPN (blue) shows extensive parietal connectivity, involving the supramarginal gyrus and superior parietal lobule, and more
limited subcortical connectivity, mainly involving the dorsal caudate and anterior thalamus. Adapted from [18].
V. Menon and M. D’Esposito
94
Neuropsychopharmacology (2022) 47:90 – 103

A circuit breaker for response inhibition
The ability to suppress unwanted or inappropriate actions and
impulses is essential for cognitive control and a crucial component
of
ﬂexible
and
goal-directed
behavior
in
general
[54–56].
Reviewing evidence from behavioral studies of patients with
unilateral PFC lesions, Aron and colleagues put forth the
hypothesis that the right inferior frontal cortex is necessary for
response inhibition, a cognitive process required to cancel an
intended movement [55, 57, 58]. Ten years later, based on
subsequent empirical work with the stop-signal task and fMRI,
Aron and colleagues modiﬁed their view to conceptualize the
right inferior frontal cortex’s function as a “brake” that “could be
turned on in different modes (totally, to outright suppress a
response; or partially to pause a response) and in different
contexts (externally, by stop or salient signals; or internally, by
goals).” [48] (Fig. 4b). The precise localization within the PFC of this
function was proposed to be the inferior frontal gyrus, through
interactions with the anterior insula, anterior cingulate cortex, pre-
supplementary motor area, and subthalamic nucleus of the basal
ganglia [11, 48, 54]. PFC regions involved in response inhibition
show signiﬁcant overlap with the SN, CON and VAN; their
differential
functional
roles
and
circuit
dynamics
remain
unresolved [11, 33, 59–61]. One challenge here is that the inferior
frontal gyrus and anterior insula are typically coactivated during
tasks involving response inhibition [59]. Quantitative analyses
have, however, revealed that the anterior insula has stronger
intrinsic and inhibition-task-related functional connectivity with
the anterior cingulate cortex, whereas the inferior frontal cortex
has stronger intrinsic and task-evoked functional connectivity with
pre-supplemental motor area, dorsomedial PFC and FPN nodes
[59]. An emerging view based on this pattern of functional circuity
is that the right anterior insula is important for detecting
behaviorally salient events, such as stop signals, whereas the
right inferior frontal cortex is more involved in the motor
implementation of inhibitory control via links with the pre-
supplemental motor area.
Rapid-adjustments vs. Set-maintenance
In a cross-task analysis of 10 different tasks in 183 subjects,
Dosenbach and colleagues [29, 30] identiﬁed a number of regions
that were consistently active during cognitive control tasks. In a
follow-up study, these brain regions obtained from the task data
served as seeds in a correlation analysis of resting-state fMRI data
[29] where graph theory and hierarchical clustering was applied to
Fronto-parietal
Cingulo-opercular
Stable set control
Rapid adaptive control
In
Out
Top-down
Feedback
Top-down
Feedback
Moment-to-moment processing
Specified
transformations
Input 
related
Output
related
mCC
precuneus
dFC
IPS
IPL
dlPFC
aPFC
al/FO
dACC/msFC
Thalamus
Cue
Cue
R FEF
R IPs
L IPs
L FEF
R TPJ
R MFG
R VFC/AI
Visual areas
Top-down control
Stimulus-driven control
Sensory
salience
Top-down
biases
Exogenous
orienting
Reorienting
Filtering
R MFG
R VFC/AI
R TPJ
R FEF
R IPs
Visual areas
L IPs
L FEF     
Premotor
M1
R-IFG
STN
β
Motor
Thal.
GPi
Sensory and 
limbic inputs
Default-mode
network
Salience
network
Fronto-parietal
network
Endogenously mediated/
self-referential mental
activity
Dynamic
switching
Exogeously driven/
cognitively demanding
mental activity
VMPFC
PCC
ACC
AI
DLPFC
PPC
a
b
d
c
Fig. 4
Dynamic mechanisms of PFC network function. a A circuit breaker for spatial attention. The VAN is hypothesized to act as a “circuit
breaker” on the DAN, directing attention to salient events. Adapted from [32]. b Hypothetical model of different hyperdirect cortico-STN
pathways for stopping and conﬂict processing. A, Stopping is initiated via right inferior frontal gyrus (R-IFG) in concert with the pre-SMA and
implemented via projections to the subthalamic nucleus (STN) adapted from [157]. c Dual-network model of cognitive control which
comprises parallel rapid-adaptive (FPN) and set-maintenance (CON) networks. Thin arrows schematize strong functional connections and
boxed arrows schematize putative ﬂow of information. The CON is hypothesized to maintain task-sets while the FPN rapidly adjusts adaptive
control. Adapted from [62]. d Network switching model in which the SN is hypothesized to initiate dynamic switching between the FPN and
DMN and regulate attention to endogenous and exogenous events. Sensory and limbic inputs are processed by the anterior insula (AI), which
detects salient events and initiates appropriate control signals for (i) access to resources for working memory in FPN and (ii) action selection
via the anterior cingulate cortex. Adapted from [8, 93].
V. Menon and M. D’Esposito
95
Neuropsychopharmacology (2022) 47:90 – 103

the correlation matrices. These analyses identiﬁed two distinct
networks that were labeled as the FPN and the CON. Based on
their role in cognitive tasks, they proposed a dual-network model
of top-down control in which the FPN comprises brain regions
that provide signals that act on a rapid time scale to initiate and
adjust control whereas the CON comprises brain regions that
provide signals that allow for set-maintenance over a longer time
scale [62] (Fig. 4c). Other empirical studies utilizing both EEG and
fMRI has led to the hypothesis that the FPN and CON modulate
alertness, rather than speciﬁc task-set control processes. It is
proposed that the FPN is involved in phasic control of alertness
and the CON network with maintenance of tonic alertness [63, 64].
Although the SN and CON show considerable anatomical
overlap in the anterior insula and anterior cingulate cortex, their
precise role in cognitive control differs across functional models of
cognitive control. In contrast to other formulations of CON
function as described above that proposed a role in “tonic”
processes, Menon and colleagues have argued that the anterior
insula node of the SN is a fast-acting ﬂexible hub [10, 65, 66] which
facilitates the detection of the most biologically and cognitively
relevant events for adaptively guiding attention and behavior [53].
Sadaghiani and colleagues have argued that while salience
detection describes the monitoring and evaluation of homeostatic
importance, tonic alertness maintenance is the sustained process
of ensuring engagement (that may be a result of and action upon
detection of homeostatically salient stimuli) [64]. An important
avenue for future research will be to determine if the different
proposed functions of the CON and SN—task-set maintenance,
tonic alertness, and saliency detection—are explained by one
network subserving different functions, or anatomically distinct
subnetworks with different functions.
Network segregation and integration
Dynamic cooperation and competition between PFC networks
likely plays a crucial role in cognitive control [67], which can be
implemented via network segregation and integration. For
example, when humans are engaged in a demanding working
memory task, global measures of network integration increase,
while global measures of network segregation decrease [9, 68]
(Fig. 5a). Speciﬁcally, it was demonstrated that two cognitive
control networks (FPN and CON) became more integrated with
each other during conditions of increased cognitive control, and
further, increased integration of these two cognitive control
networks with a task-related, non-cognitive control network, was
related to increased accuracy on the task [69]. Other studies have
reported similar results [70, 71]. Moreover, time-varying functional
connectivity analyses of fMRI data have demonstrated that
network integration and segregation ﬂuctuate even within trials,
in a behaviorally meaningful manner. For example, it was found
that a more integrated state leads to faster and more accurate
Fig. 5
Models of network segregation and integration. a Global network integration increases, while network segregation decreases during
a working memory task. Adapted from [9]. b Brain-wide functional connectivity patterns of FPN nodes shift more than those of other PFC
networks across different cognitive task conditions. Adapted from [158].
V. Menon and M. D’Esposito
96
Neuropsychopharmacology (2022) 47:90 – 103

performance on demanding cognitive tasks [72, 73], and the
degree of network segregation/integration during the trial period
before the target is presented during an auditory detection task
predicts whether subjects heard or missed that target [74]. PFC
networks are also highly dynamic even when not performing
cognitive tasks. For example, hidden Markov models of state
dynamics have revealed that temporal coupling between SN, FPN
and DMN nodes ﬂuctuates considerably over time and these
networks exist in a state of complete segregation only intermit-
tently with relatively short mean lifetimes [75].
Cross-network integration is necessary for cognitive control, and
may be implemented via symmetry breaking, which refers to
qualitative changes in brain states, induced by relatively small
perturbations within a homogeneous system of inter-connected
nodes
[76].
Symmetry
breaking
is
often
accompanied
by
formation of segregated modules with different phase relation-
ships [77, 78], a process that underlies the emergence of dynamic
cell assemblies with functional ordering of interacting compo-
nents in space and time [79].
Network switching
A shift between networks involved in cognitive control may be a
distinct mechanism from network integration and segregation. It
is proposed that switching between networks is implemented by
ﬂexible hubs in the SN [10] (Fig. 4d). For example, the SN is
hypothesized to play a prominent role in network switching
between context dependent engagement and disengagement of
the FPN and DMN [53]. Crucially, switching between DMN and FPN
would allow for disengaging from internal mental processes in
order to respond to current goals. The anterior insula node of the
SN is proposed to play a key role in identifying relevant stimuli
from the vast and continuous stream of sensory stimuli that
impact the senses. The anterior insula may facilitate task-related
information processing by initiating appropriate transient control
signals to engage the FPN while disengaging the DMN. The SN is
thus proposed to be a fast-acting system rather than a system for
maintenance of information over a longer time scale as posited by
the
CON-based
dual-network
model
of
top-down
control
[11,
61,
80].
Consistent
with
this
switching
role,
the
SN
demonstrates some of the highest levels of ﬂexibility in time-
varying connectivity compared with other PFC brain networks,
and SN ﬂexibility is predictive of individual differences in cognitive
ﬂexibility [65, 66].
Flexible hubs
The adaptability of PFC networks necessary for cognitive control is
proposed to be made possible by ﬂexible hubs: brain regions that
rapidly update their pattern of global functional connectivity
according to task demands [81] (Fig. 5b). Supporting this notion,
brain-wide functional connectivity patterns of FPN nodes shift more
than nodes in other PFC networks across a wide variety of cognitive
task states [31]. In contrast, CON nodes are proposed to play a
complementary role to FPN nodes during cognitive control [82].
CON nodes exhibit a reduction of within-network connections from
rest to task resulting in a switch in connectivity to other networks
during tasks, whereas FPN exhibits extensive between-network
reconﬁguration along with maintenance of within-network con-
nections. This proposed ﬂexible “shifter” mechanism for the CON,
which complements a ﬂexible “coordinator mechanism” for the FPN
may allow the CON to lend processing resources to other goal-
relevant networks. This idea is similar to the proposal that the SN is
involved in network switching and transient engaging of other task
relevant networks, most notably the FPN [53].
Graph theoretical analyses applied to rs-fMRI data have led to
the proposal that there are groups of highly interconnected nodes
in brain networks, referred to as the “rich club” [83] or “diverse
club” [84], which are critical for global communication. Moreover,
in these highly connected brain regions, activity increases as the
number of cognitive functions engaged in a task increases [40].
This ﬁnding suggests that these “connector hubs” are potentially
integrating information across networks and coordinating con-
nectivity between networks. Also, individuals with diversely
connected hubs and consequent modular brain networks exhibit
increased cognitive performance, regardless of the task [85].
Self-referential monitoring
A distinguishing feature of the DMN is that, unlike the FPN, SN,
CON, DAN, and VAN, nodes of this network are typically
suppressed or deactivated during a wide range of cognitively
demanding tasks [17, 86, 87]. Importantly, this response proﬁle is
not an artifact of global signal changes found in fMRI data, as
suppression of local ﬁeld potentials in DMN nodes has been found
during performance of cognitive tasks [88]. The DMN is proposed
to play a crucial role in self-referential information processing and
monitoring of the internal mental landscape [17, 89], processes
that need to be suppressed during external-stimulus dependent
cognition. The medial PFC node is particularly sensitive to value
judgment and social evaluative processes related to the self and
others [90–92]. Although the DMN may not be as directly involved
in cognitive control in the same manner as the other PFC
networks, it likely exerts a profound indirect inﬂuence on cognitive
function. For example, inability to disengage the DMN during
external stimulus driven cognition signiﬁcantly impairs task
performance [87, 93].
PFC NETWORKS, GLOBAL BRAIN DYNAMICS AND COGNITION:
OPEN QUESTIONS AND CHALLENGES
Our discussion of PFC networks in the previous sections has
highlighted the tight interplay between PFC networks and global
brain dynamics, raising broader questions regarding the role of
PFC networks in cognition. Much as individual PFC areas do not
function in isolation, PFC networks also do not function in
isolation. The role of individual brain areas involved in cognition is
constrained by the speciﬁc network it is embedded in. PFC
networks involve segregated brain areas that are engaged during
cognition and also show a consistent pattern of intrinsic
connectivity in the absence of overt tasks. Dedicated PFC
networks create a functional architecture for efﬁcient processing
without the persistent need for reconﬁguring circuits, while at the
same time ﬂexible enough for reconﬁguration when more ﬂexible
behaviors are needed based on perceptual, mnemonic, linguistic,
and motoric demands.
Most empirical research on the role of PFC networks in
cognitive control has attempted to assign the function of speciﬁc
networks to speciﬁc cognitive control processes. Clearly, the goal
of this research has been to identify the “specialized processors” in
the brain that are involved in, and perhaps, necessary, for
cognitive control. On the one hand, one may consider this
approach to be “phrenological” at the network level and not
different from most previous studies of cognitive control that have
attributed speciﬁc cognitive control processes to speciﬁc brain
PFC regions. And this is perhaps not surprising since the empirical
studies of brain networks using brain imaging evolved from the
empirical studies that have mapped a cognitive process to a
speciﬁc brain region. A problem with this empirical approach for
determining the neural mechanisms that implement cognitive
control is that it is faced with the same questions that have
challenged researchers studying cognitive control through beha-
vioral approaches, such as: What is the ontology of cognitive
control? What are the essential and most meaningful components
of cognitive control? Can we describe all aspects of cognitive
control by limited set of cognitive processes? These are clearly
important topics for further investigation.
There are two further issues regarding simply assigning a
potential cognitive function to a speciﬁc brain network for
V. Menon and M. D’Esposito
97
Neuropsychopharmacology (2022) 47:90 – 103

developing a mechanistic understanding of cognitive control.
First, if a brain region is assigned the same function as the network
as a whole (e.g., response inhibition, or set-maintenance), what is
the role of the other brain regions in the network? Second, how do
specialized brain networks interact to carry out cognitive control?
Our review of empirical work in the previous sections has
provided evidence that specialized, modular network processes
do exist in the brain, and that cognitive control is implemented
through both segregation and integration of these networks.
Beyond this, we have also emphasized that although the nodes in
any particular PFC network can function generally as a unit, it is
not the case that each node functions identically. Our under-
standing of these differential processes is still in its infancy—
identiﬁcation of the response proﬁle of a particular brain node
within a cognitive control network will require exquisite manip-
ulation of task exigencies, such as manipulation of sensory load,
which differentially modulates parietal cortex, or increasing
complexity of task rules, action selection and motor plans acting
on the same input, which differentially modulates individual PFC
regions [94–97]. Also, as we have discussed, causal manipulation
of each node’s role in a particular network may lead to further
understanding of the role that network plays in cognitive control
[27]. With such manipulations, it is possible that different response
proﬁles will be observed in different nodes within the same
network,
since
no
two
brain
areas
are
identical
in
their
connectivity patterns—each have distinct “ﬁngerprints” with
inputs and outputs that are also not identical, allowing each
node to function dissimilarly depending on task demands and
contexts. For example, within the network thought to subserve
directed spatial attention, it is proposed a parietal node provides
an internal sensory map, a cingulate node regulates the spatial
distribution of motivational valence, a frontal node coordinates
the motor programs for exploration, scanning, reaching, and
ﬁxating; and a reticular activating system node provides the
underlying level of arousal and vigilance [98].
In addition to the important role that each brain region within a
network may play for a particular type of cognitive control
process, it is possible that the same brain region may be a
member of different networks, with different roles depending on
the network engaged. Common methodological approaches for
identifying networks using fMRI data do not allow for nodes to be
members of more than one network. However, approaches do
exist, such as the mixed-membership algorithm [99], which allows
for a particular node to participate in multiple networks. The
notion that a single brain region can subserve multiple functions is
consistent with numerous human brain mapping studies that
have found that one brain region is engaged in seemingly
disparate tasks. For example, Aron and colleagues noted that the
“right inferior frontal cortex is not only involved in response
inhibition, but is also involved in category learning, visuomotor
conditional learning, memory retrieval, memory encoding” [57].
An understanding of how the same brain region is a member of
different networks yet serves different functions is far from
understood and requires careful future consideration.
Importantly, cognitive control is not implemented by one
individual PFC network, but rather by dynamic interactions among
PFC networks embedded in a global brain architecture. The
importance of network interactions required for complex cogni-
tion more broadly has been discussed elsewhere [73, 100].
Although the empirical studies we have reviewed illustrate what
we have learned about which individual brain networks are
involved in cognitive control, considerable work is needed to
elucidate the way in which these networks interact during
cognitive control. Assigning a particular function to a particular
brain region, or a particular brain network, does not reveal a
mechanism. A complete mechanistic understanding of cognitive
control remains to be uncovered [101].
The need for broader considerations of PFC networks and
global circuit dynamics is further underscored by frameworks such
as “cell assemblies”, “global workspace” and “multi-demand-
systems”. The notion of dynamic cell assemblies ﬁrst articulated
by Hebb [102] has now been articulated in the context of modern
neuroscientiﬁc discoveries. Baars proposed the concept of a
‘global workspace’, where information is integrated in a small
group of “specialized processors” or “conductors” before being
broadcast to the whole brain resulting in a hierarchical ﬂow of
information [103]. Dehaene and colleagues extended this model
and proposed that effortful cognitive tasks require two main
computational spaces: “a unique global workspace composed of
distributed and heavily interconnected neurons with long-range
axons, and a set of specialized and modular perceptual, motor,
memory, evaluative, and attentional processors” [104]. These
computational spaces were proposed to be implemented within a
large-scale distributed brain network that spanned from the
macro-level (e.g., brain regions) to the micro-level (e.g., cortical
layers). Moreover, it was conceived that the connectivity proﬁle of
the “global workspace” allowed it to communicate, and pre-
sumably inﬂuence, multiple distributed and specialized proces-
sors.
Although
there
is
potentially
an
inﬁnite
number
of
Box 1.
Open questions raised by this review
1. What are the essential and most meaningful components of
cognitive control? Can we describe key aspects of cognitive
control by a limited set of processes involving PFC
networks?
2. Can a universal taxonomy for functional brain networks be
deﬁned?
3. Are the SN and CON distinct functional networks supporting
different aspects of cognitive control?
4. A comprehensive view of the role of PFC networks in
cognitive control will require an understanding of PFC-basal
ganglia-thalamic interactions. How do subcortical interac-
tions inﬂuence PFC network function?
5. How do brain networks evolve over time during cognitive
control? How can we use intracranial EEG to advance
understanding
of the
temporal
dynamics
of
network
function? How do they relate to fMRI models of network
function?
6. What is the role of neuronal oscillations in PFC networks
involved in cognitive control?
7. What are the computational mechanisms underlying PFC
network function in cognitive control?
8. How do PFC networks involved in cognitive control
orchestrate global workspaces to engender complex cogni-
tive functions? How can computational modeling of multi-
task data inform information ﬂow?
9. What is the role of brainstem neuromodulatory systems,
such as dopamine, norepinephrine and serotonin, on PFC
networks involved in cognitive control?
10.
How can knowledge of PFC network function be used to
ameliorate behavioral and cognitive deﬁcits in psychiatric
and neurological disorders?
11. How can we better integrate translational neuroscience
studies involving optogenetic manipulation in rodents to
probe causal mechanisms of network function?
12. How can studies of PFC network function using fMRI lead to
a better understanding of the pathophysiology of brain
disorders with cognitive control deﬁcits? Can fMRI biomar-
kers of PFC networks become clinically useful for diagnosis,
clinical characterization and guidance of therapeutic inter-
ventions of brain disorders with cognitive control deﬁcits?
V. Menon and M. D’Esposito
98
Neuropsychopharmacology (2022) 47:90 – 103

“workspace representations”, it is proposed that only one can be
active at any given time.
More recently, based on a review of monkey electrophysiology
and human fMRI studies, Duncan highlighted a group of brain
regions
that
includes
the
anterior
insula,
adjacent
frontal
operculum, dorsomedial and dorsolateral frontal cortex, dorsal
anterior cingulate nodes, premotor cortex, intraparietal sulcus,
basal ganglia, thalamus, and cerebellum, that are engaged by
diverse cognitive demands [105]. These brain regions were
collectively labeled as the “multi-demand” (MD) system and
proposed to play a key role in achieving goals by assembling sub-
tasks and creating structured mental programs. Moreover, the MD
system is hypothesized to be involved in “deﬁning and controlling
the parts of such programs, with focus on the speciﬁc content of a
current cognitive operation”, rapid reorganization as mental focus
is changed, and robust separation of successive task steps. In a
later formulation of this hypothesis [106], it was proposed that a
core role of the MD system was the assembly of an “attentional
episode”, which “drives linked processing in multiple other brain
regions, conﬁguring widespread brain activity for solution of the
selected problem.” An important unresolved question is the
relationship of the MD system functions with the PFC networks
described in this review. Recently, this question was addressed by
analyzing rs-fMRI data from the Human Connectome Project [107].
It was found that core MD regions were concentrated in the FPN.
However, in another study that analyzed fMRI data collected
during the performance of a cognitive control task, it was
concluded that the MD system may be divided into two
subnetworks - the FPN and SN/CON [108]. Thus, further work is
still required to determine how PFC networks involved in
cognitive control orchestrate global workspaces, such as the MD
system, to engender complex cognitive functions. Computational
modeling of multi-task data holds particular promise in this
regard [109].
FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
In this section we discuss future research needed to further
clarify the role of PFC networks and their dynamic interactions
in cognitive control and executive function. A summary of key
open questions arising from the present review is presented in
Box 1.
Temporal dynamics on the cognitive timescale
Flexible and adaptive human cognition depends on dynamic PFC
networks that transiently link distributed brain regions in
response to moment-by-moment changes in task demands. To
address this challenge, future studies will need to overcome
limitations of the poor temporal resolution of fMRI and map
dynamics
over
the
scales
of
tens
of
milliseconds.
While
considerable progress is being made in decoding fast temporal
dynamics in individual brain areas [110] their extensions to
multiple distributed nodes remains a challenge. Recent studies
using distributed intracranial EEG recordings have begun to
address gaps in our understanding of interactions between PFC
network nodes [80]. For example, in human intracranial electro-
corticography recordings, it has been demonstrated that during
performance of a cognitive control task, the need to apply
progressively more abstract rules resulted in greater frontal
network theta band phase encoding, which predicted trial-by-trial
response times. Moreover, theta phase encoding was coupled
with high gamma band activity, suggesting a potential mechan-
ism by which frontal networks are dynamically involved in
cognitive control [111]. Even though considerable technical and
methodological challenges remain for human intracranial record-
ing [112], progress in this area will be essential for probing how
cognitive control processes involving PFC networks unfold over
time in humans.
Latent brain dynamics, state transitions and optimal brain
states
At both fast and slow time scales, dynamic brain states and
functional connectivity have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on cognition.
New computational tools for modeling brain state dynamics are
beginning to address this challenge. For example, latent brain
space models and Bayesian switching dynamical systems algo-
rithms which can identify hidden brain states and their transition
probabilities appear particularly promising for probing ﬂexible
reconﬁguration of functional brain circuits and their inﬂuence on
task performance [113]. A critical aspect of such approaches is that
they help identify brain states that are optimal for cognitive task
performance– failure to engage such states and weak transitions
to them from other brain states can impair performance and
decision-making dynamics [114]. For example, analyses of fMRI
data have revealed during cognitively demanding tasks, there is a
ﬂow of activity embedded within a low-dimensional state space,
that moves from engagement of an integrative core of brain
regions that maximizes information-processing and performance,
to a more segregated state when the task at hand concludes [73].
In another fMRI study of functional connectivity during multiple
different cognitive tasks and rest, it was found that high-
performing individuals exhibit smaller changes in functional
network architecture between rest and task, suggesting that
these individuals have more efﬁcient network updates. These
ﬁndings suggest that high performers on a given task may have a
network conﬁguration at rest that is already closer in state space
to that task’s network conﬁguration [115].
Future empirical studies implementing models based on
unsupervised learning procedures for identifying latent brain
states, their temporal evolution, lifetimes and occurrence of states,
and their switching probabilities will allow us to uncover context-
dependent latent brain dynamics associated with PFC networks.
Progress in this area will be essential for addressing the challenge
of the role of PFC networks in cognitive control and reconﬁgura-
tion of cell assemblies to support adaptive cognitive functions.
Causal manipulation and control of PFC networks
Optogenetic techniques has revolutionized our understanding of
the causal role of functional circuits in the rodent brain [116].
Although the cell-speciﬁc manipulation offered by optogenetic
techniques is not a feasible approach in the human brain and has
met with limited success in non-human primates, a number of
tools to manipulate neural responses in individual brain areas are
now available to investigate causal effects of PFC networks. These
include transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) and direct current
stimulation techniques as well as more invasive intracranial
stimulation with simultaneous EEG recordings [117]. For example,
two different frontal nodes in the CON and FPN network were
disrupted with theta-burst TMS, followed by collection of fMRI
data. Changes in the functional connectivity between and within
these two PFC networks was observed after TMS [118]. Thus, brain
stimulation in healthy individuals along with studies of patients
with focal lesions [41], provide a promising convergent approach
for studying the role of PFC networks in cognitive control.
In contrast to computational methods that assess functional
connectivity, methods that assess the inﬂuence that one neuronal
system exerts over another (sometimes referred to as effective
connectivity) hold promise for providing convergent, albeit
indirect, evidence for a causal role of PFC networks in cognition.
Such
methods
include
structural
equation
modeling
[119],
coherence [120], Granger causal analysis [121, 122], dynamic
causal modeling [123], and multidimensional state space models
[124]. The relative strengths and weaknesses of these approaches
for estimating causal interactions has been the subject of some
debate owing to the slow time course of fMRI signals [125–127].
Identiﬁcation of causal interactions between brain regions using
computational
techniques
has
nevertheless
remained
a
V. Menon and M. D’Esposito
99
Neuropsychopharmacology (2022) 47:90 – 103

challenging problem for several reasons. First, fMRI measures a
hemodynamic response to neural activity rather than neuronal
activity directly. Second, regional variations in the hemodynamic
response function can signiﬁcantly inﬂuence estimation of causal
interactions between brain regions. Third, causal interactions
between brain regions can change with experimental context.
State-space computational algorithms validated using neurophy-
siologically realistic simulations, and novel optogenetic fMRI
manipulations hold promise for identifying context-dependent
dynamic causal interactions [124, 128]. Notably, application of
these techniques to high-temporal resolution fMRI data may allow
identiﬁcation of causal outﬂow and inﬂow hubs associated with
cognition [129]. Crucially, analysis of causal control circuits has the
potential to inform how asymmetries in directed inﬂuence allow
individual networks or speciﬁc brain nodes to control others, and
further advance our understanding of how dynamic causal
interactions involving PFC network nodes play a fundamental
role in cognition.
Network controllability
Control theory techniques borrowed from engineering may also
offer promising new approaches for probing how PFC networks
can be manipulated to facilitate desirable or optimal brain states
[130–133]. This latter question may be relevant for the treatment
of psychiatric disorders such as depression where stimulation of
the dorsolateral PFC node of the FPN is used to alter distal brain
targets that inﬂuence mood [134]. Controllability, in the classical
sense, measures the ability to perturb a system from a given initial
state to speciﬁc target states, in ﬁnite time, by means of external
control inputs [133, 135, 136]. Nodes with higher controllability
require lower energy for perturbing a system from its current state
[137, 138] and controllability measures are useful for identifying
driver nodes which have the potential to inﬂuence overall system
dynamics [136]. Control properties of complex systems can
provide novel insights into how they can be perturbed to achieve
desired behaviors [130–132]. A recent advance is the application
of control theory to human neuroimaging based on structural
brain connectivity derived using diffusion tensor imaging [139],
with the suggestion that inputs to DMN nodes may facilitate
transition to many other brain states. However, it has been also
been suggested that structural topology by itself may be ill-suited
for assessing brain- cognitive-state dependent control in complex
functional brain networks [140] and researchers have drawn
attention to the importance of state dynamics for the study of
controllability in complex systems [138]. Incorporating such a
perspective a recent study found that SN nodes have the highest
functional network controllability and, more generally, functional
network controllability is dependent on cognitive load [129].
Characterization of how intrinsic functional connectivity and
structural connectivity constrain the temporal progression of
brain states remains a challenge, resolution of which will likely
yield insights into how PFC networks can be manipulated to
desired outcomes.
CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS FOR PSYCHIATRIC AND
NEUROLOGICAL DISORDERS
Deﬁcits in cognitive control have been observed in many
psychiatric and neurological disorders, such as autism, anxiety
disorders, mood disorders, schizophrenia, traumatic brain injury,
stroke, and frontotemporal dementia [141, 142]. The brain’s
cognitive control systems have been probed in these clinical
disorders
with
multiple
brain
imaging
techniques,
and
as
expected, dysfunction in PFC networks is observed [61, 93, 143–
148]. These empirical studies of describing functional connectivity
changes in brain disorders complement decades of clinical studies
of these disorders that have associated the location of pathology,
or changes in brain activity in particular regions, with cognitive
control deﬁcits observed in patients with brain disorders. As we
strive to use functional connectivity metrics to gain further
understanding of the neural mechanisms of cognitive control, we
must also strive to use these metrics in a way that provides
meaningful clinical utility. In our view, there are several potential
ways in which a network analysis of functional brain imaging data
in patients with brain disorders could have a signiﬁcant clinical
impact.
Identiﬁcation of network dysfunction using fMRI data has the
potential to aid a clinician in reaching a diagnosis, categorizing
clinical subtypes of a particular disorder or guiding therapeutic
interventions. However, despite the introduction of fMRI almost 30
years ago, there is still no clinically approved use of fMRI. The
signiﬁcant challenge that must be overcome is that a functional
brain imaging biomarker must have sufﬁcient sensitivity and
speciﬁcity within an individual patient, rather than a group of
patients as compared to a group of healthy controls. Network
approaches may have an advantage over previously failed
univariate approaches that have measured more or less activity
within individual brain regions without considering their interac-
tions with other brain regions. Some progress has been made in
the development of functional connectivity metrics that predict
the response to various therapeutic interventions aimed at
improving cognitive control deﬁcits. For example, individual
differences in baseline brain network architecture as measured
with rs-fMRI predicts gains in cognitive control functions across
several clinical populations and cognitive interventions [149–151].
Even if the goal of developing fMRI as a clinically useful tool is
never achieved, functional connectivity metrics of fMRI data will
still likely provide valuable insight into the pathophysiological
mechanisms that underlie brain disorders. In fact, one may argue
that fMRI is more optimally suited to achieve this goal. The
explosion of network neuroscience over the past decade has
undoubtedly led to a re-consideration of the pathophysiological
mechanisms underlying neurological and psychiatric disorders
[152]. For example, a triple network model of psychopathology
posits that aberrant functional organization of the SN, FPN and
DMN and their dynamic interactions contribute to a wide range of
psychiatric symptoms [93, 141, 148, 151, 153]. Speciﬁcally, this
model posits that aberrant salience assignment and mapping of
external and internal events by the SN leads to altered dynamic
temporal interactions with the FPN and DMN, resulting in
cognitive control deﬁcits. A key question to be answered for any
network model of disease is why speciﬁc networks are targeted in
speciﬁc diseases. One notion put forth is that highly connected
brain regions, independent of their network membership, are the
target of neuropathology because they are biologically costly due
to their high metabolic demands. Empirical support for this
hypothesis was found in a study of over 20,000 subjects with 26
different brain disorders. MRI lesions that were common across all
brain disorders were more likely to be located in highly connected
brain regions [154]. This network view of brain disorders is
consistent with empirical ﬁndings that lesions to highly connected
brain regions cause global changes in brain connectivity [155] and
extensive cognitive deﬁcits [156].
REFERENCES
1. Miller EK, Cohen JD. An integrative theory of prefrontal cortex function. Annu
Rev Neurosci. 2001;24:167–202.
2. T Egner, The Wiley Handbook of Cognitive Control (Wiley, New York, 2017).
3. Goldman-Rakic PS. Topography of cognition: parallel distributed networks in
primate association cortex. Annu Rev Neurosci. 1988;11:137–56.
4. Mesulam MM. From sensation to cognition. Brain. 1998;121:1013–52.
5. Fuster JM. The cognit: a network model of cortical representation. Int J Psy-
chophysiol. 2006;60:125–32.
6. J Fuster, The prefrontal cortex (Elsevier Science, Amsterdam, 2015).
7. Passingham RE, Stephan KE, Kotter R. The anatomical basis of functional loca-
lization in the cortex. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2002;3:606–16.
V. Menon and M. D’Esposito
100
Neuropsychopharmacology (2022) 47:90 – 103

8. Bressler SL, Menon V. Large-scale brain networks in cognition: emerging
methods and principles. Trends Cogn Sci. 2010;14:277–90.
9. Cohen JR, D’Esposito M. The segregation and integration of distinct brain net-
works and their relationship to cognition. J Neurosci. 2016;36:12083–94.
10. Menon V, Uddin LQ. Saliency, switching, attention and control: a network model
of insula function. Brain Struct Funct. 2010;214:655–67.
11. Cai W, Chen T, Ryali S, Kochalka J, Li CS, Menon V. Causal Interactions Within a
Frontal-Cingulate-Parietal Network During Cognitive Control: Convergent Evi-
dence from a Multisite-Multitask Investigation. Cereb cortex. 2016;26:2140–53.
12. MM Mesulam, Principles of behavioral and cognitive neurology (Oxford University
Press, 2000).
13. Petrides M, Tomaiuolo F, Yeterian EH, Pandya DN. The prefrontal cortex: com-
parative architectonic organization in the human and the macaque monkey
brains. Cortex. 2012;48:46–57.
14. Thiebaut de Schotten M, Ffytche DH, Bizzi A, Dell'Acqua F, Allin M, Walshe M,
et al. Atlasing location, asymmetry and inter-subject variability of white matter
tracts in the human brain with MR diffusion tractography. Neuroimage.
2011;54:49–59.
15. A Fornito, A Zalesky, E Bullmore, Fundamentals of brain network analysis (Elsevier
Science, Amsterdam, 2016).
16. Beckmann CF, Smith SM. Probabilistic independent component analysis for
functional
magnetic
resonance
imaging.
IEEE
Trans
Med
Imaging.
2004;23:137–52.
17. Greicius MD, Krasnow B, Reiss AL, Menon V. Functional connectivity in the
resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA. 2003;100:253–8.
18. Seeley WW, Menon V, Schatzberg AF, Keller J, Glover GH, Kenna H, et al. Dis-
sociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive
control. J Neurosci. 2007;27:2349–56.
19. Damoiseaux JS, Rombouts SA, Barkhof F, Scheltens P, Stam CJ, Smith SM, et al.
Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA. 2006;103:13848–53.
20. Shirer WR, Ryali S, Rykhlevskaia E, Menon V, Greicius MD. Decoding subject-
driven cognitive states with whole-brain connectivity patterns. Cereb cortex.
2012;22:158–65.
21. BT Yeo, FM Krienen, J Sepulcre, MR Sabuncu, D Lashkari, M Hollinshead, et al.,
The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic functional
connectivity. J Neurophysiol. 2011;106:1125–65.
22. Cohen AL, Fair DA, Dosenbach NU, Miezin FM, Dierker D, Van Essen DC, et al.
Deﬁning functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional
connectivity MRI. Neuroimage. 2008;41:45–57.
23. Johansen-Berg H, Behrens TE, Robson MD, Drobnjak I, Rushworth MF,
Brady JM, et al. Changes in connectivity proﬁles deﬁne functionally distinct
regions
in
human
medial
frontal
cortex.
Proc
Natl
Acad
Sci
USA.
2004;101:13335–40.
24. P Golland, Y Golland, R Malach (2007) Detection of spatial activation patterns as
unsupervised segmentation of fMRI data. in International Conference on Medical
Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention (Springer), pp 110–8.
25. Bassett DS, Sporns O. Network neuroscience. Nat Neurosci. 2017;20:353–64.
26. Bullmore E, Sporns O. Complex brain networks: graph theoretical analysis of
structural and functional systems. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2009;10:186–98.
27. Gratton C, Sun H, Petersen SE. Control networks and hubs. Psychophysiology.
2018;55:e13032.
28. Uddin LQ, Yeo BT, Spreng RN. Towards a universal taxonomy of macro-scale
functional human brain networks. Brain Topogr. 2019;32:926–42.
29. Dosenbach NU, Fair DA, Miezin FM, Cohen AL, Wenger KK, Dosenbach RA, et al.
Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA. 2007;104:11073–8.
30. Dosenbach NU, Visscher KM, Palmer ED, Miezin FM, Wenger KK, Kang HC, et al. A
core system for the implementation of task sets. Neuron. 2006;50:799–812.
31. Power JD, Cohen AL, Nelson SM, Wig GS, Barnes KA, Church JA, et al. Functional
network organization of the human brain. Neuron. 2011;72:665–78.
32. Corbetta M, Shulman GL. Spatial neglect and attention networks. Annu Rev
Neurosci. 2011;34:569–99.
33. Wu T, Wang X, Wu Q, Spagna A, Yang J, Yuan C, et al. Anterior insular cortex is a
bottleneck of cognitive control. NeuroImage. 2019;195:490–504.
34. Vossel S, Geng JJ, Fink GR. Dorsal and ventral attention systems: distinct neural
circuits but collaborative roles. Neuroscientist. 2014;20:150–9.
35. Sestieri, C., Shulman, G. L., & Corbetta, M. Orienting to the environment: Separate
contributions of dorsal and ventral frontoparietal attention networks. In G. R.
Mangun Editor. The neuroscience of attention: Attentional control and selection
(pp. 100–130). https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195334364.003.0005 (Oxford
University Press, 2012).
36. Fox MD, Raichle ME. Spontaneous ﬂuctuations in brain activity observed with
functional magnetic resonance imaging. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2007;8:700–11.
37. Greicius MD, Supekar K, Menon V, Dougherty RF. Resting-state functional con-
nectivity reﬂects structural connectivity in the default mode network. Cereb
cortex. 2009;19:72–78.
38. Rottschy C, Langner R, Dogan I, Reetz K, Laird AR, Schulz JB, et al. Modelling
neural correlates of working memory: a coordinate-based meta-analysis. Neu-
roimage. 2012;60:830–46.
39. D’Esposito M, Postle BR. The cognitive neuroscience of working memory. Annu
Rev Psychol. 2015;66:115–42.
40. Bertolero MA, Yeo BTT, D’Esposito M. The modular and integrative functional
architecture of the human brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 2015;112:E6798–E6807.
41. Nomura EM, Gratton C, D’Esposito M. Double dissociation of two cognitive
control networks in patients with focal brain lesions. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.
2010;107:12017 12022.
42. Wallis G, Stokes M, Cousijn H, Woolrich M, Nobre AC. Frontoparietal and
Cingulo-opercular Networks Play Dissociable Roles in Control of Working
Memory. J Cogn Neurosci. 2015;27:2019–34.
43. M Catani, M Thiebaut de Schotten, Atlas of human brain connections (Oxford
University Press, Oxford; New York, 2012), pp. xii, 519 p.
44. Chatham CH, Badre D. Multiple gates on working memory. Curr Opin Behav Sci.
2015;1:23 31.
45. Hazy TE, Frank MJ, O’Reilly RC. Banishing the homunculus: making working
memory work. Neuroscience. 2006;139:105–18.
46. Hwang K, Bertolero MA, Liu WB, D’Esposito M. The human thalamus is an
integrative hub for functional brain networks. J Neurosci. 2017;37:5594 5607.
47. Ryali S, Chen T, Supekar K, Menon V. Estimation of functional connectivity in
fMRI data using stability selection-based sparse partial correlation with elastic
net penalty. Neuroimage. 2012;59:3852–61.
48. Aron AR, Robbins TW, Poldrack RA. Inhibition and the right inferior frontal
cortex: one decade on. Trends Cogn Sci. 2014;18:177–85.
49. Corbetta M, Shulman GL. Control of goal-directed and stimulus-driven attention
in the brain. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2002;3:201–15.
50. K Nobre, S Kastner, The Oxford handbook of attention, Oxford library of psy-
chology (Oxford University Press, Oxford; New York, 2014), pp. xvi, 1242 p.
51. Shulman GL, Astaﬁev SV, Franke D, Pope DL, Snyder AZ, McAvoy MP, et al.
Interaction of stimulus-driven reorienting and expectation in ventral and dorsal
frontoparietal
and
basal
ganglia-cortical
networks.
J
Neurosci.
2009;29:4392–407.
52. Todd JJ, Fougnie D, Marois R. Visual short-term memory load suppresses
temporo-parietal junction activity and induces inattentional blindness. Psy-
chological Sci. 2005;16:965–72.
53. Sridharan D, Levitin DJ, Menon V. A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex
in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA. 2008;105:12569–74.
54. Aron AR. From reactive to proactive and selective control: developing a richer
model for stopping inappropriate responses. Biol Psychiatry. 2011;69:e55–68.
55. Diamond A. Executive functions. Annu Rev Psychol. 2013;64:135–68.
56. Dalley JW, Everitt BJ, Robbins TW. Impulsivity, compulsivity, and top-down
cognitive control. Neuron. 2011;69:680–94.
57. Aron AR, Robbins TW, Poldrack RA. Inhibition and the right inferior frontal
cortex. Trends Cogn Sci. 2004;8:170–7.
58. Aron AR, Fletcher PC, Bullmore ET, Sahakian BJ, Robbins TW. Stop-signal inhi-
bition disrupted by damage to right inferior frontal gyrus in humans. Nat
Neurosci. 2003;6:115–6.
59. Cai W, Ryali S, Chen T, Li CS, Menon V. Dissociable roles of right inferior frontal
cortex and anterior insula in inhibitory control: evidence from intrinsic and task-
related functional parcellation, connectivity, and response proﬁle analyses
across multiple datasets. J Neurosci. 2014;34:14652–67.
60. Ide JS, Shenoy P, Angela JY, Chiang-Shan RL. Bayesian prediction and evaluation
in the anterior cingulate cortex. J Neurosci. 2013;33:2039–47.
61. Sharp DJ, Bonnelle V, De Boissezon X, Beckmann CF, James SG, Patel MC, et al.
Distinct frontal systems for response inhibition, attentional capture, and error
processing. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 2010;107:6106–11.
62. Dosenbach NU, Fair DA, Cohen AL, Schlaggar BL, Petersen SE. A dual-networks
architecture of top-down control. Trends Cogn Sci. 2008;12:99–105.
63. Sadaghiani S, Scheeringa R, Lehongre K, Morillon B, Giraud AL, D'Esposito M,
et al. Alpha-band phase synchrony is related to activity in the fronto-parietal
adaptive control network. J Neurosci. 2012;32:14305–10.
64. Sadaghiani S, D’Esposito M. Functional characterization of the cingulo-opercular
network in the maintenance of tonic alertness. Cereb cortex. 2015;25:2763–73.
65. Chen T, Cai W, Ryali S, Supekar K, Menon V. Distinct global brain dynamics and
spatiotemporal organization of the salience network. PLoS Biol. 2016;14:
e1002469.
66. Krönke K-M, Wolff M, Shi Y, Kräplin A, Smolka MN, Bühringer G, et al. Functional
connectivity in a triple-network saliency model is associated with real-life self-
control. Neuropsychologia. 2020;149:107667.
V. Menon and M. D’Esposito
101
Neuropsychopharmacology (2022) 47:90 – 103

67. Cocchi L, Zalesky A, Fornito A, Mattingley JB. Dynamic cooperation and com-
petition between brain systems during cognitive control. Trends Cogn Sci.
2013;17:493–501.
68. Zippo AG, Rosa PAD, Castiglioni I, Biella GEM. Alternating dynamics of segre-
gation and integration in human EEG functional networks during working-
memory task. Neuroscience. 2018;371:191–206.
69. Cohen JR, Gallen CL, Jacobs EG, Lee TG, D’Esposito M. Quantifying the recon-
ﬁguration of intrinsic networks during working memory. PloS One. 2014;9:
e106636.
70. Kitzbichler MG, Henson RN, Smith ML, Nathan PJ, Bullmore ET. Cognitive effort
drives workspace conﬁguration of human brain functional networks. J Neurosci.
2011;31:8259–70.
71. Liang X, Zou Q, He Y, Yang Y. Topologically reorganized connectivity archi-
tecture of default-mode, executive-control, and salience networks across
working memory task loads. Cereb cortex. 2016;26:1501–11.
72. Shine JM, Bissett PG, Bell PT, Koyejo O, Balsters JH, Gorgolewski KJ, et al. The
dynamics of functional brain networks: integrated network states during cog-
nitive task performance. Neuron. 2016;92:544–54.
73. Shine JM, Poldrack RA. Principles of dynamic network reconﬁguration across
diverse brain states. NeuroImage. 2018;180:396–405.
74. Sadaghiani S, Poline J-B, Kleinschmidt A, D’Esposito M. Ongoing dynamics in
large-scale functional connectivity predict perception. Proc Natl Acad Sci.
2015;112:8463–8.
75. Ryali S, Supekar K, Chen T, Kochalka J, Cai W, Nicholas J, et al. Temporal
dynamics and developmental maturation of salience, default and central-
executive network interactions revealed by variational bayes hidden markov
modeling. PLoS Comput Biol. 2016;12:e1005138.
76. Pillai AS, Jirsa VK. Symmetry breaking in space-time hierarchies shapes brain
dynamics and behavior. Neuron. 2017;94:1010–26.
77. Fasoli D, Cattani A, Panzeri S. The complexity of dynamics in small neural cir-
cuits. PLoS Comput Biol. 2016;12:e1004992.
78. Singh R, Menon SN, Sinha S. Complex patterns arise through spontaneous
symmetry breaking in dense homogeneous networks of neural oscillators. Sci
Rep. 2016;6:22074.
79. JS Kelso, Dynamic patterns: the self-organization of brain and behavior (MIT press,
Cambridge, 1997).
80. Das A, Menon V. Spatiotemporal integrity and spontaneous nonlinear dynamic
properties of the salience network revealed by human intracranial electro-
physiology: a multicohort replication. Cereb cortex. 2020;30:5309–21.
81. Cole MW, Bassett DS, Power JD, Braver TS, Petersen SE. Intrinsic and task-evoked
network architectures of the human brain. Neuron. 2014;83:238–51.
82. Cocuzza CV, Ito T, Schultz D, Bassett DS, Cole MW. Flexible coordinator and
switcher hubs for adaptive task control. J Neurosci. 2020;40:6949–68.
83. Heuvel MPvd, Sporns O. Rich-club organization of the human connectome. J
Neurosci: Off J Soc Neurosci. 2011;31:15775 15786.
84. Bertolero MA, Yeo BTT, D’Esposito M. The diverse club. Nat Commun.
2017;8:1277.
85. Bertolero MA, Yeo BTT, Bassett DS, D’Esposito M. A mechanistic model of con-
nector hubs, modularity and cognition. Nat Hum Behav. 2018;2:765–77.
86. Raichle ME, MacLeod AM, Snyder AZ, Powers WJ, Gusnard DA, Shulman GL. A
default mode of brain function. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2001;98:676–82.
87. Greicius MD, Menon V. Default-mode activity during a passive sensory task:
uncoupled from deactivation but impacting activation. J Cogn Neurosci.
2004;16:1484–92.
88. Dastjerdi M, Foster BL, Nasrullah S, Rauschecker AM, Dougherty RF, Townsend
JD, et al. Differential electrophysiological response during rest, self-referential,
and non-self-referential tasks in human posteromedial cortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA. 2011;108:3023–8.
89. Qin P, Northoff G. How is our self related to midline regions and the default-
mode network? Neuroimage. 2011;57:1221–33.
90. Amodio DM, Frith CD. Meeting of minds: the medial frontal cortex and social
cognition. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2006;7:268–77.
91. Spreng RN, Mar RA, Kim AS. The common neural basis of autobiographical
memory, prospection, navigation, theory of mind, and the default mode: a
quantitative meta-analysis. J Cogn Neurosci. 2009;21:489–510.
92. Buckner RL, Carroll DC. Self-projection and the brain. Trends Cogn Sci.
2007;11:49–57.
93. Menon V. Large-scale brain networks and psychopathology: a unifying triple
network model. Trends Cogn Sci. 2011;15:483–506.
94. Scott BB, Constantinople CM, Akrami A, Hanks TD, Brody CD, Tank DW. Fronto-
parietal cortical circuits encode accumulated evidence with a diversity of
timescales. Neuron. 2017;95:385–98 e385.
95. Akrami A, Kopec CD, Diamond ME, Brody CD. Posterior parietal cortex repre-
sents
sensory
history
and
mediates
its
effects
on
behaviour.
Nature.
2018;554:368–72.
96. Hanks TD, Kopec CD, Brunton BW, Duan CA, Erlich JC, Brody CD. Distinct rela-
tionships of parietal and prefrontal cortices to evidence accumulation. Nature.
2015;520:220–3.
97. Badre D, D’Esposito M. Functional magnetic resonance imaging evidence for a
hierarchical
organization
of
the
prefrontal
cortex.
J
Cogn
Neurosci.
2007;19:2082–99.
98. Mesulam MM. A cortical network for directed attention and unilateral neglect.
Ann Neurol: Off J Am Neurological Assoc Child Neurol Soc. 1981;10:309–25.
99. NajaﬁM, McMenamin BW, Simon JZ, Pessoa L. Overlapping communities reveal
rich structure in large-scale brain networks during rest and task conditions.
NeuroImage. 2016;135:92–106.
100. Sporns O. Network attributes for segregation and integration in the human
brain. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 2013;23:162–71.
101. RD Mill, T Ito, MW Cole, From connectome to cognition: the search for
mechanism in human functional brain networks. NeuroImage. 2017;160:124–
139.
102. DO Hebb, The organization of behavior: a neuropsychological theory (Psychology
Press, Hove, 2005).
103. BJ Baars, A cognitive theory of consciousness (Cambridge University Press, 1993).
104. Dehaene S, Kerszberg M, Changeux J-P. A neuronal model of a global work-
space in effortful cognitive tasks. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 1998;95:14529–34.
105. Duncan J. The multiple-demand (MD) system of the primate brain: mental
programs for intelligent behaviour. Trends Cogn Sci. 2010;14:172–9.
106. Duncan J. The structure of cognition: attentional episodes in mind and brain.
Neuron. 2013;80:35–50.
107. Assem M, Glasser MF, Van Essen DC, Duncan J. A domain-general cognitive core
deﬁned
in
multimodally
parcellated
human
cortex.
Cereb
cortex.
2020;30:4361–80.
108. Crittenden BM, Mitchell DJ, Duncan J. Task encoding across the multiple
demand cortex is consistent with a frontoparietal and cingulo-opercular dual
networks distinction. J Neurosci. 2016;36:6147–55.
109. G Deco, D Vidaurre, ML Kringelbach, Revisiting the Global Workspace orches-
trating the hierarchical organization of the human brain. Nat Human Behav.
2021;5:497–511.
110. Vyas S, Golub MD, Sussillo D, Shenoy KV. Computation through neural popu-
lation dynamics. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2020;43:249–75.
111. Voytek B, Kayser AS, Badre D, Fegen D, Chang EF, Crone NE, et al. Oscillatory
dynamics coordinating human frontal networks in support of goal maintenance.
Nat Neurosci. 2015;18:1318 1324.
112. Parvizi J, Kastner S. Promises and limitations of human intracranial electro-
encephalography. Nat Neurosci. 2018;21:474–83.
113. Taghia J, Cai W, Ryali S, Kochalka J, Nicholas J, Chen T, et al. Uncovering hidden
brain state dynamics that regulate performance and decision-making during
cognition. Nat Commun. 2018;9:2505.
114. Taghia J, Ryali S, Chen T, Supekar K, Cai W, Menon V. Bayesian switching factor
analysis for estimating time-varying functional connectivity in fMRI. Neuro-
image. 2017;155:271–90.
115. Cole MW, Ito T, Bassett DS, Schultz DH. Activity ﬂow over resting-state networks
shapes cognitive task activations. Nat Neurosci. 2016;19:1718–26.
116. Kim CK, Adhikari A, Deisseroth K. Integration of optogenetics with com-
plementary methodologies
in
systems
neuroscience. Nat
Rev Neurosci.
2017;18:222–35.
117. Parvizi J, Jacques C, Foster BL, Witthoft N, Rangarajan V, Weiner KS, et al.
Electrical stimulation of human fusiform face-selective regions distorts face
perception. J Neurosci. 2012;32:14915–20.
118. Gratton C, Lee TG, Nomura EM, D’Esposito M. The effect of theta-burst TMS on
cognitive control networks measured with resting state fMRI. Front Syst Neu-
rosci. 2013;7:124.
119. Mclntosh
A,
Gonzalez‐Lima
F.
Structural
equation
modeling
and
its
application to network analysis in functional brain imaging. Hum Brain Mapp.
1994;2:2–22.
120. Sun FT, Miller LM, D’Esposito M. Measuring interregional functional connectivity
using coherence and partial coherence analyses of fMRI data. Neuroimage.
2004;21:647–58.
121. Roebroeck A, Formisano E, Goebel R. Mapping directed inﬂuence over the brain
using Granger causality and fMRI. Neuroimage. 2005;25:230–42.
122. Seth AK. Causal connectivity of evolved neural networks during behavior.
Network. 2005;16:35–54.
123. Friston KJ, Harrison L, Penny W. Dynamic causal modelling. Neuroimage.
2003;19:1273–302.
124. Ryali S, Shih YY, Chen T, Kochalka J, Albaugh D, Fang Z, et al. Combining
optogenetic stimulation and fMRI to validate a multivariate dynamical systems
model for estimating causal brain interactions. Neuroimage. 2016;132:398–405.
125. Friston K. Causal modelling and brain connectivity in functional magnetic
resonance imaging. PLoS Biol. 2009;7:e33.
V. Menon and M. D’Esposito
102
Neuropsychopharmacology (2022) 47:90 – 103

126. Roebroeck A, Formisano E, Goebel R. The identiﬁcation of interacting networks in
the brain using fMRI: Model selection, causality and deconvolution. NeuroImage.
2009;S1053-8119:01015–5.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.09.036.
[pii]
127. Kayser AS, Sun FT, D’Esposito M. A comparison of Granger causality and
coherency in fMRI-based analysis of the motor system. Hum brain Mapp.
2009;30:3475–94.
128. Ryali S, Chen T, Supekar K, Tu T, Kochalka J, Cai W, et al. Multivariate dynamical
systems-based estimation of causal brain interactions in fMRI: Group-level
validation using benchmark data, neurophysiological models and human con-
nectome project data. J Neurosci Methods. 2016;268:142–53.
129. W Cai, S Ryali, R Pasumarthi, V Talasila, V Menon, Dynamic causal brain circuits
during working memory and their functional controllability. Nat Commun.
2021;12:3314.
130. A Lombardi, M Hornquist, Controllability analysis of networks. Phys Rev E.
2007;75(5 Pt 2):056110. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.75.056110.
131. Ruths
J,
Ruths
D.
Control
proﬁles
of
complex
networks.
Science.
2014;343:1373–6.
132. E Tang, DS Bassett, Colloquium: control of dynamics in brain networks. Rev Mod
Phys. 2018;90:031003.
133. Yan G, Vértes PE, Towlson EK, Chew YL, Walker DS, Schafer WR, et al. Network
control principles predict neuron function in the Caenorhabditis elegans con-
nectome. Nature. 2017;550:519–23.
134. Holtzheimer PE, Mayberg HS. Deep brain stimulation for psychiatric disorders.
Annu Rev Neurosci. 2011;34:289–307.
135. YY Liu, AL Barabasi, Control principles of complex systems. Rev Mod Phys.
2016;88:035006.
136. Liu YY, Slotine JJ, Barabasi AL. Controllability of complex networks. Nature.
2011;473:167–73.
137. JP Hespanha, Linear systems theory (Princeton Press, Princeton, New Jersey, 2009).
138. Leitold D, Vathy-Fogarassy A, Abonyi J. Controllability and observability in
complex networks - the effect of connection types. Sci Rep. 2017;7:151.
139. Gu S, Pasqualetti F, Cieslak M, Telesford QK, Yu AB, Kahn AE, et al. Controllability
of structural brain networks. Nat Commun. 2015;6:8414.
140. Tu C, Rocha RP, Corbetta M, Zampieri S, Zorzi M, Suweis S. Warnings and caveats
in brain controllability. Neuroimage. 2018;176:83–91.
141. Menon V. Brain networks and cognitive impairment in psychiatric disorders.
World Psychiatry. 2020;19:309–10.
142. Szczepanski SM, Knight RT. Insights into human behavior from lesions to the
prefrontal cortex. Neuron. 2014;83:1 17.
143. McTeague LM, Goodkind MS, Etkin A. Transdiagnostic impairment of cognitive
control in mental illness. J Psychiatr Res. 2016;83:37–46.
144. Goodkind M, Eickhoff SB, Oathes DJ, Jiang Y, Chang A, Jones-Hagata LB, et al.
Identiﬁcation of a common neurobiological substrate for mental illness. JAMA
Psychiatry. 2015;72:305–15.
145. McTeague LM, Huemer J, Carreon DM, Jiang Y, Eickhoff SB, Etkin A. Identiﬁcation
of common neural circuit disruptions in cognitive control across psychiatric
disorders. Am J Psychiatry. 2017;174:676–85.
146. Filippi M, Agosta F, Scola E, Canu E, Magnani G, Marcone A, et al. Functional
network connectivity in the behavioral variant of frontotemporal dementia.
Cortex. 2013;49:2389–401.
147. Hayes JP, Bigler ED, Verfaellie M. Traumatic brain injury as a disorder of brain
connectivity. J Int Neuropsych Soc. 2016;22:120–37.
148. Sha Z, Wager TD, Mechelli A, He Y. Common dysfunction of large-scale neuro-
cognitive networks across psychiatric disorders. Biol Psychiatry. 2019;85:379–88.
149. Gallen CL, D’Esposito M. Brain modularity: a biomarker of intervention-related
plasticity. Trends Cogn Sci. 2019;23:293–304.
150. Uddin LQ, Supekar K, Lynch CJ, Khouzam A, Phillips J, Feinstein C, et al. Salience
network-based classiﬁcation and prediction of symptom severity in children
with autism. JAMA Psychiatry. 2013;70:869–79.
151. Supekar K, Cai W, Krishnadas R, Palaniyappan L, Menon V. Dysregulated brain
dynamics in a triple-network saliency model of schizophrenia and its relation to
psychosis. Biol Psychiatry. 2019;85:60–69.
152. Stam CJ. Modern network science of neurological disorders. Nat Rev Neurosci.
2014;15:683 695.
153. Cai W, Chen T, Szegletes L, Supekar K, Menon V. Aberrant time-varying cross-
network interactions in children with attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder
and the relation to attention deﬁcits. Biol Psychiatry Cogn Neurosci Neuroi-
maging. 2018;3:263–73.
154. Crossley NA, Mechelli A, Scott J, Carletti F, Fox PT, McGuire P, et al. The hubs of
the human connectome are generally implicated in the anatomy of brain dis-
orders. Brain. 2014;137:2382–95.
155. Gratton C, Nomura EM, Pérez F, D’Esposito M. Focal brain lesions to critical
locations cause widespread disruption of the modular organization of the brain.
J Cogn Neurosci. 2012;24:1275 1285.
156. Warren DE, Power JD, Bruss J, Denburg NL, Waldron EJ, Sun H, et al. Network
measures predict neuropsychological outcome after brain injury. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA. 2014;111:14247 14252.
157. Aron AR, Herz DM, Brown P, Forstmann BU, Zaghloul K. Frontosubthalamic
circuits for control of action and cognition. J Neurosci. 2016;36:11489–95.
158. Cole MW, Reynolds JR, Power JD, Repovs G, Anticevic A, Braver TS. Multi-task
connectivity reveals ﬂexible hubs for adaptive task control. Nat Neurosci.
2013;16:1348–55.
FUNDING INFORMATION
Supported by NIH grants MH121069 and NS086085 to VM, and MH63901 to MDE.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
VM and MDE wrote and edited the paper together.
COMPETING INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to V.M. or M.D’E.
Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/
reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
V. Menon and M. D’Esposito
103
Neuropsychopharmacology (2022) 47:90 – 103

