Related stories
• Wikipedians reach out to
academics
• Publish in Wikipedia or
perish
• The more, the wikier
Related stories
• Wikipedians reach out to
academics
• Publish in Wikipedia or
perish
• The more, the wikier
NATURE | NEWS
Wikipedia shapes language in science papers
Experiment traces how online encyclopaedia influences research write-ups.
Mark Zastrow
26 September 2017
Wikipedia is one of the world's most popular websites, but scientists rarely cite it in their papers.
Despite this, the online encyclopedia seems to be shaping the language that researchers use in
papers, according to an experiment showing that words and phrases in recently published Wikipedia
articles subsequently appeared more frequently in scientific papers1.
Neil Thompson, an innovation scholar at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cambridge, says
that this finding runs counter to an academic culture that downplays Wikipedia’s credibility as a
knowledge source. "Academia is fighting Wikipedia,” he says. Many universities, including his own,
warn students against citing the website as a source in assignments. But the study, posted on the
Social Science Research Network (SSRN) preprint server on 20 September and which Thompson co-
authored, shows how Wiki articles can serve as constantly updated open access review articles. “In its
best form, that’s what Wikipedia could be,” says Thompson.
Thompson and co-author Douglas Hanley, an economist at the University of Pittsburgh in
Pennsylvania, commissioned PhD students to write 43 chemistry articles on topics that weren’t yet on
Wikipedia. In January 2015, they published a randomized set of half of the articles to the site. The
other half, which served as control articles, weren’t uploaded.
Language mirror
By February 2017, the chemistry
articles had together received more
than 2 million views. The
researchers then analysed the text
of 50 of the highest-impact
chemistry journals published by
Elsevier to see whether the

language used in scientific papers had shifted by November 2016, nearly two years after the Wikipedia
articles were posted.
Using text-mining techniques to measure the frequency of words, they found that the language in the
scientific papers drifted over the study period as new terms were introduced into the field. This natural
drift equated to roughly one new term for every 250 words, Thompson told Nature. On top of those
natural changes in language over time, the authors found that, on average, another 1 in every 300
words in a scientific paper was influenced by language in the Wikipedia article.
The influence of Wikipedia was more apparent in less-cited journals than in the most well-known
publications. The authors suggest that ideas and language first published on topics entirely new to
science make their way into Wikipedia before feeding back into the literature in follow-up studies,
published in less-frequently cited journals. When the authors analysed papers by the author's country,
they found the effect was greater in lower-income countries compared to higher-income countries.
Hanley says some authors may be more reliant on Wikipedia if they have limited access to expensive
journals. In this way, Wikipedia serves as an equaliser, extending science to those with less resources,
he says.
Encourage site updates
Adam Dunn, a data scientist at Macquarie University in Sydney, Australia, calls the study’s randomized
controlled trial an “ingenious” idea. But he questions the authors’ claim that Wikipedia is shaping the
ideas of science. He thinks the study shows that scientists refer to Wikipedia as a way of standardizing
their language when they write papers. "It probably is showing an effect of Wikipedia, but I’m not sure
the claim is what they're suggesting,” he says.
But Pauline Zardo, who studies research translation and impact at the Queensland University of
Technology in Brisbane, Australia, says that words are symbols of thought, and, to some extent,
language reflects thinking. “What they're trying to do is really tricky. I don’t think you're going to get a
perfect method for this.” She praises the study, which has not yet been peer-reviewed, for pointing out
that academics also seek out material written for general audiences.
Thompson hopes that the study will encourage scientists to embrace Wikipedia and make it better.
One way to improve the site would be for journals or funding agencies to require scientists to
contribute to Wikipedia once their article is published, he says.

The journal RNA Biology has done just that for one its sections since 2008, mandating that authors put
RNA information updates on a set of Wiki-style pages that are automatically mirrored on Wikipedia.
Paul Gardner, the journal’s assistant editor-in-chief, based at the University of Canterbury in
Christchurch, New Zealand, says that students, professionals and academics seem to be accessing
and using the information — “we just haven’t rigorously sought to prove this, as Thompson and Hanley
appear to have done".
Nature
doi:10.1038/nature.2017.22656
References
1. Thompson, N. C. & Hanley, D. Preprint at http://ssrn.com/abstract=3039505 (2017).

