New Brunswick
Driver’s 
Handbook
New Brunswick Driver’s Handbook  |  A Guide to Learning Safe Driving Skills
DPSE


New Brunswick Driver’s Handbook
A Guide to Learning Safe Driving Skills
Published under the authority of the
Province of New Brunswick,
Department of Public Safety
P.O. Box 6000
Fredericton, NB  E3B 5H1
ISBN 1-55396-605-8
The Province of New Brunswick gratefully acknowledges the 
co-operation and assistance of Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance (SGI) in providing many of the illustrations and 
photos pictured in this manual. These graphics may not be 
reproduced without the permission of SGI.
Graphics and illustrations:
Ed Beaudry (SGI)
Ed Werthmann (CNB)
Photos:
Josh Sawka (SGI)
New Brunswick Images (CNB)
This document is distributed by Service New Brunswick 
on behalf of the Department of Public Safety
Additional copies of handbook are available at 
www.snb.ca
September 2011	
CNB 8245
78-9552

Message to the Motorist
Driving is such an important part of our culture here in New 
Brunswick, enabling us daily to meet our family, work and 
personal obligations, that we sometimes take our responsibility 
to driver safety somewhat for granted. It is helpful to recall that 
operating a motor vehicle is indeed a privilege that we share 
with over 500,000 other New Brunswickers, along with countless 
visitors to our province. The rules of the road only work to protect 
us if everyone follows them. That is why it is so important for new 
drivers to receive a proper grounding in the basics of road safety 
and why even experienced drivers must constantly be observant 
and work to improve their skills.
This handbook contains a solid overview of the laws you will be 
expected to follow, and the process for obtaining your license. It 
also includes a variety of helpful, safety-related motor vehicle and 
highway information.
I would urge all drivers to follow the essential safety rules; never 
drink and drive, always wear your seatbelt, adjust your speed to 
the conditions, avoid distractions while at the wheel, don't drive if 
you're too tired and be very careful at intersections.
If all drivers followed these simple rules it would dramatically 
reduce the number of collision-related deaths and injuries on our 
roadways. Drive safely and live. 
Charles A. O'Donnell
Registrar of Motor Vehicles
The contents of this booklet explain the motor vehicle related laws 
in New Brunswick using basic language and terms. For an exact 
expression of the law refer to the Motor Vehicle Act and Regulations.

9
Licensing of Drivers
1
1.	 LICENSING OF DRIVERS
Possession of a driver’s licence and the privilege of driving is a major 
responsibility. The Registrar of Motor Vehicles, under the authority of 
the Motor Vehicle Act issues, renews and suspends driver’s licences.
Every person who operates a motor vehicle in 
New Brunswick must demonstrate that he/
she has the qualifications necessary to safely 
operate a motor vehicle. A valid driver’s 
licence for the class of vehicle being operated 
is a requirement of the law. You must always 
carry your driver’s licence when operating a 
vehicle and must produce it for inspection 
on the request of any peace officer or 
display it on request to any other driver with  
whom you may be involved in a collision.
Note: As of June 1, 2009 all motorists in New Brunswick under the 
age of 21 must maintain a 0% Blood Alcohol Level while driving.

10
Licensing of Drivers
1
1.1 Types of Licences
Class 1
•	 Applicant must be at least 18 years of age.
•	 Applicant must meet medical standards before written test.
•	 Must pass vision screening (20/30 best eye; 20/50 weakest eye).
•	  Must pass written tests (basic - sign - supplementary).
•	 Must pass road test in a mechanically fit vehicle supplied by 
applicant that is included in the Class. Normally this will be a 
tractor-trailer combination. There are limited exceptions: (1) 
straight truck with flatbed trailer over 4,500 kg. gross vehicle 
mass; (2) straight truck with pole trailer; (3) truck used for 
towing mobile homes. These exceptions will be class 1 with 
Restriction 10 (not valid for tractor trailer).
Explanation
The Class 1 licence permits the holder to operate:
•	 Any motor vehicle which the holder of a Class 2, 3, 4 or 5 licence 
may operate.
•	 Any truck tractor.
•	 Any truck tractor towing a semi-trailer.
•	 Any truck tractor towing a semi-trailer and a trailer.
•	 Any truck tractor towing a trailer equipped with air brakes.
•	 Any truck towing a trailer equipped with air brakes.
•	 Must have air brake endorsement when driving any vehicle with 
air brakes and any vehicle towing a trailer with air brakes.

11
Licensing of Drivers
1
Class 2
•	 Applicant must be at least 18 years of age.
•	 Applicant must meet medical standards before written test.
•	 Must pass vision screening (20/30 best eye; 20/50 weakest eye).
•	 Must pass written tests (basic - signs- supplementary).
•	 Must pass road test in mechanically fit vehicle supplied by 
applicant that is included in this Class.
•	 Must have a B or C endorsement if driving a school bus.
•	 Must be at least 21 years of age and retested every 2 years for a 
school bus.
•	 Applicants between the ages of 60-65 must be retested yearly 
for school bus.
Explanation
The Class 2 licence permits the holder to operate:
•	 Any motor vehicle which the holder of a Class 3, 4 or 5 licence 
may operate.
•	 Any bus with a capacity of more than twenty-four (24) 
passengers.

12
Licensing of Drivers
1
Class 3
•	 Applicant must be at least 18 years of age.
•	 Applicant must meet medical standards before written test.
•	 Must pass vision screening (20/30 best eye; 20/50 weakest eye).
•	 Must pass written tests (basic - signs - supplementary test).
•	 Must pass road test in mechanically fit vehicle supplied by 
applicant that is included in this Class.
Explanation
The Class 3 licence permits the holder to operate:
•	 Any motor vehicle which the holder of a Class 5 licence may 
operate.
•	 Any two-axled motor vehicle towing a towed vehicle, the towed 
vehicle being registered for over 4,500 kg. gross vehicle mass 
but not equipped with air brakes.
•	 Any motor vehicle with three or more axles.
•	 Any motor vehicle with three or more axles, towing a towed 
vehicle not equipped with air brakes.
Class 3/4
Authorizes a person to 
drive any motor vehicle 
which the holder of a 
Class 3 or Class 4 licence 
may operate.
Class 4
•	 Applicant must be at least 18 years of age.
•	 Applicant must meet medical standards.
•	 Must pass vision screening (20/30 best eye; 20/50 weakest eye, 
before written test).
•	 Must pass written tests (basic - signs).
•	 Must pass road test in mechanically fit vehicle supplied by 
applicant that is included in this Class.
Explanation
The Class 4 licence permits the holder to operate:
•	 Any motor vehicle which the holder of a Class 5 licence may 
operate.
•	 Any ambulance.
•	 Any taxicab.
•	 Any bus with a capacity of less than twenty-five (25) 
passengers.

13
Licensing of Drivers
1
Class 5
•	 Applicant must be at least 18 years of age.
•	 Must pass vision screening (20/40 best eye).
•	 Must pass road test in mechanically fit vehicle supplied by the 
applicant that is included in this Class.
Explanation
Class 5 licence permits the holder to operate:
•	 Any two-axled motor vehicle, except taxi, ambulance, or bus.
•	 Any three-axled motor home.
•	 Any three axled motor vehicle, other than a truck, of a type 
designed for use in the construction, maintenance and repair of 
highways, whether or not the vehicle is to be so used.
•	 Any towed vehicle which is registered up to and including 4,500 
kg. gross vehicle mass behind a motor vehicle or motor home.
Class 6 (All Motorcycles)
•	 Applicant must be at least 16 years of age.
•	 Applicants under the age of 18 years must have parental 
consent form.
•	 Must pass vision screening (20/40 best eye).
•	 Must pass written tests (basic - signs - supplementary).
•	 Must pass road test on mechanically fit motorcycle.
•	 Must wear adequate protective headgear.
Explanation
The Class 6 licence permits the holder to operate a motorcycle and 
all vehicles included in Classes 6D and 9 on a street or highway.
Class 6D (Not to exceed 550 ccs)
•	 Applicant must be at least 16 years of age.
•	 Applicants under the age of 18 years must have parental 
consent form.
•	 Must pass vision screening (20/40 best eye).
•	 Must pass written tests (basic - signs - supplementary).
•	 Must pass road test on mechanically fit motorcycle.

14
Licensing of Drivers
1
Explanation
Class 6D licence authorizes you to operate a motorcycle up to and 
including 550 ccs and a Class 9 vehicle. Anything over this size 
requires a Class 6 licence.
Class 7 Graduated Licence (Level I and II)
This is an instructional type of licence for the driver to acquire 
experience, over a minimum of 24 months, before becoming a 
fully licensed driver. While the holder of a graduated licence, the 
driver must maintain 0% blood alcohol content while driving and 
any breach of this condition will result in a one year 
suspension, followed by a return to the beginning of 
the graduated licence period with no credit given for a 
previously passed road test or driver training course.
Suspension for loss of all points will result in at least 
a three month suspension followed by a return to the 
beginning of the graduated licence period with no credit given for 
a previously passed road test or driver training course.
•	 Applicant must be at least 16 years of age.
•	 Applicants under 18 years of age must have parental consent 
that must be witnessed by a non-relative.
•	 Must pass vision screening (20/40 best eye).
•	 Must pass written, basic and signs tests.
Explanation
Level 1
•	 Must be accompanied by only one passenger who has a Class 5 
or better licence, at least three years of driving experience and 
who is seated in the front passenger seat.
•	 Cannot drive between midnight and 5:00 a.m.
•	 Can be eligible to take the road test for Level 2 after eight 
months if graduated from a licensed driver training school or 
after 12 months if they have not.
Class 7 licence is issued for 
four years.
It is your responsibility  
to apply for a Class 5 Licence 
upon completion of a Class 7 
Graduated Licence (Level II)

15
Licensing of Drivers
1
Level 2
•	 If under 21, cannot drive between midnight and 5:00 a.m. except for 
education or work purposes or if they’re accompanied by a driver who has a 
Class 5 or better licence and at least three years driving experience. They can 
apply to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles for an exemption to this night time 
restriction for other reasons.
•	 Cannot have more than three passengers in their vehicle and no more than 
one passenger in the front seat.
Class 8
•	 Applicant must be at least 14 years of age.
•	 Applicants under 18 years of age must have parental consent 
form.
•	 Must pass vision screening (20/40 best eye).
•	 Must pass written tests (basic - signs).
Explanation
The Class 8 licence permits the holder to operate a farm tractor on a street or 
highway as well as on farmland.
Class 9
•	 Applicant must be at least 14 years of age.
•	 Applicant under 18 years of age must have parental consent form.
•	 Must pass vision screening (20/40 best eye).
•	 Must pass written tests (basic - signs) and supplementary.
•	 Must pass road test on a mechanically fit motor driven cycle.
•	 Must wear adequate protective headgear.
Explanation
The Class 9 licence permits the holder to operate a motor driven cycle and farm 
tractor on a street or highway. The motor driven cycle must be 50 ccs or under.
1.2 List of Possible Endorsements
A	 Valid for all motorcycles
B	 Valid for school buses
C	
Valid for school bus and motorcycle
D	 Valid for motorcycles up to and including 550 ccs
E	
Valid for air brake (plastic licence)

16
Licensing of Drivers
1
1.3 Learning to Drive Vehicles Requiring Higher 
Class Licences
Classes 5, 4, 3 and 2 are valid for learning to drive higher classes of 
vehicles; however you must be accompanied by a person who has 
a valid licence for that class of vehicle.
Also, you must have in your immediate possession a satisfactory 
medical certificate stamped by an authorized Driver Examiner.
1.4 Examination for Learner’s Licence
Before you, as a resident of New Brunswick, may obtain a learner’s 
licence, you must pass an examination to determine if you meet 
the required vision standards. You must also have an acceptable 
knowledge of road signs, rules of the road and safe driving 
practices. In addition, you must present one original or certified copy 
of a valid passport, birth certificate, or court order to verify your name 
and date of birth and two pieces of identification to verify your current 
address. Please contact Service New Brunswick for a complete list 
of acceptable documents. It may be a requirement for a parent or 
guardian to accompany you to verify your address. 
You must have the written consent of a parent or guardian 
before applying for a licence if you are less than 18 years of age. 
A consent form is provided at the back of this book and must be 
witnessed properly.
This written consent may be withdrawn by the parent or guardian 
at any time prior to age 18, by making written application to the 
Registrar of Motor Vehicles who may then cancel the licence.
Vision Test
If it is found that you need visual correction in order 
to drive safely, you will be advised accordingly and 
no further testing can occur and a licence cannot 
be issued to you until you obtain the necessary 
correction. When a driver’s licence is issued, it will 
display the appropriate restriction “Valid only while 
licence holder is wearing proper visual correction”.
There is a separate fee for 
both written and road tests 
and an additional fee for the 
Learner’s Licence. Check with 
Service New Brunswick for  
the amounts.

17
Licensing of Drivers
1
Road Sign Recognition Test
You will be given a written or oral examination on your ability to 
recognize and understand the meaning of highway road signs. This 
test consists of twenty (20) signs. To pass, you must correctly match 
sixteen (16), with the exception of “stop”, “yield” and “school ahead” 
which are mandatory.
Rules Test
You will be given a written or oral examination on the traffic laws 
and rules for safe driving as contained in this book. The written 
exam consists of twenty (20) multiple choice questions. To pass, 
you must answer sixteen (16) correctly. Although this guide offers 
measurements in both Metric and Imperial systems, the written test 
refers only to the Metric system.
1.5 Examination for Driver’s Licence
Note: Appointments for testing can only be booked through Service 
New Brunswick Teleservices (1-888-762-8600)  
You must pass a driving examination to determine whether you are 
qualified to operate a motor vehicle safely before you can be issued 
a driver’s licence. These examinations are conducted by a Driver 
Examiner who also indicates the areas of your driving which need 
further improvement and stresses the importance of your attitude as a 
determining factor in safe driving.
Driving Test
This is an examination to test your actual driving skills and your ability 
to operate a vehicle safely while abiding by the rules of the Motor 
Vehicle Act. You must come to the examination office with a vehicle 
that is in good mechanical condition, preferably the one which you 
expect to operate after you obtain your driver’s licence. (You must 
have the valid motor vehicle registration and insurance card to show 
the Examiner upon request). As part of the road test, the vehicle will 
be checked by the Examiner to ensure that it meets the standards set 
out under the Motor Vehicle Act. The road test will not be conducted if 
the vehicle is not in satisfactory mechanical condition.

18
Licensing of Drivers
1
During the driving test, do not talk unnecessarily to the Examiner 
who will be busy giving instructions, observing your performance 
and recording your score. No tricks will be played on you. The 
Examiner will not ask you to do anything which is a violation 
of the law. The purpose of the exam is to determine if you can 
operate a motor vehicle well enough to receive a driver’s licence.
The driving test includes such operations as:
1.	 Stopping and starting, both on a level road and on a hill.
2.	 Changing gears in vehicles not having automatic 
transmissions, both on a level road and on a hill.
3.	 Making left and right turns.
4.	 Backing.
5.	 Following another vehicle properly.
6.	 Giving proper signals.
7.	 Parallel and/or angle parking.
8.	 Observing and complying with traffic control devices (signs, 
signals and pavement markings).
The examination will be conducted over a course of at least 3 km, 
and when possible, will be conducted in fairly dense traffic. The 
exam also tests your ability to apply your knowledge of the rules of 
the road, recognition of road signs, visual perception, etc.
You may know every safe driving rule, may have adequate vision 
and other physical abilities and may exhibit the most exemplary 
attitude, but until you show your ability and skill in an actual 
driving test, you have not proven that you are competent to 
operate a motor vehicle safely upon the highway.
The following is a sample of the road test evaluation form used by 
the examiner while conducting a driving test. If you are learning 
to drive, it may help you to have your teacher grade you, using this 
form. As a driver, you have developed certain driving habits. Why not 
have your licensed passenger verify your driving?

19
Licensing of Drivers
1
A. VEHICLE HANDLING
	
Pass	
Fail	
Needs-Training
Starting	
____	
____	
____
Remarks
Backing	
____	
____	
____
Remarks
Parking	
____	
____	
____
Remarks
Starting from curb	
____	
____	
____
Remarks
Stopping from upgrade	 ____	
____	
____
Remarks
Posture	
____	
____	
____
Remarks
B. TRAFFIC CONDTIONS
	
Pass	
Fail	
Needs-Training
Following	
____	
____	
____
Remarks
Passing	
____	
____	
____
Remarks
Being passed	
____	
____	
____
Remarks
Use of horn	
____	
____	
____
Remarks
Right of way	
____	
____	
____
Remarks

20
Licensing of Drivers
1
C. ROAD TEST
	
Pass	
Fail	
Needs-Training
Stop signs	
____	
____	
____
Remarks
Traffic lights	
____	
____	
____
Remarks
Left turns	
____	
____	
____
Remarks
Left turn from  
one way street	
____	
____	
____
Remarks
Right turn	
____	
____	
____
Remarks
Blind intersection	
____	
____	
____
Remarks
Multiple lanes	
____	
____	
____
Remarks
Other signs	
____	
____	
____
Remarks
Attention	
____	
____	
____
Remarks
One-way street	
____	
____	
____
Remarks
Road Test Summary
At the end of the test the examiner will explain the ways in which 
your driving skills require improvement and will advise you on 
how to improve.

21
Licensing of Drivers
1
Re-examination After Failure
If you do not pass the examination, the Examiner will advise you of the 
reasons for your failure and you will be asked to return after further study 
and more practical road experience.
Minimum waiting periods are as follows:
First Failure - one week
Second Failure - two weeks
Third Failure - three weeks
If you have not successfully completed the required test after a period of six 
months, the written exam must be completed again.
Restrictions
If you are unable to pass the complete examination without some type of 
special equipment, or if you were not tested in a vehicle that allowed you to 
operate all vehicles covered by the class of licence being issued, or if there 
was a medical requirement imposed, your licence will restrict you to driving 
with such equipment or other limitations.
Possible restrictions are:
1.	 Must wear corrective lenses.
2.	 Vehicle must be equipped with side view mirrors.
3.	 Vehicle must be equipped with hand controls.
4.	 Vehicle must be equipped with automatic transmission.
5.	 Steering wheel must be equipped with steering knob.
6.	 Restricted to Daylight Driving Only. 
7.	 Combination of Restrictions 1 and 2.
8.	 Combination of Restrictions 3 and 4.
9.	 Combination of Restrictions 4 and 5.
10.	 Head Office Restriction – Contact Head Office
•	
Automatic Transmission: Commercial and Bus 
•	
Not Valid for Tractor Trailers 
•	
Not Valid for Ambulance
•	
Not Valid: Ambulance/Bus < 25 Passengers
11.	 Medical Restriction – Contact Head Office
12	 valid in NB only
15	 for work only
16.	 Ignition Interlock
21.	 Motor Driven Cycle and Farm Tractor
22.	 medical purposes only
23.	 O% Blood Alcohol Level while driving until (age 21).
W.	 Commercial – Canada Only

22
Licensing of Drivers
1
Expiry Date
An individual’s driver’s licence expires on the licensee’s birthday in 
the year of expiration.
Change of Address
Drivers are required by law to advise the Motor Vehicle Branch of 
any change in address within ten (10) days.
Change of Name
Drivers are required by law to advise the Motor Vehicle Branch of 
any change in name within ten (10) days.
Renewal of Licence
When renewing your driver’s licence you must notify the Motor 
Vehicle Branch of:
1.	Any changes in your physical or mental condition which might 
limit or alter your ability to operate a vehicle (some examples 
are heart condition, mental condition, mental breakdown, 
eye diseases, limbs, diabetes or conditions resulting in loss of 
consciousness); and
2.	Revocation or suspension. 
Doctors and Optometrists are required by law to report anything 
that would affect the driving ability of their patient.
Failure to provide this information may prohibit renewal of driving 
privileges. The renewal application form should be carefully read 
before signing.

23
Licensing of Drivers
1
1.6 How You May Lose Your Driving Privilege
The Registrar MUST suspend your driving privileges for any of the 
following reasons:
a)	 When a total of ten points is assessed against your driving 
record (other than a newly licensed driver).
b)	 When a newly licensed driver loses all points credited to him/
her.
c)	 Upon conviction for operating or permitting operation of a 
motor vehicle that is uninsured.
d)	 When any points are assessed against an unlicensed driver or a 
non-resident unlicensed driver.
e)	 A conviction for altering a licence.
Newly Licensed Driver Point Suspension
A newly licensed driver means any driver who has been licensed 
for less than four years.
Every driver in this category is credited with four points after being 
issued with a licence. A further two points will be credited to these 
drivers each subsequent year to a maximum of ten points.
When a newly licensed driver loses all points he/she will be 
suspended by the Registrar.
Ten (10) Point Suspension
Every driver, other than a newly licensed driver, is included in this 
category for suspension purposes.
Three points accumulated in any way is the signal for a warning 
letter to be issued. After loss of seven (7) points, a second letter 
is sent from the Registrar advising that further loss of points 
could result in the suspension of your driver’s licence. Ten (10) 
accumulated points incur automatic suspension.
No demerit points remain on a driver’s record for more than two 
years from the date of convictions. Thus the points accumulated 
on any particular day will be removed from the driver’s record two 
years later, providing ten (10) points have not been accumulated 
within a two year period which resulted in a suspension.

24
Licensing of Drivers
1
Appeals
Suspension of driving privileges for the first time in three years for 
loss of all points for offences under the Motor Vehicle Act may be 
appealed to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles.
Suspension of driving privileges as the result of a first conviction of 
a Criminal Code offence in three years may be appealed to a Judge 
of the Court of Queen’s Bench.
The Registrar or the Courts cannot recommend reinstatement of 
a licence unless the applicant’s appeal application states that the 
ability to operate a motor vehicle is essential in avoiding the loss 
of the applicant’s livelihood.
The filing of an application does not guarantee the reinstatement 
of one’s driving privileges.
No appeal can be processed by the Court while a prohibition order 
is in force.
Suspension of Driving Privilege
Suspensions resulting from accumulation of demerit points for 
offenses under the Motor Vehicle Act are for a period of three 
months.
Suspensions resulting from a first conviction under the Criminal 
Code for the following offenses is twelve months for the first 
conviction, second or subsequent convictions within a three year 
period – twenty-four (24) months, fines are from $300.00 to 
$2,000.00.
1.	 Criminal negligence;
2. 	 Dangerous operation of a motor vehicle;
3.	 Driving while disqualified.
The suspension for the first alcohol related Criminal Code 
conviction is one year, second conviction is three years and third or 
subsequent conviction is five years.
Suspension for any other Criminal Code conviction involving the 
use of a motor vehicle - six months, second or subsequent offence 
within three years - twelve months.

25
Licensing of Drivers
1
Suspensions for a conviction for failing to stop when requested 
by a peace officer or continuing to avoid a peace officer who is 
pursuing him/her – suspension can be for a period up to three 
years, imposed by the court.
Suspensions resulting from a conviction under the Motor Vehicle 
Act for driving while suspended are twelve months for the first 
conviction and twenty-four months for the second or subsequent 
conviction within three years.
Reinstatement
Licences so suspended may be reinstated after the suspension 
period imposed has elapsed providing certain conditions have 
been satisfied.
After a suspension for loss of points for offenses under the Motor 
Vehicle Act, you must pay a reinstatement fee.
After a suspension for conviction under the Criminal Code involving 
alcohol, you must take a Drinking & Driving Re-Education Course 
and pay a reinstatement fee.
In some cases, after the period of suspension is completed, the 
driver regains his/her licence “on probation” for one year. Any 
conviction during the year’s probation will automatically bring into 
effect additional periods of suspension.
IN ALL CASES WHERE A LICENCE HAS BEEN SUSPENDED, IT REMAINS 
SUSPENDED UNTIL REINSTATED BY THE REGISTRAR REGARDLESS OF THE 
FACT THAT THE TERM OF SUSPENSION HAS EXPIRED.
Financial Responsibility
A driver involved in a collision in which a person is injured 
(even slightly) or killed or the total property damage amounts 
to $1,000.00 or more must be able to prove his/her financial 
responsibility at the time of the collision. The accepted proof is a 
New Brunswick Liability Insurance Card, issued by an authorized 
insurance company, showing that public liability and property 
damage coverage has been issued on behalf of the driver or the 
owner of the vehicle.

26
Licensing of Drivers
1
The Registrar, on receipt of a collision report that does not show 
that the owner or driver has financial responsibility, must suspend 
the motor vehicle privileges of the owner and operator and cancel 
all registrations and licences of both the owner and driver. Before 
reinstatement can be made, proof of financial responsibility for the 
future must be filed with the Registrar of Motor Vehicles.
Point System
The point system is designed to protect drivers (and most drivers 
are careful) against the dangers of sharing the highways with 
those who cause collisions. The system imposes no hardship on 
safe drivers - but it is strict on law violators!
Nearly every collision is caused by someone who breaks a traffic 
law. When traffic laws are obeyed, collision rates drop. Good 
drivers can then drive with greater safety.
How it Operates
The point system has proven to be beneficial in many jurisdictions. 
In New Brunswick, it provides a graduated number of demerit 
points for traffic convictions of different levels of seriousness. 
The violator loses his/her licence when his/her total demerits 
demonstrate he/she is a greater danger to others on the highway.
Suspension resulting from an accumulation of demerit points 
remains in effect for three months.
Some examples of point loss 
offences are provided:
•	 For any offence under the 
Criminal Code involving the use 
of a motor vehicle 
	
… ……………  10 points
•	 For failure to report a collision 
	
… ……………  5 points
•	 For driving without due care 
	
… ……………  5 points
•	 For speeding more than 25 
km (15 miles) over speed limit 
	
… ……………  5 points
•	 For speeding 25 km (15 
miles) per hour or less over 
speed limit 
	
… ……………  3 points
•	 For any offence under the 
Motor Vehicle Act or local by-law 
involving the use of a motor 
vehicle in motion 
	
… ……………  3 points
•	 For unlawful parking with 
view obstructed 
	
… ……………  3 points
•	 For unlawful parking without 
view obstructed 
	
… ……………  2 points
•	 For any offence under the 
Motor Vehicle Act involving the 
equipment of a motor vehicle 
	
… ……………  2 points
•	 For driver not properly 
wearing a seat belt: 
	
… ……………  2 points
•	 For unlawful parking in a 
zone reserved for the disabled 
	
… ……………  2 points

27
Licensing of Drivers
1
1.7 Driver Improvement Re-education
The Registrar, at any time, may require any driver to be 
re-examined if there is a question about the driver’s physical 
condition or driving ability. If a re-examination is required due 
to a poor driving record (collisions, convictions, etc.) it will be 
conducted by a Driver Examiner.
Although the re-examination is basically the same as the 
qualifying examination, this test is designed to correct and 
improve any areas of the driving skills that are below set standards 
for the safe operation of a motor vehicle.
From the results of the re-examination the Registrar will consider 
whatever further driver improvement action is necessary. If a 
medical condition appears to be contributing to an individual’s 
driving problems, a medical report may be required. This medical 
report is reviewed by the Medical Advisory Board on driver 
licensing and its recommendation is provided to the Registrar. 
Under Section 309 of the Motor Vehicle Act, a driver may be totally 
retested to see if the medical reason affects the driving ability of 
the person.

28
Registration of Vehicles
2
2.	 REGISTRATION OF VEHICLES
2.1 Certificate of Registration
The owner of every motor vehicle, trailer or 
semi-trailer, who intends to operate that vehicle 
upon any highway in New Brunswick, must 
obtain registration for that vehicle by applying 
to Service New Brunswick. The registration 
permit or a photocopy must be carried by the 
driver while operating the vehicle. 
2.2 Plates are Property of the Crown
Plates and permits remain the property of the Crown and must be 
surrendered upon demand. Found plates should be delivered to 
Service New Brunswick or forwarded to Motor Vehicle Branch,  
P. O. Box 6000, Fredericton, NB E3B 5H1
2.3 Plates Must Be Legible
Licence plates must be securely fastened to the 
front and rear of the vehicle in such a position and 
condition as to be clearly legible and the rear plate 
must be lighted at night.
2.4 Owner Responsible for Plates
You are responsible for the custody of licence plates or validation 
stickers issued to you for the current year and must immediately 
notify Service New Brunswick when they are no longer in your 
possession. There is a nominal fee for replacing lost plates and 
stickers.

29
Registration of Vehicles
2
2.5 Transfer of Plates
The plates are issued to a particular vehicle and cannot be transferred 
to another. Exceptions are made for the owners of personalized, 
conservation, and specialty plates i.e. : fire-fighter, amateur radio and 
veteran’s plates.
2.6 Offence to Alter Numbers
It is an offence under the Motor Vehicle Act to alter or deface any 
of the identifying serial/vehicle identification numbers of a motor 
vehicle. Changes in chassis or body of a motor vehicle must be 
recorded with the Motor Vehicle Branch.
2.7 Non-Residents
A passenger vehicle owned by a visitor may be operated for 
personal, non-business purposes for a period of six months in New 
Brunswick without being registered in the Province. This six month 
period is determined from the date on which the passenger motor 
vehicle was first operated in New Brunswick in any registration 
year.
A person who becomes a resident of New Brunswick must register 
his/her vehicle with Service New Brunswick immediately.
2.8 Transfer of Ownership
Transfer of ownership is by process of law. The signature of the 
registered owner is required on the certificate of registration. 
The purchaser’s name, address and date of birth are required on 
the transfer document. The registration certificate is required to 
be surrendered and transferred to the purchaser’s name at any 
issuing office. The collection of sales tax and motor vehicle fees 
are required at time of transfer. The vehicle cannot be driven or 
permitted to be driven until the registration certificate is recorded 
in the new purchaser’s name.
In the case of the death of 
the registered owner, the 
vehicle may be driven to the 
residence or place of business  
of the person entitled  
to the vehicle.

30
Registration of Vehicles
2
2.9 Transit Markers
This is a temporary permit to move an 
unregistered vehicle from one place to another 
and is valid for twenty-four hours. This permit 
is also issued to move a vehicle, on which the 
inspection sticker has expired, to an inspection 
station. The applicant must show proof of 
insurance anytime the motor vehicle is being 
operated.
2.10 Expiry Dates
Registrations for passenger type vehicles and light commercial 
vehicles are staggered and expire on various days during the 
month. Plates for large commercial vehicles can expire on the last 
day of any quarter during the year. Commercial prorate plates are 
staggered and expire on the last day of a month. All-terrain plates 
expire December 31st. All other registrations expire March 31st.
2.11 Persons With Disabilities
Placards must be hung on the rear-view mirror when the 
vehicle is parked in a designated space. The person, for whom 
the placard was issued, must be getting in or out of the vehicle, 
at that stop, or the reserved parking space may not be used. An 
application form must be completed in order for the disabled 
person to receive a placard. If the disability is visible, the placard 
is issued immediately but, if not, the application requires a 
physician's verification. 
A placard is valid for a maximum period of five 
years. A permit is provided to the disabled person 
when the placard is issued. This permit must be 
carried by the placard holder. Placards and 
permits must be surrendered when no 
longer needed. Placards are issued only for 

31
Registration of Vehicles
2
the use of the designated person and may not be loaned to 
anyone else, for any reason.
Drivers who do not hold placards should respect the proper 
use of the designated parking spaces. A person who parks in a 
designated parking space without displaying a valid placard can be 
charged under the Motor Vehicle Act, which also provides for the 
loss of demerit points.
It is important to remember to remove the placard before driving.
2.12 Cancellation of Registration
The Registrar of Motor Vehicles may cancel any registration 
whenever it is deemed expedient. Registration may be cancelled 
and plates ordered returned to the Motor Vehicle Branch as 
provided under the Act.
Motor vehicle permits may be revoked or suspended:
1.	 When the Branch determines that the vehicle is unsafe or 
unfit to be operated or is not equipped as required by law.
2.	 When the vehicle is used for any unlawful purpose or when 
the owner permits it to be used by a person not entitled to  
use it.

32
Registration of Vehicles
2
2.13 Motor Vehicle Safety Inspection
All registered motor vehicles and trailers must undergo a yearly 
safety inspection at an official inspection station. These stations 
are situated in all localities of the Province and will conduct a 
prescribed safety inspection in accordance with Motor Vehicle 
Inspection Regulations. The inspection must be carried out under 
the supervision of a licensed mechanic. The inspection station 
will issue a motor vehicle inspection report form to you. This form 
should be retained in your vehicle.
Inspection stickers issued during the month in which a vehicle was 
inspected will be valid until the end of that month in the following 
year. A newly purchased vehicle cannot be re-registered unless it 
bears a valid inspection sticker. The Registrar or any peace officer 
may order a vehicle to be reinspected at any time.
A period of fourteen (14) days in which to obtain an inspection 
is permitted for out-of-province vehicles being registered in New 
Brunswick. There is a reciprocal agreement with Nova Scotia 
and Prince Edward Island whereby their inspection stickers are 
honoured.
The owner or operator of a “rejected vehicle” has fourteen (14) 
days from the date of rejection to have defects corrected and 
the vehicle reinspected. This does not permit the operation of an 
unsafe vehicle during this time.
An inspection sticker which has become defaced may be replaced 
for a nominal fee upon proof of inspection at any inspection 
station. The motor vehicle inspection report must be produced for 
this purpose.

33
Equipment
3
3.	 EQUIPMENT 
This section deals with mandatory and optional equipment for 
your vehicle as well as suggestions for safer road use. 
3.1 Lights 
No person shall drive a vehicle on a highway at nighttime or any 
other time when there is not sufficient light to render clearly 
discernible persons and vehicles on the highway at a distance of 
150 meters (500 feet) unless the vehicle is equipped with and 
displays lighted lamps and illuminating devices as required for the 
class of vehicle so driven. 
Headlamps 
Every motor vehicle, except a motorcycle 
or motor driven cycle, must have at least 
two headlights displaying white light. 
One must be attached to each side of the 
vehicle not more than 140 centimetres 
(55 inches) from the ground and not less 
than 60 centimetres (24 inches). They 
must have an upper beam that clearly 
shows ahead for 100 metres (330 feet) 
and a lower beam that shows 30 metres 
(100 feet).
Lights must be dimmed within 150 
metres (500 feet) of an approaching 
vehicle. When following another vehicle 
within 60 metres (200 feet) the lower 
beam must be used except when in the 
act of passing. It is permissible for a 
vehicle to be equipped and operated with 
an auxiliary lamp or spot lamp providing 
the total intensity does not exceed 300 
candle power.
High beams
Low beams
Low beams

34
Equipment
3
Motor Cycle Lamps
Every motorcycle must be equipped with at least one and not 
more than three head lamps displaying white light. The light must 
be strong enough to reveal a person or vehicle at 100 metres (330 
feet) when speed is 60 km (35 miles) per hour or more. The lamp 
or lamps must be aimed so that the high intensity portion does 
not project higher than the level of the centre of the lamp at a 
distance of 750 centimetres (25 feet).
Rear Lamps
Every motor vehicle, trailer, etc. and the last vehicle in a train of 
vehicles must have at least two red tail lights mounted one on 
either side of the rear of the vehicle at a height of not more than 
183 centimetres (72 inches) and not less than 38 centimetres (15 
inches). This light must be visible from a distance of 150 metres 
(500 feet) to the rear. Every vehicle must be equipped with a 
white light to illuminate the rear licence plate and make it clearly 
readable at a distance of 15 metres (50 feet).
Clearance Lamps and Reflectors
Every bus or truck must have on the rear two red reflectors and 
one stop light.
Every commercial vehicle, semi-trailer or trailer 2 metres (80 
inches) or more in width must have in addition to the above:
a)	 On the front, one amber clearance lamp on each side. 
b)	 On the rear and as high as practical a red clearance lamp on 
each side. 
c)	 On each side an amber reflector at or near the front and one 
red near the rear. 
d)	 Mud flaps mounted immediately behind the rear wheels. 
e)	 In the vehicle, three flares, electric lanterns or portable 
reflectors capable of reflecting red light for a distance of 150 
metres (500 feet) under normal nighttime conditions. They 
must also carry two red cloth flags at least 30 centimetres (12 
inches) square.

35
Equipment
3
Stop Lamps (Brake Lights) 
Motor vehicles operated on a highway must be equipped with 
a red stop lamp or lamps. This lamp must be plainly visible and 
understandable from a distance of 30 metres (100 feet) to the rear 
both during daylight and darkness.
Signal Devices
Any motor vehicle may be equipped with a lamp or lamps 
or mechanical signal devices capable of clearly indicating an 
intention to turn either to the right or to the left, such signal 
devices being visible both from the front and the rear.
A signal lamp or lamps indicating intention to turn must be visible 
during daylight and darkness from a distance of 30 metres (100 
feet) both to the front and to the rear.
Lamps on Parked Vehicles
Whenever a vehicle is parked or stopped upon a roadway or 
shoulder any time when there is not sufficient light to see persons 
and vehicles at a distance of 150 metres (500 feet), it must be 
equipped with one or more lighted lamps that exhibit white or 
amber light on the roadway side which can be seen for 150 metres 
(500 feet) to the front of the vehicle and a lighted lamp visible 
from a distance of 150 metres (500 feet) to the rear.
Daytime Running Lights
Beginning with the model year 1990 all new vehicles must 
be equipped with daytime running lights which activate 
automatically. A vehicle using these lights is more easily seen by 
other motorists, pedestrians and cyclists.
Older vehicles may be modified to produce automatic daytime 
running lights.
If your vehicle is not equipped with daytime running lights, it is 
suggested that you use your headlights at all times.

36
Equipment
3
Stop Lights
It is suggested that all motor vehicles be equipped with a “stop” 
light. This light must be so constructed and placed where it will 
give a red signal to the rear of the vehicle which is plainly visible in 
normal sunlight from a distance of 100 metres (330 feet). The stop 
light may or may not be the same as the rear lamp unit.
Flashing or Revolving Lights
The use of flashing or revolving lights on motor vehicles is 
restricted.
A flashing or revolving red light visible from the front and rear may 
only be used on: (1) ambulance; (2) a police or fire department 
vehicle; (3) a school bus while taking on or unloading passengers.
A school bus may be equipped with flashing amber lights. 
In addition, flashing amber lights may be used on a vehicle 
transporting explosives or a motor vehicle towing a wide trailer.
Four Way Flashers
When a vehicle is equipped with a switch permitting the parking 
and tail lights to flash, the flashing lights can be used when the 
vehicle is parked on the highway or any portion thereof due to 
an emergency or under circumstances beyond the control of the 
driver.
Spot Lamps
Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than one spot 
light but it must never be so aimed that it shines directly on or 
within 30 metres (100 feet) in front of an approaching vehicle.
Fog Lamps
Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than two fog 
lamps and they can only be used when headlights of the vehicle 
are on low beam.

37
Equipment
3
3.2 Brakes
Every motor vehicle must be equipped with an adequate foot 
brake and an emergency brake in good working order.
3.3 Horn
Every motor vehicle must be equipped with a horn in good 
working order that can be heard for a distance of not less than 60 
metres (200 feet) but a horn must not emit an unreasonably loud 
or harsh sound or whistle. The horn should be sounded whenever 
it is necessary to ensure safe operation of a vehicle or to give 
warning of the approach of a vehicle.
Except for authorized emergency vehicles, no siren, whistle or bell 
is to be used.
3.4 Mirror
Every motor vehicle must be equipped with a mirror so located 
as to reflect to the driver a view of the highway for a distance of 
at least 60 metres (200 feet) to the rear of such vehicle. Portable 
door or fender mirrors are illegal when not towing trailer or other 
vehicle.
3.5 Windshields and Windows
All windshields and windows must be kept clear of any signs, 
posters or other non-transparent material which obstruct the 
driver’s clear view of the highway or any intersecting highway.
3.6 Ornaments
No person is permitted to drive a motor vehicle on the highway 
having any ornaments or decorations, either inside or outside of 
the vehicle, located so that they obstruct the vision or distract the 
attention of the driver.

38
Equipment
3
3.7 Windshield Wipers
Windshield wipers shall be maintained in good  
working order.
3.8 Slow Moving Vehicle
Except when directly crossing the highway, every farm tractor 
and self-propelled implement of husbandry and any other type 
of vehicle prescribed by Regulation, when operated on a highway 
or any vehicle towed by them, shall have a slow moving vehicle 
emblem as prescribed by the Registrar attached to the rear thereof 
in accordance with the Regulations.
3.9 Mufflers
Every motor vehicle must be equipped with a muffler and exhaust 
pipes in good working order and in constant operation to prevent 
excessive or unusual noise. No person is allowed to use a muffler 
cut-out,  
by-pass or similar device, upon a motor vehicle on  
the highway.
3.10 Speedometer
Every motor vehicle must be equipped with a speedometer in 
good working condition so as to show the speed at which the 
vehicle is travelling.
3.11 Height, Width and Length of Vehicle
A vehicle without a special permit may not exceed a total outside 
width, including load, of 260 centimetres (102 inches), a height of 
415 centimetres (13 feet, 6 inches); in the case of a two or three 
axle vehicle which is 12.5 metres (40.6 feet) in length and in the 
case of a combination of vehicles coupled together, a length of 23 
metres (75.5 feet) limited to two trailers while being hauled by a 
truck-tractor.

39
Equipment
3
3.12 Studded Tires
It is permissible to use studded snow tires of a type approved by 
the Registrar at any time except during the period commencing on 
the first day of May and ending on the fifteenth day of October in 
every year. The use of studded tires may cause more of a skid in an 
emergency stop than rubber tires depending on road conditions.
3.13 Disabled Vehicles
Where a motor vehicle is disabled on a highway at nighttime, the 
operator shall forthwith place a portable reflector unit or standard 
at a distance of approximately 30 metres (100 feet) to the rear of 
the motor vehicle at or near the edge of the roadway. 
The driver of a truck over 2 metres (80 inches) wide, passenger 
bus, motor vehicle towing a house trailer or a truck tractor is 
required to display three reflector units, one beside the vehicle, 
one 30 metres (100 feet) to the rear and the third 30 metres 
(100 feet) ahead of the disabled vehicle. A Safety Red Triangle is 
recognized as a portable reflector unit.
3.14 Safety Chain
Trailers and other objects or devices drawn by a motor vehicle on 
a highway must have a secondary means of attachment to the 
towing vehicle in the form of a “safety chain”. The safety chain 
should not be attached to the hitch but to the frame/bumper 
portion of the vehicle.

40
Rules of the Road
4
4.	 TRAFFIC ON THE HIGHWAY – RULES 
OF THE ROAD
It is an offence for any person to fail to comply with an order, a 
signal or a direction of a peace officer or to fail to observe the 
instructions of any official traffic sign or signal except when 
otherwise directed by a peace officer.
4.1 Collisions
The driver of any vehicle involved in a collision causing death or 
injury to any person or property damage must stop at the scene of 
the collision, give his/her name, address, the registration number 
of his/her vehicle along with the liability insurance card and show 
his/her driver’s licence to the person struck or to occupants of any 
vehicle collided with or to a witness and shall render all reasonable 
assistance to any injured person.
First at the Scene
Remember, handling the injured must be avoided unless there is 
added danger of being struck by oncoming motorists.
Emergency Vehicles
Upon the approach from either direction of any authorized 
emergency vehicle giving an audible signal by way of bell or 
siren and visual by flashing red lights, the driver of all vehicles 
must immediately drive to the right hand curb and must stop and 
remain stopped until the emergency vehicle has passed, unless 
otherwise directed by a peace officer.
Reporting Collisions
Collisions resulting in death or injury to any person, or total 
property damage to an apparent extent of $1,000.00 or more 
must be reported immediately to the nearest office of the Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police or if in a town or city, to a member of 
the local police.
Radar Detectors
Both possession and  
use of radar detectors  
is illegal in  
New Brunswick.

41
Rules of the Road
4
Collision reports must be forwarded to the Registrar of Motor 
Vehicles within 24 hours.
The Registrar of Motor Vehicles is authorized to suspend the 
operating privileges of any person failing to report a collision.
Financial Responsibility
A driver involved in a collision in which a person is injured, even 
slightly, or killed, or when the total property damage amounts 
to $1,000.00 or more, must be able to prove his/her financial 
responsibility at the time of the collision. The accepted proof is a 
New Brunswick Liability Insurance Card, issued by an authorized 
insurance company, showing that public liability and property 
damage coverage has been issued on behalf of the driver or the 
owner of the vehicle.
The Registrar, on receipt of a collision report that does not show 
the owner or driver has financial responsibility, must suspend the 
motor vehicle privileges of the owner and operator and cancel all 
registrations and licence against both the owner and driver. Before 
reinstatement can be made, proof of financial responsibility for the 
future must be filed with the Registrar of Motor Vehicles.

42
Rules of the Road
4
4.2 Speed Restrictions
Where no speed hazard exists that require lower speed, the speed 
limits on provincial streets and highways are:
a)	 50 km (30 miles) per hour in any urban district;
b)	 80 km (50 miles) per hour in other locations or as otherwise 
posted.
This means that a driver apprehended at speeds in excess of those 
noted above is committing an offence.
OTHER SPEED LIMITS MAY BE INDICATED FOR CERTAIN SECTIONS OF THE 
HIGHWAYS BY SIGNS ERECTED BY ORDER OF THE TRAFFIC AUTHORITY AND 
THESE POSTED LIMITS MAY NOT BE EXCEEDED.
No person is permitted to operate a vehicle upon any highway 
at such a speed as to endanger the life, limb or property of any 
person, including his/her own.
4.3 Slow Drivers
It is an offence under the Act for any person to drive at such a slow 
speed as to block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, 
except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation.
Should a driver find it necessary to drive at a slow speed on the 
open highway, he/she must always keep well to the right and 
occasionally look back to see if traffic is being slowed down and if 
so, the driver must pull off the road and give the traffic a chance 
to pass.
To delay traffic is a discourteous and illegal act and greatly 
increases the chance of a collision. The “road hog” is a menace 
almost as great as those who drive too fast for conditions.

43
Rules of the Road
4
4.4 Overtaking
Except when overtaking and where passing on the right is 
permitted, the driver of an overtaken vehicle must move to the 
right in favour of the overtaking vehicle upon hearing audible 
signal and shall not increase the speed of his/her vehicle until 
completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
It is an offence to pass another vehicle on the right except when:
a)	 overtaking a vehicle making a left turn or signalling a left 
turn;
b)	 on a one way street;
c)	 on streets and highways marked for multi-lanes going in the 
same direction.
Extreme care should be taken in the above situations because 
other drivers may swerve over to the right without warning. You 
must not drive off the roadway onto the shoulder to pass 
another vehicle.
It is unlawful for a vehicle to be driven to the left side of the 
roadway under the following circumstances:
a)	 When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the 
highway where the driver’s view is obstructed within such 
distance as to create a hazard in the event another vehicle 
might approach from the opposite direction.
b)	 When approaching within 30 metres (100 feet) of or crossing 
any intersection or railroad grade crossing; or
c)	 When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 30 
metres (100 feet) of any bridge, viaduct or tunnel).

44
Rules of the Road
4
4.5 School Zones, School Buses and  
Construction Zones
If you are approaching a school bus from the front or the rear that 
has stopped to take on or discharge passengers as indicated by 
flashing red lights, you must bring your vehicle to a full stop not 
less than 5 metres (16 feet) in front or rear of the school bus and 
wait while passengers are embarking or 
disembarking and you shall not proceed 
until the school bus resumes motion or 
until signalled by the school bus driver to 
proceed.
When driving in a school zone, you must 
take extra caution and reduce speed. 
Recent amendments to the Motor Vehicle 
Act have doubled fines for speeding in 
a signed school zone. This increase will 
provide safer access for children and pedestrians on roadways 
while traveling to school facilities. The speed 
limit for school zones is 50 km/h in an urban 
district unless a different rate of speed 
has been prescribed on the signs facing 
approaching traffic. This speed limit for 
school zones is in effect between the 
hours of 7:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on the 
days which school is in session.
Speeding is an issue of great concern 
within construction zones. To help address this issue, fines for 
this offence have been doubled to improve the safety of workers. 
Drivers should comply with the speed limit prescribed by signs 
that have been erected by the Department of Transportation while 
a worker is present within the construction zone. This speed limit 
is 50 km/h in an urban district unless a different rate of speed has 
been prescribed on the signs facing approaching traffic. In sections 
of the zone where no speed limit has been posted, the limit is 80 
km/h. Proper signs also mark the commencement and the end of 
the zone for approaching traffic.

45
Rules of the Road
4
4.6 Drive on Right Half of Highway
Upon all highways of sufficient width, vehicles must be operated 
on the right half of the highway and slow moving traffic must 
move close to the right hand edge or curb.
Keep well over on your side of the road.  
Do not hug the centre line. 
4.7 Laned Traffic and Pavement Markings
Where a street or highway has been divided into lanes for traffic, a 
vehicle must be driven within a single lane.
A vehicle must be driven in the lane nearest the right hand edge of 
the highway, except when preparing to make a left turn or when 
passing another vehicle.
White lines
White lines are used to divide lanes of traffic moving in the same 
direction. White lines also may mark the right shoulder of the 
highway.
Yellow lines
Yellow lines on the pavement divide traffic moving in opposite 
directions. They are for your guidance and protection and can 
assist you in driving safely.
Painted Islands
These markings are painted on the 
pavement at an approach to an 
intersection to provide a protected or 
exclusive lane for left or right-turning 
vehicles. Once in the turning lane, the 
motorist must turn left or right only, 
as the case may be, and should not 
drive over the striped, painted 
islands. Pavement arrows are used to 
show the direction in which the driver 
should move when using the lane 
concerned.
Neither A nor B may pass.
A may pass, but B is 
prohibited from passing.
A
A
B
B

46
Rules of the Road
4
When the centre markings consist of two yellow lines and the solid 
line is on your side you are prohibited from passing. When the 
broken line is on your side it indicates that passing is permitted if 
traffic and other conditions allow. 
A single broken yellow line marking the centre of a highway 
permits passing when traffic, sight distance and other conditions 
are ideal. A solid single yellow line indicates that passing is not 
permitted. 
4.8 Blind Spots
All vehicles have a “blind spot” in the right and left rear corners. 
Your rear view mirror will not show a car in the lane next to 
yours when its front bumper is about even with or ahead of 
your rear bumper. If you rely only upon your inside mirror and 
turn into another lane without looking over your shoulder you 
could collide with a vehicle travelling in your blind spot.
4.9 Passing
Many serious collisions are caused by improper passing. After 
deciding that it is necessary to pass and pavement markings 
permit, to avoid collisions, follow these rules: 
1.	 Stay back. Often the habit of moving up closely behind a 
vehicle leads to collisions. Your view of the road ahead is 
obscured and it becomes necessary to cut out sharply to pass. 
When you do cut out, you may not have the time to pull in 
should there be an oncoming car. 
2.	 Check ahead for oncoming vehicles or obstructions. 
3.	 Check your rear view mirror for vehicles which may be 
overtaking you from behind.
4.	 Signal left.
5.	 Check your “blind spot” by looking back over your left 
shoulder.
6.	 Move left gradually.
7.	 Accelerate (You are not permitted to exceed the posted speed 
limit).
BLIND SPOT
BLIND SPOT
Do not attempt to pass 
a vehicle on a curve or 
hill. Keep to your own 
side of the “life line”.

47
Rules of the Road
4
8.	 Signal right after you have passed. Look over right shoulder.
9.	 Move right when you can see in your rear view mirror the 
headlights of the vehicle you have passed.
10.	 Resume your normal speed and cancel signal.
Caution
When approaching at night use low beam headlights until you 
have started to pass.
If another driver wants to pass you and gives audible warning, you 
must give way by driving to the right and must not increase your 
speed until the driver has completed the passing procedure.
It is unlawful to drive left of centre of the highway if you do not 
have sufficient distance to permit overtaking and passing another 
vehicle to be completed safely. You must not prevent the safe 
operation of any vehicle; either the one you are passing or one 
approaching from the opposite direction.
In any event, it is illegal to pass or drive left of the centre of the 
highway on a curve or when approaching the crest of a hill where 
your view along the highway is obstructed within a distance of 
150 metres (500 feet) or where the pavement markings prohibit.
When changing lanes, never move from one lane of traffic to 
another until you make certain that you can do so safely. This 
means that you must check oncoming traffic for safe clearance to 
the side of, ahead of and behind your vehicle and give the proper 
signal before changing lanes.

48
Rules of the Road
4
4.10 Signalling
The law requires you to signal other drivers of your intention to 
stop or decrease the speed of your vehicle, turn to the left or the 
right, change from one lane of traffic to another lane of traffic, 
leave the roadway or set your vehicle in motion from a parked 
position. 
If a vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent the hand and 
arm signal from being visible, or if any portion of the vehicle or the 
load on the vehicle extends more than 60 centimetres (24 inches) 
to the left of the centre of the vehicle’s steering wheel, the signal 
must be given by a mechanical or electrical signalling device. 
Signals must be given by signalling devices, stop light or hand and 
arm. Give correct signals well in advance and in such a way as to 
be plainly visible to other drivers. Check your signalling devices 
frequently to ensure that they are working properly.
All signals shall be given at least 30 metres (100 feet) before 
making a turn.
4.11 Right of Way
The fact that you believe you should be granted the 
right of way does not necessarily relieve you from 
responsibility for a collision.
Intersection
When approaching an intersection you must yield 
the right of way to a vehicle which has entered the 
intersection.
When two vehicles enter an uncontrolled 
intersection (three or four way stop signs) at 
approximately the same time, you must yield to the 
driver on your right. If the intersection is controlled, 
the lights control the authority to proceed.
LEFT TURN
RIGHT TURN
SLOW TO STOP

49
Rules of the Road
4
Left Turn
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the left must yield 
to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is 
within an intersection or so close as to constitute an immediate 
hazard. Keep wheels straight until ready to turn.
Rotary
When driving in a rotary or traffic circle you must drive in a 
counter-clockwise direction. If you are approaching a rotary or 
traffic circle, you must yield the right of way to traffic which is 
already in it and which is approaching so closely as to constitute 
an immediate hazard. 
In this diagram:
•	 B and C must yield to A.
•	 E must yield to D while F and D proceed.
•	 H must yield to G.

50
Rules of the Road
4
Driveway
Before entering a highway you must yield the right of way to all 
vehicles approaching on the highway.
Before emerging from an alley, driveway or building 
in a business or residential district, you must stop 
your vehicle immediately prior to driving on the 
sidewalk or on the sidewalk area extending across 
any alleyway.
Before entering an alley, driveway or building or 
across a sidewalk, you must yield the right of way 
to pedestrians crossing the entrance to the alley, 
driveway or building or on the sidewalk at the point 
where your vehicle is crossing.
4.12 Railway Crossings
When the driver of a motor vehicle approaches a 
railroad crossing and notices the lights flashing 
or a flagman or a train dangerously close to the 
crossing, the driver must bring his/her vehicle to 
a stop not less than 5 metres (16 feet) from the 
nearest rail and shall not proceed until he/she 
can do so safely.
A driver shall not drive his/her vehicle around 
any gate or barrier used to prevent vehicles 
from crossing the track(s). 
In cases where traffic is heavy and slow, i.e. city, 
a driver should never start to cross a track(s) 
unless there is sufficient room across the track(s) 
to accommodate the whole vehicle in order to 
prevent stopping across any part of the track(s). 
All buses or other vehicles carrying passengers for 
hire or any vehicle carrying an explosive substance 

51
Rules of the Road
4
or flammable liquids as cargo are required to stop, listen and look 
in both directions before proceeding through a railway 
crossing. Be prepared to stop if you are following any of 
these types of vehicles.
4.13 Yield Sign
The yield sign is placed at an intersection which does not 
require a stop sign but does require some control. You 
must yield the right of way to traffic in the intersection 
or approaching so closely as to constitute an immediate 
hazard. 
4.14 Stop Sign
A stop sign means you must bring your vehicle to a 
complete stop at the clearly marked stop line or at the 
nearest crosswalk (marked or not marked). If there is no 
painted crosswalk or stop line, stop just before entering the 
intersection, allowing room for a pedestrian to cross.
A stop sign means you must bring your vehicle to a stop:
A:	 At a clearly marked stop line 
B:	 Before entering the nearest crosswalk, whether marked 
or unmarked
C:	 At the edge of the travelled portion of the through 
street or highway where the driver has a view of 
approaching traffic on the intersecting highway 
A
B
C

52
Rules of the Road
4
4.15 Traffic Control Signals
Traffic control signals exhibiting green, amber and red lights or 
green arrow lights indicate the following:
Red Light
You must bring your vehicle to a stop at a clearly marked stop line 
or, if none, before entering the nearest crosswalk or, if none, before 
entering the intersection. Unless a sign indicates otherwise, a 
right turn may be made on a red light provided the vehicle is first 
brought to a full stop and subject always to the right of way of 
pedestrians and other traffic.
Red Flasher Light…
means STOP – a complete, 
dead stop. After stopping, 
proceed only when the way is 
clear. (Same as a “Stop Sign”.)
Green Light
Motorists and pedestrians may 
proceed unless a specific pedestrian light is in operation.
Yellow or Amber Light
Caution - Red light coming up. If too close to stop safely or you 
have already entered the intersection, proceed with caution.
Yellow or Amber Flasher Light…
means SLOW DOWN – and be 
extra careful of intersecting 
traffic, whether you have right 
of way or not. Proceed with 
caution.

53
Rules of the Road
4
Red Light – Green Arrow
This signal indicates that motorists may turn cautiously in the 
direction arrow is pointing, after yielding to pedestrians and 
other traffic.
Red or Amber Pedestrian Light
Pedestrian lights in many places are 
designated by a red or amber light. All 
vehicles must stop until traffic light changes 
to green and then proceed cautiously after 
pedestrians have cleared the crosswalk. 
Pedestrians may proceed on walk signal.
A driver may cautiously turn right on a red light 
after signalling and stopping if pedestrian and vehicle traffic will 
permit, unless a sign prohibits this turn. 
Green Flashing Traffic Light
This is an advance green light which means you can turn left if it is 
safe to do so.
4.16 Peace Officer
When a Peace Officer is directing traffic and clearly directs you, 
regardless of signs or signals, follow the direction of the Peace 
Officer with caution.
4.17 Crosswalk Guard
Crosswalk guards are authorized to stop traffic for pedestrians 
crossing at crosswalks only.

54
Rules of the Road
4
4.18 Turning at Intersections
These are some of the rules for making safe, courteous and legal 
turns.
1.	 Prepare for the turn before you get there. Decide well ahead 
where you want to turn. If you are not sure, drive slowly until 
you can read the street signs or markers or decide in some 
other way the direction you desire to turn. Never make last 
minute turns; they are dangerous.
2.	 Move into the correct lane as soon as possible. You should 
move into the proper lane sooner if fast 
moving and/or heavy traffic.
3.	 Look behind and on both sides to see 
where other traffic may be so that you 
can change lanes and make the turn 
safely.
4.	 Signal your intention to change lanes 
and to turn.
5.	 To make the turn safely, slow down 
before you reach the crosswalk and complete 
the turn at the same speed at which you entered the 
intersection. Do not have the brake or clutch pedal pushed 
down while actually turning. Do not shift gears after entering 
the intersection. 
6.	 Make the turn correctly. This will be easy if you are in the 
proper lane and are travelling slow enough at the time you 
start the turn. 
7.	 Finish the turn in the proper lane which is the lane nearest 
you. 
8.	 If you are stopped in position to make a left turn and waiting 
for opposing traffic, do not turn the steering wheel to the left 
until you are sure you can complete the turn. If you are struck 
from the rear while stopped with the wheels turned to the 
left, your car may be pushed into opposing traffic and cause 
another collision.
Do not turn from a direct course unless the move is permitted and 
can be made with safety.

55
Rules of the Road
4
Left Turn
Left Turn – One Way onto One Way
Right Turn
Left Turn – Two Way onto One Way

56
Rules of the Road
4
Two-Way Left-Turn Lane
The two-way left turn lanes provide traffic 
from either direction an area to leave the main 
travelled portion of the street or highway to 
make a left turn.
To use these lanes position your vehicle (A) next 
to the two-way turn lane, signal your intention 
to turn left, reduce your speed. Check traffic in all 
directions, including your left blind spot. When 
safe move left into the two-way left turn lane 
(B) as near as possible to the point at which the 
left turn will be made and (C) wait for a break in 
on-coming traffic. When safe, (D) complete your 
left turn.
These lanes also allow for left turns from a 
driveway (see arrow for car “E”).
Remember: Extreme caution should be used. Other vehicles may 
also be using this lane from the opposite direction.
Some vehicles may block your view of on-coming traffic.  
Caution: This lane is NOT intended as a passing lane. 
4.19 Passing on Multi-lane Streets
Always keep well to the right except when you intend to overtake 
and pass another vehicle or when you intend to make a left turn. 
Leave the right lane only when it is safe to do so. 

57
Rules of the Road
4
4.20 Parking
When leaving a vehicle standing on a rural highway it must be 
moved off the paved or main travelled part of the roadway, unless 
the vehicle is so disabled that it cannot be moved.
It is an offence to park a vehicle on the pavement or main travelled 
portion of a highway if it can reasonably be parked elsewhere. 
It is an offence to disregard a parking regulation sign. Under no 
circumstances can a vehicle be parked on a highway unless there 
are 5 metres (16 feet) of unobstructed roadway left for the free 
passage of other traffic and the parked vehicle can be clearly seen 
for a distance of sixty 60 metres (200 feet) in each direction.
If your vehicle is stopped because it has broken down, you must 
take precautions to avoid collisions with other vehicles coming 
toward you.
Whenever a vehicle is left unattended, the front wheels should be 
turned to the curb or side of the highway and the parking brake 
must be effectively set.
Whenever you park a vehicle on a rural highway at night or 
whenever lights are required, you must have at least one white or 
amber light showing from the front on the roadway side of your 
vehicle and at least one red light showing from the rear on the 
roadway side of your vehicle.
Your Parking Shows Your Skills
Many drivers find parking in a limited space at the curb their most 
difficult driving operation. To park skillfully, you must be able to 
have complete control of your vehicle at all times.
Parking on a Hill
Uphill or downhill without curb: 
Steering wheel turned right.
Uphill with curb: Steering wheel 
turned left.
Downhill with curb: Steering wheel 
turned right.
SET PARKING BRAKE

58
Rules of the Road
4
Parallel Parking
Many drivers have difficulty with this specific type of parking and 
it requires more skill.
1.	 Signal your intention. 
Stop even with car 
parked ahead of 
parking spot and about 
one-half metre (1 1/2) 
feet) away from it.
2.	 Back slowly, turning 
wheel sharply to the 
right.
3.	 Continue to back 
slowly and straighten 
your wheels
4.	 When the front of your 
car passes the rear of 
car ahead, turn wheel 
to the left - sharply, 
then gradually - while 
backing while ensuring 
clear passage.
5.	 Straighten wheels and 
pull up to within 60 
centimetres (2 feet) of 
car ahead and close to 
the curb. (no further 
than 50 cm (20") from 
the curb).

59
Rules of the Road
4
4.21 Backing
Backing a vehicle is a difficult task at any time, either to go 
straight back or to turn to one side or the other. Backing 
procedures should be completed at a speed no faster than a person 
walking quickly.
Backing Procedures
•	 Keep your foot on the brake pedal and select reverse 
gear.
•	 Do a complete safety scan.
•	 Get in the proper seating position (photo).
•	 Aim well into your intended path of travel.
•	 Move slowly controlling your vehicle with your right/
left hand at the 12 o’clock position on the steering 
wheel.
•	 Continue to scan in all directions while backing.
4.22 Miscellaneous Traffic Provisions
No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded or when 
there are in the front seat such number of persons as to obstruct 
the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or as to 
interfere with the driver’s control over the driving mechanism 
of the vehicle, and in no event, when there are more than three 
persons in the front seat. 
Coasting a motor vehicle with the transmission in neutral is 
prohibited. 
No person may deposit any glass, nails, wire, cans or scraps of 
metals or any rubbish, refuse or waste upon any highway. 
No person shall stop a vehicle to load or unload goods other than 
at the curb or shoulder of the roadway. 
No person in control or charge of a motor vehicle shall cause the 
tires of such vehicle to squeal or make any other unnecessary or 
unreasonable noise. 

60
Rules of the Road
4
The driver of any motor vehicle carrying passenger(s) for hire or of 
any bus or any vehicle carrying explosives or flammable liquids, 
shall not cross a railroad crossing(s) without first bringing his/
her vehicle to a complete stop, no closer than 5 metres (16 feet), 
before the crossing and shall not proceed over the crossing(s) until 
the way is clear and safe.
Passengers in Vehicles
You must not stop a vehicle on the highway or street for the 
purpose of taking on or letting off passengers other than at the 
curb or side of the roadway. You must not permit a person to enter 
a vehicle while it is in motion.
Intersections and Crosswalks
Except when preparing for a turn, do not enter an intersection or 
a marked crosswalk unless there is enough space in the roadway 
on the other side of the intersection for your vehicle to completely 
clear the intersection or marked crosswalk.
4.23 Pedestrians
The Driver’s Responsibility
As the driver of a vehicle you are required to yield the right of way 
to a pedestrian, which includes a person in a wheelchair, within a 
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at the end of 
a block, except at intersections where the movement of pedestrian 
traffic is being regulated by a peace officer or traffic control signs.
Whenever a vehicle has stopped at a marked crosswalk or at an 
intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway it is an 
offence for the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the 
rear to overtake and pass the stopped vehicle.

61
Rules of the Road
4
The Pedestrian’s Responsibility
Every pedestrian, which includes a person in a wheelchair, crossing 
a roadway at any point other than within a marked or unmarked 
crosswalk at the end of a block, is required to yield the right of way 
to vehicles upon the highway.
At an intersection where traffic is controlled by traffic signals, it is 
an offence for a pedestrian to disobey the instruction of any traffic 
signal placed in accordance with the Motor Vehicle Act unless 
otherwise directed by a peace officer.
Walk Light – Pedestrian traffic facing this signal may only 
proceed in the crosswalk and all other traffic must yield the right 
of way to the pedestrian traffic.
Don’t Walk – Pedestrian traffic facing this signal must not 
proceed across the intersection.
4.24 Traffic on the Highway
Sharing the Road
When driving, remember that there are many different users of our 
streets and highways. It is everyone’s responsibility to be aware 
and adjust to the presence and actions of others: passenger car 
drivers, truck drivers, motorcycle drivers, bicyclists, pedestrians, 
school bus drivers and emergency vehicle operators.
The safety of all road users is shared. The more we make ourselves 
aware of and accept this responsibility the safer we will make our 
streets and highways.
Walking on the Highway
Where sidewalks are provided a pedestrian shall not walk along or 
upon an adjacent highway.
When sidewalks are not provided any pedestrian walking along 
and upon a highway must, when practical, walk only on the 
left side of the roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may 
approach from the opposite direction. 

62
Rules of the Road
4
Pedestrian Safety 
Pedestrian walking on unlighted highways after dark should carry 
a light or wear light coloured clothing. 
In snow conditions, it is advisable to wear some dark clothing.
Retro-Reflective Material
Retro-reflective material can be seen at several hundred metres 
away. This material reflects light from a vehicle’s headlights back 
towards the driver.
Thumbing Rides
It is an offence for any person to stand in a roadway for the 
purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of a private vehicle.
4.25 Horseback Riding
Horseback riders and drivers of horse drawn vehicles are permitted 
to use streets and roadways unless restricted by signs.
The rider/driver should travel with traffic, as far to the right as 
possible, obey all signs and signals that apply. Riders should 
always observe stop signs and use the appropriate hand signals 
when crossing the road. It is not permitted to ride horseback on 
the sidewalk, to race the animal or to leave the horse unattended.
Remember, a horse is sometimes unpredictable. Be alert, slow 
down and give plenty of room until you have safely passed.
4.26 Bicyclists
It is an offence to drive on sidewalks. Bicyclists are subject to the 
same rules of the road as motor vehicle drivers. A cyclist must drive 
in the same lane as traffic, as close to the right as possible. Light 
or reflective clothing should be worn at night. Bicycles should be 
equipped with a headlight, reflectors and a horn or bell.
It is mandatory to wear a helmet when riding a bicycle.
Wearing  
dark clothing
Carrying a  
hankerchief
Wearing  
medium clothing
Wearing retro- 
reflective material

63
Safe Driving
5
5.	 SAFE DRIVING
5.1 The Vehicle 
Your vehicle must be maintained in good mechanical 
condition to be operated safely. The parts indicated 
in the diagram particularly affect the safe operation 
of the vehicle and should be checked regularly by 
qualified mechanics. 
Regular check-ups and careful maintenance will 
prolong the life of your car. 
Checkups may also prolong your life.  
Remember that you cannot drive safely in an unfit car. 
Windshield wipers:
Works properly and  
wipes clearly.
Rearview mirror:
Unbroken and clear. 
Free from vibration.
Glass: Front, rear and sides clear and 
unobscured. No unauthorized  
or expired stickers.
Fuel system:
Secure and not 
leaking.
Brakes: 1/3 pedal 
remaining at all times. 
Hand brake operative.  
No system leaks.
Tires: Ply cords not 
exposed. No bulges  
or tread cuts.
Exhaust system:
Tight and free  
from leaks.
Steering and suspension:
Not to exceed safe tolerances.
Horn: Audible 
for 60m  
and secure.
Lights: All front and 
rear in working order 
and properly aimed.

64
Safe Driving
5
5.2 Check Your Vehicle
	 Yes	
No
 
o o 
Brakes – Do they hold promptly and evenly? Will parking 
brake hold the car?
 
o o 
Head Lights – Do dimming switch and both upper and 
lower beams work? Are lights aimed to avoid glare? Is the 
glass clean?
 
o o 
Rear and Stop Lights – Do bulbs work? Do brakes operate 
stop lights? Is the glass clean and do they show a red 
light?
 
o o 
Tires – Are they properly inflated? Do you check regularly 
for worn treads, cuts and breaks?
 
o o 
Windshield Wipers – Do they always operate and wipe 
glass clean?
 
o o 
Muffler and Exhaust System – Is it free of worn spots, tight 
and quiet?
 
o o 
Steering – Is steering wheel free of excess play? Wheel 
bearings tight? Wheels properly aligned and balanced?
 
o o 
Glass – Is it clear and clean? Is it free from cracks, 
discoloration or stickers to obscure your vision?
 
o o 
Horn – Does it work?
 
o o 
Rear View Mirror – Does it give you a clear view of the 
road behind? Is it free from cracks and discoloration?

65
Safe Driving
5
5.3 Seat Belts Save Lives
All passengers that occupy a position within a vehicle must wear 
a seatbelt. The numbers of passengers are limited to the number 
of operating seatbelts. Violations for not limiting the number of 
passengers to the number of operating seatbelts will result in a 
fine. 
Drivers must ensure that passengers under 16 years of age use 
seat belts if available. Passengers age 16 years and older are 
responsible for buckling up themselves if seat belts are available. 
Children must be buckled into proper child safety seats which 
are fastened to the vehicle by a seat belt and any other straps 
specified by the manufacturer until they reach one of the 
following; age of nine, weight of 36 kg (79 lbs) or height of 145 
cm (57 inches). Taxis, emergency vehicles and buses are exempt 
from these provisions.
In vehicles equipped with a passenger front air bag caution should 
be used in securing a child restraint system in that location. Most 
vehicle manufacturers advise not to use this location and stress 
using the rear seating positions. Consult the vehicle Owner’s 
Manual.
Shoulder belts should never be worn without a regular lap belt. 
Seat belts should be worn and properly adjusted as specified in the 
manufacturer’s Owners Manual.

66
Safe Driving
5
All new vehicles are equipped with seat belts that must be worn 
by the drivers and passengers. Many cars are also equipped with 
air bags. Air bags give additional protection from serious injury 
in head-on collisions where the driver and front seat passenger 
may strike the steering wheel, dashboard or windshield. Seat belts 
must be used in conjunction with air bags.
5.4 Penalties for Seat Belt Infractions
Police officers throughout New Brunswick may check at any time for seat belt 
usage by drivers and passengers. Drivers are not assessed points for other 
passengers but they will be charged for those under 16 who are not wearing 
a seat belt. Passengers over the age of 16 are charged for the offence with no 
loss of points
If a driver is convicted of not wearing a seat belt, they must pay a fine and 
will be assigned a loss of two points on their driving record. While it is an 
offence for a passenger to not wear a seat belt, there is no assessment of 
points against a passenger’s licence or the driver should a passenger not be 
wearing a seat belt.
Transport Canada 
recommends that children 
12 years and under should 
be properly restrained in the 
back seat, especially if the 
vehicle is equipped with side 
air bags.

67
Safe Driving
5
5.5 Preparing Your Vehicle for Winter Driving
Winterize your car and your driving habits. Have these items carefully 
checked and repaired if necessary.
Radiator
Check for leaks and proper level of anti-freeze.
Battery
Cold weather starts add an extra strain on battery life. Check the 
charge and the water level in the battery.
Brakes
Have them adjusted or serviced if necessary. Be sure all four brakes 
are engaging equally. On icy roads, poorly adjusted brakes can 
cause your car to dangerously skid.
Muffler
Have it checked for leaks. A leaking muffler or exhaust system can 
create a carbon monoxide hazard, particularly if you are stalled in 
traffic or a blizzard. Never start your car in a closed garage. If you 
start to yawn, have a headache, feel dizzy, weary or nauseated 
while driving or parked, turn off the motor, get out of the car and 
walk around. Open your window to let fresh air into your vehicle.
Tires 
Check them and replace any damaged or bald tires. Verify 
condition to ensure sufficient tread to make the vehicle safe in 
various ice and snow conditions. Winter driving is safer with snow 
tires or studded tires. However, the use of studded tires may cause 
more of a skid in an emergency stop than rubber tires, depending 
on road conditions. 

68
Safe Driving
5
For added traction and steering control you should mount snow 
tires on all four wheels. A good compromise would be all season 
radials with sufficient tread depth to self clean in snow and slush 
conditions. Do not mix radials with non radial snow tires. Consult 
your Owner’s Manual. 
Tire chains may also be carried in the vehicle for use in ice and 
snow conditions. The use of chains may also cause more of a skid 
in an emergency stop. 
Windshield Wipers and Heater/Defroster 
Be sure your wiper blades are in good working condition. Ensure 
rubber is not broken or worn. Check your heater/defroster unit to 
be sure it is in proper working order. 
5.6 The Driver
Most highway crashes are caused by some fault of the driver. In 
order of frequency, the most common causes of highway crashes 
in New Brunswick are:
1.	 Inattention
2.	 Operating too fast for conditions
3.	 Failure to grant right of way.
4.	 Alcohol
5.	 Driver distraction
6.	 View obstructed
7.	 Following too closely
8.	 Improper use of lanes
Safe driving – meaning the avoidance of crashes – is the result of 
a combination of attitude and skill on the part of the individual 
driver. Skill is acquired largely through proper instruction and 
careful practice. In addition, if you strictly observe the law and 
develop an attitude of consideration for others you can help 
eliminate most highway crashes. Remember, you should adjust 
your speed according to the conditions of the road.
Distracted Driving
This law prohibits the use of 
hand-held electronic devices 
while operating a motor 
vehicle.
This includes hand-held 
cellular telephones, texting 
devices, portable global 
positioning systems (GPS) and 
entertainment devices such as 
video game players and mp3 
players.
The bill also prohibits the 
manual programming or 
adjusting of any GPS unit while 
driving. In addition, television 
style display screens, monitors, 
DVD players, and computer 
screens are not permitted 
within the visual range of 
the driver unless they are 
part of a GPS unit or provide 
information to the driver on 
the vehicle’s various operating 
systems.
To ensure that you have 
the latest information 
on distracted driving it is 
recommended that you visit 
the website at  
www.gnb.ca/0276/vehicle.

69
Safe Driving
5
Speed
Speed too fast for conditions is one of the greatest causes 
of crashes.
Speed limits indicate the maximum speed at which 
it is safe to drive under ideal conditions and other 
conditions mentioned below can only be met safely 
by a reduction in speed.
1.	 Poor visibility.
2.	 Wet or slippery highway.
3.	 Pedestrians (adults and children) and/or animals 
on or near the highway.
4.	 Heavy traffic.
5.	 Illness, tiredness or nervous tension on the part 
of the driver could even be reasons not to drive 
at all.
The higher the speed, the longer it takes to stop a 
vehicle and the greater the force of impact in the 
event of collision. When the speed is doubled, the 
impact on striking an object is four times as great.
Stopping
Stopping a vehicle is a complex operation which is 
performed in two stages:
1.	 The driver must see a reason for stopping. To 
see the reason for an emergency stop calls for 
continual close attention to the road and traffic 
conditions when driving.
2.	 As the driver, you must react quickly. You must 
take your foot off the gas pedal and apply the 
brakes. The time required for this varies slightly 
with individual drivers. Under normal conditions, 
the average reaction time is about three quarters 
(3/4) of a second. In 3/4 of a second your car 
travelling at 50 km/h will go 10 metres (about 2 
car lengths) before you can even start to apply 
the brakes.
@100
@90
@80
@70
@60
@50
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Breaking
Distance
Reaction
Distance
DISTANCE (in meters)
Note: Data based in tests of cars having brakes 
in first class condition and on dry level asphalt 
surfaces. Reaction distance is based on average 
reaction time of three-quarters of a second.

70
Safe Driving
5
Driving Posture
Proper handling and control of a vehicle only happens when the 
driver keeps a good erect posture.
•	 Adjusting the seat: The seat can be moved backward and 
forward to fit the leg length of each driver (some cars with 
power seats can also be moved up and down). The seat should 
be adjusted to allow the driver to sit comfortably in a relaxed 
position and to reach all the pedals and controls easily.
•	 Adjusting the mirrors: It is essential that all mirrors be adjusted 
so the driver has good visibility to see traffic behind and cover 
as many blind spots as possible.
•	 Adjust seat belts: Seat belts should be adjusted properly and not 
worn loosely. Injuries could result if not worn properly.
•	 Headrest:: Ensure that the headrest is properly adjusted 
•	 Controls: Become familiar with and locate all interior controls 
before starting (i.e. wipers, horn, heater, lights, etc.)
•	 Foot Controls: Always use your right foot to operate the 
accelerator and brake pedal. Your right heel should rest on the 
floor at the base of the accelerator pedal so that it can easily 
be moved to the brake pedal, when necessary. Use left foot for 
clutch in standard gear shift vehicles.
•	 Steering Wheel: Keep both hands on the steering wheel, usually 
at the 10 and 2 o’clock positions.
Following
Following too closely or tailgating is a frequent cause of highway 
collisions. To drive safely you must leave sufficient space between 
your vehicle and the vehicle ahead so that you can stop in the 
event of an emergency.

71
Safe Driving
5
The Two-Second Interval is a good way to learn to 
recognize safe following distance. Just watch the vehicle 
ahead of you pass some definite point on the highway, 
such as a sign post. Then count to yourself “one thousand 
and one, one thousand and two”. If you pass that same 
spot before you finish the count, you are following too 
closely. This holds true at any speed. This rule applies to 
favourable driving conditions. Unfavourable conditions call 
for lower speed and a longer count.
Another equally valid system is to allow at least one car 
length for each 20 km of speed.
Defensive Driving
Defensive driving means driving in anticipation of possible 
collision situations and being prepared to avoid them.
Many collisions cannot be avoided once they have begun 
to develop but they might have been avoided if the driver 
had anticipated and guarded against them. Watch for 
signs of possible hazards. A ball bouncing on the street 
may mean a child or animal running out into the roadway; 
exhaust smoke coming from a vehicle could indicate a driver ready 
to pull out; a vehicle approaching a stop sign or red light at an 
obviously fast rate of speed may not stop; brake lights flashing in a 
line of traffic means you should be prepared to stop. Always watch 
for any other indication of what a driver or pedestrian might do.
The essence of defensive driving is to reduce your own driving 
mistakes and to anticipate the mistakes of others (drivers and 
pedestrians) and guard against them.
Animals on the Highway
Animal crossing signs warn drivers where there is a known danger 
of large animals, such as moose and deer crossing the roads.
•	 Drivers should use caution especially at dawn and dusk

72
Safe Driving
5
•	 Animals are unpredictable so reduce your speed 
•	 Stay alert and scan both sides of the road, not just the 
pavement in front of you
5.7 White Cane
By law, the use of the white cane is restricted to people with visual 
impairment. When you see a pedestrian with a white cane you 
should exercise extreme caution.
Remember, you can see them but they cannot see you.
5.8 Crash
Some day you may be driving along a highway and come upon a 
serious collision. Very likely your first instinct will be to run to the 
car involved and start removing people. Both medical and collision 
records show that efforts of untrained rescuers often aggravate the 
injuries caused by the collision. Use the following information as 
a guide.
If You Arrive First at a Collision
Prevent a Second Crash - Pull completely off the road far enough 
away from the crash scene to protect the vehicles from further 
collisions with other cars.
Reduce Fire Hazard – Turn off the ignition of the damaged vehicles. 
Keep smokers away. In case of fire, try to put it out with a fire 
extinguisher, dirt or a heavy fire retardant blanket. Caution must 
be used when approaching a burning vehicle.
Attend first – To anyone who is not breathing or who is bleeding 
severely. To stop the bleeding put the cleanest available pad 
directly on the wound and apply pressure. Use cloth, handkerchief, 
clothing or your bare hand if necessary. If the pad becomes blood-
soaked, leave it on, put another on top of it. Maintain pressure 
until professional help arrives.
At 30 km/h the impact is the 
same as if your car fell from the 
top of a one storey building.
At 60 km/h (double the speed) 
the impact is the same as if 
your car fell from the top of a 
four storey building (four times 
the force of impact).

73
Safe Driving
5
Do Not Move the Injured – Unless they are in a burning car or other 
immediate danger, leave them in the car until trained help arrives. 
Do not twist or turn them. Unnecessary moving often complicates 
injuries. If a driver is trapped by a steering wheel, the pressure can 
be eased by releasing the seat catch and pulling the seat back. If 
you are not trained in first aid, you can help the injured by:
a) 	 covering them with blankets or coats to keep them warm; 
b) 	 loosening collars, ties and belts. This helps the injured to 
breathe more easily; and 
c) 	 calming them by talking to them and telling them that help is 
on the way.
Get Help – Ask the next person who stops to phone for police and/
or ambulance. Ask others to warn approaching traffic.
Artificial Respiration
In a real emergency, to help a person start breathing:
1.	 Remove anything in the person’s mouth that might block air. 
Tilt the head back, pull chin upward so tongue does not fall 
back to block airway.
2.	 Pinch nose shut. Seal mouth with yours. Blow into mouth. 
Give a full breath for an adult, and a gentle breath for an 
infant.
3.	 Remove mouth, take deep breath, blow in air again – every 5 
seconds for an adult, every 3 seconds for an infant.
4.	 If chest fails to rise and you hear no exhaling, recheck mouth 
for possible blockage, again tilt head back, pull chin up and 
start the technique again.
5.	 If you cannot obtain a tight seal over the person’s mouth, close 
mouth and breathe into nose. For an infant, breathe into both 
mouth and nose.
6.	 Continue effort until professional help is on hand or until the 
injured person is breathing.
Otherwise, unless you are trained and know how to perform first 
aid properly, you should leave it up to someone who does know.

74
Safe Driving
5
5.9 Alcohol and Driving
Alcohol induced impairment is the greatest contributing factor in 
many motor vehicle fatalities. The basic rule underlying all safe 
driving is to “keep your vehicle under control at all times”.
Drivers who have consumed alcohol do not have complete control 
over themselves and therefore cannot be in control of a vehicle. 
They are a danger to their own lives and the lives of others.
What Alcohol Does
Alcohol is not a stimulant. From the first drink it depresses the 
central nervous system and the feeling of stimulation that comes 
is the result of the impairment of the higher functions of the brain, 
including social restraints and judgement.
When alcohol enters the stomach, it does not have to be digested. 
It is absorbed through the walls of the stomach and the small 
intestine into the bloodstream, which carries it throughout the 
body.
In the brain, alcohol first depresses the area of higher function. 
Next it attacks the simple motor functions, reaction time and 
vision. Balance, co-ordination and sensory perception are the next 
faculties to be impaired. Concentrated drinking will eventually 
lead to stupor, coma and even, if continued steadily, death.
The most important factors contributing to alcoholic impairment 
are the amount of alcohol absorbed into the blood and the 
amount of time allowed for the elimination of this alcohol. This 
rate is affected by such other factors as body weight, the quantity 
and type of food in the stomach and the type of alcoholic beverage 
consumed.

75
Safe Driving
5
How the Body Handles Alcohol
Some people seem to be able to “hold their liquor” better than 
others and this excuse is often quoted by those who do not want 
to believe that a few drinks can seriously impair driving ability. 
Because of body weight, fatigue, emotional condition or a number 
of other reasons, individuals may show differing effects from 
drinking the same amount of alcohol. However, they may be 
equally impaired.
Another danger develops when the alcohol starts to “wear off”. 
You can easily convince yourself that you no longer feel the effects 
and are perfectly sober. This state of mind is a delusion. You are 
comparing your peak feeling of impairment with the declining 
impairment that you feel as your body eliminates the alcohol from 
the blood. But you are not sober. You are only making a dangerous 
comparison.
Fallacies/Remedy
Most of us have tried them at one time or another – black 
coffee, cold showers, taking a jog around the block. But we must 
recognize them for what they are – ineffective. There is only one 
thing that can sober a person: Time.
Drug and/or Medication
While alcohol is the most common cause of driver impairment, 
there are some other problems that can create a safety hazard. 
There are a wide range of illegal drugs that cause problems; many 
of these drugs are extremely dangerous to use especially when 
driving.
If you have a medical problem and are taking medication, either 
prescription or over the counter drugs, some of these medications 
are known to cause inattention and drowsiness – take great care 
not to drive while taking these drugs.
DIFFERENT, BUT EQUAL
These standard servings of 
beer, spirits and wine all 
contain an equal amount of 
alcohol.
So don’t be misled  
by appearances.  
And never mix  
drinking with driving.

76
Safe Driving
5
The Lethal Cocktail
A person may have a minor medical problem (i.e. sinus congestion, 
influenza, chest cold, etc.) and is taking a type of “over the 
counter” or prescription medication.
Only one or two drinks along with the medication can cause 
impairment and create serious problems.
Remember: As a driver you have responsibility to yourself, your 
passengers and other road users. The passengers in your car are 
usually your family and friends.
Alcohol and the Law
All motorists in New Brunswick under the age of 21 must maintain 
a 0% Blood Alcohol Content while driving. Even if you are well 
below the 0.08% level of alcohol in the blood accepted as the legal 
level in law, you can still be impaired. Being apprehended at above 
0.08% blood alcohol in the bloodstream, in itself, is a criminal 
offence. But you can be impaired on one drink.
Drivers in New Brunswick who are found to have a blood alcohol 
concentration (BAC) between 0.05% and 0.08% milligrams are 
subject to a 7 day suspension of their driver’s licence. With a blood 
alcohol concentration exceeding 0.08%, a driver will be served 
with a 90 day administrative licence suspension. Failure to provide 
a sample will result in a 90 day suspension of your licence.
Failure or Refusal to Provide a Sample
A breath test for blood alcohol is compulsory under the Criminal 
Code of Canada. The courts may also convict a person who, without a 
reasonable excuse, fails or refuses to comply with the demand made 
by the peace officer to provide a sample of their breath or blood.
Here are some examples of 
prescription drugs that may 
affect driving skills:
Analgesics
	
Codeine
	
Other narcotics
Antidepressants
	
Tricyclic Antidepressants
Antiemetic Agents
Antihistamines
Antipsychotic Drugs
	
Haloperidol
	
Major Tranquillizers
	
Phenothiazines
	
 (e.g. chlorpromazine)
Ophthalmic Preparations
Sedatives and Anxiolytics
	
Barbiturates
	
Benzodiazepines
Skeletal Muscle Relaxants
Other
	
Antihypertensive Drugs
	
Antineoplastic Agents
	
Chemotherapeutic Agents
	
Immunosuppressants
	
Steroids
Source: 
Determining Medical Fitness to Drive 
– A Guide for Physicians

77
Safe Driving
5
Criminal Code of Canada
The Criminal Code of Canada states that a person is committing an 
offence when operating or in care and control of a motor vehicle 
while impaired by alcohol or drugs even though the blood alcohol 
level is less than 80 milligrams of alcohol in 100 millilitres of blood 
(.08 percent penalties can include fines, imprisonment or both and 
a prohibition of driving). Convictions have resulted in the loss of 
insurance, higher insurance rates and loss of employment.
A peace officer, under the Motor Vehicle Act, is including but 
not limited to the RCMP and municipal/regional forces. New 
amendments to the Motor Vehicle Act give peace officers certain 
authorities:
•	 Stop vehicles for the purposes of determining whether there 
is evidence to justify the demand for a breath sample under 
section 254 of the Criminal Code.
•	 Demand documentation from drivers such as drivers 
licence, proof of insurance, and registration. Other documents 
may include mechanic’s report for motor vehicle inspection, 
carrier safety fitness certificate, or a bill of lading for commercial 
drivers. 
•	 Demand submission to Standard Field Sobriety Testing. 
This procedure includes: a) horizontal gaze nystagmus test, 
b) walk-and-turn test and c) one-leg stand test. This demand 
occurs when a peace officer has reasonable grounds to believe 
that a driver is impaired by alcohol/drugs. Refusal to submit to 
a Standard Field Sobriety Test would lead to a demand to take a 
breathalyzer test.
If a peace officer has “reasonable and probable grounds” to suspect 
the presence of alcohol, the driver of a vehicle may be demanded 
to supply a sample of breath into an approved screening device 
or to accompany the peace officer to provide a breath sample for 
analysis (breathalyser). If the person is unable to provide a breath 
sample, the peace officer may demand a sample of blood be taken 
by a qualified medical practitioner for analysis. It is an offence to 
refuse to provide these samples.

78
Safe Driving
5
A breath test for blood alcohol is compulsory under the Criminal 
Code of Canada and it is an offence to refuse to take the test.
Penalties under the different sections can range from $600 to 
$2,000 or up to 5 years in jail or both, and suspension of driving 
privileges.
Amendments to the Motor Vehicle Act have established an Alcohol 
Ignition Interlock Program for persons convicted of impaired driving 
related offences under the Criminal Code. These drivers would be 
prohibited from operating a motor vehicle during a minimum 
prohibition period imposed by the court. For the remainder 
of the suspension period, however, the convicted driver could 
be authorized to operate a vehicle provided that the person 
was participating in the Alcohol Ignition Interlock Program and 
operating only those vehicles equipped with an interlock device. 
In order to participate in the program, the person would first 
be required to complete a drinking driver re-education course 
as specified under the Motor Vehicle Act. The aim of the Alcohol 
Ignition Interlock Device Program is to modify the behaviour of 
individuals who frequently drink and drive with a high blood-
alcohol content. The length of time that the convicted driver would 
be required to spend in the program would depend on whether 
the conviction was the driver’s first, second, third (or subsequent) 
alcohol-related offence as shown in the following table:
Offence
Suspension Period  
(New Brunswick)
Minimum Prohibition Before 
Qualifying for Interlock Program 
(Federal)
Maximum Time in 
Interlock Program
First
1 year
3 months
9 months
Second
3 years
6 months
30 months
Third (or more)
5 years
12 months
48 months

79
Safe Driving
5
5.10 Some Rules for Safe Driving
Courteous drivers seldom cause crashes. Use courtesy and common 
sense while driving. Follow these safe driving rules to reduce 
crashes. 
1.	 You must not assume that you will be given the right of way. 
The other person may not think that he/she should grant it.
2.	 Slow moving vehicles must drive to the extreme right and 
must not impede traffic.
3.	 Do not pass on a hill or curve at any time.
4.	 When stopping is necessary, see that you and your vehicle are 
clear of the paved surface or close to the curb. Always exit the 
vehicle from the curb side. Never park on the left side of the 
roadway facing traffic.
5.	 Know and obey all traffic signs and signals.
6.	 Line markings on the pavement are for your guidance and 
protection. Where the road is marked with double lines, a 
solid line on your side prohibits passing. A broken line on 
your side indicates you may overtake and pass if conditions so 
warrant. Do not ride the line.
7.	 When approaching an intersection slow down and check in all 
directions for hazards.
8.	 Except when driving in two or more marked lanes going in the 
same direction, never pass on the approach to an intersection, 
a bridge or a railroad crossing.
9.	 When leaving a parked position check oncoming traffic and 
signal, check your blind spot as well as your mirrors. Pull out 
only when way is clear, both behind and in front.
10.	 A driver must yield the right of way to a pedestrian in a 
crosswalk or in an unmarked crosswalk at the end of a block. 
11.	 Year after year “speed too fast for conditions” is a major 
cause of collisions in which the driver is held responsible. The 
remedy is simple - observe road and weather conditions and 
adjust your speed accordingly. 

80
Safe Driving
5
12.	 When passing, check for other traffic, ahead and behind. 
Signal before changing lanes and sound your horn for the 
driver you are passing. On a two lane highway, do not try to 
pass more than one car at a time. Don’t follow another car 
that is passing, allow that driver to complete the pass before 
you attempt to pass. If you are being passed, give way to the 
other driver. 
13.	 Be extra careful when there are bicyclists and/or motorcyclists 
on the road. Do not tailgate. Watch for them in your mirror. 
They may be riding in your “blind spot”.
14.	 Good drivers do more than comply with the law. Be considerate 
of the other driver. The life you save may be your own.

81
Safe Driving
5
Check Your Driving Habits
	Yes	
No
o o 
Traffic Laws: Do you know and drive by the rules?
o o 
Signs, Signals, Markings: Do you read and heed these 
“Signs of Life” that point the way to safety?
o o 
Stop and Turning Signals: Do you let other drivers 
know your intentions, knowing that the proper signal is a 
good turn for everyone?
o o 
Traffic Lanes: Do you always drive in and turn from the 
proper lane?
o o 
Speed: Do you slow down here to show up there? Do you 
keep in mind that speed limits are for your protection? Do 
you glance at your speedometer frequently so that you 
may keep within limits?
o o 
Bad Weather Conditions: Do you always keep an eye 
on the weather and adjust your driving accordingly? Rain, 
sleet, snow, ice and fog automatically mean slow!
o o 
Nighttime: Do you slow down at sundown?
o o 
Pedestrians: Are you a driver who gives pedestrians a 
break -- and the right of way?
o o 
Children: When it comes to traffic, do you always expect 
the unexpected from children… especially in school 
zones, near playgrounds and in residential sections?
o o 
One For The Road: Do you refuse to drive after drinking?
An important safety device in any car – 
A driver with safe driving habits!

82
Safe Driving
5
5.11 The Environment – 
Highway, Weather and Visibility Conditions
Friction
The only contact your car has with the highway is through the 
tires and it is the friction between the tires and the highway 
that enables you to start, stop and control the car. This contact 
is about equal to the length of the palm of your hand. On a wet 
or slippery road, this friction is greatly reduced and it becomes 
correspondingly more difficult to stop or control a vehicle.
Stopping on Ice
If you apply your brakes suddenly on an icy road your car will go 
into a skid. If you have to stop on a slippery surface, it is advisable 
to pump the brake pedal – in and out – gradually slowing the 
vehicle without locking the wheels. (Note: if your vehicle is 
equipped with ABS, you should not pump the pedal. Rather, apply 
steady pressure.) The use of studded tires decreases stopping 
distance on ice but can also increase the distance in extreme cold 
temperatures.
Rain
Many drivers do not realize that roads are likely to be especially 
slick just after it begins to rain or drizzle. The first few drops loosen 
the grease and dirt accumulated on the surface of the road. The 
loosened grease and dirt mix with the raindrops and the road 
is quickly covered with a slippery film that makes it extremely 
dangerous. The first few drops of rain are danger signals telling 
you to slow down and use extra caution.
Hydroplaning – “Water Skiing on the Highway”
Hydroplaning takes place on wet roads. As speed increases, your 
tires start to ride up on a film of water. In a passenger car, partial 
hydroplaning starts at about 55 km/h and increases with speed to 
about 85 km/h at which point the tires may be totally up on the 
water. In a severe rainstorm, for example, the tires lose all contact 
with the road at 85 km/h. When this is the case, there is no friction 
available to brake, accelerate or corner. A gust of wind, a change 

83
Safe Driving
5
of road angle or a slight turn can create an unpredictable and 
uncontrollable skid.
The best thing to do is to take your foot off the accelerator and 
let the car slow down. If you skid while your car is only partially 
hydroplaning, you should be able to control by correcting for the 
particular type of skid that occurs. On the other hand, if you are 
totally hydroplaning, follow your natural impulse and steer to 
keep the car going in its original direction but be careful – DO 
NOT OVERSTEER. When you feel the car regaining traction start 
to straighten your wheels but be prepared to handle a skid in the 
opposite direction.
To prevent hydroplaning it is most helpful to have good tires with 
deep treads. The treads allow the water to escape from under 
the tires and tend to prevent complete hydroplaning at normal 
highway speeds. However, when the depth of the water exceeds 
the depth of the treads, complete hydroplaning can be expected.
Skids
When tire grip fails, skidding occurs and the driver loses control. 
Drivers cause skidding by:
1.	 excessive speed
2.	 excessive acceleration
3.	 sudden and/or excessive braking
4.	 abrupt steering
To correct a rear-wheel skid, remove 
your feet from the pedals and 
steer in the direction of the skid. To 
correct a four-wheel skid, release 
the brake. Reapply it gently and 
increase pressure slowly to avoid 
locking the wheels again.
Experienced front wheel drive 
vehicle drivers may find that gentle 
acceleration will help the vehicle 
pull out of a rear wheel skid. If the 
front wheels skid, take your foot 
off the accelerator. The engine 
braking effect may slow the car to 
the point where front end traction 
is regained. If the skid continues, 
depress the clutch or select neutral. 
Freely rolling wheels are  
better able to regain  
traction.

84
Safe Driving
5
For added traction and steering control you should mount snow 
tires on all four wheels. A good compromise would be all season 
radials with sufficient tread depth to self clean in snow and slush 
conditions. Do not mix radials with non radial snow tires. Consult 
your owner’s manual.
Rules For Winter Driving
1.	 Accept your responsibility to do all in your power to drive 
without collisions. Do not blame the weather for a crash. Be 
prepared to meet any situation.
2.	 Adjust your speed to conditions – Slow down on wet, snow 
covered or icy roads so that you can stop in time if you have to. 
Watch for ice patches, especially in shaded areas, on bridges 
and on overpasses.
3.	 Get the “feel” of the road – Try brakes occasionally while 
driving slowly and if away from traffic. Find out just how 
slippery the road is and adjust your speed to road and weather 
conditions. Remember, you cannot stop on a dime. Never 
make sudden moves like slamming on brakes or accelerator. 
Downshift the gears to slow down for a stop.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
DISTANCE (in metres)
GLARE ICE
PACKED SNOW
CONCRETE
Dry
Wet
Chains on wheels
No chains
Chains on rear wheels
No chains
Winter Driving Facts
Know how to save your car,
your life… or your neighbour’s!
Braking distances of a car travelling 
at 30 km/h

85
Safe Driving
5
4.	 Keep the windshield clear of snow, ice and condensation. Be 
sure headlights, windshield wiper blades and defrosters are in 
top working condition. You have to see danger to avoid it.
5.	 Use snow tires, tire chains or studded tires on snow and ice. 
They cut stopping distances and give more starting and 
climbing traction ability. However, even with the help of 
chains or studs slower than normal speeds are a “must” on 
snow and ice.
6.	 Pump your brakes to slow down or stop. Slamming on the 
brakes can lock the wheels and cause a dangerous skid. 
In vehicles without ABS brakes use the threshold braking 
technique: Keep heel on the floor between the brake and the 
accelerator. Use toes to press brake to the point of the brakes 
locking up. Ease off the brake to the “threshold” where the 
brakes stop locking up.
7.	 Follow at a safe distance – Keep well back of the vehicle ahead 
of you in order to give yourself room to stop. Remember, 
without tire chains, it takes up to 12 times the distance to stop 
on snow and ice as on dry concrete.
8.	 Remember condensation on the pavement of bridges and 
overpasses freezes before the rest of the roadway.
5.12 Intersections
Due to the fact that a great many collisions occur at intersections, 
drivers should exercise extra caution when approaching any cross 
street or road. Always reduce your speed before entering the 
intersection and check for oncoming traffic, first to the left and 
then to the right, to make sure the way is clear before proceeding.

86
Safe Driving
5
5.13 Tire Blow-out
If a tire blows out do not apply the brake. Let up on the 
accelerator. Keep the clutch engaged, make sure you have a 
firm grip on the steering wheel with both hands and slow down 
gradually until you have come to a stop. One protection against 
blow-outs is careful tire maintenance and frequent inspection of 
inside of casing.
5.14 Running Off the Pavement
If a wheel runs off the pavement onto the shoulder of the road, 
remove your foot from the accelerator and steer straight ahead. 
When the way is clear behind you, turn wheels to the left and 
drive slowly back onto the pavement. If you jerk the car back on 
the road by a quick turn, it may go out of control and swerve into 
the path of oncoming traffic or overturn.
5.15 Curves
To drive around a curve safely:
1.	 reduce speed when approaching and
2.	 gradually accelerate after entering the curve.
Collisions occur when drivers enter at top speed and then attempt 
to slow down in the curve. If the road is slippery, a slight force 
would be enough to push the car off the road. If there is an 
advisory speed posted, slow down to the speed. Never stop, park 
or make a U-turn in a curve.
Since curves (and hills) obstruct the view of the road, do not pass 
or back up in these areas.

87
Safe Driving
5
5.16 Driving at Night
Night driving calls for special care because of reduced visibility. It 
is particularly important not to overdrive your headlights - that 
is, to drive at so fast a speed that you cannot stop the car within 
the distance in which your headlights will reveal objects on 
the highway. Unless you immediately reduce your speed when 
deflecting headlight beams, you are driving into a blind area.
5.17 Driving in Fog
Fog is one of the most dangerous driving conditions the driver can 
encounter. Most drivers recognize the hazards of driving in fog 
but are unaware of what should be done to increase safety and 
minimize hazards.
Follow these tips:
1.	 The very first thing to do when fog is encountered is gradually 
reduce speed. Avoid sudden stops. Remember that other 
vehicles - especially trucks - need a greater distance in which 
to slow down.
2.	 In dense fog, creep. Most collisions in fog are caused by 
overdriving visibility distance - in other words, travelling too 
fast.
3.	 Drive using low-beam headlights which throw light down 
onto the road rather than into the fog. Lighted headlights 
provide an additional safety factor by helping other drivers 
to see your vehicle. Do not use parking lights under these 
conditions.
4.	 When stopping because of poor visibility in fog, be certain to 
get as far off the road as possible. It’s a good idea, especially if 
traffic is heavy, to get out of the car and move far off the road. 
Moving off the highway and waiting for the fog to lift is by far 
the safest thing to do.
It is wise to use the above practices in conditions of densely falling 
or blowing snow.
SEE AND BE SEEN!
Turn on your headlights!

88
Safe Driving
5
5.18 Limited Access Highway
Two Lane Highway with Climbing Lane
Slow traffic lanes are designed to allow faster moving traffic to 
pass slower moving vehicles.
Where a traffic control device directs traffic to use a designated 
lane, drive in that lane.
In the situation of either a climbing lane or slow traffic lane, at the 
end the driver in the right hand lane must yield to the driver in the 
left lane. 
Entrance and Exit Ramps
Limited access roads and other multi-lane highways in the city 
or country are designed for more convenient and safer driving. 
However, they are safe only when motorists know and practice the 
following rules:
1.	 Plan your route before you use these roads. Follow your guide 
signs.
2.	 When approaching exits and interchanges, keep alert - read 
and obey the signs. Use the proper lanes for leaving or 
continuing on these highways. If changing lanes, make sure it 
is safe to do so and give the proper signal.
3.	 When entering the highway use acceleration lane to increase 
speed when merging into through traffic. The driver on the 
road should be prepared to change to the left lane if it is safe 
to do so or slow down to allow traffic to enter the highway.
4.	 Use deceleration lanes to lower speed when exiting highway.
5.	 Drive within the minimum and maximum limits unless 
the traffic or weather conditions make these limits unsafe. 
Remember, keep a safe following distance. Leave enough 
space for an emergency stop.
6.	 Never stop on the travelled portion of the roadway even if you 
miss an exit.
7.	 If you pass your exit, drive to the next one. Never back up on a 
highway.

89
Safe Driving
5
Continuity Lines
Continuity lines are painted on the highway at entry and exit 
ramps. They indicate the separation between the through lane 
and the entry/exit ramps. They are wider than the regular lane 
separation lines and are shown in the sketch.
Intersections
Modern interchanges involving roads which cross each other 
at different levels may be designed in a number of ways. For 
example, at a diamond interchange all exits from the main 
road are to the right. All turning movements are made at the 
intersections with the minor road.

90
Sharing the Road
6
6.	 TRAFFIC ON THE HIGHWAY – 
SHARING THE ROAD
When driving remember that there are many different users of our 
streets and highways.
It is everyone’s responsibility to watch out for and adjust to the 
presence and actions of others.
•	 Passenger car drivers
•	 Truck drivers
•	 Motorcycle drivers
•	 Motor driven cycle drivers (moped)
•	 Bicyclists
•	 Pedestrians
•	 School bus drivers
•	 Emergency vehicle operators
The safety of all road users is shared. The more we make ourselves 
aware of and accept this responsibility, the safer we will make our 
streets and highways.
6.1 Drivers Helping Other Drivers
Driving is a high risk task - it is important to always pay attention 
– keep your mind on driving–- be alert and adjust to the actions 
of others.
•	 Keep a safe following distance
•	 Avoid tailgating
•	 Avoid crowding other vehicles and leave yourself space in case 
of an emergency 
Check your blind spot and watch for other drivers when turning or 
changing lanes. Avoid travelling in another vehicle’s blind spot.
Avoid sudden or abrupt moves that might confuse other drivers.
Regardless of the speed limit posted, do not drive faster than 
conditions allow – adjust your speed to weather, road, traffic 
and vehicle conditions. Winter conditions demand your constant 
attention – watch for temperature changes, especially at or near 
the freezing point when roads are most slippery.

91
Sharing the Road
6
6.2 Drivers and Large Commercial Vehicles
Very large vehicles can be intimidating to car drivers - the fact is 
that it works both ways.
Vehicle Drivers
Large vehicles require more space when making turns at 
intersections.
•	 Right Turn – may require the driver to swing left before turning 
right. NEVER attempt to move into this open space.
•	 Left Turn – may require the driver to swing wide and use all the 
extra space.
•	 Heavy vehicles require longer stopping distances and accelerate 
more slowly. Avoid passing while going down hill. Wait until 
you are on level ground and the speed has stabilized.
•	 Large vehicles have very large blind spots – always keep eye 
contact with the driver. Remember, if you cannot see the driver, 
the driver cannot see you.
•	 Allow additional time and distance to pass these vehicles safely.
Large Commercial Vehicle Drivers:
•	 must have consideration for smaller vehicle driver.
•	 do not tailgate, always keep a safe following distance.
•	 do not attempt to pass unless you have enough time to 
complete the pass safely.
•	 be alert while turning for vehicles that may crowd in beside you.
•	 be alert for smaller vehicles cutting in front of you especially 
at intersections, driveways, business areas and multi-lane 
highways.
NOTE: Driving a large vehicle requires a special person who respects 
other road users. Think before you act. It takes a lot of knowledge and 
skill to be a successful professional driver. 

92
Sharing the Road
6
6.3 Drivers and Motorcycles
Vehicle drivers and motorcyclists must share the road and do so 
safely. Always follow the rules of the road and be alert to the 
traffic around you.
Vehicle Drivers 
•	 Look for motorcycles; make sure you know what the motorcycle 
driver is going to do before you make your manoeuvre into his/
her path. 
•	 A motorcycle is entitled to a full highway lane.  
Never crowd into the same lane as the motorcycle. 
•	 Motorcycles can stop quicker than other vehicles – therefore 
allow extra following distance. 
•	 Motorcycles may be difficult to see and can easily disappear in 
your blind spot – USE CAUTION. 
Motorcycle Drivers 
•	 Remember your vehicle is small and not easily seen. Make eye 
contact with other drivers. 
•	 Position yourself to see and be seen - as a rule ride in the left 
wheel position and keep a safe following distance. 
•	 Maintain your lane position. Do not zig-zag between cars in 
traffic. 
6.4 Drivers and Bicycles
Riders of bicycles must obey the traffic rules and regulations that 
apply to all road users. Drivers must respect the bicyclist’s right to 
share the road.
Vehicle Drivers
Bicyclists are at greater risk of death or injury – use extreme 
caution.
•	 Check your blind spot when turning left and especially when 
turning right.

93
Sharing the Road
6
•	 Bicyclists can dart in and out of traffic quickly, expect the 
unexpected.
•	 Give the bicyclist room, do not tailgate or crowd the bicyclist.
Bicyclists
You are at greater risk of death or injury in a collision.
•	 Let others know what you are going to do, use hand signals, 
and be in the correct lane position.
•	 Check your blind spots.
•	 Avoid busy streets.
•	 Stay off sidewalks.
•	 Safe bicycling requires knowledge, skill and maturity.
•	 Keep your bicycle in good working order and properly equipped 
(i.e. horn, lights and reflectors at night).
It is mandatory to wear an approved helmet when riding your bicycle.
6.5 Drivers and Pedestrians
Vehicle Drivers
Remember that pedestrians are extremely vulnerable to death or 
injury in a collision with a motor vehicle.
•	 Drivers must give the pedestrian the right of way in a crosswalk, 
unless otherwise indicated by a sign or signal.
•	 Pedestrians may not act as you expect – expect the unexpected. 
Be alert.
•	 Persons with disabilities may take longer to cross the street – 
give them enough time.
•	 Never pass a vehicle yielding to a pedestrian at a crosswalk.
Pedestrians
•	 Always stop and make eye contact with drivers. Check ahead, 
left, right and behind for other vehicles.
•	 Always look behind the one car you see for passing vehicles - 
learn to expect the unexpected.
•	 Cross the street briskly, do not run.

94
Sharing the Road
6
•	 At night, wear light coloured or reflective type clothing so 
drivers can see you better.
•	 Do not rely on the driver for your own safety.
•	 Obey all traffic signals, use crosswalks and sidewalks.
Important Note:
Drivers must always be aware that pedestrians can be hidden in 
the vehicle’s blind spot:
•	 behind the rear view mirror.
•	 beside the door pillars.
•	 to the sides of the vehicle.
•	 in front of and behind the vehicle (do a circle check before 
starting).
6.6 Drivers and School Buses
Transportation of school students is an important part of our 
education system and requires the co-operation of all drivers.
Vehicle Drivers
School buses are specially marked and have alternating flashing 
lights.
•	 Alternating flashing amber lights are to be used 150 metres 
(500 feet) before the school bus stops to pick up children. Be 
alert for students.
•	 Alternating flashing red lights are used when the school bus is 
stopped, while picking up or discharging students.
It is illegal to pass a school bus displaying the alternating flashing red 
lights.
School Bus Drivers
•	 School bus drivers should be courteous and assist in 
maintaining the flow of traffic.
•	 Be alert for passing motorists when picking up or discharging 
students.

95
Sharing the Road
6
•	 Train your students to be alert and cautious when using the 
school bus.
•	 All drivers hired to transport children to and from school must 
obtain a “B” or “C” endorsement on their driver’s licence.
Drivers of school buses must stop before proceeding through a railway 
crossing unless otherwise indicated.
6.7 Drivers and Emergency Vehicles
Drivers of emergency vehicles and other vehicle drivers must share 
the responsibility of assisting in dealing with emergencies.
Drivers
When approached by an emergency vehicle using siren and 
flashing lights:
•	 Pull over to the right and come to a complete stop. Allow the 
emergency vehicle to proceed.
•	 Yield the right of way to emergency vehicles at intersections.
•	 It is an offence to follow an emergency vehicle within 150 
metres (500 feet).
Emergency Vehicle Drivers
•	 May only use siren and flashing lights when responding to an 
emergency.
•	 Are required to drive with due regard for the safety of all 
persons using the highways at all times.

96
Sharing the Road
6
6.8 Drivers and Farm Vehicles
In recent years, the number of collisions on Canadian highways 
involving farm equipment has increased. The equipment has 
become larger in size and the speeds at which they operate are 
higher. However, in most cases, the equipment has not kept pace 
with other vehicles using the highways. When approaching, it 
can be difficult for other drivers to determine the rate of speed 
at which the farm equipment is traveling. Three major types of 
accidents involving farm equipment include: 
•	 rear end collisions with moving vehicles, 
•	 collisions at intersections where the direction of movement of 
the farm vehicle was difficult to recognize and 
•	 overtaking a farm vehicle that is turning left. 
As a result, new regulations have been made regarding the safe 
movement of farm vehicles. It is important that all other road 
users be familiar with safe driving practices when in the presence 
of such vehicles:
•	 BE ALERT! - Watch for slow moving farm equipment and adjust 
your speed accordingly. Give these drivers the courtesy that you 
would expect if you were driving the equipment. 
•	 BE AWARE! - Look for any farm lanes near the highway 
and watch for signs indicating high volumes of agricultural 
equipment. When you encounter slow-moving equipment, slow 
down, keep your distance and assess the situation.  
•	 DO NOT PASS! - First ensure that the operator of the farm 
equipment is fully aware of your intentions. Be sure that the 
way is clear. Always check your rear view mirror for other 
approaching vehicles that may be traveling at a faster rate than 
you. 
•	 BE PATIENT! - Often, these large farm vehicles will not be able 
to respond to you immediately. It may be impossible for the 
equipment to move over right away if there are obstructions or 
soft shoulders on the road.  

97
Traffic Signs
7
7.	 TRAFFIC SIGNS
Many collisions and near crashes occur as a result of drivers who 
ignore or fail to respond appropriately to traffic signs. It is essential 
that the meaning of traffic signs be interpreted correctly. Signs 
are classified according to their function: regulatory, warning and 
information.
The easiest way to identify traffic signs is to learn to recognize 
their shapes and colours. For safe driving, you must recognize and 
obey traffic signs without hesitation.
A sign-conscious driver is a safe driver. Keep a constant look-out 
for signs as you move your eyes in the field of view ahead of you.
7.1 Six Basic Sign Shapes Every Driver Must Know
Stop
The stop sign, a red octagon with white 
lettering, means come to a full stop and be 
sure the way is clear before proceeding.
Yield
Yield Right of Way signs are triangular and 
have a red border on a white background.
A yield sign means you must reduce speed 
when approaching an intersection. Give right 
of way and stop if necessary if any other traffic is in, or closely 
approaching, the intersection.
Regulatory
Regulatory signs are white rectangles or 
squares with black or other coloured lettering. 
These signs state the law, such as speed 
limits, parking regulations and turning and 
passing movements.

Traffic Signs
7
98
Warning
Warning signs are diamond shaped and are yellow or orange 
with black letters or symbols. They warn of dangerous or unusual 
conditions ahead, such as a curve, turn, dip or side road.
Railway Crossing
The crossbuck is the traditional symbol at roadway-railway crossings. Signs with a 
red reflective border on a white reflective background have replaced the older sign 
with “Railway Crossing” in black lettering.
School Zone
This five-side (pentagonal) sign indicates a school zone. When children are present 
in a school zone, slow down, watch for children and exercise extreme caution. The 
maximum speed permitted is 50 km/h unless otherwise 
posted.
Regardless of the speed limit posted in a school area, 
your speed must be reasonable and prudent for existing 
conditions.
7.2 Standard Sign Colours
Each colour has a particular meaning.
Red – Stop or prohibition
Blue – General information or service road information
Green – Indicates traffic movement such as turns which are 
permitted or directional guidance
Yellow – General warning danger/caution
Fluorescent Yellow – School zone and school crosswalk ahead 
signs
White – Regulatory
Orange – Construction and maintenance warning
Brown – Off road facilities/motorist services

Traffic Signs
7
99
7.3 Regulatory Signs
Regulatory signs inform drivers of laws and regulations affecting 
the use of the highway. It is an offence under the Motor Vehicle Act 
to disregard them.
One-way street  
or highway
Two-way traffic
The maximum speed allowed 
under ideal conditions
Advance warning of a lower 
maximum speed zone ahead
Signs with a green circle give 
permission, as indicated
Signs with a red circle with a 
slash deny permission,  
as indicated
Passing Permitted
Heavy trucks should use  
this roadway
Dangerous goods route
Passing Not Permitted
No heavy trucks are allowed  
on roadway
Dangerous goods carriers 
prohibited

Traffic Signs
7
100
Do not enter
Truck inspection station
Keep to the right of traffic 
islands or obstruction
You must not turn your vehicle 
around in the roadway to 
travel in the opposite direction 
(no U-turn) 
Weight limit of vehicle 
permitted on highway or 
bridge expressed in tonnes
Inspection station exit 
Arrow indicates which side 
of road
Parking prohibited  
as indicated
Stopping prohibited  
as indicated
Parking Signs

Traffic Signs
7
101
Parking Signs
Lane Designation Signs
These signs may be mounted above (or to the side of) the roadway. 
When mounted above, each sign is centred over the lane it controls.
These signs indicate pedestrian 
movement, either at an 
intersection or mid-block. 
You must yield to pedestrians 
within the crosswalk.
This lane must turn left
This lane must turn right
This lane left or through
This lane right or through
This lane left or right
This lane all movements
This lane through only
Two-way left turn lane

Traffic Signs
7
102
Turn Control Signs
These signs may be accompanied by a tab that indicates the sign is only in 
effect during certain hours of the day.
No left turn
Through or Right turn
No right turn
Through or Left turn
Turn left only
Turn right only
Turn right or left
No turns
No right turn on red
Wait for green light before 
making a right turn

Traffic Signs
7
103
7.4 Warning Signs
Warning signs are yellow and diamond shaped, and use symbols 
instead of words. They give warning of some condition of the road 
ahead that calls for special care on the part of the driver.
Two-way traffic ahead
Obstruction
Pass to either side
Stop sign ahead
Divided highway begins
Keep to the right
Divided highway ends
Road surface slippery  
when wet
Traffic signals ahead
Be prepared to stop
Bump or rough road ahead
Steep hill ahead
Shift to lower gear or  
slow down if going down  
very steep hill

Traffic Signs
7
104
Section of roadway regularly 
crossed by animal depicted
Reverse curve ahead
Two turns in opposite directions 
separated by a tangent of less 
than 120m, first turn right
Sharp curve
Maximum advised speed
Concealed or hidden 
intersection ahead
Road from right and/or left
Road narrows
Road ahead is not as wide as 
the road you are driving on
Underpass ahead
Overhead clearance as indicated
Narrow bridge ahead
Width of pavement narrower 
than approach
Winding road ahead
First curve right
Lane ends
Right lane ends
Curve to the right ahead
Checkerboard
Road ends or very sharp turn

Traffic Signs
7
105
Added lane
Two roads converge  
and merging movements  
are not required
Surface subject to icing
Bridge or roadway surface may 
be slippery at zero degrees 
Celsius - slow down
Railway ahead
Road intersects with rail tracks 
ahead at angle depicted
School bus stop ahead
Stop for bus with flashing lights
Pavement ends
Continuation has gravel surface
Warns of "T" intersection
Road turns sharply right  
and left
Two lanes merge ahead
Traffic entering from right
Snowmobile crossing ahead
Pedestrian crosswalk or 
corridor ahead
Cattle crossing ahead
Playground ahead
School crosswalk ahead

Traffic Signs
7
106
Hazard Markers
Chevron (arrowhead)
Posted in groups to guide 
drivers around sharp curves  
in the road
Hazard close to  
the edge of the road
The downward lines show  
the side on which you may 
safely pass
Slow moving vehicle
Mounted on the rear of vehicles 
that travel at speeds  
less than 40 km/h 
It warns drivers approaching 
from behind to slow down
Warning sign on 
overdimension loads  
or on escort vehicles

Traffic Signs
7
107
Construction Signs
Construction signs have black letters or symbols on an orange 
background.
Construction ahead
This sign indicates you are 
entering a construction zone
Drive with extra caution and 
be prepared for changes in the 
speed limit
Road work ahead
This sign marks the beginning 
of an ORANGE ZONE where 
speed limit is 60 km/h  
or less when passing  
highway workers
Survey crew ahead
The maximum speed is  
60 km/h when passing crews  
or equipment engaged in  
work on the highways
Traffic control person ahead
Be prepared to stop for 
instructions
Truck entrance left/right
The location at which trucks are 
entering, leaving or crossing
Pavement drop-off
This sign warns motorists that 
they are on or approaching a 
section of roadway where either 
the adjacent lane or shoulder or 
both are lower or higher than 
the motorist's travel lane
Detour ahead

Traffic Signs
7
7.5 Railway Crossings
The deadliest of all highway collisions is that which occurs 
between a motor vehicle and a train. Railway / highway crossing 
collisions should never occur. Public railway/highway crossings 
are marked with signs, and may also have mechanical or electrical 
warning devices, for your protection. Learn what they are and 
watch for them.
108
Advance Warning Signs
These signs tell you to look, listen and slow down because you may have to stop. There may be an 
advisory speed sign erected below the advance warning sign to show that the safe road speed is 
less than the posted speed.
Pavement Markings
Pavement markings consist of an “X” and/or stop line that may be painted on the pavement at 
the approach to some railway/highway crossings.
Railway Crossing Signs
Railway Crossing Signs are found at all public railway/highway crossings. A Railway 
Crossing Sign means drivers must yield to all trains. If there is more than one track, the 
sign below the Railway Crossing Sign indicates the number of tracks.
Railway Crossing Signs With a Stop Sign
 If a stop sign is erected at a railway/highway crossing, the driver must stop no closer 
than five (5) metres from the nearest rail. Drivers must not proceed until they can do so 
safely.
Railway Crossing Signs with Flashing Lights and Bell
If flashing lights and bells are erected at a railway / highway crossing, the driver 
must stop when the lights and bell are activated because this means that a train is 
approaching. All drivers must stop at the stop line painted on the roadway or, if none exists, no 
closer than five metres from nearest rail. Do not proceed until the lights and bells have stopped, 
the train has passed 
or until you can do 
so safely. If there is 
more than one track, make sure all the tracks are clear before crossing. Drivers have started across 
the tracks right after a train has gone by only to be struck by a second train coming from the 
opposite direction.

109
Traffic Signs
7
7.6 Guide Signs
Guide signs are essential to guide the motorist along established 
roads, to inform him/her of intersecting roads, and generally to 
give such information as will help the driver along his/her way in 
the most simple, direct method possible.
109
Trans Canada highway
Arterial highway
Collector highway
Local highway
Hospital
Airport
Plane points direction to airport
Local airport

110
Traffic Signs
7
7.7 Information Signs
These signs are square in shape. They indicate the location of 
various facilities.
110
Museum
Accommodations
Gasoline
Food
Picnic facilities
Tourist information
Campground

What Every Motorcyclist Must Know
8
8.	 WHAT EVERY MOTORCYCLIST MUST 
KNOW
It is an offence to carry passengers on the handle bars, frame or 
tank of the motorcycle. It is also an offence to cling to or attach 
yourself or your vehicle to any other moving vehicle while driving 
your motorcycle.
8.1 Motorcycle Driver’s Licence
If you hold a driver’s licence you may not drive a motorcycle on 
the highway except while taking a driver’s examination unless 
the licence contains an endorsement permitting you to drive 
a motorcycle. To qualify you must first pass a vision screening, 
written test, then a road test.
The written exam to obtain a licence consists of ten (10) questions. 
You must answer eight correctly. As well, you will be required to 
write basic and sign tests.
8.2 Equipment
1.	 Brakes – Every motorcycle must be equipped with a brake on 
each wheel.
2.	 Headlight – One and not more than three headlights are 
required.
3.	 Rear Lamp and Brake Light – Every motorcycle must have a 
rear lamp and brake light. These may or may not be the same 
light. Licence plate must be illuminated.
4.	 Muffler – It must have a muffler in good working order.
5.	 Handlebars – Handlebars must be securely fastened and not 
exceed 30 cm (12 inches) in height as measured vertically 
from its point of attachment at the frame.
6.	 Foot rests – A motorcycle must have foot rests which may 
be used in the normal sitting position by an operator or 
passenger where the motorcycle is equipped for carrying a 
passenger.
111

What Every Motorcyclist Must Know
8
7.	 Rear-view Mirror – It must have a mirror which will give the 
driver a view of the highway for at least 60 m (200 feet) to the 
rear.
8.	 Horn – A motorcycle must have a horn in good working order 
capable of being heard at 60 m (200 feet).
9.	 Seat – Do not carry passengers unless the motorcycle has 
been so designed.
10.	 Goggles – It is advisable that both drivers and passengers be 
protected by glasses, goggles or a transparent shield. This 
shield should be colourless for night driving and should not 
alter your perception. 
11.	 Headgear – You are not allowed by law to operate or ride 
on a motorcycle unless you are wearing adequate protective 
headgear of a kind prescribed by Regulation. 
Every motorcycle is entitled to the full use of a traffic lane and full 
parking space. 
8.3 Safe Driving Rules
Defensive riding is the most important key to safe driving. Expect 
the unexpected. Be aware of the other motorist at all times and 
always be prepared for his/her mistakes. Know your motorcycle 
and your own driving limitations and drive within them. Your skill 
and your attitude are important factors in defensive driving. While 
driving, continually assess the condition of the road ahead and 
behind. 
Do not make yourself a hidden target. When stopping at an 
intersection you should stop behind the last car. Most motorcycle 
– car collisions take place at intersections. They also take place 
most frequently during daylight, on weekends, on dry, level roads 
and during the summer.
Most fatal motorcycle crashes involve collisions with automobiles. 
In the majority of cases, the car driver did not see the motorcyclist.
112

What Every Motorcyclist Must Know
8
Wear clothing of heavy material (leather is recommended) with 
long sleeves, long pants, heavy boots and gloves when driving 
or riding as a passenger. For night riding, wear clothing of light 
colours with reflective material attached.
8.4 Motorcycle Safety Check
For safe operation, a motorcycle must be maintained in sound 
mechanical condition and adjustment. Critical items should be 
verified daily, while others should be checked regularly.
Daily Safety Inspection
1.	 Tires and Wheels – tread depth, sidewall condition, inflation, 
foreign material or objects, rim condition, spoke tension, axle 
nuts, cotter pins.
2.	 Final Drive – chain or belt adjustment, wheel alignment.
3.	 Lubrication System – oil levels, leaks.
4.	 Fuel System – fuel level, leaks, valve operation.
5.	 Cables and Control Clutch – throttle, choke, brakes.
6.	 Electrical System – battery condition, fluid level, terminals, 
headlights (lens operation, adjustment, high/low), tail 
light (lens operation), brake light (front/rear actuation, 
adjustment), signal lights (lens operation), running lights, 
horn operation, auxiliary lighting (lens operation), indicator 
lights operation.
7.	 Mirrors – adjustment, broken.
8.	 Legal – licence plate and decal, registration, insurance.
113

What Every Motorcyclist Must Know
8
8.5 Starting
You should develop a routine for starting up the engine to ensure 
that nothing important is missed. Before you get on, however, 
both you and the motorcycle should be properly prepared.
Your pre-start routine should include the following steps:
F	
Fuel – Does the tank have enough fuel for the trip? Is the fuel 
valve turned on?
I	
Ignition – Is the ignition key turned on?
N	 Neutral – Is the transmission in neutral? Roll the motorcycle 
backwards or forwards about a foot to ensure that it is.
E	
Engine Cut-Off – Is the “kill” switch turned to the run position?
C	
Choke (or Enricher) – If the engine is cold, is the choke 
applied?
On some models, you must disengage the clutch. If you can 
remember the term F I N E - C, then you should be able to 
perform the pre-start routine easily and properly.
So that you do not accidentally apply too much throttle, follow this 
procedure: Grasp throttle with a flat or slightly bent wrist position. 
Use palm and thumb to control throttle and your fingers to control 
the front brake. If the wrist is lowered, you will have a hard time to 
reach the brake.
8.6 Stopping
The front brake (located on the right handlebar) is the most 
important. Other than at very low speeds (under 10 km/h), always 
apply both brakes to stop. The front brake provides about 70% of 
the total braking force under normal road conditions because the 
weight shifts forward during braking. The rear wheel will lock if 
you apply too much force to the brake pedal but the front wheel is 
more difficult to lock. Extensive practise is needed to get the most 
power out of your brakes, while avoiding skids. Be careful in using 
your front brake. If you brake too hard, your front wheel may lock. 
114

What Every Motorcyclist Must Know
8
This is more likely to happen on gravel, dirt or wet surfaces.
•	 Always be ready to stop. Downshift as you brake so you will 
have power available if needed. This also allows you to use the 
engine compression as a brake.
•	 Use both brakes every time you slow down or stop. If you use 
only the rear brake for normal stops, you may not have enough 
skill to use the front brake properly in an emergency.
•	 It is preferable when stopped in traffic to have transmission in 
neutral.
•	 When stopped in traffic and your motorcycle is in gear, keep the 
rear brake firmly applied. This will prevent the motorcycle from 
lurching forward should the clutch cable break or your hand slip 
off the clutch.
•	 Braking in turns can cause loss of control if road surface is 
slippery and the brakes are not used properly. If you must, use 
both brakes more gradually than on straight line braking. Do 
not lock either brake.
•	 Never ride the brake partly applied. It turns on your brake lights. 
This is confusing to other drivers and causes unnecessary wear 
on your brakes.
•	 You can stop quicker than most vehicles. Know what is behind 
you. Check your mirror often. If someone is too close, flash your 
brake light. Always leave adequate distance between you and 
the vehicle ahead in case you have to avoid a crash.
•	 When approaching sand or gravel, slow down and shift to a 
lower gear.
•	 When riding on wet or slippery roads, avoid sudden braking or 
rapid acceleration. Avoid painted or metal surfaces, they may be 
slippery.
Keep your feet on the footrests. Remove them only when about to 
stop.
115

What Every Motorcyclist Must Know
8
8.7 Passengers
Inexperienced drivers should not attempt to carry passengers. 
Passengers may affect stability and control of the motorcycle, 
particularly at low speeds. When carrying passengers, instruct 
them to:
a)	 hold tightly to either the driver or handgrips;
b)	 keep their feet on the pegs;
c)	 lean with the vehicle; and
d)	 not touch the muffler or engine.
Do not carry a passenger unless your machine is designed for more 
than one person.
Remember that you need a greater distance in which to stop when 
carrying a passenger than you do when driving alone.
8.8 Driving Techniques
Turns
Do your braking and gear shifting well in advance of a turn to slow 
down. When taking a curve at normal cruising speed, you should 
lean the motorcycle and your body at the same angle. However, 
when making a sharp turn at less than 25 km/h, you should lean 
the motorcycle in the direction of the turn farther than your body. 
Do not drag your feet on the road surface when turning.
Slippery Surface
When driving on a slippery surface: (a) avoid leaning the machine; 
(b) use the front brake carefully - avoid sudden braking: (c) 
decrease speed; and (d) do not accelerate suddenly.
Railroad Tracks
When railroad tracks cross the highway at an angle, it is not always 
advisable to cross them head on. It may be safer to cross the tracks 
at a slight angle.
116

What Every Motorcyclist Must Know
8
8.9 Defensive Driving
In order to be seen by other drivers you should take into account 
their field of vision and learn to drive in a position where you can 
be seen. Do not ride in another vehicle’s blind spot. 
When riding with other cycles, do not ride two abreast in a single 
lane on public streets and highways. Stagger your positions so the 
driver on the left is in front of the machine on the right. This will 
allow room for both of you to manoeuvre and pass. 
The best position in which to see ahead and to be seen by other 
drivers on a two-way, two-lane street is the left side of the right 
lane.
Each lane offers you three choices of position: left side, center and 
right side. There is no one lane position which is best all the time. 
Evaluate traffic and road conditions constantly and decide what 
is the best position. There are advantages and disadvantages for 
each and your choice will always result in compromise.
Remember, it is very dangerous to operate a motorcycle between 
lines of traffic or to pass between curb lane traffic and the curb.
Ride on the right side when using the right lane, when preparing 
to make a right turn at an intersection. Do not ride on the extreme 
right of a road because: (a) you may not be seen by a driver 
waiting to enter the road; (b) cars may crowd in beside you; and 
(c) you will be too close to parked cars you may have to pass.
Driving a motorcycle with lights on in daytime helps you to 
be seen by other drivers.
8.10 Shoulder Checks
When you plan to start, stop or change direction in traffic, there is 
only one sure way to see a car behind you in the next lane; that is, 
turn your head and glance over your shoulder at the traffic behind 
you. Just checking your rearview mirror is not enough.
117

What Every Motorcyclist Must Know
8
8.11 Following Other Vehicles
You should always leave plenty of space between yourself and 
vehicles you are following because:
1.	 Ahead you will be able to see traffic and road conditions more 
easily.
2.	 If the road becomes slippery, you may need more room to stop 
than would a car.
3.	 If the vehicle ahead should stop suddenly, you can use some 
of the space ahead to keep a vehicle behind from hitting you.
As you increase speed, allow more space between yourself and the 
vehicle you are following.
Following Distances
Following too close or tailgating is a frequent cause of highway 
collisions. To drive safely you must leave sufficient space between 
your vehicle and the vehicle ahead so that you can stop in the 
event of an emergency.
The Two-Second Interval is a good way to learn to recognize safe 
following distance. Just watch the vehicle ahead of you pass 
some definite point on the highway, such as a telephone pole. 
Then count to yourself “one thousand and one, one thousand and 
two”. That is two seconds. If you pass that same spot before you 
finish the count, you are following too closely. This holds true 
at any speed. This rule applies to favourable driving conditions. 
Unfavourable conditions call for lower speed and a longer count.
Do not use high speed highways unless you can keep up with the 
flow of traffic. Remember, the following areas are slippery when 
wet:
1.	 painted lines and arrows, particularly when newly painted
2.	 greasy areas in center of lane
3.	 metal surfaces
4.	 fallen leaves
5.	 sand and gravel collected near the road shoulder.
118
The highway is likely  
to be more slippery for the 
first few minutes after it 
starts to rain or following 
light drizzle.

What Every Motorcyclist Must Know
8
8.12 Emergencies When Riding
Avoiding Obstacles
A quick stop may not be enough to keep you from hitting 
something in your path. Debris or a pothole might appear 
suddenly; the only way to avoid a collision would be with a quick 
turn.
•	 The procedure to making a quick turn is to get the motorcycle to 
lean quickly in the direction you wish to turn.
•	 To get the motorcycle to lean quickly, counter steer. (Counter-
steering means steering one way to send the bike in the 
opposite direction). If you wish to turn right, push on the right 
handgrip, this will cause the front wheel to move slightly left. 
The result is a lean to the right.
•	 As the motorcycle begins to lean, you now can turn the 
handlebars in the direction it is leaning to keep from falling 
over. 
Riding Over Obstacles 
Sometimes you have no choice but to ride over an object in your 
path. A length of tailpipe, etc. may be seen too late to steer around 
it. In this type of situation the basic rules to follow are:
•	 Hold onto the handlebars tightly.
•	 Keep a straight course.
•	 Stand slightly on the footpegs.
•	 Shift weight back.
•	 Accelerate slightly as front wheel reaches object.
•	 Decelerate and move weight forward as you go over object.
119
Do not loan your motorcycle 
to inexperienced drivers  
or to someone who does 
not have a valid motorcycle 
licence.

120
What Every Motorcyclist Must Know
8
Sudden Stops
If you have to stop quickly try:
•	 To keep the bike upright and in a straight line. Apply each brake 
as hard as you can without locking either wheel. If a wheel locks 
up and skids, it may slide to one side making the cycle hard to 
control.
•	 If you are forced to brake when the front wheel is turned, do it 
gradually. Give more emphasis to the back brake.
You need practice to know how hard you can brake without 
locking the wheels and skidding.
•	 In an emergency situation, draw in the clutch, apply the 
front brake and push down on the back brake all at the same 
time. This will help your balance and stop you in the shortest 
distance.
•	 Remember if you take your feet off the pegs for balance, only 
your front brake remains on.
Wobble
When travelling at high speeds, the front wheel can suddenly start 
to wobble (shake from side to side). The only thing you can do in 
this situation is to ride it out.
•	 Do not brake. 
•	 Grip the handlebars firmly but do not try to stop the wobble.
•	 Gradually close the throttle and pull off the road as soon as you 
can. 
•	 Check for unequal tire pressure, bent or misaligned wheels, 
loose spokes or an improperly mounted windshield.
All of the above are typical causes of unsteadiness.
120
Questions on safe driving 
practices for motorcycle 
operators
1.	 When two lanes of vehicles 
stop at a traffic signal light, 
you should:
•	 Stop behind the last car 
in the lane you are in?
•	 Pass all vehicles on the 
right?
•	 Pass all vehicles between 
the two lanes of cars?
•	 Pass all vehicles on the 
left?
2.	 A motorcycle may be parked:
•	 In any parking space 
provided for a four-
wheeled vehicle?
•	 On the sidewalk?
•	 At a right angle to the 
curb?
•	 Between cars?
•	 In any vacant curb space 
provided the motorcycle 
is parked parallel to the 
curb?
3.	 When three or more riders 
are together, the safest way 
to travel is:
•	 four abreast?
•	 three abreast?
•	 single file?
•	 in a group?

121
What Every Motorcyclist Must Know
8
Stuck Throttle
If your throttle sticks, the following steps should be applied:
•	 Immediately squeeze the clutch lever.
•	 Rotate the throttle back and forth several times.
•	 If you can not close the throttle, turn off the engine with the 
emergency kill switch, if you have one; if not, use the ignition 
key.
•	 Carefully steer off the road and stop.
Blowouts
If you have a blowout, you will need to react quickly to keep your 
balance. A front wheel blowout is dangerous since it affects your 
steering.
You cannot always hear a tire blow. You should be able 
to detect a flat tire from the way the motorcycle reacts. 
If the front tire goes flat, the steering will feel heavy. If 
the rear tire goes flat, the back of the motorcycle will 
tend to slide from side to side.
If the rear tire blows, maintain your position on the 
machine. Don’t brake – ease off the throttle instead.
If a front tire blows, hang on firmly and try to steer 
straight and shift your weight to the rear. When you’ve 
slowed enough, move to the right side of the road.
Skids
Most motorcycle skids are caused by braking too hard - 
usually the rear wheel.
To correct skid
Rear Wheel: Steer slightly in the direction of the skid, letting up on 
the brake so the wheel can turn.
Front Wheel: Release the front brake immediately.
A rear wheel skid caused by over-acceleration should be corrected 
by closing the throttle gradually. Sudden closing of throttle may 
worsen the problem.
121

122
Organ Transplantation and Donation
9
9.	 ORGAN TRANSPLANTATION AND 
DONATION
9.1 Transplantation
Advances in medical science now make it possible to replace failing 
human organs. In fact, replacement of a kidney, cornea, heart 
or liver is no longer considered an experiment but a treatment 
choice. Organs and tissues that can be effectively transplanted are 
kidneys, hearts, lungs, livers, corneas, bones, joints, skin, pancreas, 
bone marrow and bowel. Therefore, one person’s decision to be an 
organ donor could benefit as many as 10 people. However, many 
Canadians die each year because donor organs are not available.
9.2 Organ Donation
For many patients, transplantation offers the only hope for leading 
a healthy and productive life, or, in some cases, for life at all. By 
signing an organ donor card and urging your family and friends to 
do the same, you could ensure the freedom and quality of life that 
you enjoy is passed on to someone else.
Your donor card confirms your wish to give the gift of any or all 
tissues and organs after your death. Although it is important 
to discuss your feelings about transplantation with your family, 
friends or doctor, the information on the card may help them with 
decisions at a difficult time.
122

123
Organ Transplantation and Donation
9
9.3 Age
Age is never an absolute barrier to some form of organ donation.
If you are over 19, you may direct that any tissue or organ may be 
used after your death. For persons under 19 years, your parent or 
guardian should sign the donor card also. Donor cards are available 
from The Kidney Foundation or the CNIB.
FOR MORE INFORMATION
For more information on transplantation and organ donation, 
contact:
NB Organ and Tissue Procurement Program at
(506) 643-6848
123

Additional Information Important to Drivers
10
10	 ADDITIONAL INFORMATION 
IMPORTANT TO DRIVERS
10.1 Parking Regulations
A person is not permitted to stop, stand or park a vehicle except to 
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the 
directions of a peace officer or traffic control device, in any of the 
following places:
a)	 on a sidewalk;
b)	 in front of a public or private driveway;
c)	 within an intersection;
d)	 within 5 metres (16 feet) from the point on a curb opposite a 
fire hydrant;
e)	 on a crosswalk;
f)	 within 5 metres (16 feet) of a crosswalk at an intersection;
g)	 within 10 metres (32 feet) upon the approach to any flashing 
beacon, stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of 
a roadway;
h)	 between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 10 
metres (32 feet) of points on the curb immediately opposite 
the ends of a safety zone, unless the local authority indicates a 
different length by signs or markings;
i)	 within 15 metres (50 feet) of the nearest rail of a railroad 
crossing;
j)	 within 10 metres (32 feet) of the driveway entrance to any fire 
station and on the side of a street opposite to any fire station 
within 25 metres (82 feet) of said entrance;
k)	 alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction 
when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
l)	 on the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the 
edge of a curb of a street;
m)	 upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway 
or within a highway tunnel;
124

Additional Information Important to Drivers 10
n)	 at any place where official signs prohibit stopping;
o)	 more than 50 centimetres (20 inches) from a curb;
p)	 upon a provincial highway so as to interfere with snow 
ploughing operations.
10.2 Following
It is illegal for a commercial motor vehicle (other than a police 
vehicle) or a vehicle towing a trailer or a mobile home to follow 
another vehicle within 60 metres (200 feet) when travelling upon 
a highway outside a business or residential district except for the 
purpose of overtaking and passing.
10.3 Following Fire Vehicles
It is an offence to follow within 150 metres (500 feet) of any fire 
apparatus which is answering an alarm. It is also an offence to 
drive or park within 150 metres (500 feet) of any fire apparatus 
which has stopped in answer to an alarm. Driving over a fire hose 
is prohibited unless instructed to do so by a fire department official 
in charge.
10.4 Riding in the Back Portion of a Vehicle
No person shall operate a motor vehicle on a highway with 
a person riding on a portion of the motor vehicle that is not 
designed or normally used for carrying passengers unless:
a)	 the motor vehicle is used in a parade that is approved by an 
appropriate governmental authority;
b)	 the motor vehicle is transporting persons who are working 
while being transported on the motor vehicle; or
c)	 the motor vehicle is transporting persons to or from a 
worksite.
125

Additional Information Important to Drivers
10
No person shall ride in or on a trailer or semi-trailer that is being 
hauled on a highway by a motor vehicle or a farm tractor unless:
a)	 the person is taking part in a parade that is approved by an 
appropriate governmental authority;
b)	 the person is being transported to or from a worksite.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle or farm tractor with a 
person riding in or on a trailer or semi-trailer that is hauled on a 
highway by the motor vehicle or farm tractor unless:
a)	 the trailer or semi-trailer is being used in a parade that is 
approved by an appropriate governmental authority;
b)	 the trailer or semi-trailer is transporting persons who are 
working while being transported in or on the trailer or semi-
trailer; or
c)	 the trailer or semi-trailer is transporting persons to or from a 
worksite.
10.5 Driving Tips
•	 Stop driving when you become drowsy. Pull off the highway 
as soon as it is safe to do so. Drowsiness is one of the greatest 
dangers in highway driving.
•	 Avoid distractions while driving, especially on high speed roads. 
Keep your eyes on the road not on other passengers in the 
vehicle. Do not drive with animals loose in the car.
•	 When you leave the highway after a long drive and begin to 
drive on two-lane highways and/or city streets, you must make 
a complete adjustment in speed and vision to the changes in 
driving conditions.
126

Additional Information Important to Drivers 10
127
10.6 Fuel Efficient Driving Techniques
Safety should be your number one concern every time you get 
behind the wheel of a vehicle. The good news is that practising 
defensive driving techniques not only improves road safety, it 
also reduces fuel consumption and cuts exhaust emissions that 
contribute to climate change and urban smog. Depending on your 
driving habits and how often you drive, these basic techniques 
and useful tips could save you hundreds of dollars a year in fuel 
maintenance costs:
How You Drive
Don't drive aggressively: it is both safer and more fuel-efficient 
to maintain a steady speed on the road, accelerate smoothly when 
passing or merging with faster traffic and avoid hard braking. 
European tests have shown that agressive driving - frequent rapid 
acceleration and hard braking - can increase fuel consumption by 
up to 39 percent.
Reduce your speed: never drive faster than the posted speed limit. 
Increasing your highway cruising speed from 100 km/h to 120 
km/h will increase fuel consumption by up to 20 percent.
Don't idle: if you are going to be stopped for more than 10 
seconds, except in traffic, turn off your engine. Idling your vehicle 
for longer than 10 seconds uses more fuel than it takes to restart 
your vehicle. For more information visit: idling.gc.ca
Plan your trips: combine errands and to avoid traffic jams, steep 
hills, road construction, etc. Combining a number of short trips into 
one longer one allows your engine and drivetrain to reach peak 
operating temperature, which is not possible on trips of less than 
5 km. Avoiding trouble spots shortens your travel time and reduces 
unnecessary idling.

Additional Information Important to Drivers
10
Manual transmission: if you are driving a vehicle with a manual 
transmission, learn how to use it properly for maximum fuel 
savings. A tachometer can help you shift the transmission at 
the most fuel-efficient engine speeds (the owners' manual will 
indicate these speeds).
Maintaining your vehicle
Maintain your vehicle: follow the vehicle manufacturer's 
recommended operating procedures and maintenance schedule in 
your owner's manual. Regular maintenance such as oil and filter 
changes will not only prevent early degeneration of your vehicle's 
components, it will also keep them operating at their most fuel-
efficient level. A clogged air filter can increase fuel consumption 
by up to 10 percent. Regular maintenance will keep your vehicle 
operating safely, save you money and, at the same time, help the 
environment.
Check your tires: measure the pressure of your tires at least 
once a month when the tires are cold (i.e. the vehicle has been 
stationary for at least three hours or has not been driven more 
than 2 km). If you have to drive more than 2 km to add air, check 
the tires before you leave and then add the amount of air that is 
missing from this reading. Inflate the tires to the recommended 
pressure, usually indicated on the car door, glove compartment 
or in the owner's manual. With proper tire inflation, your car will 
burn less fuel and be safer to drive. A vehicle with tires that are 
under inflated by  
56 kPa (8 psi) increases fuel consumption by 4 percent. For more 
information visit: betiresmart.ca
128

Additional Information Important to Drivers 10
Buying a Fuel-Efficient Vehicle
Find the vehicle that meets your everday needs: when buying 
a vehicle, it's important to find the most fuel-efficient model that 
meets your everyday needs. If you're shopping for a car or light 
truck, the Fuel Consumption Guide from Natural Resources Canada 
(NRCan) is the place to start. This Guide lets you compare vehicle 
information, including fuel-consumption ratings, estimated 
annual fuel costs and fuel use, and carbon dioxide emissions.
Make fuel-efficient choices: be aware of the effect certain 
options, such as power seats, large engine size, 4-wheel drive and 
oversized tires, can have on your fuel efficiency by adding weight 
and draining power from the engine.
Fuel-Efficient Features
Air conditioning: in summer, minimize your use of air 
conditioning. Operating an air conditioner in hot weather can 
increase fuel consumption by more than 20 percent in city 
driving. A more fuel-efficient option for staying cool is to open a 
window. However, at highway speeds, use your car's flow-through 
ventilation - open windows and sunroofs increase aerodynamic 
drag, which makes the engine work harder and consume more 
fuel. If you must use your vehicle's air conditioning, avoid running 
it continuously; shut it off after the interior is cool or set the 
controls to a comfort level that allows the system to cycle.
Block heaters: use a block heater in the winter to warm the 
engine oil and make cold starts easier on your engine components. 
Your vehicle's oil does not freeze when the temperature dips below 
0° C, but it does get much thicker. This means your engine has to 
work harder and use more fuel. Use a timer to switch the block 
heater on two hours before you plan to drive. Proper use of a block 
heater can improve your vehicle's overall fuel economy by as much 
as 10 percent. But don't leave your block heater on overnight or 
your energy savings will disappear in a higher electricity bill.
129

Additional Information Important to Drivers
10
130
Remote car starters: are handy on cold winter mornings, but 
don't start your car too soon - in most driving conditions, today's 
modern engines need to warm-up for only 30 seconds, even on 
cold mornings. Also, allowing your car to idle too long wastes gas 
and produces unnecessary exhaust emissions.
Cruise control: use it for highway driving to maintain a constant 
speed, avoid inadvertent speeding and save fuel. The exception is 
on hilly terrain, where it's a good idea to allow the vehicle's speed 
to drop slightly going uphill and then let gravity help you build up 
speed again (to a safe level) going down the other side.
Remove them when they're not needed: ski racks, roof racks and 
heavy items in your trunk also add weight and cause you to burn 
more fuel.
You will find other useful tips, information and tools at  
vehicles.gc.ca

131
Additional Information Important to Drivers 10
10.7 What Motorists Need to Know About Trucks and 
Their Limitations
Trucks are not large cars. They are a different species of highway 
creature. Whether they are accelerating, braking, climbing a hill, 
switching lanes or turning onto a side street, tractor-trailer trucks 
must perform certain manoeuvres that drivers of automobiles must 
understand.
A typical tractor-trailer combination – a power unit pulling 
a loaded semi-trailer – may weigh up to 49,500 kilograms. 
Depending on the trailer length – 12.2, 13.7, 14.6 or 16.2 metres 
– the total length of the combination may exceed 23 metres. On 
the busiest intercity routes a motorist may encounter double trailer 
combinations (B-trains) up to 25 metres in length and weighing up 
to 62,500 kilograms.
These large trucks, at a traffic light, accelerate much slower than 
the typical late-model automobile. The truck may have to go 
through nine to eighteen gears – a relatively lengthy process – to 
reach the speed limit. The truck may have two or three times more 
power than a car but with 31,750 kilograms or more of trailer and 
cargo behind it, a truck engine must move 30 to 50 times more 
weight than does a car engine.
Braking
Most motorists understand that a semi-trailer will take more time 
and distance to brake to a stop than a car travelling at the same 
speed. But how much more? Typically, a passenger sedan travelling 
90 kilometres per hour stops in 56 metres while a sleeper-cab 
tractor with a loaded trailer requires a minimum 60 metres.

132
Additional Information Important to Drivers
10
As well, it takes almost as long to stop a “bobtail” – a tractor 
running without its trailer – as it does to stop a loaded tractor-
trailer combination. Without the weight of a trailer on its rear 
wheels, the bobtail comes to a stop only after travelling 56 metres.
When motorists fail to understand the physical forces that act on 
trucks, the resulting confusion can have serious consequences. 
Using the example of a bobtail’s braking distance, our “instincts” 
tell us that a lightly loaded truck should have less momentum and 
a shorter stopping distance than one carrying a heavy load - and 
that a bobtail should stop fastest of all. The fatal collision rate 
for bobtails was more than 13 times higher than that for tractors 
pulling trailers.
Braking distances are increased by two additional factors: reaction 
time and brake lag. Reaction time is the number of seconds it takes 
a driver to recognize a problem and take the appropriate action. 
The average reaction time of most people is three-quarters of a 
second. At 90 kilometres per hour, a truck will travel 18 metres 
before the driver applies the brakes.
Brake lag, the period of time between the application of the foot 
valve and the time the brakes react to maximum brake efficiency, 
is more evident in trucks. The hydraulic brakes on automobiles 
and smaller trucks engage almost immediately. In tractor-trailers, 
however, the air-brake systems that transmit braking power from 
the tractor to the trailer are subject to a lag that can add many 
metres to the stopping distance.
A combination truck travelling at 90 kilometres per hour with a full 
load under ideal conditions will travel a total of 102 metres before 
coming to a complete stop. With hot brakes, the distance will be 
even longer, in excess of 103 metres. A tractor-trailer of any kind 
takes far longer to stop than does a passenger car and motorists 
must take this into account while driving.
Braking characteristics are not the only way in which motorists may 
be confused by a truck’s actions.

133
Additional Information Important to Drivers 10
Turning characteristics have the same effect. For example, many 
motorists following a semi-trailer assume that if the truck moves to 
the left it is preparing to make a left turn.
In fact, tractor-trailer trucks often swing out to the left as the 
first step in making a right turn. Particularly when making a tight 
turn at an urban intersection or when pulling off the street into 
a driveway, the tractor must swing to the left first to prevent 
the trailer from riding up over the curb or striking vehicles in 
the parking lane. Unprepared motorists, however, sometimes 
misinterpret this preliminary swing to the left as the beginning of 
a left turn that will allow them to pass the truck on the right. When 
the truck proves to be turning right, the auto is trapped between 
the truck and the curb in the “right turn squeeze”.
When following a truck, observe its turn signals before trying to 
pass on the right at an intersection.
A Trucker’s Blind Spots
One of the most serious misjudgments motorists make about trucks 
concerns a trucker’s field of vision. Many motorists believe that 
because a truck driver sits twice as high as the driver of an auto, 
he can see farther ahead and can react more promptly to events as 
they develop. True, the trucker has a better view over the top of any 
cars ahead of him but truckers have serious blind spots motorists 
do not have – immediately in front, on either side of the cab and 
up to 60 metres in the rear.
A trucker cannot see over or through another tractor trailer in front 
of him any better than a motorist can and may have a limited view 
of the road directly in front of his cab. If he is driving a tractor with 
a long hood, a trucker may not be able to see the first 6 metres 
of concrete in front of his bumper – ample space for a car to slip 
unnoticed into a position of danger. Even on some of the more 
streamlined tractors with sloped hoods or with no front hood 
(called cab-overs), there can be a blind spot of up to 3 metres.

134
Additional Information Important to Drivers
10
The blind spots on the sides and in the rear hamper a trucker’s 
ability to take evasive action to avoid collisions, so motorists must 
be careful to ensure their vehicle will be seen. An often cited rule of 
thumb for motorists overtaking a semi-trailer is, if you cannot see 
the truck driver in his side mirror, he cannot see you.
10.8 Your Road Driving Test
The road driving test is an important part of your driver licence 
examination.
No tricks are played and you will not be asked to do anything 
unlawful but you will be expected to obey all traffic laws. In 
addition, you will be expected to give all signals required by law - 
either by hand and arm or approved mechanical indicators.
The vehicle in which you take the test must be in good mechanical 
condition. Defective equipment or improper registration plates 
will result in a delay of the driving test until legal requirements are 
met. If the test is delayed, you must arrange for a new driving test.
If you have an instructional licence, you must be accompanied to 
the Examining Station by a licensed driver. If you are presently 
unlicensed, then a licensed driver must drive your vehicle to the 
Examining Station.
Applicants for a Class 4 licence will be road tested in the type of 
vehicle they intend driving. The medical fitness report will be 
identified as being either for an ambulance, taxi or small bus. The 
road test will then be taken only in that type of vehicle.
Applicants for all other classes (Classes 1, 2, 3, 5, 6 and 9) will be 
road tested in the type of vehicle covered by those classes.
The driving test is not difficult. Remember that thousands of drivers 
have been successful on tests and are now licensed to drive. They 
can do it, so can you. Being relaxed and doing the best you can will 
help both yourself and the Driver Examiner.

135
Additional Information Important to Drivers 10
After you pass your driving test and receive your driver’s licence, 
continue to drive in the safe manner you demonstrated during 
the test. You will have received the driving privilege with the 
understanding that you will obey all traffic laws and safe driving 
practices. The Motor Vehicle Branch keeps a record of all reported 
traffic violations and collisions. The driving privilege may be 
withdrawn if drivers are convicted of traffic offences or contribute 
to traffic collisions. Protect your driving privilege.
The Department of Public Safety extends best wishes for safe and 
pleasant driving.
10.9 A Note of Encouragement
You do not have to worry about taking the road test. The Driver 
Examiner is there to help you.
Examiners will be courteous and polite and you should not feel 
intimidated. Talk with the Driver Examiner before the road test and 
get to know him or her.
Driver Examiners do understand that you are nervous. You must 
learn to relax both for the test and in regular driving. Please ask any 
questions before proceeding with the road test.
Good luck on your test and please drive carefully!
Susan McCracken
Chief Driver Examiner
Deputy Registrar of Motor Vehicles

136
Additional Information Important to Drivers
10
10.10 Consent Form
The Consent Form must be signed by a parent or a legally 
appointed guardian who has legal custody of applicant.
NOTE: Authorizing signature must ensure that the consent form is 
properly completed and witnessed by a non-relative
*   This consent form may be removed  from this  
handbook for use.

CONSENT FORM • FORMULE DE CONSENTEMENT
To: The Registrar of Motor Vehicles 
Au : Registraire des véhicules à moteur
	
Consent is hereby given for the issuance of a licence to operate a Motor Vehicle to: 
	
Je consens, par les présentes, à ce qu’un permis de conduire d’un véhicule à moteur soit délivré à :
	
who was born on
	
qui est né(e) le
I am the	
	
Father	
	
Mother	
	
Guardian	
of the applicant named above. 
Je suis le (la)	
o Père	
o Mère	
o Tuteur(trice)	
du demandeur nommé ci-dessus.
	
Non-Related Witness	
Date	
Signature of Parent or Guardian 
	
Témoin non-parent	
	
Signature du parent ou du tuteur
Day
Jour
Month
Mois
Year
Année

