© 2007 Nature Publishing Group 
letters
Correlated three-dimensional light and electron 
microscopy reveals transformation of mitochondria 
during apoptosis 
Mei G. Sun1, James Williams1, Cristina Munoz-Pinedo2, Guy A. Perkins3, Joshua M. Brown3, Mark H. Ellisman3, 
Douglas R. Green2 and Terrence G. Frey1,4
In addition to their role in cellular bioenergetics, mitochondria 
also initiate common forms of programmed cell death 
(apoptosis) through the release of proteins such as cytochrome 
c from the intermembrane and intracristal spaces1,2. The 
release of these proteins is studied in populations of cells 
by western blotting mitochondrial and cytoplasmic fractions 
of cellular extracts, and in single cells by fluorescence 
microscopy using fluorescent indicators and fusion proteins3,4. 
However, studying the changes in ultrastructure associated 
with release of proteins requires the higher resolution provided 
by transmission electron microscopy5–7. Here, we have used 
fluorescence microscopy to characterize the state of apoptosis 
in HeLa cells treated with etoposide followed by electron 
microscopy and three-dimensional electron microscope 
tomography of the identical cells to study the sequence of 
structural changes. We have identified a remodelling of the 
inner mitochondrial membrane into many separate vesicular 
matrix compartments that accompanies release of proteins; 
however, this remodelling is not required for efficient release 
of cytochrome c. Swelling occurs only late in apoptosis 
after release of cytochrome c and loss of the mitochondrial 
membrane potential.
Concurrent with the recognition of the importance of mitochondria 
in apoptosis, has been the application of electron microscope tomog-
raphy, a form of three-dimensional transmission electron microscopy 
(TEM), to study mitochondrial ultrastructure leading to a new paradigm 
of mitochondrial structure. Electron microscope tomography reveals 
that in normal mitochondria the inner membrane has two topologically 
distinct components: the inner boundary membrane lies closely apposed 
to the outer membrane with a small space (the intermembrane space, 
approximately 8 nm thick) between the two. At various loci, the inner 
membrane projects into the matrix via tubular structures of uniform 
diameter called crista junctions, which merge to form lamellar crista 
compartments enclosing the intracristal space5–8.
In most cell culture models of apoptosis the relevant mitochondrial 
events, release of cytochrome c and loss of the mitochondrial membrane 
potential (ΔΨm) occur within minutes, while the onset of these changes 
occurs asynchronously among a population of cells over periods of sev-
eral hours3,4 (Fig. 1). To examine the ultrastructure of mitochondria at 
defined stages of apoptosis in an asynchronous cell population, cor-
related light and electron microscopy was performed on cells growing 
in special petri dishes that contain a glass coverslip with an etched grid. 
The grid allowed identification of successive stages in the apoptotic pro-
gramme in HeLa cells permanently transfected with fluorescent cyto-
chrome c fusion proteins to monitor cytochrome c release, and stained 
with tetramethylrhodamine ethyl ester (TMRE) to monitor ΔΨm
3,4. The 
identical cells were subsequently fixed and embedded for TEM, and 
their ultrastructure was characterized by both conventional thin-sec-
tion TEM and by three-dimensional electron microscope tomography 
of semi-thick sections up to 0.5 µm thickness7. This method comprises a 
form of virtual four-dimensional TEM — three spatial dimensions plus 
time expressed as the stage of apoptosis.
HeLa cells permanently transfected with a cytochrome c fusion 
protein (relative molecular mass, Mr, of 13,300) containing a short 
tetracysteine motif (Cyt. c-4CYS) that binds the membrane-perme-
able biarsenical fluorescein derivative FlAsH3,9 are shown in Fig. 1a–f. 
The cells were treated with etoposide to induce apoptosis, stained with 
FlAsH to monitor the distribution of Cyt. c-4CYS and with TMRE to 
reveal mitochondria that maintain ΔΨm. Images recorded at the start 
of the experiment show the distribution of Cyt. c-4CYS, mitochondria 
maintaining a ΔΨm and an overlay demonstrates localization of Cyt.  
c-4CYS within mitochondria (Fig. 1a–c). Images of the same field 
of cells 16  h after addition of etoposide reveal two cells (outlined 
1Department of Biology, San Diego State University, San Diego, CA 92182-4614, USA. 2Department of Immunology, St Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis, 
TN 38105–2794, USA. 3Center for Research in Biological Systems, National Center for Microscopy and Imaging Research, University of California, San Diego,  
La Jolla, CA 92093-0608, USA.
4Correspondence should be addressed to T.G.F. (e-mail: tfrey@sunstroke.sdsu.edu)
Received 7 June 2007; accepted 3 August 2007; published online 26 August 2007; DOI: 10.1038/ncb1630
nature cell biology  volume 9 | number 9 | SEPTEMBER 2007	
1057  

© 2007 Nature Publishing Group 
l e t t e r s
by a circle and a square) that represent two successive stages in the 
apoptotic programme in all Fig. 1 components (Fig. 1d–f). The circled 
cell has released cytochrome c, as indicated by diffuse FlAsH staining 
in Fig. 1d, while maintaining ΔΨm, as indicated by punctate TMRE 
staining in Fig. 1e. The cell outlined in the square has also released 
cytochrome c, but all of the mitochondria within this cell have lost 
their ΔΨm. This same field of cells was chemically fixed, dehydrated 
and embedded in plastic before cutting sections for examination by 
TEM, and a thin section of this area is shown at low magnification 
in Fig. 1f. Cells that lost ∆Ψm but maintained punctate FlAsH–Cyt. 
c-4CYS staining were not observed, confirming that release of cyto-
chrome c precedes loss of ΔΨm, as previously reported3,4. Western blot 
analysis of identically treated cells confirms that, among a popula-
tion of cells, release of native cytochrome c is 50% complete within 
16–18 h and nearly complete for all cells by 20 h after treatment with 
etoposide (Fig. 1g).
Based on the changes in fluorescence observed in HeLa cells 
expressing Cyt. c-4CYS labelled with FlAsH and TMRE, three stages 
during apoptosis initiated by etoposide were identified: stage 1, 
before release of cytochrome c and before loss of ΔΨm; stage 2, after 
release of cytochrome c but before loss of ΔΨm; stage 3, after both 
release of cytochrome c and loss of ΔΨm. Fig. 2 shows fluorescent 
light and transmission electron micrographs of three different fields 
of cells at each of the three stages of the apoptotic programme. A 
field of cells before release of cytochrome c and before loss of ΔΨm, 
as indicated by the punctate FlAsH and TMRE staining that match 
in the overlay, are observed in stage 1 (Fig. 2a). The higher mag-
nification electron micrograph reveals a number of mitochondria 
that all have the morphology of the normal orthodox conformation 
observed in healthy cells. In stage 2, the FlAsH staining is diffuse, 
indicating that cytochrome c has been or is being released, wheras 
the TMRE staining remains punctate, indicating the presence of 
ΔΨm (Fig. 2b). The higher magnification electron micrograph shows 
many normal mitochondria, but also several mitochondria with an 
altered morphology that we refer to as ‘vesicular’ based on electron 
microscope tomography described below. In stage 3, fluorescence 
microscopy again reveals the diffuse FlAsH staining indicative 
of cytochrome c release and the now nearly complete absence of 
TMRE staining, indicating that all of the mitochondria have lost 
ΔΨm (Fig. 2c). The higher magnification electron micrograph 
Etoposide (100 µm)
Incubation time (h):
Mitochondrial
fraction
Cytosolic
fraction
20
18
16
14
0
a
d
e
f
g
b
c
Figure 1 Cyt. c-4CYS staining with FlAsH colocalizes with TMRE staining 
of mitochondria that maintain a ΔΨm. Cyt. c-4CYS is released before loss 
of ΔΨm. HeLa cells transfected with Cyt. c-4CYS were grown in petri dishes 
with a glass coverslip containing an etched grid and then stained with  
FlAsH and TMRE. Apoptosis was initiated with 100 μM etoposide.  
(a–c) Cyt. c-4CYS (green), TMRE (red) and the overlay showing overlap 
of the two signals (yellow) of a field of cells at the start of the experiment 
(stage 1). (d–e) The same field of cells as in a–c 16 h after addition of 
etoposide. (f) A low magnification electron micrograph of the same field of 
cells after chemical fixation, dehydration and embedding in plastic at 16 h. 
The circles enclose a cell whose mitochondria have released  
Cyt. c-4CYS but maintains ΔΨm after 16 h (stage 2). The square encloses a 
cell whose mitochondria have both released Cyt. c-4CYS and lost ΔΨm after 
16 h (stage 3). The scale bars in a–e represent 25 µm. (g) Western blot of 
total cytochrome c in cytosolic and mitochondrial fractions of a population 
of HeLa cells after treatment with etoposide. Protein aliquots (13 µg) 
from cytosolic fractions and mitochondrial fractions were prepared 0, 14, 
16, 18 and 20 h after etoposide addition and subjected to SDS–PAGE. 
The proteins were transferred to PVDF and subjected to immunoblotting 
with anti-cytochrome c, and visualized by chemiluminescent ECL 
substrate. Uncropped images of the scans are shown in the Supplementary 
Information, Fig. S4.
1058
nature cell biology  volume 9 | number 9 | SEPTEMBER 2007

© 2007 Nature Publishing Group 
l e t t e r s
a
b
c
Figure 2 Mitochondrial inner membrane conformation changes to the 
vesicular form during cytochrome c release, and the matrix swells during or 
after the loss of ΔΨm.  HeLa cells transfected with Cyt. c-4CYS and stained 
with FlAsH and TMRE were monitored by confocal microscopy before 
preparation for electron microscopy of the same fields of cells.  
(a) Stage 1 cells have neither released Cyt. c-4CYS nor lost ΔΨm, as 
indicated by the colocalization of FlAsH staining of Cyt. c-4CYS (green) with 
TMRE staining (red) in the overlay image (yellow). The electron micrographs 
show only the normal mitochondrial morphology. The inset on the upper 
left is a low magnification electron micrograph of the complete field of six 
cells.  (b) Stage 2 cells have released (or are releasing) Cyt. c-4CYS but 
maintain ΔΨm, as indicated by the diffuse FlAsH staining in the upper left 
panel that does not correlate with the punctate TMRE staining in the overlay. 
These cells display both normal mitochondrial morphologies in electron 
micrographs but also many mitochondria with vesicular matrix compartments 
with one indicated by the arrow. The inset on the lower right shows a low 
magnification electron micrograph of this field of four cells. (c) Stage 3 cells 
that have released Cyt. c-4CYS and have lost ΔΨm contain relatively few 
mitochondria with normal morphology and many with swollen morphology 
(arrow) and vesicular–swollen mitochondria (arrowhead). The scale bars 
represent 25 µm in the fluorescent micrographs and low magnification TEMs 
and 500 nm in the high magnification TEMs.
nature cell biology  volume 9 | number 9 | SEPTEMBER 2007	
1059  

© 2007 Nature Publishing Group 
l e t t e r s
reveals no normal mitochondria, but does include several mito-
chondria that appear to be swollen, and some of these also display  
vesicular morphology.
We have identified five characteristic mitochondrial morphologies 
based on observation of electron micrographs of cells within the 
three stages as shown in Fig. 3: normal, Fig. 3a; normal–vesicular, 
Fig. 3b; vesicular, Fig. 3c; vesicular–swollen, Fig. 3d; and swollen, 
Fig. 3e. Mitochondria exhibiting the vesicular ultrastructure are eas-
ily identified in electron micrographs of thin sections, but character-
izing their structure required the third spatial dimension provided 
by electron microscope tomography (Fig. 4). Electron microscope 
tomography indicates that in vesicular mitochondria, the inner mem-
brane encloses separate vesicular matrix compartments, the lumen 
of which is topologically equivalent to the mitochondrial matrix 
(Fig. 4c and see Supplementary Information, Movie 1). Furthermore, 
the change in morphology from normal to vesicular is progressive 
from one region of an extended mitochondrion to another, because 
intermediate forms designated normal–vesicular display normal cris-
tae within an inner boundary membrane at one end and vesicular 
matrix compartments at the other (Fig. 4b and see Supplementary 
Information, Movie 2).
Swollen mitochondria are identified by their expanded matrix 
space, fewer cristae and less dense staining of the matrix (exam-
ples are shown in Figs 2c, 3e and 4e, and see Supplementary 
Information, Movie 3; note that in the latter, the outer membrane 
seems to be ruptured by the expanded matrix). Again an interme-
diate form, vesicular–swollen, is observed in which one domain 
of a mitochondrion seems swollen, while another domain seems 
vesicular (Figs 2c, 3d and 4d, and see Supplementary Inform­­ation, 
Movie 4).
These unusual mitochondrial inner membrane structures are 
unlikely to be the result of artifacts of either the specimen prepara-
tion procedure or illumination of cells containing multiple fluoro-
phores. As controls, non-transfected HeLa cells, in the absence of 
fluorophores, were prepared by cryofixation at high pressure followed 
by freeze substitution — a procedure believed to provide superior 
structural preservation when properly applied7. Vesicular mitochon-
dria were only observed when cells were treated with etoposide for 
many hours (see Supplementary Information, Fig. S1). Extensively 
illuminated HeLa cells stained with both FlAsH and TMRE were also 
observed in the absence of etoposide and no vesicular mitochondria 
were ever seen in these cells.
To determine the sequence of ultrastructure changes during apop-
tosis, we recorded numerous electron micrographs of cells in each 
of the three stages, as determined by fluorescence confocal micro-
scopy, and scored the numbers of mitochondrial profiles with each 
of the five morphologies. The results are shown in Fig. 5, together 
with the number of cells and total number of mitochondria meas-
ured in each case. As expected, control cells that were not treated 
with etoposide are defined as stage 1 and displayed only normal 
a
d
e
b
c
Figure 3 Five mitochondrial morphologies are identified. (a) normal;  
(b) normal–vesicular; (c) vesicular; (d) vesicular–swollen; and (e) 
swollen. The scale bars represent 200 nm in a–d and  
100 nm in e.
1060
nature cell biology  volume 9 | number 9 | SEPTEMBER 2007

© 2007 Nature Publishing Group 
l e t t e r s
a
b
c
d
e
Figure 4 Electron microscope tomography of examples of the five 
mitochondrial morphologies. On the left are sections of constant z through 
the electron tomograms, and on the right are renderings of the models 
produced from segmented tomograms. Outer membrane (translucent light 
blue); the inner boundary membrane (white); cristae in various colours. 
The successive views rotate about a vertical axis by varying amounts 
from left to right. (a) Normal mitochondrion with the outer membrane 
in the leftmost and two rightmost views reduced to reveal the small 
discrete crista junctions (red, green, and yellow; see Supplementary 
Information, Movie 7). (b) Normal–vesicular mitochondrion with the 
vesicular portion at the top and different vesicular matrix compartments 
indicated in various colours. The normal portion is below and the normal 
cristae (green) are contained within the matrix compartment enclosed 
within the inner boundary membrane (white). The arrow indicates an 
elongated crista junction (see Supplementary Information, Movie 2). 
(c) Vesicular mitochondrion with the vesicular matrix compartments 
containing the fragmented matrix in various colours; note, there is no 
inner boundary membrane (see Supplementary Information, Movie 1). 
(d) Vesicular–swollen mitochondrion with two swollen vesicular matrix 
compartments indicated in yellow (upper end) and in magenta (centre), 
and small vesicular matrix compartments (in various colours) surrounding 
the magenta swollen vesicular compartment; note again, the absence of 
an inner boundary membrane (see Supplementary Information, Movie 4). 
(e) Swollen mitochondrion with one swollen vesicular matrix compartment 
(yellow) and two lamellar cristae (red and green) contained within a swollen 
matrix bound by an inner boundary membrane (white); note that the 
outer membrane seems to be ruptured at the bottom (see Supplementary 
Information, Movie 3). The scale bars represent 250 nm.
nature cell biology  volume 9 | number 9 | SEPTEMBER 2007	
1061  

© 2007 Nature Publishing Group 
l e t t e r s
mitochondrial profiles with a very low number of swollen mito-
chondria. Cells treated with etoposide for 15 h and imaged before 
either the release of cytochrome c or loss of ΔΨm were also defined 
as stage 1, and they contained only normal mitochondrial profiles 
(Fig. 5b). Stage 2 mitochondria had released cytochrome c but 
maintained a normal ΔΨm, and although a small majority (62%) of 
mitochondria still displayed a normal profile, there was a significant 
number that exhibited vesicular morphology, with a total of 32% 
falling into the normal–vesicular, vesicular or vesicular–swollen  
morphologies, and approximately 6% in the swollen category. Stage 3 
mitochondria had released cytochrome c, lost ΔΨm and exhibited a 
further shift away from the normal structure (down to 39%) toward 
100
80
60
40
20
0
100
80
60
40
20
0
100
80
60
40
20
0
100
80
60
40
20
0
100
80
60
40
20
0
Stage 1: control (5 cells
/ 532 mitochondria)
a
b
c
e
f
g
d
Stage 1: +etoposide (15 h; 7 cells
/ 771 mitochondria)
Stage 3: +etoposide (15 h; 5 cells
/ 300 mitochondria)
Stage 2: +etoposide (15 h; 7 cells
/ 695 mitochondria)
Stage 3: +etoposide + CsA (8 cells
/ 848 mitochondria)
Stage 3: +zVAD +etoposide (8 cells
/ 752 mitochondria)
Normal
Norm-Ves
Vesicular
Ves-Swol
Swollen
Normal
Norm-Ves
Vesicular
Ves-Swol
Swollen
Normal
Norm-Ves
Vesicular
Ves-Swol
Swollen
Normal
Norm-Ves
Vesicular
Ves-Swol
Swollen
Normal
Norm-Ves
Vesicular
Ves-Swol
Swollen
Crista-junction length versus width
0
40
80
120
160
200
Width (nm)
h
i
j
Group 1
Group 2
Group 3
Group 1: Normal
Group 2: Etop+zVad
Group 3: Etop stage 1
Length (nm)
Morphology (percentage)
Morphology (percentage)
Morphology (percentage)
Morphology (percentage)
Morphology (percentage)
Morphology (percentage)
Percentage of cells
Percentage of cells
Percentage of cells
Percentage of cells
100
80
60
40
20
0
Normal
Norm-Ves
Vesicular
Ves-Swol
Swollen
Percentage of cells
Percentage of cells
Figure 5 Mitochondria progress from normal to vesicular during release of 
cytochrome c and then swell during or after the loss of ΔΨm. (a–f) Histograms 
showing the percentage of mitochondria observed within each of the five 
morphologies for cells in stages 1–3. Cells were selected based on FlAsH 
and TMRE staining of HeLa cells transfected with Cyt. c-4CYS (see Fig. 2 
for examples). Electron micrographs of each cell were collected and all 
of the mitochondria within a thin section of each cell were classified in a 
double-blind fashion. The number of cells and total number of mitochondria 
analysed are indicated at the top of each graph. The error bars represent 
the s.d. of the percentage of mitochondria with each morphology within 
the group of cells analysed for each stage, and show greater variation for 
stages 2 and 3 as cells in these categories represent times along a continuum 
of structural change. Stage 1, control cells with no treatment (a). Stage 1, 
treatment with etoposide for 15 h; Cells have not released Cyt. c-4CYS 
and maintain ΔΨm (b). Stage 2, treatment with etoposide for 16 h; cells 
have released Cyt. c-4CYS but maintain ΔΨm (c). Stage 3, treatment with 
etoposide for 16 h; cells have released Cyt. c-4CYS and have lost ΔΨm (d). 
Stage 3 with caspases inhibited and treatment with etoposide for 16 h in 
the presence of zVAD-fmk; cells have released Cyt. c-4CYS and have lost 
ΔΨm (e). Stage 3 with mPTP inhibited and treatment with etoposide for 16 h 
in the presence of cyclosporin A; cells have released Cyt. c-4CYS and have 
lost ΔΨm (f). (g) z-VAD-fmk inhibits crista junction elongation. The length 
(the longest dimension) and width (the shortest dimension orthogonal to 
the length) of 50 crista junctions from each of three groups of HeLa cells 
were measured by Image J from the tomograms. Group 1, untreated control 
(measured from five tomograms); Group 2, stage 3 HeLa cells pretreated 
with zVAD to inhibit caspases and treated with etoposide for 16 h (measured 
from three tomograms); Group 3, stage 1 are cells treated with etoposide 
for 15 h (measured from four tomograms). (h–j) Three-dimensional models 
from electron microscope tomography of mitochondria representing each of 
the three groups described in g. Arrows in the group 3 tomogram indicate 
elongated crista junctions.
1062
nature cell biology  volume 9 | number 9 | SEPTEMBER 2007

© 2007 Nature Publishing Group 
l e t t e r s
the vesicular and swollen structures (Fig. 5d). We interpreted this to 
indicate that the progression of change is from the normal structure 
to the vesicular during or immediately after cytochrome c release, 
then progressing to a swollen morphology after the loss of ΔΨm. 
This progression of change is indicated by the greater variation of the 
distributions of morphologies among the individual cells in stages 2 
and 3, as each cell seemingly represents a different point along a 
continuum of changes grouped within each classification or stage. 
Note that even stage 3 cells still contain 39% normal mitochondria, 
and we do not know whether all mitochondrial cristae convert to 
vesicular morphology before swelling.
To evaluate the importance of caspase activation, the experiment was 
repeated in the presence of the general caspase inhibitor, zVAD-fmk, 
which inhibited caspases by more than 54% (data not shown). Caspase-
inhibited cells in stage 3 maintained normal mitochondrial structure 
(89%), with a small number of swollen mitochondria (11%, Fig. 5e). 
Thus, transformation to the vesicular structure seems to require active 
caspases. We also examined the possible participation of the mitochon-
drial permeability transition pore (mPTP) by conducting the experi-
ment in the presence of cycloporin‑A (CsA). As expected CsA treatment  
inhibited opening of the mPTP, as it prevented the release of calcein 
trapped within mitochondria (see Supplementary Information, Fig. S2)10, 
but it did not inhibit cytochrome c release or prevent the transformation 
to the vesicular structure (Fig. 5f).
We wanted to determine whether mitochondrial swelling and/or 
inner mitochondrial membrane remodelling occured during apop-
tosis, and whether either swelling or inner membrane remodelling 
was required for release of cytochrome c. The answers are yes and 
no, respectively. Significant swelling occurs only after loss of ΔΨm 
and long after release of cytochrome c (Fig. 5). Although formation 
of vesicular mitochondria is observed during release of cytochrome 
c, and would facilitate diffusion of cytochrome c from intracristal 
compartments, vesicular mitochondria comprise a minority of mito-
chondrial structures until after the loss of ΔΨm. More significantly, 
inhibition of caspases by addition of zVAD-fmk completely prevents 
the transformation to vesicular mitochondria. A more subtle ques-
tion is whether crista-junction size must increase to facilitate release 
of cytochrome c from the intracristal spaces as previous observa-
tions indicate that cytochrome c release accompanies an enlargement 
and elongation of crista junctions following treatment of purified 
rodent liver mitochondria with truncated Bid11,12. Crista-junction 
sizes were measured in mitochondria in untreated cells, in mito-
chondria in stage 3 cells treated with etoposide in the presence of 
zVAD-fmk and in stage 1 etoposide-treated cells (Fig. 5g–j). Normal 
mitochondria, and mitochondria in cells treated with etoposide in 
the presence of zVAD-fmk, displayed overlapping distributions of 
crista-junctions sizes with relatively isotropic diameters centred at 
approximately 20 nm, and the stage 3 cells treated with etoposide 
in the presence of zVAD-fmk released cytochrome c and lost ΔΨm. 
Although the 20 nm crista-junction diameter is several times the 
diameter of cytochrome c, the junctions could present a kinetic bar-
rier to efficient release of cytochrome c. However, kinetic modelling 
studies indicate that crista junctions should not prevent release of 
intracristal cytochrome c within 1–2 min13. Furthermore, it was pre-
viously shown that although the cytochrome c in the intermembrane 
space and the intracristal space represented separate pools on a fast 
time scale, essentially all cytochrome c within purified mitochondria 
is reduced by externally added NADH via NADH-cytochrome b5 
reductase in the outer mitochondrial membrane within 1–2 min14 
— approximately the time measured for release of cytochrome c from 
mitochondria during apoptosis3,4.
The vesicular mitochondrial phenotype has been observed under 
other conditions, and even in intact tissues, establishing that it is not 
merely a curiosity confined to our particular cultured-cell model. OPA1 
(mgm1p in yeast) is a dynamin-related protein found in the mitochon-
drial intermembrane space, and is believed to function in determining 
inner mitochondrial membrane conformation and crista-junction shape 
and size, as well as mediate inner membrane fusion11,15–17. During sup-
pression of OPA1 expression with short interfering RNA (siRNA) to 
model the most common form of autosomal dominant optic atrophy 
(ADOA), mitochondrial structures that seem identical to those that we 
have identified as vesicular were observed18. More significantly, mito-
chondria with a morphology identical in thin sections to our vesicular 
mitochondria were observed in muscle tissue from mice deficient in 
collagen VI created as a model for Bethlehem myopathy, a heritable 
human muscle disease19.
If not required for efficient release of cytochrome c the vesicu-
lar transformation of the mitochondrial inner membrane may have 
another function or relevance: a possibility is in the fragmenta-
tion of the mitochondrial network that accompanies apoptosis20–23. 
Vesicular mitochondria contain fragmented vesicular-matrix com-
partments, and subsequent fragmentation of the mitochondrial 
network requires only outer membrane fission. In this context, it is 
interesting to note that mitochondria in stage 1 etoposide-treated 
cells displayed many crista junctions with an elongated shape: these 
mitochondria had one short dimension, plotted as the ‘width’ in 
Fig. 5g, whose distribution matches the more isotropic diameters 
of crista junctions in normal mitochondria. The elongated crista 
junctions exhibited a much greater length of up to 180 nm (Fig. 5j 
and see Supplementary Information, Movie 5). This observation 
suggests a facile mechanism for the transformation of normal mito-
chondria into the vesicular form by elongation and fusion of crista 
junctions around the perimeter of lamellar cristae, as shown in the 
Supplementary Information, Fig. S3 and Movie 6. This achieves frag-
mentation of the matrix into separate vesicular matrix compart-
ments without compromising the integrity of the matrix. The fact 
that suppression of OPA1 expression by siRNA produces a similar 
phenotype18 suggests that the inner-membrane transformation to 
vesicular-matrix compartments may represent the mechanism for 
inner-membrane fission that occurs throughout the mitochondria 
in the formation of vesicular mitochondria, but would normally 
occur only at the sites of outer-membrane fission during the normal 
mitochondrial-fission process.
Although these results indicate that mitochondrial swelling is an effect, 
rather than a proximate cause, of apoptosis initiated in the mitochondrial 
pathway, it is important to keep in mind that under other conditions 
apoptosis may proceed by a different mechanism1. We have recently 
shown that, in HeLa cells, initiation of apoptosis by addition of H2O2 
results in immediate loss of ΔΨm, subsequent activation of the mPTP 
and large amplitude swelling of the mitochondrial matrix, which seems, 
in this case, to be the immediate cause of cytochrome c release (M.G.S., 
unpublished observations).  
nature cell biology  volume 9 | number 9 | SEPTEMBER 2007	
1063  

© 2007 Nature Publishing Group 
l e t t e r s
METHODS
Culture conditions and the induction of apoptosis. HeLa cells expressing Cyt. 
c-4CYS were previously described3 and were grown and maintained at 37 °C in 
DMEM (Gibco, Carlsbad, CA) supplemented with 10% FBS, 2 mM l-glutamine, 
200 mg ml–1 penicillin and 100 mg ml–1 streptomycin sulphate in a humidified 
atmosphere of 5% CO2:95% air. Cells were subcultured 1:10 by incubating them 
in 0.25% trypsin (Gibco) when they were confluent and resuspending cells in 
growth medium.
Apoptosis was induced with 100 μM etoposide for 12–18 h. Where indicated, 
zVAD-fmk (100 μM; Sigma, St Louis, MO) was added 12 h before the apoptotic 
stimulus to inhibit caspase activity. TMRE (50 nM; Sigma) was added to monitor 
the ΔΨm and, where indicated, cyclosporin A (CsA, 0.1 μM; Sigma) was used to 
inhibit opening of the mitochondrial transition pore (mPTP).
Cytochrome c labelling with biarsenical ligands. The staining media were pre-
pared by the addition of a premixed DMSO stock solution to give a final concen-
tration of 2.5 μM of FlAsH-1,2-ethanedithiol (EDT)2 and 10 μM EDT (Fluka, 
St Louis, MO) in DMEM. Cells were incubated at 37 °C in an incubator for 1 h, 
rinsed in glucose-containing Hanks’ buffered saline solution (HBSS; Gibco) and 
incubated for 10 min at room temperature in HBSS containing 62.5 μM EDT. 
Cells were washed three times with HBSS and returned to the incubator for at 
least 12 h before treatment.
Western blotting to detect cytochrome c release from HeLa cells. HeLa cells 
were incubated with etoposide (100 μM) and collected at 0 h, 14 h, 16 h, 18 h 
and 20 h. Cells were then treated with lysis buffer (80 mM KCl, 250 mM sucrose, 
500 μg ml–1 digitionin, 0.1 mM PMSF, 1 mM DTT, 1:800 protease inhibitors) for 
5 min and centrifuged for 5 min at 10,000g at 4 °C. The supernatant (cytosolic 
fractions) and pellets (mitochondrial fractions) were used for western blot analy-
sis of 13 μg of total protein aliquots subjected to SDS–PAGE. The proteins were 
transferred to PVDF membranes and subjected to immunoblotting with anti-
cytochrome c (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA). Film was developed after incuba-
tion of the PVDF with SuperSignal West Pico Chemiluminescent ECL Substrate 
(Pierce, Rockford, IL).
Calcein-AM to monitor mPTP. HeLa cells were incubated with calcein-AM 
(2 μM; Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) and CoCl2 (1 mM) for 60 min at 37 °C. The 
cytosolic and nuclear calcein signal is quenched by CoCl2, and mPTP opening 
was detected by a rapid release of mitochondrial calcein fluorescence.
Confocal microscopy. For time-lapse analysis, cells were grown in 35 mm 
microwell dishes containing a glass coverslip with an etched grid (MatTek Corp., 
Ashland, MA). Images were acquired using a Leica TCS SP2 inverted confocal 
microscope. Cyt.c-4CYS–FlAsH, and calcein were excited using the 488 nm line 
from an Ar–Kr laser attenuated to 35%. TMRE was excited using a 543 nm line 
from an Ar–Kr laser attenuated to 34%. The detector slits of the confocal micro-
scope were adjusted to detect FlAsH emission between 497–553 nm, TMRE emis-
sion between 555–620 nm and calcein emission between 497–553 nm.
Single-cell analysis of mitochondrial structure by correlated confocal and elec-
tron microscopy/tomography. After confocal imaging, cells were fixed immedi-
ately by a 1 h incubation on ice in a 2.5% paraformaldehyde, 2.5% glutaraldehyde, 
0.1 M sodium cacodylate pH 7.4 buffer. After washing three times in ice-cold 
0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffer containing 3 μM calcium chloride for 3 min, 
the primary fixed cells were then incubated with 1% osmium tetroxide, 0.8% 
potassium ferrocyanide, 3 μM calcium chloride in 0.1 M sodium cacodylate for 
60 min on ice. After washing with distilled water three times for 3 min, fixed cells 
were stained and stabilized in ice-cold 2% uranyl acetate for 30 min on ice and 
dehydrated in an ice-cold ethanol series of 20%, 50%, 70% and 90% successively 
on ice for 3 min each. The cells were then dehydrated at room temperature three 
times for 3 min each in 100% ethanol and infiltrated in well-mixed 50% ethanol, 
50% Durcupan ACM resin (Fluka) for 60 min with agitation at room temperature 
followed by 100% Durcupan ACM twice for 1 h with agitation, after which the 
samples were placed in an oven and allowed to polymerize at 60–80 °C for at least 
48 h. The glass coverslip was peeled away from the bottom using a razor blade and 
the selected area was cut out and glued to a block for sectioning. Thin sections 
(approximately 80 nm) were collected and pre-stained with 2% uranyl acetate 
and Sato lead before examination in an FEI Tecnai 12 TEM.
For electron microscope tomography, single-tilt series three-dimensional 
reconstructions were obtained from semi-thick samples (250–500 nm) in a tilt-
series every 2° from –60° to +60° on a JOEL 4000EX electron microscope operated 
at 400 kV. The IMOD software suite was used to process the images in each tilt 
series (Boulder Laboratory for three-dimensional electron microscopy of cells, 
University of Colorado, Boulder, CO). X-Voxtrace software enabled volume seg-
mentation of tomographic data using manual tracing followed by rendering using 
Synu (National Center for Microscopy and Imaging Resources, University of 
California, San Diego, CA). Tomograms were converted to Tiff stacks for meas-
urements of crista junction sizes using Image J (http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij/).
High-pressure freezing. HeLa-cell pellets were loaded into the 100 µm-deep 
well of a type A brass planchettes (Ted Pella, Inc., Redding, CA) and covered 
with the flat side of brass type B planchettes. The planchette A and B sandwiches 
were quickly loaded into the freezing holder and frozen in a Bal-Tec HPF 010 
high pressure-freezing machine. The sandwich was separated under liquid nitro-
gen and the type A planchette that held the cells was placed in a cryo-vial filled 
with 2% osmium and 0.1% uranyl acetate in acetone (electron microscopy grade; 
Fullam Inc., Latham, NY). Freeze substitution was carried out in a Leica EM AFS 
raising the temperature to –90 °C over 72 h, then to 0 °C over 2 h, and finally to 
room temperature over 4 h. After substitution, the specimens were rinsed in pure 
acetone three times (10 min at room temperature). The specimens were removed 
from planchettes after the last wash and infiltrated with 30% Durcupan in acetone 
for 2 h, 50% Durcupan overnight, 70% Durcupan for 4 h, 90% over 2 h and 100% 
Durcupan overnight. The next day, the 100% Durcupan was changed twice more 
and the resin polymerized in the oven at 60 °C overnight.
Caspase-3 assay. Caspase-3 activity was measured using a caspase-3 fluorogenic 
substrate, Ac-DEVD-AFC (Sigma). Cells were lysed on ice by lysis buffer (0.71% 
NP-40, 71 mM Tris t pH 7.5, 0.71 mM EDTA, 212 mM NaCl). The protein con-
centration of the resulting supernatant was determined using the Bio-Rad DC 
protein assay. Equal amounts of total cell lysate protein (40 μg) were mixed with 
caspase-3 assay buffer (21 mM HEPES, 105 mM NaCl, 5.35 mM DTT) contain-
ing substrate Ac-DEVD-AFC (25 μM) in a black 96-well titre plate, in triplicate. 
Caspase-3 mediated cleavage of Ac-DEVD-AFC into free AFC was measured 
using a Spectra Max Gemini XS flourimeter plate reader with an excitation wave-
length of 400 nm and emission wavelength of 505 nm using Softmax Pro version 
3.1.2 software replicated three times.
Note: Supplementary Information is available on the Nature Cell Biology website.
Acknowledgements
 This project was supported by a Blasker Science and Technology Grant from 
the San Diego Foundation to T.G.F., by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) 
National Center for Research Resources (Grant No. P41 RR004050; G.A.P. and 
M.H.E.), by NIH Roadmap Grant GM72033 (Roger Y. Tsien and M.H.E.) and by 
NIH Grants AI40646, AI52735 and CA69381 (D.R.G.). C.M.-P. was supported 
by the Secretaria de Estado de Universidades Investigacion and the Fondo de 
Investigaciones Sanitarias of Spain. We thank Y. Jones (National Center for 
Microscopy and Imaging Research, University of California, San Diego) for 
assistance with high pressure freezing and freeze substitution, and J. Nulton for 
suggesting the mechanism of transformation mitochondria to the vesicular form.
COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Published online at http://www.nature.com/naturecellbiology/ 
Reprints and permissions information is available online at http://npg.nature.com/
reprintsandpermissions/
1.	 Green, D. R. & Kroemer, G. The pathophysiology of mitochondrial cell death. Science 
305, 626–629 (2004).
2.	 Shiozaki, E. N. & Shi, Y. Caspases, IAPs and Smac/DIABLO: mechanisms from struc-
tural biology. Trends Biochem. Sci. 29, 486–494 (2004).
3.	 Goldstein, J. C. et al. Cytochrome c is released in a single step during apoptosis. Cell 
Death Differ. 12, 453–462 (2005).
4.	 Goldstein, J. C., Waterhouse, N. J., Juin, P., Evan, G. I. & Green, D. R. The coordinate 
release of cytochrome c during apoptosis is rapid, complete and kinetically invariant. 
Nature Cell Biol. 2, 156–162 (2000).
5.	 Frey, T., Renken, C. & Perkins, G. Insight into mitochondrial structure and function 
from electron tomography. Biochim. Biophys. Acta. 1555, 196–203 (2002).
1064
nature cell biology  volume 9 | number 9 | SEPTEMBER 2007

© 2007 Nature Publishing Group 
l e t t e r s
6.	 Frey, T. G. & Mannella, C. A. The internal structure of mitochondria. Trends Biochem. 
Sci. 25, 319–324 (2000).
7.	 Frey, T. G., Perkins, G. A. & Ellisman, M. H. Electron tomography of membrane-bound 
cellular organelles. Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 35, 199–224 (2006).
8.	 Mannella, C. A. The relevance of mitochondrial membrane topology to mitochondrial 
function. Biochim. Biophys. Acta. 1762, 140–147 (2006).
9.	 Gaietta, G. et al. Multicolor and electron microscopic imaging of connexin trafficking. 
Science 296, 503–507 (2002).
10.	Petronilli, V. et al. Transient and long-lasting openings of the mitochondrial permeability 
transition pore can be monitored directly in intact cells by changes in mitochondrial 
calcein fluorescence. Biophys. J. 76, 725–734 (1999).
11.	Frezza, C. et al. OPA1 controls apoptotic cristae remodeling independently from mito-
chondrial fusion. Cell 126, 177–189 (2006).
12.	Scorrano, L. et al. A distinct pathway remodels mitochondrial cristae and mobilizes 
cytochrome c during apoptosis. Dev. Cell 2, 55–67 (2002).
13.	Manor, J. C. et al. in International Conference on Bioinformatics and Computational 
Biology 310–314 (CSREA Press, Las Vegas; 2006).
14.	Bernardi, P. & Azzone, G. F. Cytochrome c as an electron shuttle between the outer and 
inner mitochondrial membranes. J. Biol. Chem. 256, 7187–7192 (1981).
15.	Cipolat, S. et al. Mitochondrial rhomboid PARL regulates cytochrome c release during 
apoptosis via OPA1-dependent cristae remodeling. Cell 126, 163–175 (2006).
16.	Meeusen, S. et al. Mitochondrial inner-membrane fusion and crista maintenance 
requires the dynamin-related GTPase Mgm1. Cell 127, 383–395 (2006).
17.	Shaw, J. M. & Nunnari, J. Mitochondrial dynamics and division in budding yeast. Trends 
Cell Biol. 12, 178–184 (2002).
18.	Griparic, L., van der Wel, N. N., Orozco, I. J., Peters, P. J. & van der Bliek, A. M. 
Loss of the intermembrane space protein Mgm1/OPA1 induces swelling and localized 
constrictions along the lengths of mitochondria. J. Biol. Chem. 279, 18792–18798 
(2004).
19.	Irwin, W. A. et al. Mitochondrial dysfunction and apoptosis in myopathic mice with 
collagen VI deficiency. Nature Genet. 35, 367–371 (2003).
20.	Chan, D. C. Mitochondrial fusion and fission in mammals. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 
22, 79–99 (2006).
21.	Heath-Engel, H. M. & Shore, G. C. Mitochondrial membrane dynamics, cris-
tae remodelling and apoptosis. Biochim. Biophys. Acta. 1763, 1277–1280 
(2006).
22.	Karbowski, M. et al. Quantitation of mitochondrial dynamics by photolabeling of indi-
vidual organelles shows that mitochondrial fusion is blocked during the Bax activation 
phase of apoptosis. J. Cell Biol. 164, 493–499 (2004).
23.	Lee, Y. J., Jeong, S. Y., Karbowski, M., Smith, C. L. & Youle, R. J. Roles of the mam-
malian mitochondrial fission and fusion mediators Fis1, Drp1, and Opa1 in apoptosis. 
Mol. Biol. Cell 15, 5001–5011 (2004).
nature cell biology  volume 9 | number 9 | SEPTEMBER 2007	
1065  

S UPPLE ME NTARY  INF O R M ATION
WWW.NATURE.COM/NATURECELLBIOLOGY 
1
Supplementary Figure 1. High Pressure Freezing Method confirms mitochondrial structure
in Etoposide treated HeLa cells.
Wild Type HeLa cells were treated with Etoposide for 16 hours. A pelleted sample was
cryofixed by freezing in a Bal-Tec HPF 010 high pressure freezing apparatus followed by freeze
substitution and embedding in Durcupan for sectioning. Only cells treated with etoposide
showed vesicular mitochondria. Scale bar is 250 nm.
© 2007 Nature Publishing Group 

SUP PL E MENTA RY  I N F O R M AT I O N
2 
WWW.NATURE.COM/NATURECELLBIOLOGY
Supplementary Figure 2. Cyclosporin A (CsA, 0.1 M) inhibits mPTP opening:
HeLa cells were treated with etoposide (1mM) for 4 hours. Opening of the mPTP (mitochondria
permeability transition pore) was determined by monitoring the release of fluorescent calcein
trapped in mitochondria. Confocal images revealed the mPTP opened within 4 hours following
treatment with etoposide, while Cyclosporin A inhibited mPTP opening after 4 hours treatment.
Before
Etop
Etop+CsA
Treatment
4 hours
4 hours
© 2007 Nature Publishing Group 

S UPPLE ME NTARY  INF O R M ATION
WWW.NATURE.COM/NATURECELLBIOLOGY 
3
© 2007 Nature Publishing Group 

SUP PL E MENTA RY  I N F O R M AT I O N
4 
WWW.NATURE.COM/NATURECELLBIOLOGY
Supplementary Figure 3. A schematic topological model by which normal mitochondria
transform to vesicular mitochondria by elongation of crista junctions until nearest neighbors
within each lammelar crista fuse followed by continued elongation of the fused crista
junctions around the perimeter of the crista.
(a) Schematic model of the inner membrane of a normal orthodox mitochondrion; the outer
membrane is not included. The two lamellar cristae in opaque yellow are connected to the inner
boundary membrane in translucent blue that surrounds them through short tubular crista
junctions, four in the upper crista and three in the lower crista. The cristae plus the inner
boundary membrane are one complex two dimensional surface. The ends of the mitochondrion
at the top and bottom are not modeled for simplification.
(b - d) The crista junctions in each lamellar crista elongate around the perimeter of the cristae
and fuse to form slot like crista junctions.
(e) The crista junctions have elongated completely around the perimeter of what were previously
lamellar cristae separating the matrix into three separate vesicular matrix compartments. The
model continues to show the distinction between yellow opaque crista membrane and translucent
light blue inner boundary membrane with the former crista membranes forming the upper and
lower boundaries of the matrix compartments; however, in vesicular mitochondria this
distinction is no longer relevant, and the shapes of the vesicular compartments would be round.
Three-dimensional models were created with Google SketchUp 5 (www.sketchup.com). See
also Movie 6 in Supplementary Information.
© 2007 Nature Publishing Group 

S UPPLE ME NTARY  INF O R M ATION
WWW.NATURE.COM/NATURECELLBIOLOGY 
5
Supplementary Figure 4. Western for cytochrome c of mitochondrial and cytosolic fractions
following treatment of HeLa cells with etoposide for 20, 18, 16, 14, and 0 hours respectively.
Molecular weight markers are shown on the right. The second band at approximately 30 kD is
commonly observed by ourselves and others and its changes follow closely the band at
approximately 14 kD; it is probably a cytochrome c dimer. Molecular weights are approximate
based upon Multi Mark Standards (Invitrogen).
© 2007 Nature Publishing Group 

SUP PL E MENTA RY  I N F O R M AT I O N
6 
WWW.NATURE.COM/NATURECELLBIOLOGY
MOVIE LEGENDS
Movie 1:  Vesicular Mitochondrion: Model based upon a segmented EM Tomogram of a mitochondrion in a HeLa cell treated with Etoposide for 16 hours. 
Outer membrane is rendered in translucent blue and surrounds multiple vesicular matrix compartments of various sizes rendered in different colors.  No inner 
boundary membrane is present.
Movie 2:  Normal Vesicular Mitochondrion:  Model based upon a segmented EM Tomogram of a mitochondrion in a HeLa cell treated with Etoposide for 
16 hours. Outer membrane is rendered in translucent blue, note inner boundary membrane at one end of the mitochondrion rendered in opaque white 
with cristae rendered in green, and crista junctions that have anisotropic dimensions with lengths often greater than widths.  The opposite end of the 
mitochondrion contains vesicular matrix compartments of various sizes rendered in different colors surrounded by outer membrane with no inner boundary 
membrane.
Movie 3:  Swollen Mitochondrion: Model based upon a segmented EM Tomogram of a mitochondrion in a HeLa cell treated with Etoposide for 16 hours. Outer 
membrane is rendered in translucent blue and at one end surrounds an inner boundary membrane rendered in white that encloses two cristae rendered in red 
and in green; the outer membrane is ruptured at this end.  At the other end is a single vesicular matrix compartment rendered in yellow.  
Movie 4:  Vesicular Swollen Mitochondrion: Model based upon a segmented EM Tomogram of a mitochondrion in a HeLa cell treated with Etoposide for 16 
hours. Outer membrane is rendered in translucent blue and surrounds multiple vesicular matrix compartments of various sizes rendered in different colors.  
The magenta and yellow vesicular compartments appear to be swollen.
Movie 5:  Mitochondrion model based upon a segmented EM Tomogram of a mitochondrion in a HeLa cell treated with Etoposide for 16 hours; this 
mitochondrion has not released cytochrome c, maintains a normal ΔΨm, and appears normal in TEM thin sections.  Outer membrane is rendered in 
translucent blue, inner boundary membrane rendered in opaque white with cristae rendered in different colors.  Note that while some crista junctions 
appear normal others, particularly those of the magenta crista between the green and red cristae, are elongated around the periphery of the lamellar crista as 
predicted by the model in Supplementary Figure 3 and Movie 6.
Movie 6:  Schematic model of the inner membrane of a normal orthodox mitochondrion transforming into vesicular matrix compartments; the outer membrane 
is not included.  At the beginning two lamellar cristae are connected to the inner boundary membrane surrounding them through short tubular crista 
junctions, four in the upper crista and three in the lower crista.  The inner boundary membrane is translucent light blue and the crista membrane is opaque 
yellow.  The ends of the mitochondrion at the top and bottom are not modeled for simplification.  As the movie progresses the crista junctions elongate around 
the periphery of the lamellar cristae eventually merging and fusing until the top and bottom halves of the lamellar cristae membranes become part of the 
vesicular matrix compartments that are modeled in opaque red, blue, and green at the end of the movie.
Movie 7:  Normal Mitochondrion:  Model based upon a segmented EM Tomogram of a control mitochondrion in a HeLa cell that has not been treated with 
Etoposide.  Outer membrane is rendered in translucent blue, inner boundary membrane is rendered in opaque white, and cristae are rendered in various 
colors.  Note relatively small and uniform discrete crista junctions connecting cristae to the inner boundary membrane.
© 2007 Nature Publishing Group 

